
Writing Arguments
A Rhetoric with Readings
Concise Edition
Seventh Edition
John D. Ramage
Arizona State University
John C. Bean
Seattle University
June Johnson
Seattle University
Boston  Columbus  Hoboken  Indianapolis  New York  San Francisco
Amsterdam  Cape Town  Dubai  London  Madrid  Milan  Munich  Paris  Montréal  Toronto
Delhi  Mexico City  São Paulo  Sydney  Hong Kong  Seoul  Singapore  Taipei  Tokyo

Senior Acquisitions Editor: Brad Potthoff
Program Manager: Anne Shure
Development Editor: Kassi Radomski
Product Marketing Manager: Ali Arnold
Field Marketing Manager: Mark Robinson
Executive Digital Producer: Stefanie A. Snajder
Content Specialist: Erin Jenkins
Project Manager: Savoula Amanatidis
Project Coordination, Text Design, and Page 
Makeup: Integra
Program Design Lead and Cover Designer: 
Barbara Atkinson
Cover Images: Clockwise from top left: Drill rig set 
up for winter drilling in Wyoming  
(Tom Grundy/Shutterstock); Urban  
teenagers using multimedia devices (Csondy, 
Getty); American Female Soldier in combat 
uniform saluting a flag at sunset (Steve Cukrov/
Shutterstock); Working bees on honey cells 
(Kotomiti Okuma/Shutterstock).
Photo Research: QBS Learning
Senior Manufacturing Buyer: Roy L.  
Pickering, Jr.
Printer and Binder: R. R. Donnelley and Sons 
Company–Crawfordsville
Cover Printer: Lehigh-Phoenix Color 
Corporation–Hagerstown
Text Font: 10.5/12 Minion Pro
Acknowledgments of third-party content appear on pages 296–297, which constitute an extension of this 
­copyright page.
Copyright © 2016, 2012, and 2010 by Pearson Education, Inc.
All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. This publication is protected by copyright, and 
permission should be obtained from the publisher prior to any prohibited reproduction, storage in a ­retrieval 
system, or transmission in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or 
otherwise. For information regarding permissions, request forms and the appropriate contacts within the 
Pearson Education Global Rights & Permissions Department, please visit www.pearsoned.com/permissions/.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Ramage, John D., author.
  Writing arguments: a rhetoric with readings/John D. Ramage, John C. Bean, June Johnson.—Concise edition;  
  7th edition.
    p.  cm
  ISBN 978-0-321-96428-1
  1.  English language—Rhetoric.  2.  Persuasion (Rhetoric)  3.  College readers.  4.  Report writing. 
  I.  Bean, John C., author.  II.  Johnson, June, author.  III.  Title.
  PE1431.R33 2016
  808’.0427—dc23
	
2014033973
Complete Edition
ISBN-10:        0-321-90673-X
ISBN-13: 978-0-321-90673-1
Brief Edition
ISBN-10:         0-321-96427-6
ISBN-13: 978-0-321-96427-4
Concise Edition
ISBN-10:         0-321-96428-4
ISBN-13: 978-0-321-96428-1
www.pearsonhighered.com
Pearson, Always Learning, and MyWritingLab are exclusive trademarks in the United States and/or 
other ­countries, of Pearson Education, Inc., or its affiliates.
Unless otherwise indicated herein, any third-party trademarks that may appear in this work are the property of their 
respective owners and any references to third-party trademarks, logos, or other trade dress are for demonstrative or 
descriptive purposes only. Such references are not intended to imply any sponsorship, endorsement, authorization, 
or promotion of Pearson’s products by the owners of such marks, or any relationship between the owner and Pearson 
Education, Inc., or its affiliates, authors, licensees, or distributors.
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1—DOC—18  17  16  15

	
	
iii
Brief Contents
	
Part One	
Overview of Argument        1
	
1	
Argument: An Introduction        2
	
2	
Argument as Inquiry: Reading and Exploring        12
	
Part Two	
Writing an Argument        43
	
3	
The Core of an Argument: A Claim with Reasons        44
	
4	
The Logical Structure of Arguments        55
	
5	
Using Evidence Effectively        73
	
6	
Moving Your Audience: Ethos, Pathos, and Kairos        88
	
7	
Responding to Objections and Alternative Views        100
	
Part Three	
Analyzing Arguments        123
	
8	
Analyzing Arguments Rhetorically        124
	
9	
Analyzing Visual Arguments        142
	
Part Four	
Arguments in Depth: Types of Claims        167
	
10	
An Introduction to the Types of Claims        168
	
11	
Definition and Resemblance Arguments        178
	
12	
Causal Arguments        201
	
13	
Evaluation and Ethical Arguments        224
	
14	
Proposal Arguments        245
	 Appendix 1	
Informal Fallacies        271
	 Appendix 2	
A Concise Guide to Evaluating, Using, and Documenting Sources        276

iv	
Detailed Contents
Preface        xiii
Acknowledgments        xvi
	
Part One	
Overview of Argument        1
	
 1	
Argument: An Introduction        2
What Do We Mean by Argument?        2
Argument Is Not a Fight or a Quarrel        2
Argument Is Not Pro-Con Debate        3
Arguments Can Be Explicit or Implicit        3
The Defining Features of Argument        4
Argument Requires Justification of Its Claims        4
Argument Is Both a Process and a Product        6
Argument Combines Truth Seeking and Persuasion        7
Argument and the Problem of Truth        9
	
 2	
Argument as Inquiry: Reading and Exploring        12
Finding Issues to Explore        12
Do Some Initial Brainstorming        13
Be Open to the Issues All around You        13
Explore Ideas by Freewriting        14
Explore Ideas by Idea Mapping        16
Explore Ideas by Playing the Believing and Doubting Game        17
Reading Texts Rhetorically        19
Genres of Argument        19
Authorial Purpose and Audience        22
Determining Degree of Advocacy        24
Reading to Believe an Argument’s Claims        25
JAMES SUROWIECKI, “The Pay Is Too Damn Low”        25
Summary Writing as a Way of Reading to Believe        27
Practicing Believing: Willing Your Own Belief in the Writer’s Views        29
Reading to Doubt        29
Thinking Dialectically        30

	
Detailed Contents	
v
MICHAEL SALTSMAN, “To Help the Poor, Move Beyond ‘Minimum’ Gestures”        32
Three Ways to Foster Dialectic Thinking        33
Writing Assignment: An Argument Summary or A Formal Exploratory Essay        34
TRUDIE MAKENS (STUDENT), “Should Fast-Food Workers Be Paid $15 per Hour?”        36
	
Part Two	
Writing an Argument        43
	
 3	
The Core of an Argument: A Claim with Reasons        44
The Classical Structure of Argument        44
Classical Appeals and the Rhetorical Triangle        46
Issue Questions as the Origins of Argument        47
Difference between an Issue Question and an Information Question        48
How to Identify an Issue Question        48
Difference between a Genuine Argument and a Pseudo-Argument        49
Pseudo-Arguments: Committed Believers and Fanatical Skeptics        49
A Closer Look at Pseudo-Arguments: The Lack of Shared Assumptions        50
Frame of an Argument: A Claim Supported by Reasons        51
What Is a Reason?        51
Expressing Reasons in Because Clauses        52
Writing Assignment: An Issue Question and Working Thesis Statements        53
	
 4	
The Logical Structure of Arguments        55
An Overview of Logos: What Do We Mean by the “Logical Structure” of 
an Argument?        55
Formal Logic versus Real-World Logic        55
The Role of Assumptions        56
The Core of an Argument: The Enthymeme        56
The Power of Audience-Based Reasons        58
Adopting a Language for Describing Arguments: The Toulmin System        59
Using Toulmin’s Schema to Plan and Test Your Argument        63
Hypothetical Example: Cheerleaders as Athletes        64
Extended Student Example: Girls and Violent Video Games        67
Carmen Tieu (STUDENT), “Why Violent Video Games Are Good for Girls”        68
The Thesis-Governed “Self-Announcing” Structure of Classical Argument        70
Writing Assignment: Plan of an Argument’s Details        72

vi	
Detailed Contents
	
 5	
Using Evidence Effectively        73
Kinds of Evidence        73
The Persuasive Use of Evidence        77
Apply the STAR Criteria to Evidence        77
Establish a Trustworthy Ethos        78
Be Mindful of a Source’s Distance from the Original Data        79
Rhetorical Understanding of Evidence        80
Angle of Vision and the Selection and Framing of Evidence        80
Rhetorical Strategies for Framing Evidence        82
Examining Visual Arguments: Angle of Vision        83
Special Strategies for Framing Statistical Evidence        85
Creating a Plan for Gathering Evidence        86
Writing Assignment: A Supporting-Reasons Argument        87
	
 6	
Moving Your Audience: Ethos, Pathos, and Kairos        88
Ethos and Pathos as Persuasive Appeals: An Overview        88
How to Create an Effective Ethos: The Appeal to Credibility        90
How to Create Pathos: The Appeal to Beliefs and Emotions        91
Use Concrete Language        91
Use Specific Examples and Illustrations        91
Use Narratives        92
Use Words, Metaphors, and Analogies with Appropriate Connotations        93
Kairos: The Timeliness and Fitness of Arguments        93
Using Images to Appeal to Logos, Ethos, Pathos, and Kairos        94
How Audience-Based Reasons Enhance Logos, Ethos, and Pathos        95
Examining Visual Arguments: Logos, Ethos, Pathos, and Kairos        96
Writing Assignment: Revising a Draft for Ethos, Pathos, and Audience-Based Reasons        99
	
 7	
Responding to Objections and Alternative Views        100
One-Sided, Multisided, and Dialogic Arguments        100
Determining Your Audience’s Resistance to Your Views        101
Appealing to a Supportive Audience: One-sided Argument        102
Appealing to a Neutral or Undecided Audience: Classical Argument        102
Summarizing Opposing Views        103
Refuting Opposing Views        103
Strategies for Rebutting Evidence        104

	
Detailed Contents	
vii
Conceding to Opposing Views        105
Example of a Student Essay Using Refutation Strategy        106
TRUDIE MAKENS (STUDENT), “Bringing Dignity to Workers: Make the Minimum Wage a 
Living Wage”        106
Appealing to a Resistant Audience: Dialogic Argument        108
Creating a Dialogic Argument with a Delayed Thesis        109
Ross Douthat, “Islam in Two Americas”        109
Writing a Delayed-Thesis Argument        111
A More Open-Ended Approach: Rogerian communication        112
Rogerian Communication as Growth for the Writer        113
Rogerian Communication as Collaborative Negotiation        115
Writing Rogerian Communication        115
COLLEEN FONTANA (STUDENT), “An Open Letter to Robert Levy in Response to His Article  
‘They Never Learn’”        116
Writing Assignment: A Classical Argument or a Rogerian Letter        119
LAUREN SHINOZUKA (STUDENT), “‘The Dangers of Digital Distractedness”        119
	
Part Three	
Analyzing Arguments        123
	
 8	
Analyzing Arguments Rhetorically        124
Thinking Rhetorically about a Text        124
Questions for Rhetorical Analysis        125
Conducting Rhetorical Analysis        128
KATHRYN JEAN LOPEZ, “Egg Heads”        128
Our Own Rhetorical Analysis of “Egg Heads”        131
Writing Assignment: A Rhetorical Analysis        134
Generating Ideas for Your Rhetorical Analysis        135
Organizing Your Rhetorical Analysis        136
ELLEN GOODMAN, “Womb for Rent”        137
ZACHARY STUMPS (STUDENT), “A Rhetorical Analysis of Ellen Goodman’s  
‘Womb for Rent’”        138
	
 9	
Analyzing Visual Arguments        142
Understanding Design Elements in Visual Argument        143
The Components of Visual Design        143
An Analysis of a Visual Argument Using Type and Spatial Elements        145

viii	
Detailed Contents
The Compositional Features of Photographs and Drawings        146
An Analysis of a Visual Argument Using All the Design Components        148
The Genres of Visual Arguments        151
Posters and Fliers        152
Public Affairs Advocacy Advertisements        154
Cartoons        156
Web Pages        157
Constructing Your Own Visual Argument        158
Using Information Graphics in Arguments        159
How Tables Contain a Variety of Stories        159
Using a Graph to Tell a Story        161
Incorporating Graphics into Your Argument        163
Writing Assignment: A Visual Argument Rhetorical Analysis, a Visual Argument, or a Microtheme  
Using Quantitative Data        165
	
Part Four	
Arguments in Depth: Types of Claims        167
	
 10	
An Introduction to the Types of Claims        168
The Types of Claims and Their Typical Patterns of Development        168
Using Claim Types to Focus an Argument and Generate Ideas:  
An Example        170
Writer 1: Ban E-Cigarettes        171
Writer 2: Promote E-Cigarettes as a Preferred Alternative  
to Real Cigarettes        172
Writer 3: Place No Restrictions on E-Cigarettes        173
Hybrid Arguments: How Claim Types Work Together in Arguments        173
Some Examples of Hybrid Arguments        173
An Extended Example of a Hybrid Argument        174
ALEX HUTCHINSON, “Your Daily Multivitamin May Be Hurting You”        175
	
 11	
Definition and Resemblance Arguments        178
What is at Stake in a Categorical Argument?        179
Consequences Resulting from Categorical Claims        180
The Rule of Justice: Things in the Same Category Should Be Treated  
the Same Way        180
Types of Categorical Arguments        181
Simple Categorical Arguments        182
Definition Arguments        182

	
Detailed Contents	
ix
Resemblance Argument Using Analogy        183
Resemblance Arguments Using Precedent        184
Examining Visual Arguments: Claim about Category (Definition)        185
The Criteria-Match Structure of Definition Arguments        186
Overview of Criteria-Match Structure        186
Toulmin Framework for a Definition Argument        187
Creating Criteria Using Aristotelian Definition        188
Creating Criteria Using an Operational Definition        189
Conducting the Match Part of a Definition Argument        189
Idea-Generating Strategies for Creating Your Own Criteria-Match  
Argument        190
Strategy 1: Research How Others Have Defined the Term        190
Strategy 2: Create Your Own Extended Definition        191
Writing Assignment: A Definition Argument        193
Exploring Ideas        194
Identifying Your Audience and Determining What’s at Stake        194
Organizing a Definition Argument        196
Questioning and Critiquing a Definition Argument        196
ALEX MULLEN (STUDENT), “A Pirate But Not a Thief: What Does ‘Stealing’ Mean in a 
Digital Environment?”        198
	
 12	
Causal Arguments        201
An Overview of Causal Arguments        202
Kinds of Causal Arguments        203
Toulmin Framework for a Causal Argument        205
Two Methods for Arguing that One Event Causes Another        207
First Method: Explain the Causal Mechanism Directly        208
Second Method: Infer Causal Links Using Inductive Reasoning        208
Examining Visual Arguments: A Causal Claim        210
Key Terms and Inductive Fallacies in Causal Arguments        210
A Glossary of Key Terms        210
Writing Assignment: A Causal Argument        212
Exploring Ideas        212
Identifying Your Audience and Determining What’s at Stake        213
Organizing a Causal Argument        213
Questioning and Critiquing a Causal Argument        214

x	
Detailed Contents
JULEE CHRISTIANSON, “Why Lawrence Summers Was Wrong: Culture Rather Than Biology  
Explains the Underrepresentation of Women in Science and Mathematics” (APA-format 
research paper)        218
	
 13	
Evaluation and Ethical Arguments        224
An Overview of Categorical and Ethical Evaluation Arguments        226
Constructing a Categorical Evaluation Argument        226
Criteria-Match Structure of Categorical Evaluations        226
Developing Your Criteria        227
Making Your Match Argument        229
Examining Visual Arguments: An Evaluation Claim        230
Constructing an Ethical Evaluation Argument        232
Consequences as the Base of Ethics        232
Principles as the Base of Ethics        233
Example Ethical Arguments Examining Capital Punishment        233
Common Problems in Making Evaluation Arguments        235
Writing Assignment: An Evaluation or Ethical Argument        236
Exploring Ideas        236
Identifying Your Audience and Determining What’s at Stake        237
Organizing an Evaluation Argument        237
Critiquing a Categorical Evaluation Argument        237
Critiquing an Ethical Argument        239
LORENA MENDOZA-FLORES (STUDENT), “Silenced and Invisible: Problems of Hispanic Students at Valley 
High School”        240
JUDITH DAAR AND EREZ ALONI, “Three Genetic Parents—For One Healthy Baby”        243
	
 14	
Proposal Arguments        245
The Special Features and Concerns of Proposal Arguments        247
Practical Proposals versus Policy Proposals        247
Toulmin Framework for a Proposal Argument        247
Special Concerns for Proposal Arguments        247
Examining Visual Arguments: A Proposal Claim        249
Developing a Proposal Argument        250
Convincing Your Readers that a Problem Exists        250
Showing the Specifics of Your Proposal        251
Convincing Your Readers that the Benefits of Your Proposal  
Outweigh the Costs        251

	
Detailed Contents	
xi
Using Heuristic Strategies to Develop Supporting Reasons for Your Proposal        252
The “Claim Types” Strategy        252
The “Stock Issues” Strategy        254
Proposal Arguments as Advocacy Posters or Advertisements        256
Writing Assignment: A Proposal Argument        258
Exploring Ideas        259
Identifying Your Audience and Determining What’s at Stake        259
Organizing a Proposal Argument        260
Designing a One-Page Advocacy Advertisement        260
Designing PowerPoint Slides or Other Visual Aids for a Speech        261
Questioning and Critiquing a Proposal Argument        262
IVAN SNOOK (STUDENT), “Flirting with Disaster: An Argument Against Integrating Women into the 
Combat Arms”        264
SANDY WAINSCOTT (STUDENT), “Why McDonald’s Should Sell Meat and Veggie Pies: A Proposal to End 
Subsidies for Cheap Meat”        269
	 Appendix 1 	
Informal Fallacies        271
Fallacies of Pathos        271
Fallacies of Ethos        272
Fallacies of Logos        273
	 Appendix 2 	
A Concise Guide to Evaluating, Using, and Documenting Sources        276
Evaluating Your Sources by Reading Rhetorically        276
Reading with Your Own Goals in Mind        276
Reading with Rhetorical Awareness        277
Taking Purposeful Notes        278
Evaluating Sources        280
Using Sources for Your Own Purposes        282
Using Summary, Paraphrase, and Quotation        284
Summarizing        284
Paraphrasing        285
Quoting        286
Quoting Words and Phrases        287
Creating Attributive Tags to Indicate Use of a Source        287
Avoiding Plagiarism        288
Why Some Plagiarism May Occur Unwittingly        288
Strategies for Avoiding Plagiarism        289

xii	
Detailed Contents
Citing Sources in Your Text in MLA Style        291
Documenting Sources in a “Works Cited” List (MLA)        292
Student Example of an MLA-Style Research Paper        293
Citing Sources in Your Text in APA Style        294
Documenting Sources in a “References” List (APA)        294
Student Example of an APA-Style Research Paper        295
Credits        296
Index        298

	
	
xiii
Preface
Through many editions, Writing Arguments has established itself as a leading col-
lege textbook in argumentation. By focusing on argument as dialogue in search of 
solutions to problems instead of as pro-con debate with winners and losers, Writing 
Arguments treats argument as a process of inquiry as well as a means of persuasion. 
Users and reviewers have consistently praised the book for teaching the critical think-
ing skills needed for writing arguments: how to analyze the occasion for an argument; 
how to ground an argument in the values and beliefs of the targeted audience; how to 
develop and elaborate an argument; and how to respond sensitively to objections and 
alternative views. We are pleased that in this seventh concise edition, we have made 
many improvements while retaining the text’s signature strengths.
What’s New in the Seventh Edition?
■	 An updated, revised, and streamlined Chapter 2 on “Argument as Inquiry,” 
­exploring the “living wage” controversy. Chapter 2 now has all new student exam-
ples, visual arguments, and professional readings on the timely issue of raising the 
minimum wage for fast-food workers or retail store clerks. A new annotated student 
exploratory essay models the process of rhetorical reading and dialogic thinking.
■	 Six new student model essays, many of which are annotated. New student model 
­arguments, including newly annotated models, help demonstrate argument strate-
gies in practice. Showing how other students have developed various types of argu-
ments makes argument concepts and strategies easier for students to grasp and use 
themselves. New student essays address timely and relevant issues such as raising the 
minimum wage, ­analyzing the ethics of downloading films from person-to-person 
torrent sites on the Web, critiquing a school culture that makes minorities “invisible,” 
opposing women in combat roles, and evaluating the effect of social media on today’s 
college students.
■	 Expanded treatment of evidence. A revised and expanded Chapter 5 explains with 
greater clarity the kinds of evidence that can be used in argument and shows students 
how to analyze evidence rhetorically. A new section shows students how to evaluate 
evidence encountered in secondary sources by tracing it back to its primary sources.
■	 Expanded treatment of Rogerian communication and other means of en-
gaging alternative views. In Chapter 7, we expand our treatment of Rogerian 
argument by reframing it as Rogerian communication, which focuses more on 
mutual listening, negotiation, and growth than on persuasion. In addition, a new 
annotated student essay illustrates how a classical argument appealing to a neu-
tral, undecided, or mildly resistant audience addresses alternative views.
■	 Four new professional readings. New readings about issues such as a living wage, 
the use of dietary supplements among athletes, and therapeutic cloning have been 
chosen for their illustrative power and student interest.
■	 New visual examples throughout the text. New images, editorial cartoons, and 
graphics throughout the text highlight current issues such as living wage, climate 

xiv	
Preface
change, bullying, sexual trafficking, date rape, rainwater conservation, fracking, 
and gender or racial stereotypes.
■	 Streamlined organization of each chapter now keyed to learning outcomes. Each 
chapter now begins with learning outcomes. Each main heading in a chapter is 
linked to an outcome, enhancing the explanatory power of the outcomes and help-
ing students learn the high-level take-away points and concepts in each chapter.
What Hasn’t Changed? The Distinguishing Features of 
Writing Arguments
Building on earlier success, we have preserved the signature features of earlier editions 
praised by students, instructors, and reviewers:
■	 Integration of four different approaches to argument. This text uses:
•	 The enthymeme as a rhetorical and logical structure. This concept, espe-
cially useful for beginning writers, helps students “nutshell” an argument as 
a claim with one or more supporting because clauses. It also helps them see 
how real-world arguments are rooted in assumptions granted by the audience 
rather than in universal and unchanging principles.
•	 The three classical types of appeal—logos, ethos, and pathos. These concepts 
help students place their arguments in a rhetorical context focusing on audi-
ence-based appeals; they also help students create an effective voice and style.
•	 Toulmin’s system of analyzing arguments. Toulmin’s system helps students see 
the complete, implicit structure that underlies an enthymeme and develop appro-
priate grounds and backing to support an argument’s reasons and warrants. It also 
highlights the rhetorical, social, and dialectical nature of argument.
•	 Stasis theory concerning types of claims. This approach stresses the heuristic 
value of learning different patterns of support for different types of claims and 
­often leads students to make surprisingly rich and full arguments.
■	 Focus throughout on writing arguments. Grounded in composition theory, 
this text combines explanations of argument with exploratory writing activities, 
sequenced writing assignments, and class-tested discussion tasks with the aim 
of helping students produce their own strong arguments. The text emphasizes 
the critical thinking that underlies effective arguments, particularly the skills of 
critical reading, of active questioning and listening, of believing and doubting, 
of negotiating ambiguity and seeking synthesis, and of developing effective rea-
sons and evidence to support claims.
■	 Emphasis on argument as a rhetorical act. Analyzing the audience, understand-
ing the real-world occasions for argument, appreciating the context and genre of 
arguments, and tying arguments to the audience’s beliefs and values are all treated 
as equally ­important rhetorical considerations.
■	 Generous treatment of the research process. Appendix 2 covers a variety of re-
search skills, including reading and evaluating sources rhetorically, taking notes, 
integrating source material, avoiding plagiarism and patch writing, and citing 
sources using two academic citation systems: MLA and APA.
■	 Well-sequenced writing assignments. The text provides a variety of sequenced 
writing assignments that include an argument summary, a researched exploratory 

	
Preface	
xv
essay, a “supporting-reasons” argument, a classical argument, a delayed-thesis 
argument or Rogerian letter, a rhetorical analysis of a written argument, a rhe-
torical analysis of a visual argument (an advocacy ad or poster), a definition 
argument, a causal argument, an evaluation or ethical argument, a proposal argu-
ment, and a speech with PowerPoint slides.
■	 “For Class Discussion” exercises and “Examining Visual Arguments” exer-
cises. These class-tested informal activities, which teach critical thinking and 
build argumentative skills, are designed to produce active class discussion and 
debate. All “For Class Discussion” exercises can be used either for whole-class 
discussions or for collaborative group tasks.
Resources for Instructors and Students
Now Available for Composition 	
Writing
TM
My
Lab
Integrated Solutions for Writing. MyWritingLab is an online homework, tutorial, 
and assessment program that provides engaging experiences for today’s instructors 
and students. New features designed specifically for composition instructors and their 
course needs include a new writing space for students, customizable rubrics for assess-
ing and grading student writing, multimedia instruction on all aspects of composition, 
and advanced reporting to improve the ability to analyze class performance.
Adaptive learning. MyWritingLab offers pre-assessments and personalized remedia-
tion so students see improved results and instructors spend less time in class reviewing 
the basics.
Visit www.mywritinglab.com for more information.
eTextbooks
Pearson eText gives students access to Writing Arguments, Seventh Edition, whenever 
and wherever they can access the Internet. The eText pages look exactly like the printed 
text, and include powerful interactive and customization functions. Users can create 
notes, highlight text in different colors, create bookmarks, zoom, click hyperlinked words 
and phrases to view definitions, and view as a single page or as two pages. Pearson eText 
also links students to associated media files, enabling them to view videos as they read 
the text, and offers a full-text search and the ability to save and export notes. The Pearson 
eText also includes embedded URLs in the chapter text with active links to the Internet.
The Pearson eText app is a great companion to Pearson’s eText browser-based 
book reader. It allows existing subscribers who view their Pearson eText titles on a 
Mac or PC to additionally access their titles in a bookshelf on the iPad or an Android 
tablet either online or via download.
Instructor’s Manual, Tenth Edition
The Instructor’s Manual, tenth edition, includes suggestions for designing an argu-
ment course, sequencing writing assignments, and teaching each chapter, as well as 
sample syllabi and an introduction to Toulmin.

xvi	
Acknowledgments
We are happy for this opportunity to give public thanks to the scholars, teachers, and stu-
dents who have influenced our approach to composition and argument.
We are particularly grateful to our talented students—Trudie Makens, Lauren 
Shinozuka, Alex Mullen, Lorena Mendoza-Flores, and Ivan Snook—who contributed to 
this edition their timely arguments built from their intellectual curiosity, ideas, personal 
experiences, and research. We also thank Janie Bube for her environmental advocacy 
poster and Trey Tice for his film criticism. Additionally, we are grateful to all our students 
whom we have been privileged to teach in our writing classes. Their insights and growth as 
writers have inspired our ongoing study of rhetoric and argumentation.
We thank, too, the many users of our texts who have given us encouragement about 
our successes and offered helpful suggestions for improvements. Particularly we thank 
the following scholars and teachers who reviewed this revision of Writing Arguments 
in its various stages: Alicia Alexander, Cape Fear Community College; Elijah Coleman, 
Washington State University; Shannon Collins, Owensboro Community and Technical 
College; Veronda Hutchinson, Johnston Community College; A. Abby Knoblauch, 
Kansas State University; Beth Lewis, Moberly Area Community College; Layne Neeper, 
Morehead State University; Jessie Nixon, University of Alaska Anchorage; Thomas Riddle, 
Guilford Technical Community College; Dixie A. Shaw-Tillmon, The University of Texas 
San Antonio; Janice R. Showler, Holy Family University; Coreen Wees, Iowa Western 
Community College; and Stephen H. Wells, Community College of Allegheny County.
We thank our editor, Brad Potthoff, for his publishing knowledge and cordial leadership, 
and our two development editors, Kassi Radomski and Marion Castellucci, who shepherded 
this project through every stage, giving us timely insight, collaborative feedback, and their 
professional support. We also thank Martha Beyerlein, our production editor, who has worked 
with us for years and patiently ushered us into the paperless stages of text preparation.
As always we thank our families, who ultimately make this work possible. John Bean 
thanks his wife, Kit, also a professional composition teacher, and his children, Matthew, 
Andrew, Stephen, and Sarah, all of whom have grown to adulthood since he first began 
writing textbooks. Our lively conversations at family dinners, which now include spouses, 
partners, and grandchildren, have kept him engaged in arguments that matter about 
how to create a just, humane, and sustainable world. June Johnson thanks her husband, 
Kenneth Bube, a mathematics professor and researcher, and her daughter, Janie Bube, now 
a student contributor to this text. Ken and Janie have played major roles in the ongoing 
family analysis of argumentation in the public sphere on wide-ranging subjects. Janie’s 
knowledge of environmental issues and Kenneth’s knowledge of mathematical thinking, 
online education, energy resources, and technology have broadened June’s understanding 
of argument hotspots. They have also enabled her to meet the demands and challenges of 
continuing to infuse new ideas and material into this text in each revision.
John C. Bean
June Johnson

1
Part One
Overview of Argument
	 1	 Argument: An Introduction
	 2	 Argument as Inquiry: Reading and Exploring
Across the country, protests like this one in front of a Burger King in Boston are raising awareness of the 
­poverty-level wages of fast-food workers, who are not represented by unions and who often depend on public 
assistance such as food stamps to get by every month. While protestors argue for a minimum wage of $15 per 
hour, opponents argue that raising the minimum wage would increase food prices and reduce the number of 
jobs. If you were making a brochure or poster in favor of an increased minimum wage for fast-food workers, how 
effective would this realistic, low-keyed photo be in raising sympathy for the cause? Chapters 2 and 7 explore 
the issue of a living wage for unskilled workers.

2	
1
Argument: An Introduction
What you will learn in this chapter:
	
1.1	 To explain common misconceptions about the meaning of argument
	
1.2	 To describe defining features of argument
	
1.3	 To understand the relationship of argument to the problem of truth
At the outset of a book on argument, you might expect us to provide a simple 
definition of argument. Instead, we’re going to explain why no universally 
accepted definition is possible. Over the centuries, philosophers and rhetori-
cians have disagreed about both the meaning of the term and about the goals 
that arguers should set for themselves. This opening chapter introduces you 
to some of these controversies.
We begin by showing some common misconceptions about argument 
while also explaining how arguments can be either implicit or explicit. We 
then discuss three defining features of argument: It requires writers or speak-
ers to justify their claims, it is both a product and a process, and it combines 
elements of truth seeking and persuasion. Finally, we explore more deeply the 
relationship between truth seeking and persuasion by asking questions about 
the nature of “truth” that arguments seek.
What Do We Mean by Argument?
Let’s begin by examining the inadequacies of two popular images 
of argument—fight and debate.
Argument Is Not a Fight or a Quarrel
The word argument often connotes anger, as when we say, “I just 
got in a huge argument with my roommate!” We may picture 
heated disagreements, rising pulse rates, and slamming doors. We may conjure 
up images of shouting talk-show guests or flaming bloggers.
But to our way of thinking, argument doesn’t necessarily imply anger. 
In fact, arguing is often pleasurable. It is a creative and productive activ-
ity that engages us at high levels of inquiry and critical thinking, often in 
1.1  To explain 
common miscon-
ceptions about 
the meaning of 
argument

	
Chapter 1    Argument: An Introduction	
3
conversation with people we like and respect. For your primary image of argument, 
we invite you to think not of a shouting match on cable news but of a small group of 
reasonable people seeking the best solution to a problem. We will return to this image 
throughout the chapter.
Argument Is Not Pro-Con Debate
Another popular conception of argument is debate—a presidential debate, perhaps, 
or a high school or college debate tournament. According to one popular dictionary, 
debate is “a formal contest of argumentation in which two opposing teams defend 
and attack a given proposition.” Although formal debates can develop our critical 
thinking powers, they stress winning and losing, often to the detriment of coopera-
tive inquiry.
To illustrate the limitations of debate, consider one of our former students, a 
champion high school debater who spent his senior year debating prison reform. 
Throughout the year he argued for and against such propositions as “The United States 
should build more prisons” and “We must find innovative alternatives to prison.” One 
day we asked him, “What do you personally think is the best way to reform prisons?” 
He replied, “I don’t know. I’ve never thought about what I would actually choose.”
Here was a bright, articulate student who had studied prisons extensively for a year. 
Yet nothing in the atmosphere of pro-con debate had engaged him in truth-seeking 
inquiry. He could argue for and against a proposition, but he hadn’t experienced the 
wrenching process of clarifying his own values and taking a personal stand. As we ex-
plain throughout this text, argument entails a desire for truth; it aims to find the best 
solutions to complex problems. We don’t mean that arguers don’t passionately sup-
port their own points of view or expose weaknesses in views they find faulty. Instead, 
we mean that their goal isn’t to win a game but to find and promote the best belief or 
course of action.
Arguments Can Be Explicit or Implicit
Before proceeding to some defining features of argument, we should also note that 
arguments can be either explicit or implicit. An explicit argument directly states its 
controversial claim and supports it with reasons and evidence. An implicit argument, 
in contrast, may not look like an argument at all. It may be a bumper sticker, a bill-
board, a poster, a photograph, a cartoon, a vanity license plate, a slogan on a T-shirt, an 
advertisement, a poem, or a song lyric. But like an explicit argument, it persuades its 
audience toward a certain point of view.
Consider the striking photograph in Figure 1.1—a baby wearing a bib labeled 
“POISON.” This photograph enters a conversation about the safety of toys and other 
baby products sold in the United States, prompted in part by the discovery that a sub-
stance used to make plastics pliable and soft—phthalates (pronounced “thalates”)—may 
be harmful. Phthalates have been shown to interfere with hormone production in rat 
fetuses and, based on other rodent studies, may produce cancers and other ailments. 

4	
Part 1	
Overview of Argument
Because many baby products contain phthal-
ates—bibs, edges of cribs, rubber duckies, and 
other soft rubbery toys—parents worry that 
babies can ingest phthalates by chewing on 
these items.
The photograph of the baby and bib 
makes the argumentative claim that baby 
products are poisonous; the photograph im-
plicitly urges viewers to take action against 
phthalates. But a skilled arguer would recog-
nize that this photograph is just one voice in a 
surprisingly complex conversation. Is the bib 
in fact poisonous? An examination of explicit 
arguments about phthalates—that is, verbal 
arguments with stated reasons and evidence—
reveals a number of disputed questions about 
the risk posed by phthalates. To what extent 
do studies on rats apply to humans? How 
much exposure to phthalates should be con-
sidered dangerous? (Experiments on rats used 
large amounts of phthalates—amounts that, 
according to many scientists, far exceed any-
thing a baby could absorb by chewing on a 
toy.) Also at issue is the level of health risks 
a free market society should be willing to 
tolerate. A U.S. agency generally doesn’t ban 
a substance unless it has been proven harmful to humans, not merely suspected of being 
harmful. In defense of free markets, the toy and chemical industries accused opponents of 
phthalates of using “junk science” to produce scary—but inaccurate—data.
Our point in summarizing the toxic toy controversy is to demonstrate the persua-
sive roles of both implicit and explicit arguments in resolving civic disputes.
The Defining Features of Argument
We turn now to examine arguments in more detail. (Unless we say oth-
erwise, by argument we mean explicit arguments that attempt to supply 
reasons and evidence to support their claims.) This section examines three 
defining features of such arguments.
Argument Requires Justification of Its Claims
To begin defining argument, let’s turn to a humble but universal site of disagreement: 
the conflict between a parent and a teenager over rules. In what way and in what 
­circumstances do such conflicts constitute arguments?­
1.2  To describe 
defining features 
of argument
Figure 1.1  Baby and bib

	
Chapter 1    Argument: An Introduction	
5
Consider the following dialogue:
Young Person (racing for the front door while putting coat on):    Bye. See you later.
Parent:  Whoa! What time are you planning on coming home?
Young Person (coolly, hand still on doorknob):  I’m sure we discussed this ­earlier. I’ll 
be home around 2 a.m. (The second sentence, spoken very rapidly, is barely audible.)
Parent (mouth tightening):  We did not discuss this earlier, and you’re not staying out 
till two in the morning. You’ll be home at twelve.
At this point in the exchange, we have a quarrel, not an argument. Quarrelers ex-
change antagonistic assertions without any attempt to support them rationally. If the 
dialogue never gets past the “Yes-you-will/No-I-won’t” stage, it either remains a quar-
rel or degenerates into a fight.
Let us say, however, that the dialogue takes the following turn:
Young Person (tragically):  But I’m sixteen years old!
Now we’re moving toward argument. Not, to be sure, a particularly well-developed 
or cogent one, but an argument all the same. It’s now an argument because one of the 
quarrelers has offered a reason for her assertion. Her choice of curfew is satisfactory, 
she says, because she is sixteen years old.
The parent can now respond in one of several ways that will either advance the 
argument or turn it back into a quarrel. The parent can simply invoke parental author-
ity (“I don’t care—you’re still coming home at twelve”), in which case the ­argument 
ceases. Or the parent can provide a reason for his or her view (“You will be home at 
twelve because your dad and I pay the bills around here!”), in which case the argument 
takes a new turn.
So far we’ve established two necessary conditions that must be met before we’re 
willing to call something an argument: (1) a set of two or more conflicting assertions 
and (2) the attempt to resolve the conflict through an appeal to reason.
But good argument demands more than meeting these two formal requirements. 
For an argument to be effective, the arguer must clarify and support the reasons 
presented. For example, “But I’m sixteen years old!” is not yet a clear support for the 
assertion “I should be allowed to set my own curfew.” On the surface, Young Person’s 
argument seems absurd. Her parent, of all people, knows precisely how old she is. 
What makes it an argument is that behind her claim lies an unstated assumption—all 
sixteen-year-olds are old enough to set their own curfews. What Young Person needs 
to do now is to support that assumption.* In doing so, she must anticipate the sorts of 
questions the assumption will raise in the minds of her parent: What is the legal ­status 
of sixteen-year-olds? How psychologically mature, as opposed to chronologically 
*In Chapter 4 we will call the assumption underlying a line of reasoning its warrant.

6	
Part 1	
Overview of Argument
mature, is Young Person? What is the actual track record of Young Person in being 
responsible? Each of these questions will force Young Person to reexamine and ­clarify 
her assumptions about the proper degree of autonomy for sixteen-year-olds. And 
her response to those questions should in turn force the parents to reexamine their 
assumptions about the dependence of sixteen-year-olds on parental guidance and 
wisdom. (Likewise, the parents will need to show why “paying the bills around here” 
automatically gives them the right to set Young Person’s curfew.)
As the argument continues, Young Person and Parent may shift to a different line 
of reasoning. For example, Young Person might say, “I should be allowed to stay out 
until 2 a.m. because all my friends get to stay out that late.” (Here the unstated assump-
tion is that the rules in this family ought to be based on the rules in other families.) 
The parent might in turn respond, “But I certainly never stayed out that late when I 
was your age”—an argument assuming that the rules in this family should ­follow the 
rules of an earlier generation.
As Young Person and Parent listen to each other’s points of view (and begin 
­realizing why their initial arguments have not persuaded their intended audience), both 
parties find themselves in the uncomfortable position of having to examine their own 
beliefs and to justify assumptions that they have taken for granted. Here we encounter 
one of the earliest senses of the term to argue, which is “to clarify.” As an arguer begins 
to clarify her own position on an issue, she also begins to clarify her audience’s posi-
tion. Such clarification helps the arguer see how she might accommodate her audience’s 
views, perhaps by adjusting her own position or by developing reasons that appeal to 
her audience’s values. Thus Young Person might suggest an argument like this:
I should be allowed to stay out until 2 a.m. on a trial basis because I need enough space to 
demonstrate my maturity and show you I won’t get into trouble.
The assumption underlying this argument is that it is good to give teenagers 
freedom to demonstrate their maturity. Because this reason is likely to appeal to her 
parent’s values (the parent wants the daughter to mature) and because it is tempered 
by the qualifier “on a trial basis” (which reduces some of the threat of Young Person’s 
initial demands), it may prompt productive discussion.
Whether or not Young Person and Parent can work out the best solution, the 
preceding scenario illustrates how argument leads people to clarify their reasons and 
provide justifications that can be examined rationally. The scenario also illustrates 
two specific aspects of argument that we will explore in detail in the next sections: 
(1) Argument is both a process and a product. (2) Argument combines truth seeking 
and persuasion.
Argument Is Both a Process and a Product
In the preceding scenario, argument functioned as a process whereby two or more 
parties sought the best solution to a question or problem. Argument can also be 
viewed as a product, each product being any person’s contribution to the conversation 

	
Chapter 1    Argument: An Introduction	
7
at a given moment. In an informal discussion, these products are usually short, 
whatever time a person uses during his or her turns in the conversation. Under more 
formal settings, an orally delivered product might be a short, impromptu speech (say, 
during an open-mike discussion of a campus issue) or a longer, carefully prepared 
formal speech (as in a PowerPoint presentation at a business meeting or an argument 
at a public hearing on a city project).
Similar conversations occur in writing. Roughly analogous to a small-group 
discussion is an exchange of the kind that occurs regularly online through informal 
chat groups or more formal blog sites. In an online discussion, participants have more 
thinking time to shape their messages than they do in a real-time oral discussion. 
Nevertheless, messages are usually short and informal, making it possible over the 
course of several days to see participants’ ideas shift and evolve as conversants modify 
their initial views in response to others’ views.
Roughly equivalent to a formal speech would be a formal written argument, which 
may take the form of an academic argument for a college course; an online blog post-
ing; a guest column for the op-ed* section of a newspaper; a legal brief; or an article 
for an organizational newsletter, popular magazine, or professional journal. In each of 
these instances, the written argument (a product) enters a conversation (a process)—
in this case, a conversation of readers, many of whom will carry on the conversation by 
writing their own responses or by discussing the writer’s views with others. The goal 
of the community of writers and readers is to find the best solution to the problem or 
issue under discussion.
Argument Combines Truth Seeking and Persuasion
In thinking about argument as a product, the writer will find herself continually mov-
ing back and forth between truth seeking and persuasion—that is, between questions 
about the subject matter (What is the best solution to this problem?) and about audi-
ence (What reasons and evidence will most persuade them?). Back and forth she’ll 
weave, alternately absorbed in the subject of her argument and in the audience for that 
argument.
Rarely is either focus ever completely ignored, but their relative importance 
shifts during different phases of the argument’s development. We could thus place 
arguments on a kind of continuum that measures the degree of attention a writer 
gives to subject matter versus audience (see Figure 1.2). At the far truth-seeking 
end might be an exploratory piece that lays out several alternative approaches to a 
problem and weighs the strengths and weaknesses of each. At the other end of the 
continuum would be outright propaganda, such as a political campaign advertise-
ment that reduces a complex issue to sound bites. (At its most blatant, propaganda 
obliterates truth seeking; it will do anything, including distorting or inventing 
*Op-ed stands for “opposite-editorial.” It is the generic name in journalism for signed arguments 
that voice the writer’s opinion on an issue, as opposed to news stories, which are supposed to report 
events objectively.

8	
Part 1	
Overview of Argument
evidence, to win over an audience.) In the middle ranges of the continuum, writers 
shift their focuses back and forth between truth seeking and persuasion, but with 
varying degrees of emphasis.
As an example of a writer focusing primarily on truth seeking, consider the 
case of Kathleen who, in her college argument course, addressed the definitional 
question “Should American Sign Language meet the university’s foreign language 
requirement?” Kathleen had taken two years of ASL at a community college. When 
she transferred to a four-year college, her ASL proficiency was dismissed by the for-
eign language department chair. “ASL isn’t a ‘language,’” he said summarily. “It’s not 
equivalent to learning French, German, or Japanese.”
Kathleen disagreed, so she immersed herself in developing her argument. In 
her initial research she focused almost entirely on subject matter, searching for what 
linguists, neurologists, cognitive psychologists, and sociologists had said about ASL. 
She was only tacitly concerned with her audience, whom she mostly envisioned as 
her classmates and those sympathetic to her view. She wrote a well-documented 
­paper, citing several scholarly articles that made a good case to her classmates (and 
her professor) that ASL is indeed a distinct language.
Proud of the big red A the professor had placed on her paper, Kathleen ­decided 
for a subsequent assignment to write a second paper on ASL—but this time aimed 
it directly at the chair of foreign languages, petitioning him to accept her ASL pro-
ficiency for the foreign language requirement. Now her writing task falls closer 
to the persuasive end of our continuum. Kathleen once again immersed herself 
in ­research, but this time focused not on subject matter—whether or not ASL is 
a distinct language—but on audience. She researched the history of the foreign 
language requirement at her college and discovered some of the politics behind 
it. She also interviewed foreign language teachers to find out what they knew and 
didn’t know about ASL. She discovered that many teachers thought ASL was “easy 
to learn” and would allow students to avoid the rigors of a “real” foreign language 
class. Additionally, she learned that foreign language teachers valued immersing 
students in a foreign culture; in fact, the foreign language requirement was part of 
her ­college’s effort to create a multicultural curriculum.
Truth Seeking
Persuasion
Exploratory
essay
examining
all sides of
an issue
Argument as
inquiry, asking
audience to
think out
issue with
writer
Dialogic
argument
seeking
common
ground with
a resistant
audience
Outright
propaganda
Aggressive
one-sided
arguments
One-sided
argument
aimed at a
friendly
audience (often
for fund-raising
or calls to action)
Classical
argument
aimed at a
neutral or
possibly
skeptical
audience
Figure 1.2  Continuum of arguments from truth seeking to persuasion

	
Chapter 1    Argument: An Introduction	
9
This new understanding of her target audience helped Kathleen reconceptualize 
her argument. Her claim that ASL was a real language (the subject of her first paper) 
became only one section of her second paper, much condensed and abridged. She 
added sections showing (1) that learning ASL is difficult (to counter her audience’s 
belief that learning ASL was easy), (2) that the deaf community formed a distinct 
culture with its own customs and literature (to show how ASL met the goals of multi-
culturalism), and (3) that the number of transfer students with ASL credits would be 
negligible (to allay fears that accepting ASL would threaten enrollments in language 
classes). She ended her argument with an appeal to her college’s emphasis—declared 
in its mission statement—on eradicating social injustice and reaching out to the op-
pressed. She described the isolation of deaf people in a world where almost no hearing 
people learn ASL, and she argued that the deaf community on her campus could be 
integrated more fully into campus life if more students could “talk” with them. Thus 
the ideas included in her new argument—the reasons selected, the evidence used, the 
arrangement and tone—all were determined by her primary focus on persuasion.
Our point, then, is that all along the continuum writers are concerned with truth 
seeking and persuasion, but not necessarily with equal balance. Kathleen could not 
have written her second paper, aimed specifically at persuading the chair of the foreign 
language department, if she hadn’t first immersed herself in truth-seeking research that 
convinced her that ASL is indeed a distinct language. Nor are we saying that her second 
argument was better than her first. Both involved truth seeking and persuasion, but the 
first focused primarily on subject matter and the second primarily on audience.
Argument and the Problem of Truth
The tension that we have just examined between truth seeking and persua-
sion raises an ancient issue in the field of argument: Is the arguer’s first 
obligation to truth or to winning the argument? And just what is the nature 
of the truth to which arguers are supposed to be obligated?
In Plato’s famous dialogues from ancient Greek philosophy, these 
questions were at the heart of Socrates’ disagreement with the Sophists. 
The Sophists were professional rhetoricians who specialized in training orators to win 
arguments. Socrates, who valued truth seeking over persuasion and believed that truth 
could be discovered through philosophic inquiry, opposed the Sophists. For Socrates, 
Truth resided in the ideal world of forms, and through philosophic rigor humans 
could transcend the changing, shadowlike world of everyday reality to perceive the 
world of universals where Truth, Beauty, and Goodness resided. Through his method 
of questioning his interlocutors, Socrates would gradually peel away layer after layer of 
false views until Truth was revealed. The good person’s duty, Socrates believed, was not 
to win an argument but to pursue this higher Truth. Socrates distrusted rhetoricians 
because they were interested only in the temporal power and wealth that came from 
persuading audiences to the orator’s views.
Let’s apply Socrates’ disagreement with the Sophists to a modern instance. 
Suppose your community is divided over the issue of raising environmental standards 
1.3  To understand 
the relationship of 
argument to the 
problem of truth

10	
Part 1	
Overview of Argument
versus keeping open a job-producing factory that doesn’t meet new guidelines for 
waste discharge. The Sophists would train you to argue any side of this issue on behalf 
of any lobbying group willing to pay for your services. If, however, you followed the 
spirit of Socrates, you would be inspired to listen to all sides of the dispute, peel away 
false arguments, discover the Truth through reasonable inquiry, and commit yourself 
to a Right Course of Action.
But what is the nature of Truth or Right Action in a dispute between jobs and the 
environment? The Sophists believed that truth was determined by those in power; thus 
they could enter an argument unconstrained by any transcendent beliefs or assump-
tions. When Socrates talked about justice and virtue, they could reply contemptuously 
that these were fictitious concepts invented by the weak to protect themselves from the 
strong. Over the years, the Sophists’ relativist beliefs were so repugnant to people that 
the term sophistry became synonymous with trickery in argument.
However, in recent years the Sophists’ critique of a transcendent Universal Truth 
has been taken seriously by many philosophers, sociologists, and other thinkers who 
doubt Socrates’ confident belief that arguments, properly conducted, necessarily 
­arrive at a single Truth. For these thinkers, as for the Sophists, there are often different 
­degrees of truth and different kinds of truths for different situations or cultures. From 
this perspective, when we consider questions of interpretation or value, we can never 
demonstrate that a belief or assumption is true—not through scientific observation, 
not through reason, and not through religious revelation. We get our beliefs, according 
to these contemporary thinkers, from the shared assumptions of our particular cul-
tures. We are condemned (or liberated) to live in a pluralistic, multicultural world with 
competing visions of truth.
If we accept this pluralistic view of the world, do we then endorse the Sophists’ 
radical relativism, freeing us to argue any side of any issue? Or do we doggedly pursue 
some modern equivalent of Socrates’ truth?
Our own sympathies are with Socrates, but we admit to a view of truth that is 
more tentative, cautious, and conflicted than his. For us, truth seeking does not mean 
finding the “Right Answer” to a disputed question, but neither does it mean a valueless 
relativism in which all answers are equally good. For us, truth seeking means taking 
responsibility for determining the “best answer” or “best solution” to the question for 
the good of the whole community when taking into consideration the interests of all 
stakeholders. It means making hard decisions in the face of uncertainty. This more 
tentative view of truth means that you cannot use argument to “prove” your claim, but 
only to make a reasonable case for your claim.
To seek truth, then, means to seek the best or most just solution to a problem 
while observing all available evidence, listening with an open mind to the views of all 
stakeholders, clarifying and attempting to justify your own values and assumptions, 
and taking responsibility for your argument. It follows that truth seeking often means 
delaying closure on an issue, acknowledging the pressure of alternative views, and 
being willing to change one’s mind. Seen in this way, learning to argue effectively has 
the deepest sort of social value: It helps communities settle conflicts in a rational and 
humane way by finding, through the dialectic exchange of ideas, the best solutions to 
problems without resorting to violence or to other assertions of raw power.

	
Chapter 1    Argument: An Introduction	
11
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Role-Playing Arguments
On any given day, the media provides evidence of the complexity of living in a plural-
istic culture. Issues that could be readily decided in a completely homogeneous culture 
raise questions in a society that has fewer shared assumptions. Use the following case 
as the subject of a “simulation game” in which class members present the points of 
view of the people involved.
Case: Political Asylum for German Family Seeking Right to Homeschool 
Their Children
In 2010 an Evangelical Christian family from Germany, Uwe and Hannelore Romeike and 
their five children, moved to the United States seeking asylum from political persecution. 
At the U.S. immigration hearings, the couple argued that if they remained in Germany 
their decision to homeschool their children would result in fines, possible arrest, and even 
forced separation from their children. German law forbids homeschooling on the grounds 
that failure to attend recognized schools will create “parallel societies” whose members will 
fail to integrate into Germany’s open and pluralistic culture. In early 2011, a U.S. federal 
immigration judge granted political asylum to the family, denouncing the German gov-
ernment’s policy against homeschooling. He called it “utterly repellent to everything we 
believe as Americans.” However, in 2013 the Sixth Circuit Court unanimously overturned 
the original decision and revoked the family’s status as political refugees. Stating that the 
United States cannot give political asylum to every victim of perceived unfairness in an-
other country’s laws, the court declared that Germany’s ban on homeschooling did not 
constitute political persecution. The decision led to international debate about the role of 
homeschooling in a pluralistic society and about the definition of political persecution. In 
the United States, the Homeschooling Legal Defense Association urged that the case be 
heard by the United States Supreme Court and sponsored a petition drive supporting the 
Romeike family.
Your task: Imagine a public hearing on this issue where all stakeholders are invited 
to present their points of view. The U.S. Immigration Web site offers the following 
­definition of refugee status:
Refugee status or asylum may be granted to people who have been persecuted or fear they 
will be persecuted on account of race, religion, nationality, and/or membership in a par-
ticular social group or political opinion.
Your goal isn’t to make your own decision about this case but to bring to imaginative 
life all the points of view in the controversy. Hold a mock public hearing in which 
classmates play the following roles: (a) An American parent advocating homeschool-
ing; (b) an American teacher’s union representative opposing homeschooling; (c) an 
attorney arguing that the Romeike family meets the criteria for “refugee status”; (d) an 
attorney arguing that the Romeike family does not meet the criteria for refugee status; 
(e) a German citizen supporting the German law against homeschooling; (f) a Romeike 
parent arguing that they would be persecuted if they returned to Germany; (g) other 
roles that your class thinks are relevant to this case.
■ ■ ■

12	
What you will learn in this chapter:
	
2.1	 To find issues to explore
	
2.2	 To read sources rhetorically by analyzing a text’s genre, purpose, and degree 
of advocacy
	
2.3	 To read to believe an argument’s claims
	
2.4	 To read to doubt an argument’s claims
	
2.5	 To delay closure by thinking dialectically
In the previous chapter we explained that argument focuses on both truth seek-
ing and persuasion. In this chapter, we focus on inquiry (truth seeking) as the 
entry point into argumentative conversations. Unfortunately, in today’s wired 
environment argument is often carried on within isolated echo chambers of 
like-minded participants who believe they already possess the truth. In contrast, 
this chapter argues that argument is better approached as an exploratory process 
in which participants try to suspend judgment and delay closure by engaging 
thoughtfully with alternative points of view, truly listening to other perspectives, 
examining their own values and assumptions, and perhaps even changing their 
views. We value the insight of rhetorician Wayne Booth, who proposes that 
when we enter an argumentative conversation, we should not ask first “How can 
I change your mind?” but rather “When should I change my mind?”*
In this chapter, we present some practical strategies for reading and 
exploring arguments in an open-minded and intellectually responsible way. 
To illustrate argument as inquiry, we will show you how one student, Trudie 
Makens, explored the problem of whether fast-food workers and other low-
wage laborers should be paid a “living wage” of $15 per hour.
Finding Issues to Explore
Argument as inquiry begins when you find yourself in disagree-
ment with someone else’s point of view. Sometimes you will be 
confused about the issue. At other times, you will have a visceral 
*Wayne Booth raised these questions in a featured session with Peter Elbow titled “Blind 
Skepticism vs. the Rhetoric of Assent: Implications for Rhetoric, Argument, and Teaching,” 
presented at the CCCC annual convention, Chicago, Illinois, March 2002.
2.1  To find issues 
to explore
2
Argument as Inquiry
Reading and Exploring

	
Chapter 2    Argument as Inquiry	
13
gut reaction that causes you to take an immediate position, even though you haven’t 
thought through the issue in depth. At the start of the arguing process, being confused 
is often preferable to having a strong stand. Initial confusion disposes you to uncover 
your issue’s complexity and let your thinking evolve. In this section we show you ways 
to find issues worth exploring.
Do Some Initial Brainstorming
As a first step, make an inventory of issues that interest you. Many of the ideas you 
­develop may become subject matter for arguments that you will write later in this 
course. The chart on pages 13–14 will help you generate a productive list.
Once you’ve made a list, add to it as new ideas strike you and return to it each time 
you are given a new argumentative assignment.
Be Open to the Issues All around You
We are surrounded by argumentative issues. You will be invited into argumentative 
conversations by posters, bumper stickers, blog sites, newspaper editorial pages, 
magazine articles, movie reviews, song lyrics, class discussions, and so forth. When 
you read or listen, watch for “hot spots”—passages or moments that evoke strong 
agreement, disagreement, or confusion. As an illustration of how arguments are 
all around us, try the following exercise on the issue of a living wage for low-wage 
workers.
Brainstorming Issues to Explore
What You Can Do
How It Works
Make an inventory of the communities to  
which you belong. Consider classroom communities; 
clubs and organizations; residence hall, apartment, 
neighborhood, or family communities; church/­
synagogue or work communities; communities 
­related to your hobbies or avocations; your city,  
state, region, nation, and world communities.
Because arguments arise out of disagreements 
within communities, you can often think of 
issues for argument by beginning with a list 
of the communities to which you belong.
Identify controversies within those communities. 
Think both big and small:
■	 Big issue in world community: What is the best 
way to prevent destruction of rain forests?
■	 Small issue in residence hall community: 
Should quiet hours be enforced?
To stimulate thinking, use prompts such 
as these:
■	 People in this community frequently ­disagree 
about _____.
■	 Within my work community, Person 
X believes _____; however, this view 
troubles me because _____.
(Continued)

14	
Part 1	
Overview of Argument
What You Can Do
How It Works
Narrow your list to a handful of problematic issues 
for which you don’t have a position; share it with 
classmates. Identify a few issues that you would like to 
explore more deeply. When you share with classmates, 
add their issues to yours.
Sharing your list with classmates stimulates more 
thinking and encourages conversations. The more 
you explore your views with others, the more ideas 
you will develop. Good writing grows out of good 
talking.
Brainstorm a network of related issues. Any given 
issue is always embedded in a network of other issues. 
To see how open-ended and fluid an argumentative 
conversation can be, try connecting one of your issues 
to a network of other issues including subissues and 
side issues.
Brainstorm questions that compel you to look at 
an issue in a variety of ways. For example, if you 
explored the controversy over whether toys with 
phthalates should be banned (see Chapter 1), you 
might generate questions such as these about related 
issues:
■	 How dangerous are phthalates?
■	 Is the testing that has been done on rats ad-
equate or accurate for determining the effects 
on humans?
■	 To what extent are controversies over 
phthalates similar to controversies 
over steroids, genetically modified 
foods, nitrites in cured meat, or mer-
cury in dental fillings?
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Responding to Visual Arguments  
about a Living Wage
Suppose, in your initial search for a controversial issue, you encounter three visual 
texts related to raising the minimum wage for fast-food workers: the protest photo 
(page 1), the cartoon (Figure 2.1), and the graph (Figure 2.2). Working individually or 
in small groups, generate exploratory responses to these questions:
	 1.	 What claim is each of these visual texts making?
	 2.	 What network of related issues do these visual texts suggest?
	 3.	 What questions or ideas do these visual texts raise for you?
Explore Ideas by Freewriting
Freewriting is useful at any stage of the writing process. When you freewrite, you put fin-
gers to keyboard (or pen to paper) and write rapidly nonstop, usually five to ten minutes 
at a stretch, without worrying about structure, grammar, or correctness. Your goal is to 
generate as many ideas as possible without stopping to edit your work. If you can’t think 
of anything to say, write “relax” or “I’m stuck” over and over until new ideas emerge. Here 
is how Trudie Makens did a freewrite in response to the protest photo at the beginning of 
Part 1 (p. 1).
■ ■ ■

	
Chapter 2    Argument as Inquiry	
15
Figure 2.1  Political cartoon on minimum wage
Trudie’s Freewrite
Working in the food and service industry as a busser, I relate to the man in the picture 
holding the sign reading “Stand with Fast Food Workers.” It’s hard to live off of mini-
mum wage, and if it weren’t for my tips, I wouldn’t be able to pay some of my bills. And 
that is with help from my parents since I am a college student. I can’t imagine what it 
would be like for full time workers in the fast food industry where orders are taken via 
counter. I remember when I worked counter service jobs, as a barista and at a dumpling 
café, no one ever tipped. They didn’t feel like they needed too since it was not formal 
wait service. My work, and my coworkers’ work, was not valued. What some people don’t 
realize is that whether you are working at McDonalds or in an upscale restaurant, you 
are still working hard to provide good service. If anything, it is harder to work jobs like 
McDonalds where customers are dismissive and don’t value the service they are receiv-
ing. Think, relax. Why do people not value the work of fast food and counter service 
workers? Because it is considered unskilled labor? A lot of the people I have worked 
with didn’t have the time or money to go to college because they were burdened with the 
financial strains of having children or caring for sick or elderly relatives. I remember my 
co-worker Maria who was always stressed out because she couldn’t pay her rent and had 

16	
Part 1	
Overview of Argument
26.0
12.0
21.1
23.7
17.5
22.1
30.8
38.1
4.6
4.2
0
20
40
60
80
Percent
100
Percentage of Low-Wage Workers By Age Group,
1979 and 2011
1979
2011
65
35–64
25–34
20–24
16–19
Figure 2.2  Graph offering employment statistics relevant to 
­minimum wage controversy
Adapted from Schmitt, John, and Janelle Jones, “Low-Wage Workers Are Older and Better 
Educated Than Ever.” Center for Economic and Policy Research. April 2012.
a child to support. A living wage would help people who haven’t been lucky enough to 
inherit wealth to pull themselves out of poverty. And it wouldn’t hurt corporations like 
McDonalds to live with a little less profit.
Explore Ideas by Idea Mapping
Another good technique for exploring ideas is idea mapping. When you make an 
idea map, draw a circle in the center of a page and write some trigger idea (a broad 
topic, a question, or working thesis statement) in the center of the circle. Then record 
your ideas on branches and subbranches extending from the center circle. A major 
­advantage of “picturing” your thoughts is that you can see them as part of an emerging 
­design rather than as strings of unrelated ideas.
Idea maps usually generate more ideas, though less well-developed ones, than 
freewrites. Figure 2.3 shows an idea map that student Trudie Makens created on the 
issue of minimum wage after class discussion of the visual texts in Figures 2.1 and 2.2.

	
Chapter 2    Argument as Inquiry	
17
Should fast-food workers
make $15/hour
Con-raising
wage
Might lead to
job layoffs or
reduced hours
Pro-raising wage
My experiences
Saw older
coworkers
struggle
Busser,
 barista
Need tips to
make enough
Questions
Discourage people
from getting more
skills or education
Raise food
prices
Could reduce
poverty among
working poor
Will sustain
a family
Create happier
workers
Increase
productivity
Produce
income equality
Might make
fast-food jobs
too attractive
More just
How important is
cheap food to the
economy?
Are there better
ways to reduce
poverty?
How much would
cost of food
actually rise?
Maria couldn’t
pay rent
No safety
net
Had a child
Figure 2.3  Trudie’s idea map
Explore Ideas by Playing the Believing and Doubting Game
The believing and doubting game, a critical thinking strategy developed by rhetorician 
Peter Elbow, is an excellent way to stretch your thinking.
■	 As a believer, your role is to be wholly sympathetic to an idea. You must listen 
carefully to the idea and suspend all disbelief. You must identify all the ways in 
which the idea may appeal to different audiences and all the reasons for believing 
the idea. The believing game can be difficult, even frightening, if you are asked to 
believe an idea that strikes you as false or threatening.
■	 As a doubter, your role is to be judgmental and critical, finding fault with an 
idea. The doubting game is the opposite of the believing game. You do your best to 
find counterexamples and inconsistencies that undermine the idea you are examin-
ing. Again, it can be threatening to doubt ideas that you instinctively want to believe.
When you play the believing and doubting game with an assertion, simply write 
two different chunks, one chunk arguing for the assertion (the believing game) and 
one chunk opposing it (the doubting game). Freewrite both chunks, letting your ideas 
flow without censoring. Or, alternatively, make an idea map with believing and doubt-
ing branches. Here is how student writer Trudie Makens played the believing and 
doubting game with the assertion “Fast-food workers should be paid $15 per hour.”
Trudie ’s Believing and Doubting Game
Believing: I doubt anyone strives to become a full-time fast-food worker, but many people 
become stuck in those jobs and can’t advance because they don’t have a college education 

18	
Part 1	
Overview of Argument
or because there are no better jobs available. Sometimes the workers are college students, 
so an increase in minimum pay would help them not accrue so much debt and perhaps 
have more time to study because they wouldn’t have to work so many hours. But the real 
benefit would come to the uneducated, unskilled fast-food worker whose financial situa-
tion has led him or her to the fast-food job. The current minimum wage is barely livable. 
If the fast-food worker were to receive $15 per hour, there is far more of a chance for them 
to support themselves and their family comfortably without the stress of poverty. Even if 
the full-time fast-food worker does not go on to get more skills or go to college, it becomes 
more likely their children will be able to go to college if the fast-food worker is receiving a 
higher wage. Thus, the cycle of poverty as it is inherited generationally is, at least mildly, 
disrupted.
Doubting: If a $15 per hour minimum wage were to be implemented, the fast-food corpo-
rations would have to find ways to compensate for the profit loss. The most obvious way 
would be to raise food prices. If prices were to rise, fast food would no longer be afford-
able. This could have damaging and reversing effects on the working class who may rely on 
cheap fast food. Another problem is that the $15 per hour minimum wage may encourage 
workers to stay put in their jobs and not strive for a career. The student worker may no 
longer see the benefit of going into debt to get a degree and be satisfied with their current 
fast-food job. The effect of more desirable fast-food jobs may put pressure on other com-
panies to raise the hourly wage of their entry-level positions. The rise in wage may, again, 
have the ripple effect of higher-priced products, thus reducing sales and forcing these com-
panies to lay off some workers. No matter what scenario is dreamt up, it would seem that 
raising the minimum wage to $15 per hour, even if just for fast-food workers, might have 
damaging effects on the economy that diminish any benefits or advantages that theoreti-
cally come from receiving a higher wage.
Although Trudie sees the injustice of paying low wages to fast-food workers, she 
also sees that paying such workers $15 per hour might raise the cost of food, reduce 
the number of jobs available, or have other negative consequences. Playing the believ-
ing and doubting game has helped her articulate her dilemma and see the issue in 
more complex terms.
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Playing the Believing and Doubting Game
Individual task: Choose one or more of the following controversial claims and play 
the believing and doubting game with it, through either freewriting or idea mapping.
	 1.	 Federal law should forbid the purchase of assault weapons or high-capacity 
magazines.
	 2.	 Athletes should be allowed to take steroids and human growth hormone under a 
doctor’s supervision.
	 3.	 Illegal immigrants already living in the United States should be granted amnesty 
and placed on a fast track to U.S. citizenship.
Group task: Working in pairs, in small groups, or as a whole class, share your ­results 
with classmates.
■ ■ ■

	
Chapter 2    Argument as Inquiry	
19
Reading Texts Rhetorically
Once you become engaged with an issue, you will typically 
­research it to understand the various voices in the conversation, 
the points of disagreement, the uses of evidence and counter-
evidence, and the underlying assumptions and beliefs of differ-
ent stakeholders. In this section, we focus on reading sources 
rhetorically by analyzing their genre, their author’s purpose and intended audience, 
and the text’s degree of advocacy. In later chapters, we discuss rhetorical reading in 
more depth: Chapter 5 teaches the concept of “angle of vision” based on the way an 
argumentative text selects and frames evidence; Chapter 8 teaches you how to write a 
rhetorical analysis of a text; and finally, Appendix 2 teaches the skills of research writ-
ing from a rhetorical perspective.
Genres of Argument
To situate an argument rhetorically, you should try to identify its genre. A genre is a 
recurring type or pattern of argument such as a letter to the editor, a scholarly jour-
nal article, or the home page of an advocacy Web site. Genres are often categorized 
by recurring features, formats, and styles. The genre of any given argument helps 
­determine its length, tone, sentence complexity, level of informality or formality, use 
of visuals, kinds of evidence, and the presence or absence of documentation. When 
you do your own Internet research, you therefore need to be aware of the original 
genre of the text you are reading—to know, for example, whether the piece published 
on the Web was originally a newspaper editorial, a blog, a peer-reviewed scholarly 
­article, or something else.
In the following chart we identify most of the genres of argument through which 
readers and writers carry on the conversations of a democracy.
2.2  To read sources rhetor-
ically by analyzing a text’s 
genre, purpose, and degree 
of advocacy
Genres of Argument
Genre
Explanation and Examples
Stylistic Features
Personal 
correspondence
■	 Letters or e-mail messages
■	 Often sent to specific deci-
sion makers (complaint let-
ter, request for an action)
■	 Style can range from a formal 
business letter to an informal 
note
Letters to the 
editor
■	 Published in newspapers and 
some magazines
■	 Provide a forum for citizens 
to voice views on public 
issues
■	 Very short (fewer than 300 
words) and time sensitive
■	 Can be summaries of longer 
arguments, but often focus in 
“sound bite” style on one point
(Continued)

20	
Part 1	
Overview of Argument
Genre
Explanation and Examples
Stylistic Features
Newspaper 
­editorials and 
­op-ed pieces
■	 Published on the editorial or 
op-ed (“opposite-editorial”) 
pages
■	 Editorials promote views 
of the newspaper owners/
editors
■	 Op-ed pieces, usually written 
by professional columnists or 
guest writers, range in bias 
from ultraconservative to 
socialist
■	 Often written in response 
to political events or social 
problems in the news
■	 Usually short (500–1,000 words)
■	 Vary from explicit thesis-driven 
arguments to implicit arguments 
with stylistic flair
■	 Have a journalistic style (short 
paragraphs) without detailed 
evidence
■	 Sources usually not documented
Blogs and 
­postings to 
chat rooms 
and electronic 
bulletin boards
■	 Web-published commentar-
ies, usually on specific topics 
and often intended to influ-
ence public opinion
■	 Blogs are gaining influence 
as alternative commentaries 
to the established media
■	 Reflect a wide range of 
perspectives
■	 Often blend styles of 
­journalism, personal narrative, 
and formal argument
■	 Often difficult to determine 
identity and credentials of 
blogger
■	 Often provide hyperlinks to 
­related sites on the Web
Articles in public 
affairs or niche 
magazines
■	 Usually written by staff 
­writers or freelancers
■	 Appear in public affairs 
magazines such as National 
Review or The Progressive 
or in niche magazines for 
special-interest groups such 
as Rolling Stone (popular 
­culture) or The Advocate 
(gay and lesbian issues)
■	 Often reflect the political  
point of view of the 
magazine
■	 Frequently include narrative 
elements rather than explicit 
thesis-and-reasons organization
■	 Often provide well-researched 
coverage of various perspectives 
on a public issue
Articles in 
­scholarly  
journals
■	 Peer-reviewed articles 
published by nonprofit aca-
demic journals subsidized 
by universities or scholarly 
societies
■	 Characterized by scrupulous 
attention to completeness and 
accuracy in treatment of data
■	 Usually employ a formal 
­academic style
■	 Include academic documenta-
tion and bibliographies
■	 May reflect the biases, methods, 
and strategies associated with 
a specific school of thought or 
theory within a discipline

	
Chapter 2    Argument as Inquiry	
21
Genre
Explanation and Examples
Stylistic Features
Legal briefs  
and court 
decisions
■	 Written by attorneys or 
judges
■	 “Friend-of-the-court” briefs 
are often published by stake-
holders to influence appeals 
courts
■	 Court decisions explain the 
reasoning of justices on civic 
cases (and often include 
­minority opinions)
■	 Usually written in legalese, 
but use a logical reasons-and-
evidence structure
■	 Friend-of-the-court briefs are 
sometimes aimed at popular 
audiences
Organizational 
white papers
■	 In-house documents or 
PowerPoint presentations 
aimed at influencing organi-
zational policy or decisions 
or giving informed advice 
to clients
■	 Sometimes written for 
­external audiences to influ-
ence public opinion to be 
favorable to the organization
■	 External white papers are 
often posted on Web sites or 
sent to legislators
■	 Usually desktop or Web 
published
■	 Often include graphics and 
other visuals
■	 Vary in style from the dully 
­bureaucratic (satirized in 
Dilbert cartoons) to the cogent 
and persuasive
Public ­affairs 
advocacy 
advertisements
■	 Published as posters, 
­fliers, Web pages, or paid 
advertisements
■	 Condensed verbal/visual ­ 
arguments aimed at 
influencing public opinion
■	 Often have explicit bias and 
ignore alternative views
■	 Use succinct “sound bite” style
■	 Employ document design, 
­bulleted lists, and visual  
elements (graphics, photo-
graphs, or drawings) for  
rhetorical effect
Advocacy 
Web sites
■	 Usually identified by the 
­extension “.org” in the Web 
site address
■	 Often created by well-
financed advocacy groups 
such as the NRA (National 
Rifle Association) or PETA 
(People for the Ethical 
Treatment of Animals)
■	 Reflect the bias of the site 
owner
■	 Often contain many layers with 
hyperlinks to other sites
■	 Use visuals and verbal text to 
create an immediate visceral 
response favorable to the site 
owner’s views
■	 Ethically responsible sites 
­announce their bias and 
purpose in an “About Us” or 
“Mission Statement” link on 
the home page
(Continued)

22	
Part 1	
Overview of Argument
Genre
Explanation and Examples
Stylistic Features
Visual  
arguments
■	 Political cartoons, usually  
drawn by syndicated 
cartoonists
■	 Other visual arguments 
(photographs, drawings, 
graphics, ads), usually 
­accompanied by verbal text
■	 Make strong emotional appeals, 
often reducing complex issues 
to one powerful perspective 
(see Chapter 9)
Speeches and 
PowerPoint 
presentations
■	 Political speeches, keynote 
speeches at professional 
meetings, informal speeches 
at hearings, interviews, 
­business presentations
■	 Often made available via 
transcription in newspapers 
or on Web sites
■	 In business or government 
settings, often accompanied 
by PowerPoint slides
■	 Usually organized clearly with 
highlighted claim, supporting 
reasons, and transitions
■	 Accompanying PowerPoint 
slides designed to highlight 
structure, display evidence in 
graphics, mark key points, and 
sometimes provide humor
Documentary 
films
■	 Formerly nonfiction report-
ing, documentary films now 
range widely from efforts to 
document reality objectively 
to efforts to persuade view-
ers to adopt the filmmaker’s 
perspective or take action
■	 Usually cost less to produce 
than commercial films and 
lack special effects
■	 Cover topics such as art, 
science, and economic, 
­political, environmental, 
and military crises
■	 Often use extended visual 
­arguments, combined with 
interviews and voice-overs, 
to influence as well as inform 
viewers
■	 The filmmaker’s angle of vision 
may dominate, or his or her 
perspective and values may be 
more subtle
Authorial Purpose and Audience
A democratic society depends on the lively exchange of ideas—people with stakes 
in issues and different perspectives advocating for their positions. In reconstructing 
the rhetorical context of an argument, consider how any given writer is spurred to 
write by a motivating occasion and by the desire to change the views of a particular 
audience. The following list identifies the wide range of writers, as well as cartoonists, 
filmmakers, and others, who are apt to produce arguments on public issues.
■	 Lobbyists and advocacy groups. Lobbyists and advocacy groups commit them-
selves to a cause, often with passion, and produce avidly partisan arguments 
aimed at persuading voters, legislators, government agencies, and other decision 

	
Chapter 2    Argument as Inquiry	
23
makers. They often maintain advocacy Web sites, buy advertising space in news-
papers and magazines, and lobby legislators face-to-face.
■	 Legislators, political candidates, and government officials. Whenever new laws, 
regulations, or government policies are proposed, staffers do research and write 
white papers recommending positions on an issue. Often these are available on 
the Web.
■	 Business professionals, labor union leaders, and bankers. Business spokespeople 
often try to influence public opinion in ways that support corporate or business 
interests, whereas labor union officials support wage structures favorable to union 
members. Typically businesspeople produce “corporate image” advertisements, 
send white papers to legislators, or write op-ed pieces that frame issues from a busi-
ness perspective, whereas labor unions produce arguments favorable to workers.
■	 Lawyers and judges. Many controversial issues are entangled in legal matters. 
Lawyers write briefs supporting their clients’ cases. Sometimes lawyers or legal 
experts not directly connected to a case, particularly law professors, file “friend-of-
the-court” briefs aimed at influencing the decision of judges. Finally, judges write 
court opinions explaining their decisions on a case.
■	 Media commentators. Many controversial issues are in the news and attract the 
attention of media commentators (journalists, editorial writers, syndicated colum-
nists, bloggers, political cartoonists) who write articles and blogs or op-ed pieces 
on the issue or produce editorial cartoons, filtering their arguments through the 
perspective of their own political views.
■	 Professional freelance or staff writers. Some of the most thoughtful analy-
ses of public issues are composed by freelance or staff writers for public forum 
­magazines such as Atlantic Monthly, The Nation, Ms., National Review, and The 
New Yorker, or for online news sites or blogs such as The Daily Kos or Little Green 
Footballs. These can range from in-depth background pieces to arguments with 
a highly persuasive aim.
■	 Think tanks. Because today many political, economic, and social issues are very 
complex, policy makers and commentators often rely on research institutions or 
think tanks to supply statistical studies and in-depth investigation of problems. 
These think tanks range across the political spectrum, from conservative (the 
Hoover Institute, the Heritage Foundation) or libertarian (the Cato Institute) 
to the centrist or liberal (the Brookings Institution, the Pew Foundation, the 
Economic Policy Institute). They usually maintain many-layered Web sites that 
include background on research writers, recent publications, and archives of past 
publications, including policy statements and white papers.
■	 Scholars and academics. College professors play a public role through their 
scholarly research, contributing data, studies, and analyses to public debates. 
Scholarly research differs substantially from advocacy argument in its systematic 
attempt to arrive at the best answers to questions based on the full examination of 
relevant data. Scholarly research is usually published in refereed academic jour-
nals rather than in popular magazines.
■	 Independent and commercial filmmakers. Testifying to the growing popularity 
of film and its power to involve people in issues, documentary filmmakers often 
reflect on issues of the day, and commercial filmmakers often embed arguments 

24	
Part 1	
Overview of Argument
within their dramatic storytelling. The global film industry is adding international 
perspectives as well.
■	 Citizens and students. Engaged citizens influence social policy through letters, 
contributions to advocacy Web sites, guest editorials for newspapers, blogs, and 
speeches in public forums. Students also write for university communities, present 
their work at undergraduate research conferences, and influence public opinion 
by writing to political leaders and decision makers.
Determining Degree of Advocacy
As you read any given source connected to your issue, try to determine whether it is an 
advocacy piece that supports a position, a background piece that provides the context 
for an issue, or an overview article that tries to summarize the various positions in the 
controversy. If it is an argument, also try to determine its degree of advocacy along 
the continuum from “truth seeking” to “persuasion” shown in Figure 1.2 (page 8). 
Particularly pay attention to how an argument selects and frames evidence. When you 
encounter any argumentative text, use the following guide questions to help you read 
the text rhetorically.
Questions for Reading Texts Rhetorically
	 1.	 What genre of argument is this? How do the conventions of that genre help deter-
mine the depth, complexity, and even appearance of the argument?
	 2.	 Who is the author? What are the author’s credentials and what is his or her invest-
ment in the issue?
	 3.	 What audience is he or she writing for?
	 4.	 What motivating occasion prompted the writing? The motivating occasion could 
be a current event, a crisis, pending legislation, a recently published alternative 
view, or another ongoing problem.
	 5.	 What is the author’s purpose? The purpose could range from strong advocacy to 
inquiring truth seeker.
	 6.	 What information about the publication or source (magazine, newspaper, advo-
cacy Web site) helps explain the writer’s perspective or the structure and style of 
the argument?
	7.	 What is the writer’s angle of vision? By angle of vision, we mean the filter, lens, 
or selective seeing through which the writer is approaching the issue. What is 
left out from this argument? What does this author not see? (Chapter 5, pages 
80–87, discusses how angle of vision operates in the selection and framing of 
evidence.)
This rhetorical knowledge becomes important in helping you select a diversity 
of voices and genres of argument when you are exploring an issue. Note how Trudie 
Makens makes use of her awareness of rhetorical context in her exploratory paper on 
pages 36–42.

	
Chapter 2    Argument as Inquiry	
25
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Placing Readings in Their Rhetorical Context
Find two recent arguments on the subject of minimum wage* or on another subject 
specified by your instructor. Your arguments should (1) represent different genres and 
(2) represent different kinds of arguers (syndicated newspaper columnists, bloggers, 
freelance magazine writers, scholars, and so forth).
For each argument, answer the “Questions for Reading Texts Rhetorically” on 
page 24. Then share your findings with classmates.
Reading to Believe an Argument’s Claims
A powerful strategy for reading an argument rhetorically is to follow the 
spirit of the believing and doubting game, beginning with “believing.” 
When you read to believe an argument, you practice what psychologist 
Carl Rogers calls empathic listening. Empathic listening requires that you 
see the world through the author’s eyes, temporarily adopt the author’s beliefs and 
values, and suspend your scepticism and biases in order to hear what the author is 
saying.
To illustrate what we mean by reading to believe, we will continue with our 
example of raising the minimum wage, a highly controversial issue. The following 
article, “The Pay Is Too Damn Low,” is by James Surowiecki, an American journal-
ist who writes the “Financial Page” column in The New Yorker, a magazine with a 
liberal perspective. This article appeared in The New Yorker in August 2013. Please 
read this article carefully in preparation for the exercises and examples that follow.
*For help on how to find articles through Web or licensed database searches, see Chapter 15.
■ ■ ■
2.3  To read to 
believe an argu-
ment’s claims
The Pay Is Too Damn Low
James Surowiecki
A few weeks ago, Washington, D.C., passed a 
living-wage bill designed to make Walmart pay 
its workers a minimum of $12.50 an hour. Then 
President Obama called on Congress to raise the 
federal minimum wage (which is currently $7.25 
an hour). McDonald’s was widely derided for re-
leasing a budget to help its employees plan finan-
cially, since that only underscored how brutally 
hard it is to live on a McDonald’s wage. And last 
week fast-food workers across the country staged 
walkouts, calling for an increase in their pay to 
fifteen dollars an hour. Low-wage earners have long 
been the hardest workers to organize and the easiest 
to ignore. Now they’re front-page news.
The workers’ grievances are simple: low wages, 
few (if any) benefits, and little full-time work. 
In inflation-adjusted terms, the minimum wage, 
though higher than it was a decade ago, is still well 
below its 1968 peak (when it was worth about 
$10.70 an hour in today’s dollars), and it’s still 
poverty-level pay. To make matters worse, most 
fast-food and retail work is part time, and the weak 

26	
Part 1	
Overview of Argument
job market has eroded what little bargaining power 
low-wage workers had: their earnings actually fell 
between 2009 and last year, according to the 
National Employment Law Project.
Still, the reason this has become a big political 
issue is not that the jobs have changed; it’s that the 
people doing the jobs have. Historically, low-wage 
work tended to be done either by the young or by 
women looking for part-time jobs to supplement 
family income. As the historian Bethany Moreton 
has shown, Walmart in its early days sought ex-
plicitly to hire underemployed married women. 
Fast-food workforces, meanwhile, were dominated 
by teenagers. Now, though, plenty of family bread-
winners are stuck in these jobs. That’s because, over 
the past three decades, the U.S. economy has done 
a poor job of creating good middle-class jobs; five 
of the six fastest-growing job categories today pay 
less than the median wage. That’s why, as a recent 
study by the economists John Schmitt and Janelle 
Jones has shown, low-wage workers are older and 
better educated than ever. More important, more 
of them are relying on their paychecks not for pin 
money or to pay for Friday-night dates but, rather, 
to support families. Forty years ago, there was no 
expectation that fast-food or discount-retail jobs 
would provide a living wage, because these were  
not jobs that, in the main, adult heads of house-
hold did. Today, low-wage workers provide  
46 percent of their family’s income. It is that 
change which is driving the demand for higher pay.
The situation is the result of a tectonic shift in 
the American economy. In 1960, the country’s big-
gest employer, General Motors, was also its most 
profitable company and one of its best-paying. It 
had high profit margins and real pricing power, 
even as it was paying its workers union wages. And 
it was not alone: firms such as Ford, Standard Oil, 
and Bethlehem Steel employed huge numbers of 
well-paid workers while earning big profits. Today, 
the country’s biggest employers are retailers and 
fast-food chains, almost all of which have built 
their businesses on low pay—they’ve striven to 
keep wages down and unions out—and low prices.
This complicates things, in part because of 
the nature of these businesses. They make plenty 
of money, but most have slim profit margins: 
Walmart and Target earn between three and four 
cents on the dollar; a typical McDonald’s franchise 
restaurant earns around six cents on the dollar 
before taxes, according to an analysis from Janney 
Capital Markets. In fact, the combined profits 
of all the major retailers, restaurant chains, and 
supermarkets in the Fortune 500 are smaller than 
the profits of Apple alone. Yet Apple employs just 
76,000 people, while the retailers, supermarkets, 
and restaurant chains employ 5.6 million. The 
grim truth of those numbers is that low wages are 
a big part of why these companies are able to stay 
profitable while offering low prices. Congress is 
currently considering a bill increasing the mini-
mum wage to $10.10 over the next three years. 
That’s an increase that the companies can easily 
tolerate, and it would make a significant differ-
ence in the lives of low-wage workers. But that’s 
still a long way from turning these jobs into the 
kind of employment that can support a middle-
class family. If you want to accomplish that, you 
have to change the entire way these companies 
do business. Above all, you have to get consumers 
to accept significantly higher, and steadily rising, 
prices. After decades in which we’ve grown used to 
cheap stuff, that won’t be easy.
Realistically, then, a higher minimum wage can 
be only part of the solution. We also need to ex-
pand the earned-income tax credit and strengthen 
the social-insurance system, including child care 
and health care (the advent of Obamacare will help 
in this regard). Fast-food jobs in Germany and 
the Netherlands aren’t much better-paid than in 
the United States, but a stronger safety net makes 
workers much better off. We also need many more 
of the “middle-class jobs” we’re always hearing 
about. A recent McKinsey report suggested that the 
5

	
Chapter 2    Argument as Inquiry	
27
government should invest almost a trillion dollars 
over the next five years in repairing and upgrading 
the national infrastructure, which seems like a good 
place to start. And we really need the economy as 
a whole to grow faster, because that would both 
increase the supply of good jobs and improve the 
bargaining power of low-wage workers. As Jared 
Bernstein, an economist at the Center for Budget 
and Policy Priorities told me, “The best friend that 
low-wage workers have is a strong economy and a 
tight job market.” It isn’t enough to make bad jobs 
better. We need to create better jobs.
Summary Writing as a Way of Reading to Believe
One way to show that you have listened well to an article is to summarize its argument 
in your own words. A summary (also called an abstract, a précis, or a synopsis) presents 
only a text’s major points and eliminates supporting details. Writers often incorporate 
summaries of other writers’ views into their own arguments, either to support their 
own views or to represent alternative views that they intend to oppose. Summaries can 
be any length, depending on the writer’s purpose, but usually they range from several 
sentences to one or two paragraphs.
To help you write an effective summary, we recommend the following steps:
Step 1: Read the argument for general meaning. Don’t judge it. Put your objections 
aside; just follow the writer’s meaning, trying to see the issue from the writer’s per-
spective. Try to adopt the writer’s values and belief system.
Step 2: Reread the article slowly, writing brief does and says statements for each 
paragraph (or group of closely connected paragraphs). A does statement identi-
fies a paragraph’s function, such as “summarizes an opposing view,” “introduces 
a supporting reason,” “gives an example,” or “uses statistics to support the 
previous point.” A says statement summarizes a paragraph’s content. What fol-
lows are does and says statements for the first three paragraphs of Surowiecki’s 
article:
Does/Says Analysis of Surowiecki’s Article
Paragraph 1: Does: Gives examples of recent news stories about protests of 
­low-wage workers. Says: Hard-to-organize, low-wage earners are now in the news 
demanding an increase in the minimum wage.
Paragraph 2: Does: Provides details about the workers’ grievances. Says: A weak-
ening job market combined with low wages, lack of benefits, and mainly part-time 
hours keeps low-wage workers at poverty levels.
Paragraph 3: Does: Explains the changing demographics of those who hold low-
wage jobs. Says: In the past, minimum-wage jobs were held primarily by teenagers 
or by women desiring part-time work to supplement family incomes, but today 
many primary breadwinners depend on minimum-wage jobs to support a family.

28	
Part 1	
Overview of Argument
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Writing Does/Says Statements
Working individually or in small groups, write does and says statements for the re-
maining paragraphs of Surowiecki’s article.
Step 3: Examine your does and says statements to determine the major sections of 
the argument. Create a list of the major points (and subpoints) that must appear 
in a summary in order to represent that argument accurately. If you are visually 
oriented, you may prefer to make a flowchart or scratch outline of the sections of 
Surowiecki’s argument.
Step 4: Turn your list, outline, or flowchart into a prose summary. Typically, writ-
ers do this in one of two ways. Some start by joining all their says statements into 
a lengthy paragraph-by-paragraph summary and then prune it. Others start with a 
one-sentence summary of the argument’s thesis and major supporting reasons and 
then flesh it out with more supporting ideas. Your goal is to be as neutral as possible 
by keeping your own response to the writer’s ideas out of your summary. You also 
need to cover all the writer’s main points and give them the same emphasis as in the 
original article.
Step 5: Revise your summary until it is the desired length and is sufficiently clear, 
concise, and complete. Your goal is to spend your words wisely, making every 
word count. When you incorporate a summary into your own essay, you must 
distinguish that author’s views from your own by using attributive tags (expres-
sions such as “Surowiecki asserts” or “according to Surowiecki”). You must also 
put any directly borrowed wording in quotation marks. Finally, you must cite 
the original author using appropriate conventions for documenting sources.
What follows are two summaries of Surowiecki’s article—a one-paragraph version 
and a one-sentence version—by student writer Trudie Makens.
Trudie’s One-Paragraph Summary of Surowiecki’s Argument
In his New Yorker article “The Pay Is Too Damn Low,” James Surowiecki analyzes the griev-
ances of workers at fast-food franchises, Walmart, or Target. In the past, it didn’t matter that 
these jobs were low-pay, part-time, and without benefits because they were held mainly 
by teenagers or married women seeking to supplement a husband’s wages. But today, says 
Surowiecki, a growing number of primary breadwinners rely on these poverty-level wages 
to support families. The problem stems from a “tectonic shift in the American economy” 
(26). While in 1960, “firms like Ford, Standard Oil, and Bethlehem Steel employed huge 
numbers of well-paid workers while earning big profits” (26), nowadays America’s biggest 
employers are fast-food and retail companies with low profit margins. These companies 
depend on low-wage workers to keep prices cheap for the American consumer. Paying liv-
ing wages to workers would completely change the business model, resulting in steadily ris-
ing prices. According to Surowiecki raising the minimum wage is only one tool for fighting 
poverty. America also needs to create a social insurance system like that of Germany or the 
Netherlands. Surowiecki calls for an increase in earned income tax credit, universal health 
insurance, affordable child care, and investment of almost a trillion dollars in infrastructure 
to create good middle-class jobs.
■ ■ ■

	
Chapter 2    Argument as Inquiry	
29
Work Cited
Surowiecki, James. “The Pay Is Too Damn Low.” New Yorker 12 Aug. 2013: 35. Rpt in 
Writing Arguments: A Rhetoric with Readings. John D. Ramage, John C. Bean, and 
June Johnson. Concise 7th ed. New York: Pearson Education, 2016: 25-27. Print.
Trudie’s One-Sentence Summary of Surowiecki’s Argument
In his New Yorker article, “The Pay Is Too Damn Low,” James Surowiecki argues that rais-
ing the minimum wage is only a partial solution to the problem of poverty and needs to 
be supplemented with a European-style social security network including an increase in 
earned income tax credit, universal health insurance, affordable child care, and investment 
of almost a trillion dollars in infrastructure to create good middle-class jobs.
Practicing Believing: Willing Your Own Belief in the Writer’s Views
Although writing an accurate summary of an argument shows that you have listened to 
it effectively and understood it, summary writing by itself doesn’t mean that you have 
actively tried to enter the writer’s worldview. We want to stress the importance of be-
lieving it. Rhetorician Peter Elbow reminds us that before we critique a text, we should 
try to “dwell with” and “dwell in” the writer’s ideas—play the believing game—in order 
to “earn” our right to criticize.* To help you “believe” a writer, find places in the text that 
resonate positively for you, look for values and beliefs you hold in common (however 
few), and search for personal experiences and values that affirm his or her argument.
Reading to Doubt
After willing yourself to believe an argument, will yourself to doubt it by 
questioning the writer’s logic, the writer’s evidence and assumptions, and 
the writer’s strategies for developing the argument. You also think about 
what is not in the argument by noting what the author has glossed over 
or left out. You add a new layer of marginal notes, articulating what is bothering 
you, ­asking questions, demanding proof, doubting evidence, challenging the author’s 
­assumptions and values, and so forth.
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Raising Doubts about Surowiecki’s Argument
Return now to Surowiecki’s article and read it skeptically. Raise questions, offer objec-
tions, and express doubts. Then, working as a class or in small groups, list all the doubts 
you have about Surowiecki’s argument.
Now that you have doubted Surowiecki’s article, compare your questions and 
doubts to some raised by student writer Trudie Makens.
*Peter Elbow, “Bringing the Rhetoric of Assent and the Believing Game Together—Into the Classroom,” 
College English, 67.4 (March 2005), 389.
2.4  To read to 
doubt an argu-
ment’s claims
■ ■ ■

30	
Part 1	
Overview of Argument
Trudie’s Doubts about Surowiecki’s Article
■	 In his second paragraph, Surowiecki outlines three workers’ grievances: “low wages, few 
(if any) benefits, and little full-time work.” But increasing the minimum wage addresses 
only one of the grievances. A higher minimum wage might make it less likely for a 
worker to ­receive benefits or obtain full-time rather than part-time work. Moreover, 
with a higher wage, large companies may try to maintain profits by cutting jobs.
■	 Surowiecki asserts that large retailers and fast-food companies would absorb the cost of 
a higher minimum wage by raising prices on consumer goods. But if low-wage workers 
are also ­consumers, won’t higher prices on previously cheap products defeat the benefits 
of a higher wage?
■	 Though he ends his article by calling for a multifaceted solution to poverty, he does so 
without offering a way to accomplish this goal. Where would the money come from in 
order to expand the earned income tax credit, strengthen the United States’ current so-
cial insurance system, or invest in infrastructure? Further, how would the United States 
effectively implement and sustain these nationwide social programs without upsetting 
the already delicate economy?
■	 In his article Surowiecki mentions several studies, but there is no way to tell if these are 
widely respected studies or controversial ones. Would other studies, for example, con-
clude that low-wage workers today are responsible for 46 percent of their family’s income?
These are only some of the objections that might be raised against Surowiecki’s argu-
ment. The point here is that doubting as well as believing is a key part of the explor-
atory process and purpose. Believing urges you to adapt the views of others so that you 
can expand your own thinking and try on ideas that might begin to modify your own 
views or even change them. Doubting helps protect you from becoming overpowered 
by others’ arguments and teaches you to stand back, consider, and weigh points care-
fully. It also leads you to new questions and points you might want to explore further.
Thinking Dialectically
This chapter’s final strategy—thinking dialectically to bring texts into con-
versation with each other—encompasses all the previous strategies and can 
have a powerful effect on your growth as a thinker and arguer. The term 
dialectic is associated with the German philosopher Georg Wilhelm Friedrich 
Hegel, who postulated that each thesis prompts an opposing thesis (which he calls an 
“antithesis”) and that the conflict between these views can lead thinkers to a new claim  
(a “synthesis”) that incorporates aspects of both views. Dialectic thinking is the philo-
sophical underpinning of the believing and doubting game, pushing us toward new and 
better ideas. As Peter Elbow puts it, “Because it’s so hard to let go of an idea we are holding 
(or more to the point, an idea that’s holding us), our best hope for leverage in learning to 
doubt such ideas is to take on different ideas.”* Dialectic thinking means playing ideas 
against each other, creating a tension that forces you to keep expanding your perspective.
2.5  To delay clo-
sure by thinking 
dialectically
*Peter Elbow, “Bringing the Rhetoric of Assent and the Believing Game Together—Into the Classroom,” 
College English 67.4 (March 2005), 390.

	
Chapter 2    Argument as Inquiry	
31
As you listen to differing views, try to identify sources of disagreement among 
arguers, which often fall into two categories: (1) disagreement about the facts of the 
case and (2) disagreement about underlying values, beliefs, or assumptions. We saw 
these disagreements in Chapter 1 in the conversation about phthalates in children’s 
toys. At the level of facts, disputants disagreed about the amount of phthalates a baby 
might ingest when chewing a rubber toy or about the quantity of ingested phthalates 
needed to be harmful. At the level of values, disputants disagreed on the amount 
of risk that must be present in a free market economy before a government agency 
should ban a substance. As you try to determine your own position on an issue, 
consider what ­research you might have to do to resolve questions of fact; also try to 
­articulate your own underlying values, beliefs, and assumptions.
As you consider multiple points of view on an issue, try using the following ques-
tions to promote dialectic thinking:
Questions to Promote Dialectic Thinking
	 1.	 What would writer A say to writer B?
	 2.	 After I read writer A, I thought _____; however, after I read writer B, my thinking 
on this issue had changed in these ways: _____.
	 3.	 To what extent do writer A and writer B disagree about facts and interpretations 
of facts?
	 4.	 To what extent do writer A and writer B disagree about underlying beliefs, assump-
tions, and values?
	 5.	 Can I find any areas of agreement, including shared values and beliefs, between 
writer A and writer B?
	 6.	 What new, significant questions do these texts raise for me?
	 7.	 After I have wrestled with the ideas in these two texts, what are my current views 
on this issue?
Responding to questions like these—either through class discussion or through 
exploratory writing—can help you work your way into a public controversy. Earlier in 
this chapter you read James Surowiecki’s article expressing liberal support for raising 
the minimum wage and enacting other government measures to help the poor. Now 
consider an article expressing a quite different point of view, an op-ed piece written 
by Michael Saltsman, the research director at the Employment Policies Institute—a 
­pro-business, free market think tank opposed to raising the minimum wage. It appeared 
in The Huffington Post in April 2013. We ask you to read the article and then use the 
preceding questions to stimulate dialectic thinking about Surowiecki versus Saltsman.
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Practicing Dialectic Thinking with  
Two Articles
Individual task:   Freewrite your responses to the preceding questions, in which 
Surowiecki is writer A and Saltsman is writer B.
Group task:   Working as a whole class or in small groups, share your responses to 
the two articles, guided by the dialectic questions.
■ ■ ■

32	
Part 1	
Overview of Argument
To Help the Poor, Move Beyond “Minimum” Gestures
Michael Saltsman
Actor and director Ben Affleck made news this week with the announcement that 
he’ll spend five days living on just $1.50—the U.S.-dollar daily equivalent of extreme 
poverty, according to the Global Poverty Project.
Affleck’s heart is in the right place, but his actions won’t provide a measurable 
benefit for people who actually live in poverty. On that score, Affleck’s actions are not 
unlike a series of recently-introduced proposals to raise the federal minimum wage—
well-intentioned but ultimately empty gestures that will do little to raise poor families 
out of poverty.
For poverty-reducing policies to benefit the poor, the benefits first have to be prop-
erly targeted to people living in poverty. On this count, a higher minimum wage fails 
miserably. Census Bureau data shows that over 60 percent of people living below the 
poverty line don’t work. They don’t need a raise—they need a job.
Among those who do earn the minimum wage, a majority actually don’t live 
in poverty. According to a forthcoming Employment Policies Institute analysis of 
Census Bureau data, over half of those covered by President Obama’s $9 proposal 
live in households with income at least twice the poverty level—and ­one-third are in 
households with an income three times or greater than the poverty level.
That’s because nearly 60 percent of affected employees aren’t single earners, accord-
ing to the EPI report—they’re living in households where a parent or a spouse often 
earns an income far above the minimum. (The average family income of this group is 
$50,789). By contrast, we found that only nine percent of people covered by President 
Obama’s $9 minimum wage are single parents with children.
It’s for reasons like these that the majority of academic research shows little con-
nection between a higher minimum wage and reductions in poverty. For instance, 
economists from American and Cornell Universities examined data from the 28 states 
that raised their minimum wages between 2003 and 2007, and found no associated 
reductions in poverty.
Of course, poor targeting isn’t the only problem. The vast majority of economic 
­research—including 85 percent of the most credible studies from the last two decades—
finds that job loss for the least-skilled employees follows on the heels of minimum 
wage hikes.
That’s why better-targeted policies like the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) 
­deserve the support of politicians and public figures who want to do something about 
poverty. It’s been empirically proven to boost employment and incomes, without the 
unintended consequences of a wage hike. Accounting for the EITC, the full-time hourly 
wage for many minimum wage earners is already above the $9 figure that President 
Obama has proposed.
Boosting the EITC might not have the same media appeal of a higher minimum 
wage (or of Ben Affleck’s pledge, for that matter), but it does what neither wage hikes 
or the Affleck pledge can—actually make a measurable difference for the poor.
5

	
Chapter 2    Argument as Inquiry	
33
Three Ways to Foster Dialectic Thinking
In this concluding section, we suggest three ways to stimulate and sustain the process 
of dialectic thinking.
Effective Discussions  Good, rich talk is one of the most powerful ways to stimu-
late dialectic thinking. The key is to keep these discussions from being shouting 
matches or bully pulpits for those who like to dominate the airtime. Discussions are 
most productive if people are willing to express different points of view or to role-play 
those views for the purpose of advancing the conversation.
Reading Logs  In our classes, we require students to keep reading logs or journals in 
which they use freewriting and idea mapping to explore their ideas as they encounter 
multiple perspectives on an issue. One part of a journal or reading log should include 
summaries of each article you read. Another part should focus on your own dialectic 
thinking as you interact with your sources while you are reading them. Adapt the 
questions for promoting dialectic thinking on page 31.
A Formal Exploratory Essay  A formal exploratory essay tells the story of an 
intellectual journey. It is both a way of promoting dialectical thinking and a way of 
narrating one’s struggle to negotiate multiple views. The keys to writing successful 
exploratory essays are: (1) choosing an issue to explore on which you don’t yet have an 
answer or position (or on which you are open to changing your mind); (2) wrestling 
with an issue or problem by resisting quick, simple answers and by exploring diverse 
perspectives; and (3) letting your thinking evolve and your own stance on the issue 
grow out of this exploration.
Exploratory essays can be powerful thinking and writing experiences in their own 
right, but they can also be a valuable precursor to a formal argument. Many instructors 
assign a formal exploratory paper as the first stage of a course research project—what 
we might call a “thesis-seeking” stage.
An exploratory essay includes these thinking moves and parts:
■	 The essay is opened and driven by the writer’s issue question or research problem—
not a thesis.
■	 The introduction to the essay presents the question and shows why it interests the 
writer, why it is significant, and why it is problematic rather than clear-cut or easy 
to resolve.
■	 The body of the essay shows the writer’s inquiry process. It demonstrates how the 
writer has kept the question open, sincerely wrestled with different views on the 
question, accepted uncertainty and ambiguity, and possibly redefined the question 
in the midst of his or her reading and reflection on multiple perspectives.
■	 The body of the essay includes summaries of the different views or sources that 
the writer explored and often includes believing and doubting responses to them.
■	 In the essay’s conclusion, the writer may clarify his or her thinking and discover 
a thesis to be developed and supported in a subsequent argument. But the con-
clusion can also remain open because the writer may not have discovered his or 
her own position on the issue and may acknowledge the need or desire for more 
exploration.

34	
Part 1	
Overview of Argument
One of the writing assignment options for this chapter is a formal exploratory 
paper. Trudie Makens’s exploratory essay on pages 36–42 shows how she explored dif-
ferent voices in the controversy over raising the minimum wage to $15 per hour.
Writing Assignment  An Argument Summary or A Formal Exploratory Essay
Option 1: An Argument Summary Write a 250-word summary of an argument 
selected by your instructor. Then write a one-sentence summary of the same argument. 
Use as models Trudie Makens’s summaries of James Surowiecki’s argument on raising 
the minimum wage (pages 28 and 29).
Option 2: A Formal Exploratory Essay Write an exploratory essay in which you 
narrate in first-person, chronological order the evolution through time of your 
thinking about an issue or problem. Rather than state a thesis or claim, begin with 
a question or problem. Then describe your inquiry process as you worked your way 
through sources or different views. Follow the guidelines for an exploratory paper 
shown on page 33. When you cite the sources you have considered, be sure to use 
attributive tags so that the reader can distinguish between your own ideas and those 
of the sources you have summarized. If you use research sources, use MLA documen-
tation for citing ideas and quotations and for creating a Works Cited at the end.  ■

	
Chapter 2    Argument as Inquiry	
35
•   Introduce your first source and show why you started with it.
•   Provide rhetorical context and information about it.
•   Summarize the source’s content and argument.
•   Offer your response to this source, including both
    believing and doubting points.
•   Talk about what this source contributes to your
 
understanding of your question:  What did you learn?  What
 
value does this source have for you? What is missing from this
 
source that you want to consider?  Where do you want to go
 
from here?
Body section 1:
First view or source 
•   Continue exploring views or sources.
Body sections 3, 4, 5, etc.
•   Establish that your question is complex, problematic,
    and significant.  
•   Show why you are interested in it.
•   Present relevant background on your issue.
Begin with your question or build up to it, using it to end
your introductory section. 
Introduction
(one to
several paragraphs) 
Body section 2:
Second view or source 
•   Repeat the process with a new source selected to advance
 
the inquiry.
•   Explain why you selected this source (to find an alternative
 
view, pursue a sub-question, find more data, and so forth).
•   Summarize the source’s argument.
•   Respond to the source’s ideas. Look for points of agreement
 
and disagreement with other sources.
•   Show how your cumulative reading of sources is shaping
 
your thinking or leading to more questions. 
Conclusion
•   Wrap up your intellectual journey and explain where you
 
are now in your thinking and how your understanding of your
 
problem has changed.
•   Present your current answer to your question based on all
 
that you have learned so far, or explain why you still can’t
 
answer your question, or explain what research you might
 
pursue further. 
Organization Plan for an Exploratory Essay

36	
Part 1	
Overview of Argument
Reading
What follows is Trudie Makens’s exploratory essay on the subject of raising the mini-
mum wage. Her research begins with the articles by Surowiecki and Saltsman that you 
have already read and discussed. She then moves off in her own direction.
Should Fast-Food Workers Be Paid 
$15 per Hour?
Trudie Makens (Student)
Title as question indi-
cates an exploratory 
purpose.
Having worked as a busser in a pizza restaurant, a part-time barista, 
and a server at a dumpling cafe, I was immediately attracted to our 
class discussions of minimum wage, sparked by recent protests of fast-
food workers demanding pay of $15 per hour. My first job as a barista 
­exposed me to the harsh reality of living on today’s existing minimum 
wage as I witnessed my coworker Maria lose her home because she 
couldn’t pay rent and support her kids at the same time. As a single 
mother of two, Maria had to bounce from relative to relative putting a 
strain on her family relations, her image of herself as an able provider, 
and her children. I am lucky because, as a student, I am blessed to have 
my family operate as a safety net for me. If I am ever short on a bill or 
get sick or hurt, my parents will assist me financially. Many of the indi-
viduals I have worked with do not have that same safety net. These in-
dividuals are often older and have children or are beginning a family. 
Understanding the hardships of minimum-wage jobs, I entered our 
class discussions in support of the $15/hour demand because this pay 
rate would give workers a living wage. However, despite my personal 
affinities with these workers, I  also understood that raising the 
­minimum wage might have negative consequences for our economy. I  
wanted to explore this issue in more depth so I decided to pose my re-
search question as “Should fast-food workers be paid a living wage of 
$15 per hour?”
My exploration began with an article that our instructor assigned to 
the whole class: “The Pay Is Too Damn Low” by James Surowiecki 
from The New Yorker. In the past, according to Surowiecki, it didn’t 
matter that jobs at Walmart, Target, or fast-food franchises were low-
pay, part-time, and without benefits because they were held mainly by 
teenagers or married women seeking to supplement a husband’s wages. 
But today, says Surowiecki, a growing number of primary breadwin-
ners rely on these poverty-level wages to support families. The problem 
Introduction identifies 
the issue, explains the 
writer’s interest in it, 
and acknowledges its 
complexity.
Writer states her 
­research question.
Writer identifies her 
first source.
Writer summarizes the 
article.

	
Chapter 2    Argument as Inquiry	
37
stems from a “tectonic shift in the American economy” (35). While in 
1960, “firms like Ford, Standard Oil, and Bethlehem Steel employed 
huge numbers of well-paid workers while earning big profits” (35), 
nowadays America’s biggest employers are fast-food and retail compa-
nies with low profit margins. While Surowiecki acknowledges that these 
retail companies and food franchises depend on low-wage workers to 
keep prices cheap for the American consumer, he still supports increas-
ing the minimum wage but sees it as only one tool for fighting poverty. 
He argues that America also needs to create a European-style safety net 
system and calls for an increase in earned income tax credit, universal 
health insurance, affordable child care, and investment of almost a tril-
lion dollars in infrastructure to create good middle-class jobs.
Surowiecki’s concluding remarks about a safety net system resonated 
with me. I understood that what protected me from a financial crisis was 
my family acting like a safety net. The government, Surowiecki argues, 
should perform the same function for low-wage earners through such 
programs as childcare and health care. He points to Germany and the 
Netherlands, arguing the stronger safety net put in place for workers 
by these European governments provides a better economic and social 
situation for low-wage workers, even though they are paid around the 
same amount as United States low-wage workers. Surowiecki also 
­addressed some of my concerns regarding the economic consequences 
of implementing a living wage. Even though some low-wage jobs might 
be eliminated and food costs might go up, government investment in 
­infrastructure might create more high-paying, middle-class jobs, result-
ing in a net benefit. But I still wasn’t convinced or completely satisfied. 
How exactly would the government raise the money for a redesigned 
social insurance system? Would the country accept the needed higher 
taxes? While Surowiecki had convinced me that the government had an 
important role to play in creating the conditions for a living wage, I still 
was unclear on how the government could effectively do so without 
­detrimentally upsetting the economy.
I wanted to know more about raising the minimum wage from the 
business perspective, so I Googled “living wage” and found an anti-
minimum wage article from Michael Saltsman, the research director 
of  the Employment Policy Institute. The op-ed piece was published 
­online in The Huffington Post and entitled, “To Help the Poor, Move 
Beyond ‘Minimum’ Gestures.” I also found a full page ad from the 
same conservative institute depicting a robot doing the work of a fast 
food employee. Saltsman believes that despite the good intentions of 
living wage proponents a higher federal minimum wage will do more 
harm than good. Within his piece, Saltsman equates the symbolic value 
Writer shows how 
this article has ad-
vanced her thinking 
by strengthening her 
previous mention of 
“safety nets.”
Writer includes  
doubting points by 
identifying problems 
not resolved in first 
source.
Writer shows rhetorical  
thinking by purposely 
seeking an argument 
from a business  
perspective; she  
identifies conservative 
credentials of author 
and summarizes his 
argument.
Writer summarizes 
­second source.

38	
Part 1	
Overview of Argument
of Ben Affleck’s pledge to live five days on $1.50, “the U.S. dollar 
equivalent of extreme poverty,” to proposals for a higher federal mini-
mum wage. Both, according to Saltsman, are “ultimately empty ges-
tures” that do little to lift families out of poverty. What the poor need, 
Saltsman asserts, is “not a raise” but a job. Saltsman claims that over 
“60% of people living below the poverty line don’t work” and those 
who do earn a minimum wage don’t live in poverty households. Even if 
a member of the working poor were to receive a living wage, Saltsman 
argues, “job loss for the least-skilled employees follows on the heels of 
a minimum wage hike.” What helps to reduce poverty, according to 
Saltsman, is not a higher minimum wage but the Earned Income Tax 
Credit, “empirically proven to boost employment and incomes” and 
thus providing “a measurable difference for the poor.”
Prior to reading Saltsman, I had not fully considered the potential 
that workers would be laid off because it would be cheaper for busi-
nesses to use robots or other automation than to employ higher-wage 
workers. Though Saltsman got me thinking about the dangers of job 
displacement, I wasn’t convinced by his argument that an increased min-
imum wage would primarily benefit people who didn’t need it such as 
teenagers or second earners in an already middle-class family. I could 
see that an increased minimum wage wouldn’t help the 60 percent of the 
poor who were unemployed, but I also realized that the Earned Income 
Tax Credit wouldn’t help the unemployed either because it is goes only 
to poor people who report income. (I Googled “earned income tax 
credit” just to make sure I understood how it works by giving a boost of 
income to poor but working tax filers.) Though Saltsman persuaded me 
to consider the negative economic consequences of a living wage, I 
wasn’t convinced the living wage was entirely ineffective. I thought back 
to Surowiecki who, unlike Saltsman, saw a living wage as one compo-
nent in a larger solution to reduce poverty. Both recommended an ex-
panded Earned Income Tax Credit, but Surowiecki went further and 
also encouraged a stronger social-insurance system in addition to a 
higher minimum wage. Neither article persuaded me the living wage was 
either fully beneficial or fully injurious. To clarify my position, I needed 
to do more research.
I wanted another economist’s perspective, so I typed in “economic 
impact and living wage” into ProQuest, an interdisciplinary research 
database. One of the articles that caught my attention was “Living 
Wage: Some Gain, Neediest Lose Out.” The article was an interview 
with labor economist Richard Toikka by author Charles Oliver featured 
in Investor’s Business Daily, a conservative financial newspaper focused 
on stock and bond investments. In the interview, Oliver prompts Toikka 
to discuss the unintended consequences of a higher minimum wage. 
Writer includes both 
believing and  
doubting points.
Writer shows dialectic 
thinking by comparing 
and contrasting views 
of first two sources.
Writer again seeks 
sources purposefully; 
she shows how she 
found the source and 
places it in rhetorical 
context.
Writer summarizes the 
article.
5

	
Chapter 2    Argument as Inquiry	
39
Toikka asserts that in order to absorb the cost of a higher wage, compa-
nies seek to hire higher-skilled workers who require less training, and 
thus cost the company less money. With a higher wage offered, Toikka 
argues, more high-skilled workers, such as college students, seek these 
jobs, increasing “the competition low skilled workers face.” Thus an in-
creased minimum wage reduces the number of low-skilled jobs available. 
Toikka also makes the same argument as Saltsman, concluding that the 
benefits of a higher wage don’t go towards the families who need it, but 
instead to second-earners who aren’t living below the poverty line. 
Toikka cites a survey among labor economists asked to rate the effi-
ciency of anti-poverty measures, and “69% said living wages weren’t at 
all efficient in meeting the needs of poor families.” The more efficient 
way to combat poverty, Toikka argues, is not a living wage but an 
­expansion of the Earned Income Tax Credit.
Putting Toikka in conversation with Saltsman, I began to understand 
and heed the warnings of both economists. Though well-intentioned, 
increasing the minimum wage by itself is not apt to reduce poverty and 
would ultimately injure the poor rather than helping. If a living wage 
does lead to heightened competition and employers slashing jobs, then 
perhaps a living wage is ineffective and therefore should be abandoned 
in favor of the Earned Income Tax Credit. So far, all the articles agreed 
the Earned Income Tax Credit was a good way to reduce poverty, even 
though it too benefits only those with jobs. Even so, I couldn’t help but 
think that abandoning a living wage was a concession to a flawed eco-
nomic system that doesn’t value the working poor or the impoverished 
unemployed enough. I thought back to Surowiecki when he praised 
Germany and the Netherlands for providing a strong social insurance 
system that served as a safety net for those in low-wage jobs. If Europe 
can ensure dignity and security to its citizens, then why can’t the United 
States? Although 69 percent of labor economists say that a living wage 
is an inefficient way to alleviate poverty, we don’t know what they would 
say if the government also invested in infrastructure to create well-paying 
jobs. Right now, it seems from my readings, that the current market 
doesn’t value low-wage workers. What is valued in our economy is capi-
tal, profit, and cheap goods, all of which come at the expense of ­millions 
of workers. Is the structure of the economy where wealth is unequally 
distributed and workers are exploited really inevitable? Or is it an 
­economic trend that can be reversed? I wanted to believe the latter, so I 
returned to ProQuest to find another article addressing the economic 
impact of a living wage but from a pro-labor perspective.
In my search, I found an article entitled “The Task Rabbit Economy,” 
authored by Robert Kuttner and published in the progressive magazine 
The American Prospect. Kuttner begins by describing a successful San 
Writer shows how the 
pro-business sources 
have complicated 
her initial tentative 
position.
Writer uses believing 
and doubting strate-
gies to think dialecti-
cally, looking for a 
synthesis.
Writer purposefully 
seeks a different 
perspective.
Writer identifies next 
source and places it in 
rhetorical context.

40	
Part 1	
Overview of Argument
Francisco company whose Web site matches people who have an odd 
job they need done with people who will do the work for a fee. The com-
pany, named the Task Rabbit, is like an online temp agency that oper-
ates by having would-be workers bid against each other, driving the 
price down for their labor. Kuttner argues that Task Rabbit’s business 
model, which produces cheap labor, is analogous to our current econ-
omy, where workers have lost “bargaining power” and work has become 
casual and unstable (46). Kuttner argues that this low-wage economy 
has produced less economic growth, less prosperity, and more unem-
ployment than earlier eras when there was more job stability and higher 
wages. According to Kuttner, the claim made by labor economists that a 
higher minimum wage leaves low-skilled workers without a job ignores 
how an unregulated labor market has allowed corporations to “weaken 
labor . . . and extract abnormal profits” (47). Kuttner draws on the 
­economy of Sweden to provide an example where a living wage, full 
­employment, and a “deliberate effort to narrow wage gaps” has been 
implemented effectively (48). What’s more, Kuttner addresses the con-
cern of rising prices by citing a Demos study that found raising wages so 
retail workers “earned at least $25,000 a year” only cost large retailers  
“1 percent of the $2.17 trillion annual sales” (52). Kuttner closes out his 
article by emphasizing that “organized labor” is what will change the 
­labor market, using both collective bargaining and “political force” (55).
Kuttner’s article moved me in a way that Toikka and Saltsman’s pieces 
could not. Instead of accepting an economic system where low-wage 
workers are exploited for stockholder profits and cheap goods, Kuttner 
criticizes the labor market for its failure to value workers. Kuttner ac-
knowledges that a higher minimum wage will upset the present economy, 
but he argues that the present economic system isn’t inevitable but the 
result of large employers choosing to value capital over people without 
strong governmental policies protecting labor and the poor. Moreover, 
Kuttner’s article illuminates the inefficiency of our economy. The studies 
Kuttner references reveal that the United States was better off in the 
years after World War II, when jobs were stable, plentiful, and paid a liv-
ing wage. Most of all, I appreciated Kuttner’s concluding call to action, 
and his assurance that such action will not lead to economic suicide but 
create the “dynamic, supple, and innovative” economy our nation strives 
for. According to Kuttner, we can choose to allow the market to continue 
unregulated, or, through organizing workers, we can push towards poli-
cies that value people—their rights, health, and dignity. As I read 
Kuttner, I wondered what current labor movements are in existence to-
day and the progress they are making in their fight to gain rights and a 
living wage. I, again, turned to ProQuest. 
Writer summarizes the 
article.
Writer shows how this 
source has advanced 
and solidified her own 
thinking.
Writer again shows 
purposeful search for 
next source.

	
Chapter 2    Argument as Inquiry	
41
My search handed me a long list of results, but I found one article 
that provided a relevant look into a labor campaign organized by 
Walmart sales associates. Titled “Job Insecurity,” the article was writ-
ten by Kevin Clarke and published in the Catholic magazine America. 
Clarke begins by introducing William Fletcher, a twenty-three-year-
old retail sales associate at Walmart. According to Fletcher, he loves 
his job and “working with the public” but, he says, he and other em-
ployees constantly struggle with “low wages, chaotic scheduling, and 
insensitive management” (11). Both Fletcher and Clarke wonder why 
being a retail sales associate for Walmart warrants not receiving 
enough to “have a home, have health insurance, have all the basic 
things in life” (11). In order to improve his working conditions, 
Fletcher joined Organization United for Respect at Walmart, or OUR 
Walmart. OUR Walmart, Clarke states, is “part of an emerging labor 
phenomenon of non-union activism against Walmart and other pow-
erful, profitable U.S. corporations that maintain large, low paid work 
forces” (12). Walmart, according to both Fletcher and Clarke, is a 
trend-setting company. If labor conditions improve at Walmart, other 
companies could follow suit. The organization draws from the tactics 
of “community organizing and the civil rights movement” (12). 
Unfortunately, Clarke states, Walmart management continues to 
thwart protests or walkouts. Despite obstacles, OUR Walmart per-
sists, marking a major moment in the contemporary labor movement. 
The article ends with Clarke’s appeal to the Catholic social justice 
tradition of solidarity with the poor. He notes that Walmart sales as-
sociates depend on government support programs such as food 
stamps and housing assistance. He reminds his readers that our con-
tinual search for the cheapest goods makes us partially guilty for the 
exploitation of workers. He urges us to shop conscientiously and 
thoughtfully (14).
I reached the end of the article feeling shocked. In lieu of every-
thing I read from Kuttner, I was amazed that Walmart could dismiss 
the demands of OUR Walmart. Clarke states the owners of Walmart, 
the Walton family, possess “48% of Walmart stock and [are] the rich-
est family on earth, with over $107 billion in net worth” (14). Hearing 
numbers like these confirmed my forming conviction that the unregu-
lated labor market dangerously exploits workers in order to gain cheap 
labor, cheap goods, and bloated profits. What’s more, Walmart actively 
tries to scare workers from organizing—threatening to take away their 
jobs. Though there is much more to read and learn about the grow-
ing labor movement in the United States, Clarke’s article, as well as 
Surowiecki, Saltsman, Toikka, and Kuttner’s pieces, allowed me to 
Writer identifies next 
source and places it in 
rhetorical context.
10
Writer pulls together 
the results of her 
dialectic thinking, 
which has resulted in a 
synthesis.

42	
Part 1	
Overview of Argument
round out my position on a higher minimum wage. As I end my explor-
atory paper, I understand that a living wage is possible and should be 
provided to service workers as a basic human right. But it also needs to 
be supplemented with the kinds of social insurance systems stressed by 
Surowiecki and Kuttner.
Works Cited
Clarke, Kevin. “Job Insecurity.” America 18 Feb. 2013: 11-14. ProQuest. Web. 8 Jan 
2014
Kuttner, Robert. “The Task Rabbit Economy.” American Prospect 24 Sept. 2013: 
45-55. ProQuest. Web. 10 Jan 2014
Oliver, Charles. “Living Wage: Some Gain, Neediest Lose Out.” Investor’s Business 
Daily 5 Sept. 2000. ProQuest. Web. 10 Jan 2014
Saltsman, Michael. “To Help the Poor, Move Beyond ‘Minimum’ Gestures.” 
Huffington Post. 26 April, 2013. Web. 13 Jan. 2014.
Surowiecki, James. “The Pay Is Too Damn Low.” New Yorker 12 Aug. 2013: 35. 
ProQuest. Web. 5 Jan 2014.
Final sentences reveal 
synthesis that goes  
beyond original lean-
ings in first paragraph.
Writer compiles an 
MLA-formatted “Works 
Cited” page that lists 
alphabetically all the 
sources discussed in 
the paper.

43
Writing an Argument
Part  Two
	 3	 The Core of an Argument: A Claim with Reasons
	 4	 Logical Structure of Arguments
	 5	 Using Evidence Effectively
	 6	 Moving Your Audience: Ethos, Pathos, and Kairos
	 7	 Responding to Objections and Alternative Views
This still from the Tomb Raider video game series features main character Lara Croft engaged in one of her 
typical combats with humans, beasts, or supernatural creatures. Lara, an adventurer and archaeologist, 
­represents both a sexualized and an empowered woman. Women and violent video games are the focus of 
student Carmen Tieu’s argument developed in Chapters 3–5; however, Carmen explores gender roles from 
the perspective of a woman playing a “male” video game, Halo.

44	
The Core of an Argument
A Claim with Reasons
3
What you will learn in this chapter:
	
3.1	 To describe the key elements of classical argument
	
3.2	 To explain the rhetorical appeals
	
3.3	 To distinguish between issue and information questions and between 
genuine and pseudo-arguments
	
3.4	 To describe the basic frame of an argument
In Part One, we explained that argument combines truth seeking with persua-
sion. Part One, by highlighting the importance of exploration and inquiry, 
­emphasizes the truth-seeking dimension of argument, offering a variety of 
writing assignments ranging from freewriting to playing the believing and 
doubting game to writing a formal exploratory essay. In Part Two, we show 
you how to convert your exploratory ideas into a thesis-governed classical 
argument that uses effective reasons and evidence to support its claims. Each 
chapter in Part Two focuses on a key skill or idea needed for responsible and 
effective persuasion.
The Classical Structure of Argument
Classical argument is patterned after the persuasive speeches of 
­ancient Greek and Roman orators. It typically has the organiza-
tional structure shown on page 45, which shows these typical 
sections:
■	 The introduction. Writers of classical argument typically begin by estab-
lishing the timeliness of the issue at stake and connecting the audience to the 
issue with a current event, memorable scene, illustrative story, or startling 
statistic—something that grabs the audience’s attention. They continue the 
introduction by focusing the issue—often by stating it directly as a question 
or by briefly summarizing opposing views—and providing needed back-
ground and context. They conclude the introduction by presenting their 
claim (thesis statement) and forecasting the argument’s structure.
■	 The presentation of the writer’s position. The presentation of the 
writer’s position is usually the longest part of a classical argument. 
Here writers present the reasons and evidence supporting their claims, 
3.1  To describe 
the key elements of 
classical argument

	
Chapter 3    The Core of an Argument	
45
typically choosing reasons that tie into their audience’s values, beliefs, and 
­assumptions. Usually each reason is developed in its own paragraph or sequence 
of paragraphs.
■	 The summary and critique of alternative views. When summarizing and respond-
ing to opposing views, writers have several options. If there are several opposing 
arguments, writers may summarize all of them together and then compose a single 
response, or they may summarize and respond to each argument in turn. As we 
­explain in Chapter 7, writers may respond to opposing views either by refuting 
them or by conceding to their strengths and shifting to a different field of values.
■	 The conclusion. Finally, in their conclusion, writers sum up their argument, often 
calling for some kind of action, thereby creating a sense of closure and leaving a 
strong final impression.
•   Main body of essay
•   Presents and supports each reason in turn
•   Each reason is tied to a value or belief held
    by the audience
Presentation of writer's
position
•   Refutes or concedes to opposing views
•   Shows weaknesses in opposing views
•   May concede to some strengths
Response to opposing
views
•   Attention grabber (often a memorable scene)
•   Explanation of issue and needed background
•   Writer's thesis (claim)
•   Forecasting passage
Introduction
(one to
several paragraphs) 
Summary of opposing
views
•   Summary of views differing from writer's
 
(should be fair and complete)
Conclusion
•   Brings essay to closure
•   Often sums up argument
•   Leaves strong last impression
•   Often calls for action or relates topic
 
 to a larger context of issues
Organization Plan for an Argument with a Classical Structure

46	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
In this organization, the body of a classical argument has two major sections—the 
one presenting the writer’s position and the other summarizing and critiquing alterna-
tive views. Our organization plan has the writer’s position coming first, but it is pos-
sible to reverse that order. (In Chapter 7 we consider the factors affecting this choice.)
For all its strengths, the classical structure may not always be your most persuasive 
strategy. In some cases, you may be more effective by delaying your thesis, by ignoring alter-
native views altogether, or by showing great sympathy for opposing views (see Chapter 7). 
Even in these cases, however, the classical structure is a useful planning tool. Its call for a 
thesis statement and a forecasting statement in the introduction helps you see the whole 
of your argument in miniature. And by requiring you to summarize and consider oppos-
ing views, classical argument alerts you to the limits of your position and to the need for 
further reasons and evidence. As we will show, the classical structure is a particularly per-
suasive mode of argument when you address a neutral or undecided audience.
Classical Appeals and the Rhetorical Triangle
Besides developing a template or structure for an argument, classical rheto-
ricians analyzed the ways that effective speeches persuaded their audiences. 
They identified three kinds of persuasive appeals—logos, ethos, and pathos. 
These appeals can be understood within a rhetorical context illustrated by a triangle 
with points labeled message, writer or speaker, and audience (see Figure 3.1). Effective 
3.2  To explain the 
rhetorical appeals
Message
LOGOS: How can I make the argument
internally consistent and logical?
How can I find the best reasons and
support them with the best evidence?
Audience
PATHOS: How can I make the reader
open to my message? How can I best
appeal to my reader's values and
interests? How can I engage my
reader emotionally and imaginatively?
Writer or Speaker
ETHOS: How can I present myself
effectively? How can I enhance my
credibility and trustworthiness?
Figure 3.1  The rhetorical triangle

	
Chapter 3    The Core of an Argument	
47
arguments pay attention to all three points on this rhetorical triangle. As Figure 3.1 
shows, each point on the triangle corresponds to one of the three persuasive appeals:
■	 Logos (Greek for “word”) focuses attention on the quality of the message—that 
is, on the internal consistency and clarity of the argument itself and on the logic 
of its reasons and support. The impact of logos on an audience is referred to as its 
logical appeal.
■	 Ethos (Greek for “character”) focuses attention on the writer’s (or speaker’s) char-
acter, or credibility, as it is projected in the message. Ethos is conveyed through 
the writer’s investment in his or her claim, through the fairness with which the 
writer considers alternative views, through the tone and style of the message, and 
even through the message’s professional appearance on paper or screen, including 
correct grammar, flawless proofreading, and appropriate formats for citations and 
bibliography. In some cases, ethos is also a function of the writer’s reputation for 
honesty and expertise independent of the message. The impact of ethos on an audi-
ence is referred to as its ethical appeal or appeal from credibility.
■	 Pathos (Greek for “suffering” or “experience”) focuses attention on the values and 
beliefs of the intended audience. It is often associated with emotional appeal, but 
pathos appeals more specifically to an audience’s imaginative sympathies—their 
capacity to feel and see what the writer feels and sees. Thus, when we turn the 
abstractions of logical discourse into a tangible and immediate story, we are mak-
ing a pathetic appeal. Whereas appeals to logos and ethos can further an audience’s 
intellectual assent to our claim, appeals to pathos engage the imagination and feel-
ings, moving the audience to a deeper appreciation of the argument’s significance.
A related rhetorical concept, connected to the appeals of logos, ethos, and pathos, 
is that of kairos, from the Greek word for “right time,” “season,” or “opportunity.” This 
concept suggests that for an argument to be persuasive its timing must be effectively 
chosen and its tone and structure in right proportion or measure. You may have had 
the experience of composing an argumentative e-mail and then hesitating before click-
ing the “send” button. Is this the right moment to send this message? Is my audience 
ready to hear what I’m saying? Would my argument be more effective if I waited for a 
couple of days? If I send this message now, should I change its tone and content? This 
attentiveness to the unfolding of time is what is meant by kairos. We will return to this 
concept in Chapter 6, when we consider ethos and pathos in more depth.
Given this background on the classical appeals, let’s turn now to logos—the logic 
and structure of arguments.
Issue Questions as the Origins of Argument
At the heart of any argument is an issue, which we can define 
as a controversial topic area, such as “the labeling of genetically 
engineered foods” or “racial profiling,” that gives rise to differ-
ing points of view and conflicting claims. A writer can usually 
focus an issue by asking an issue question that invites at least two 
3.3  To distinguish between 
issue and information ques-
tions and between genuine 
and pseudo-arguments

48	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
alternative answers. Thus the topic area “abortion” gives rise to issue questions such 
as “Should abortion be legal?” “Should the federal government underwrite the cost of 
abortion?”“When does a fetus become a human being?” Each of these issue questions 
opens up one strand of the complex debate on abortion.
Difference between an Issue Question  
and an Information Question
Of course, not all questions are issue questions that can be answered reasonably in two 
or more differing ways; thus not all questions can lead to effective arguments. Some 
may simply call for more information, not argument. Keeping this distinction in mind, 
consider the following two questions:
How does the teenage pregnancy rate in the United States compare with the rate in 
Sweden? If the rates are different, why?
Although both questions seem to call for information rather than for argument, we 
believe that the second one would be an issue question if reasonable people disagreed 
on the answer. Thus, different writers might agree that the teenage pregnancy rate in 
the United States is seven times higher than the rate in Sweden. But they might disagree 
about why. One writer might emphasize Sweden’s practical, secularized sex education 
courses in the schools, leading to more consistent use of contraceptives among Swedish 
teenagers. Another writer might point to the higher use of oral contraceptives among 
teenage girls in Sweden (partly a result of Sweden’s generous national health program) 
and to less reliance on condoms for preventing pregnancy. Another might argue that 
moral decay in the United States is at fault. Thus, underneath the surface of what looks 
like a simple explication of the “truth” is really a controversy.
How to Identify an Issue Question
You can generally tell whether a given question is an issue question or an information 
question by examining your purpose in relationship to your audience. If your relation-
ship to your audience is that of teacher to learner, so that your audience hopes to gain 
new information, knowledge, or understanding that you possess, then your question is 
probably an information question. But if your relationship to your audience is that of 
advocate to decision maker or jury, so that your audience needs to make up its mind 
on something or is weighing different points of view, then the question you address is 
an issue question. Often the same question can be an information question in one con-
text and an issue question in another. Consider the following examples:
■	 How does a diesel engine work? (Probably an information question, posed by an 
audience of learners who regard you as a teacher.)
■	 What is the most cost-effective way to produce diesel fuel from crude oil? (This 
could be an information question if experts agree and you are addressing new 

	
Chapter 3    The Core of an Argument	
49
learners. But if you are addressing engineers and one engineer says process X is the 
most cost-effective and another argues for process Y, then the question is an issue 
question.)
■	 Should the present highway tax on diesel fuel be increased? (This is certainly an 
issue question. One person says yes; another says no; another offers a compromise.)
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Information Questions versus Issue Questions
Working as a class or in small groups, decide whether the following questions are 
­information questions or issue questions. Some questions could be either, depending 
on the context. For such questions, create hypothetical contexts that justify your choice.
	 1.	 What percentage of public schools in the United States are failing?
	 2.	 What is the effect on children of playing first-person-shooter games?
	 3.	 Is genetically modified corn safe for human consumption?
	 4.	 Should people get rid of their land lines and have only cell phones?
Difference between a Genuine Argument  
and a Pseudo-Argument
Although every argument features an issue question with alternative answers, not 
every dispute over answers is a rational argument. Rational arguments require two 
additional factors: (1) reasonable participants who operate within the conventions of 
reasonable behavior and (2) potentially sharable assumptions that can serve as a start-
ing place or foundation for the argument. Lacking one or both of these conditions, 
disagreements remain stalled at the level of pseudo-arguments.
Pseudo-Arguments: Committed Believers  
and Fanatical Skeptics
A reasonable argument assumes the possibility of growth and change; disputants may 
modify their views as they acknowledge strengths in an alternative view or weak-
nesses in their own. Such growth becomes impossible—and argument degenerates to 
pseudo-argument—when disputants are so firmly committed to their own positions 
that they can’t “hear” each other. Consider the case of the committed believer or the 
fanatical skeptic.
From one perspective, committed believers are admirable. They are persons of 
conviction, unwilling to compromise their principles or bend to the prevailing winds. 
But from another perspective, committed believers can seem rigidly fixed, incapable of 
growth or change. When committed believers from two clashing belief systems try to 
engage in dialog with each other, a truth-seeking exchange of views becomes difficult. 
They talk past each other; dialogue is replaced by monologue from within isolated 
silos. Once committed believers push each other’s buttons on climate change, guns, 
health care, taxes, religion, or some other issue, each disputant resorts to an endless 
■ ■ ■

50	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
replaying of the same prepackaged arguments. Disagreeing with a committed believer 
is like ordering the surf to quiet down. The only response is another crashing wave.
In contrast to the committed believer, the fanatical skeptic dismisses the possibil-
ity of ever believing anything. Skeptics often demand proof where no proof is possible. 
So what if the sun has risen every day of recorded history? That’s no proof that it will 
rise tomorrow. Short of absolute proof, which never exists, fanatical skeptics accept 
nothing. In a world where the most we can hope for is increased audience adherence 
to our ideas, the skeptic demands an ironclad, logical demonstration of our claim’s 
rightness.
A Closer Look at Pseudo-Arguments: The Lack  
of Shared Assumptions
As we have seen, rational argument degenerates to pseudo-argument when there is 
no possibility for listening, learning, growth, or change. In this section, we look more 
closely at a frequent cause of pseudo-arguments: lack of shared assumptions.
Shared Assumptions and the Problem of Ideology  As our discussion of com-
mitted believers suggests, reasonable argument is difficult when the disputants have 
differing “ideologies,” which is an academic word for belief systems or worldviews. We 
all have beliefs and values that are shaped by our family backgrounds, friends, culture, 
particular time in history, race or ethnicity, gender or sexual orientation, social class, 
religion, education, and so forth. Because we tend to think that our particular lens for 
looking at the world is natural and universal rather than peculiar to ourselves, we must 
be aware that persons who disagree with us may not share our deepest assumptions 
and beliefs. To participate in rational argument, we and our audience must seek shared 
assumptions—certain principles or values or beliefs that can serve as common ground.
The failure to find shared assumptions often leads to pseudo-arguments, particu-
larly if one disputant evokes assumptions that another disputant cannot accept. For 
example, consider differences within the Christian community over how to interpret 
the Bible. Some Christians choose a straightforward, literal interpretation of the Bible 
as God’s word while others read some passages metaphorically or mythically; still oth-
ers read it as an ethical blueprint for social justice. These Christians may not be able 
to argue rationally about, say, evolution or gay marriage because they have very differ-
ent ways of reading Biblical passages and invoking the authority of the Bible. Similar 
disagreements about assumptions occur in the political arena as well. Our point is that 
certain religious or political beliefs or texts cannot be evoked for evidence or authority 
when an audience does not assume the belief’s truth or does not agree on the way that 
a given text should be read or interpreted.
Shared Assumptions and the Problem of Personal Opinions  Lack of shared 
assumptions also dooms arguments about purely personal opinions—for example, 
someone’s claim that opera is boring or that pizza is better than nachos. Of course, a 
pizza-versus-nachos argument might be possible if the disputants assume a shared cri-
terion about nutrition. For example, a nutritionist could argue that pizza is better than 

	
Chapter 3    The Core of an Argument	
51
nachos because it provides more balanced nutrients per calorie. But if one of the dis-
putants responds, “Nah, nachos are better than pizza because nachos taste better,” then 
he makes a different assumption—“My sense of taste is better than your sense of taste.” 
This is a wholly personal standard, an assumption that others are unable to share.
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Reasonable Arguments versus Pseudo-Arguments
The following questions can all be answered in alternative ways. However, not all of 
them will lead to reasonable arguments. Try to decide which questions will lead to rea-
sonable arguments and which will lead only to pseudo-arguments.
	 1.	 Are the Star Wars films good science fiction?
	 2.	 Is it ethically justifiable to capture dolphins and train them for human 
entertainment?
	 3.	 Is an abstract oil painting by a monkey a true work of art?
	 4.	 Are nose rings and tongue studs attractive?
Frame of an Argument: A Claim Supported by Reasons
We said earlier that an argument originates in an issue question, which by 
definition is any question that promotes disagreement about the best answer. 
When you write an argument, your task is to take a position on an issue and 
to support it with reasons and evidence. The claim of your essay is the posi-
tion you want your audience to accept. To put it another way, your claim is your essay’s 
thesis statement, a one-sentence summary answer to your issue question. Your task, then, 
is to make a claim and support it with reasons.
What Is a Reason?
A reason (also called a premise) is a claim used to support another claim. A reason is 
usually linked to a claim with words such as because, since, for, so, thus, consequently, 
and therefore, indicating that the claim follows logically from the reason.
Let us take an example. In one of our recent classes, students heatedly debated the 
ethics of capturing wild dolphins and orcas (killer whales) and training them to per-
form in marine parks. This issue—made public by news stories and films such as The 
Cove (2009) and Blackfish (2012)—has many dimensions, including safety concerns 
for both the animals and their human trainers, as well as moral, scientific, legal, and 
economic considerations. Here are the frameworks the class developed for two alter-
native positions on this issue:
One View
CLAIM:  The public should not support marine parks.
REASON 1:  Marine parks stressfully separate dolphins and orcas from their 
natural habitat.
■ ■ ■
3.4  To describe 
the basic frame of 
an argument

52	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
REASON 2:  The education these parks claim to offer about marine mammals is 
just a series of artificial, exploitive tricks taught through behavior modification.
REASON 3:  The motive behind these parks is big business profit.
REASON 4:  Marine parks encourage artificial breeding programs and inhumane 
hunts and captures.
REASON 5:  Marine parks promote an attitude of human dominance over animals.
Alternative View
CLAIM:  The public should continue to enjoy marine parks.
REASON 1:  These parks observe accreditation standards for animal welfare, 
health, and nutrition.
REASON 2:  These marine parks enable scientists and veterinarians to study 
­animal behavior in ways not possible with field studies in the wild.
REASON 3:  These marine parks provide environmental education and memo-
rable entertainment.
REASON 4:  Marine parks use some of their profits to support research, conser-
vation, and rescue and rehabilitation programs.
REASON 5:  In their training of dolphins and orcas, these marine parks reinforce 
natural behaviors, exercise the animals’ intelligence, and promote beneficial bond-
ing with humans.
Formulating a list of reasons in this way breaks your argumentative task into a series 
of subtasks. It gives you a frame for building your argument in parts. In the previous 
example, the frame for the argument opposing commercial use of sea mammals suggests 
five different lines of reasoning a writer might pursue. A writer might use all five reasons 
or select only two or three, depending on which reasons would most persuade the in-
tended audience. Each line of reasoning would be developed in its own separate section 
of the argument, where the reason would be supported with evidence and details.
Expressing Reasons in Because Clauses
Chances are that when you were a child, the word because contained magical explana-
tory powers. Later, as you got older, you discovered that because only introduced your 
arguments and that it was the reasons following because that made the difference. Still, 
because introduced you to the powers potentially residing in the adult world of logic.
Of course, there are many other ways besides “because” to express the logical 
connection between a reason and a claim:
■	 The public should not support marine parks because these parks stressfully sepa-
rate dolphins and orcas from their natural habitat.
■	 Marine parks stressfully separate dolphins and orcas from their natural habitat. 
Therefore the public should not support them.
■	 One reason that the public should not support marine animal parks is that they 
stressfully separate dolphins and orcas from their natural habitat.

	
Chapter 3    The Core of an Argument	
53
Even though logical relationships can be stated in various ways, writing out 
one or more because clauses seems to be the most succinct and manageable way to 
clarify an argument for oneself. We therefore suggest that sometime in the writing 
process, you create a working thesis statement that summarizes your main reasons as 
because clauses attached to your claim.* Just when you compose your own working 
thesis statement depends largely on your writing process—whether you like to ­create 
a whole outline at the beginning or discover your ideas as you write. Composing 
­because clauses can be a powerful discovery tool, causing you to think of many dif-
ferent kinds of arguments to support your claim. But it is often difficult to wrestle 
your ideas into the because clause shape, which sometimes seems to be overly tidy 
for the complex network of ideas you are trying to work with. Nevertheless, trying to 
­summarize your argument as a single claim with reasons should help you see more 
clearly what you have to do.
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Developing Claims and Reasons
Try this exercise to help you see how writing because clauses can be a discovery 
procedure.
Divide into small groups. Each group member should contribute an issue that he 
or she might like to explore. Discussing one person’s issue at a time, help each member 
develop a claim supported by several reasons. Express each reason as a because clause. 
Then write out the ­working thesis statement for each person’s argument by attaching 
the because clauses to the claim. Finally, try to create because clauses in support of an 
alternative claim for each issue. Recorders should select two or three working thesis 
statements from the group to present to the class as a whole.
Writing Assignment  An Issue Question and Working Thesis Statements
Decide on an issue and a claim for a classical argument that you would like to write. 
Create a one-sentence question that summarizes the controversial issue that your 
claim addresses. Then draft a working thesis statement for your proposed ­argument. 
Organize the thesis as a claim using bulleted because clauses for reasons. You 
should have at least two reasons, but it is okay to have three or four. Also include an 
“­opposing thesis statement”—a claim with because clauses for an alternative position 
on your issue.
Recall that in Part One we emphasized exploratory writing as a way of resisting 
closure and helping you wrestle with multiple perspectives. Now we ask you to begin a 
process of closure by developing a thesis statement that condenses your argument into 
■ ■ ■
*A working thesis statement opposing the commercial use of captured dolphins and orcas might 
look like this: The public should not support marine parks because marine parks stressfully separate 
dolphins and orcas from their natural habitat; because they are mainly big businesses driven by profit; 
because they create inaccurate and incomplete educational information about dolphins and orcas; 
because they encourage inhumane breeding programs and hunts and captures; and because they 
promote an attitude of human dominance over animals. You might not put a bulky thesis statement 
like this into your essay; rather, a working thesis statement is a behind-the-scenes way of summarizing 
your argument so that you can see it whole and clear.

54	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
a claim with supporting reasons. However, as we emphasize throughout this text, draft-
ing itself is an exploratory process. Writers almost always discover new ideas when they 
write a first draft; as they take their writing project through multiple drafts, their views 
may change substantially. Often, in fact, honest writers can switch positions on an issue 
by discovering that a counterargument is stronger than their own. So the working thesis 
statement that you submit for this assignment may evolve substantially once you begin 
to draft.
In this chapter, as well as in Chapters 4 and 5, we will follow the process of student 
writer Carmen Tieu as she constructed an argument on violent video games. During 
earlier exploratory writing, she wrote about a classroom incident in which her professor 
had described video game playing as gendered behavior (overwhelmingly male). The 
professor indicated his dislike for such games, pointing to their antisocial, dehuman-
izing values. In her freewrite, Carmen described her own enjoyment of violent video 
games—particularly first-person shooter games—and explored the pleasure that she 
derived from beating boys at Halo. She knew that she wanted to write an argument on 
this issue. What follows is Carmen’s submission for this assignment.
Carmen’s Issue Question and Working Thesis Statements
Issue Question: Should girls be encouraged to play first-person shooter video games?
My claim: First-person shooter (FPS) video games are great activities for girls
■	 because beating guys at their own game is empowering for girls
■	 because being skilled at FPS games frees girls from feminine stereotypes
■	 because they give girls a different way of bonding with males
■	 because they give girls new insights into a male subculture
Opposing claim: First-person shooter games are a bad activity for anyone, especially girls
■	 because they promote antisocial values like indiscriminate killing
■	 because they amplify the bad macho side of male stereotypes
■	 because they waste valuable time that could have been spent on something 
constructive
■	 because FPS games could encourage women to see themselves as objects  ■

	
	
55
4
The Logical Structure 
of Arguments
What you will learn in this chapter:
	
4.1	 To explain the logical structure of argument in terms of claim, reason, 
and assumption granted by the audience
	
4.2	 To use the Toulmin system to describe an argument’s logical structure
	
4.3	 To use the Toulmin system to generate ideas for your argument and test it 
for completeness
In Chapter 3 you learned that the core of an argument is a claim supported by 
reasons and that these reasons can often be stated as because clauses attached 
to a claim. In the present chapter we examine the logical structure of argu-
ments in more depth.
An Overview of Logos: What Do We Mean  
by the “Logical Structure” of an Argument?
As you will recall from our discussion of the rhetorical 
triangle, logos refers to the strength of an argument’s 
support and its internal consistency. Logos is the argu-
ment’s logical structure. But what do we mean by “logical 
structure”?
Formal Logic versus Real-World Logic
First of all, what we don’t mean by logical structure is the kind of precise 
certainty you get in a philosophy class in formal logic. Logic classes deal with 
symbolic assertions that are universal and unchanging, such as “If all ps are qs 
and if r is a p, then r is a q.” This statement is logically certain so long as p, q, 
and r are pure abstractions. But in the real world, p, q, and r turn into actual 
things, and the relationships among them suddenly become fuzzy. For exam-
ple, p might be a class of actions called “Sexual Harassment,” while q could be 
the class called “Actions That Justify Getting Fired from One’s Job.” If r is the 
class “Telling Off-Color Stories,” then the logic of our p–q–r statement sug-
gests that telling off-color stories (r) is an instance of sexual harassment (p), 
which in turn is an action justifying getting fired from one’s job (q).
4.1  To explain the logical 
structure of argument in 
terms of claim, reason, and 
assumption granted by the 
audience

56	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
Now, most of us would agree that sexual harassment is a serious offense that might 
well justify getting fired. In turn, we might agree that telling off-color stories, if the 
jokes are sufficiently raunchy and are inflicted on an unwilling audience, constitutes 
sexual harassment. But few of us would want to say categorically that all people who 
tell off-color stories are harassing their listeners and ought to be fired. Most of us 
would want to know the particulars of the case before making a final judgment.
In the real world, then, it is difficult to say that rs are always ps or that every 
­instance of a p results in q. That is why we discourage students from using the word 
prove in claims they write for arguments (as in “This paper will prove that euthanasia 
is wrong”). Real-world arguments seldom prove anything. They can only make a good 
case for something, a case that is more or less strong, more or less probable. Often 
the best you can hope for is to strengthen the resolve of those who agree with you or 
weaken the resistance of those who oppose you.
The Role of Assumptions
A key difference, then, between formal logic and real-world argument is that real-
world arguments are not grounded in abstract, universal statements. Rather, as we 
shall see, they must be grounded in beliefs, assumptions, or values granted by the 
audience. A second important difference is that in real-world arguments, these beliefs, 
assumptions, or values are often unstated. So long as writer and audience share the 
same assumptions, it’s fine to leave them unstated. But if these underlying assumptions 
aren’t shared, the writer has a problem.
To illustrate the nature of this problem, consider one of the arguments we intro-
duced in the last chapter.
The public should not support marine parks because they stressfully separate dolphins and 
orcas from their natural habitat.
On the face of it, this is a plausible argument. But the argument is persuasive only if the 
audience agrees with the writer’s assumption that it is wrong to separate wild animals 
from their natural habitats. What if you believed that confinement of wild animals is 
not always harmful or stressful to the animals, that the knowledge derived from the 
capture of wild animals enables humans to preserve the natural environment for these 
animals, and that the benefits to be gained from the captivity of a small number of wild 
animals outweigh the animals’ loss of freedom? If this were the case, you might believe 
that marine parks have positive consequences so long as they strive to provide humane 
conditions for the animals, with minimal stress. If these were your beliefs, the argument 
wouldn’t work for you because you would reject the underlying assumption. To persuade 
you with this line of reasoning, the writer would have to defend this assumption, show-
ing why it is unwise or unethical to remove animals from their free and wild conditions.
The Core of an Argument: The Enthymeme
The previous core argument (“The public should not support marine parks because 
they stressfully separate dolphins and orcas from their natural habitat”) is an incomplete 
logical structure called an enthymeme. Its persuasiveness depends on an underlying 

	
Chapter 4    The Logical Structure of Arguments	
57
assumption or belief that the audience must accept. To complete the enthymeme and 
make it effective, the audience must willingly supply a missing premise—in this case, 
that it is wrong to separate wild animals from their natural environments. The Greek 
philosopher Aristotle showed how successful enthymemes root the speaker’s argument 
in assumptions, beliefs, or values held by the audience. The word enthymeme comes 
from the Greek en (meaning “in”) and thumos (meaning “mind”). Listeners or readers 
must have in mind an assumption, belief, or value that lets them willingly supply the 
missing premise. If the audience is unwilling to supply the missing premise, then the 
argument fails. Our point is that successful arguments depend both on what the arguer 
says and on what the audience already has “in mind.”
To clarify the concept of “enthymeme,” let’s go over this same territory again, 
this time more slowly, examining what we mean by “incomplete logical structure.” 
The sentence “The public should not support marine parks because they stressfully 
separate dolphins and orcas from their natural habitat ” is an enthymeme. It combines 
a claim (the public should not support marine parks) with a reason expressed as a 
­because clause (because they stressfully separate dolphins from their natural habitat). 
To render this enthymeme logically complete, the audience must willingly supply a 
missing assumption—that it is wrong to separate wild animals from their natural habi-
tat. If your audience accepts this assumption, then you have a starting place on which 
to build an effective argument. If your audience doesn’t accept this assumption, then 
you must supply another argument to support it, and so on until you find common 
ground with your audience.
To sum up:
	 1.	 Claims are supported with reasons. You can usually state a reason as a because 
clause attached to a claim (see Chapter 3).
	 2.	 A because clause attached to a claim is an incomplete logical structure called an 
enthymeme. To create a complete logical structure from an enthymeme, the under-
lying assumption (or assumptions) must be articulated.
	 3.	 To serve as an effective starting point for the argument, this underlying assump-
tion should be a belief, value, or principle that the audience grants.
Let’s illustrate this structure by putting the previous example into schematic form.
Audience must supply this assumption
ENTHYMEME
CLAIM The public should not support marine parks
REASON because they stressfully separate dolphins and
orcas from their natural habitat.
UNDERLYING ASSUMPTION
It is wrong to separate wild animals from their natural
habitats.

58	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
The Power of Audience-Based Reasons
Aristotle’s concept of the enthymeme focuses on the writer’s need to create what we 
can now call “audience-based reasons” as opposed to “writer-based reasons.” A reason 
that is persuasive to you might not be persuasive to your audience. Finding audience-
based reasons means finding arguments effectively anchored within your audience’s 
beliefs and values. To illustrate the difference between an audience-based reason and 
a writer-based reason, suppose that you are a vegetarian persuaded mainly by ethical 
arguments against causing needless suffering to animals. Suppose further that you 
wanted to persuade others to become vegetarians or at least to reduce their consump-
tion of meat. Your “writer-based reason” for vegetarianism could be stated as follows:
You should become a vegetarian because doing so will help reduce the needless suffering 
of animals.
The underlying assumption here is that it is wrong to cause the suffering of animals. 
This writer-based reason might also be an audience-based reason for persons who are 
wrestling with the moral dimension of animal suffering. But this assumption might 
not resonate with people who have made their own peace with eating meat. How 
might you use audience-based reasons to appeal to these meat-eaters? Here are two 
more possible enthymemes:
You should become a vegetarian because doing so may help you lower your cholesterol.
You should become a vegetarian because doing so will significantly lower your carbon 
footprint.
These arguments hook into the assumption that it is good to lower one’s cholesterol 
(health values) or that it is good to lower one’s carbon footprint (environmental values). 
All three of the arguments—whether based on ethics, health, or the environment—might 
further the practice of vegetarianism or at least reduce the amount of meat consumed, 
but they won’t appeal equally to all audiences. From the perspective of logic alone, all 
three arguments are equally sound. But they will affect different audiences differently.
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Identifying Underlying Assumptions and Choosing 
Audience-Based Reasons
Working individually or in small groups, identify the unstated assumption that the 
audience must supply in order to make the following enthymemes persuasive.
Example
Enthymeme: Rabbits make good pets because they are gentle.
Underlying assumption: Gentle animals make good pets.
	 1.	 We shouldn’t elect Joe as committee chair because he is too bossy.
	 2.	 Airport screeners should use racial profiling because doing so will increase the 
odds of stopping terrorists.

	
Chapter 4    The Logical Structure of Arguments	
59
	 3.	 Racial profiling should not be used by airport screeners because it violates a person’s 
civil rights.
	 4.	 We should strengthen the Endangered Species Act because doing so will preserve 
genetic diversity on the planet.
	 5.	 The Endangered Species Act is too stringent because it severely damages the 
economy.
Adopting a Language for Describing  
Arguments: The Toulmin System
Understanding a new field usually requires us to learn a new vocabulary. 
For example, if you were taking biology for the first time, you’d have to 
learn dozens and dozens of new terms. Luckily, the field of argument 
­requires us to learn a mere handful of new terms. A particularly useful set 
of argument terms, one we’ll be using occasionally throughout the rest of 
this text, comes from philosopher Stephen Toulmin. In the 1950s, Toulmin 
rejected the prevailing models of argument based on formal logic in favor of a very 
audience-based courtroom model.
Toulmin’s courtroom model differs from formal logic in that it assumes that 
(1) all assertions and assumptions are contestable by “opposing counsel” and that 
(2) all final “verdicts” about the persuasiveness of the opposing arguments will be 
rendered by a neutral third party, a judge or jury. As writers, keeping in mind the 
“opposing counsel” forces us to anticipate counterarguments and to question our 
assumptions. Keeping in mind the judge and jury reminds us to answer opposing 
arguments fully, without rancor, and to present positive reasons for supporting our 
case as well as negative reasons for disbelieving the opposing case. Above all else, 
Toulmin’s model reminds us not to construct an argument that appeals only to 
those who already agree with us. In short, it helps arguers tailor arguments to their 
audiences.
The system we use for analyzing arguments combines Toulmin’s language with 
Aristotle’s concept of the enthymeme. It builds on the system you have already been 
practicing. We simply need to add a few key terms from Toulmin. The first term is 
Toulmin’s warrant, the name we will now use for the underlying assumption that 
turns an enthymeme into a complete, logical structure as shown at the top of the 
next page.
Toulmin derives his term warrant from the concept of “warranty” or “guarantee.” 
The warrant is the value, belief, or principle that the audience has to hold if the sound-
ness of the argument is to be guaranteed or warranted. We sometimes make similar 
use of this word in ordinary language when we say, “That is an unwarranted conclu-
sion,” meaning one has leaped from information about a situation to a conclusion 
about that situation without any sort of general principle to justify or “warrant” that 
move. Thus the warrant—once accepted by the audience—“guarantees” the soundness 
of the argument.
■ ■ ■
4.2  To use the 
Toulmin system 
to describe an 
­argument’s logical 
structure

60	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
But arguments need more than claims, reasons, and warrants. These are simply 
one-sentence statements—the frame of an argument, not a developed argument. To 
give body and weight to our arguments and make them convincing, we need what 
Toulmin calls grounds and backing. Let’s start with grounds. Grounds are the support-
ing evidence that causes an audience to accept your reason. Grounds are facts, data, 
statistics, causal links, testimony, examples, anecdotes—the blood and muscle that 
flesh out the skeletal frame of your enthymeme. Toulmin suggests that grounds are 
“what you have to go on” in an argument—the stuff you can point to and present be-
fore a jury. Here is how grounds fit into our emerging argument schema:
ENTHYMEME
CLAIM The public should not support marine parks
REASON because they stressfully separate dolphins and orcas from their natural habitat.
 
Grounds support
the reason
GROUNDS
Evidence and arguments showing stressful difference between dolphin and orca behavior in
the wild and in captivity:
• In the wild, dolphins and orcas swim in pods, dolphins around forty miles a day, and orcas
  around sixty miles a day, in the open ocean whereas marine park tanks provide only a tiny
  fraction of that space.
• Evidence that separation from their family members and pods in their natural habitats
  creates emotional distress that can’t be remedied by the presence of randomly selected
  other dolphins and orcas in these marine parks.
• Statistics that the stress caused by confinement and the echoes and noise of concrete pools,
  audiences, and music often results in the animals needing medication.
• Statistics that show that dolphins and orcas don’t live as long in captivity as in their
  natural habitat. 
Audience must supply this warrant
ENTHYMEME
CLAIM The public should not support marine parks 
REASON because they stressfully separate dolphins and
orcas from their natural habitat.
 
WARRANT
It is wrong to separate wild animals from their natural
habitats.

	
Chapter 4    The Logical Structure of Arguments	
61
In many cases, successful arguments require just these three components: a claim, 
a reason, and grounds. If the audience already accepts the unstated assumption behind 
the reason (the warrant), then the warrant can safely remain in the background, unstated 
and unexamined. But if there is a chance that the audience will question or doubt the 
warrant, then the writer needs to back it up by providing an argument in its support. 
Backing is the argument that supports the warrant. It may require no more than one or 
two sentences or as much as a major section in your argument. Its goal is to persuade the 
audience to accept the warrant. Here is how backing is added to our schema:
Backing supports
the warrant
WARRANT
It is wrong to separate wild animals from their natural habitats.
BACKING
Arguments showing why it is unwise, unethical, or otherwise wrong to separate wild
animals from their natural environments:
• Examples of wild animals (those in aquariums and zoos) that do not thrive in
 artificially constructed environments, that don’t live long, or that suffer
 psychological stress from confinement
• An ecological argument about the beauty of animals in the wild and of the
 complexity of the natural webs of which animals are a part
• A philosophical argument that humans shouldn’t treat animals as instruments for
 their own enjoyment or profit
Toulmin’s system next asks us to imagine how a resistant audience would try 
to refute our argument. Specifically, the adversarial audience might challenge our 
reason and grounds by arguing that dolphins in captivity are not as stressed as we 
claim (evidence provided by veterinarians, caretakers, or animal trainers verifying 
that most dolphins in captivity are in good health). Or the adversary might attack 
our warrant and backing by showing how the captivity of some wild animal might 
save the species from extinction or how animals are often saved from illness and 
predators by caring humans. An adversary might attack our philosophical or spiritual 
arguments by saying that the same reasoning, taken to its logical conclusion, would 
eliminate zoos and require all humans to become vegetarians or vegans. An adversary 
might even argue that dolphins enjoy being with humans and have the same capacity 
to be animal companions as dogs or cats.
In the case of the argument opposing dolphins in captivity, an adversary might 
­offer one or more of the following rebuttals.

62	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
As this example shows, adversarial readers can question an argument’s reasons 
and grounds or its warrant and backing or sometimes both. Conditions of rebuttal 
remind writers to look at their arguments from the perspective of skeptics.
Toulmin’s final term, used to limit the force of a claim and indicate the degree of 
its probable truth, is qualifier. The qualifier reminds us that real-world arguments al-
most never prove a claim. We may say things such as very likely, probably, or maybe 
to indicate the strength of the claim we are willing to draw from our grounds and 
warrant. Thus if there are exceptions to your warrant or if your grounds are not very 
ENTHYMEME
CLAIM The public should not support marine parks
REASON because they stressfully separate dolphins and
orcas from their natural habitat.
GROUNDS
WARRANT
It is wrong to separate wild animals from their natural
habitats.
BACKING
Writer must anticipate these attacks from skeptics
“POSSIBLE CONDITIONS OF REBUTTAL
A skeptic can attack the reason and grounds”:
• Argument that these programs must observe
  strict accreditation standards for animal welfare,
  health, and education
• Marine parks exercise dophins’ and orcas’
  intelligence and abilities and build on their
  natural behaviors.
• Many dolphins and orcas have been bred in
  captivity, so they aren’t “wild.”
• The education and entertainment provided by
  marine parks promote public concern for
  dolphins and orcas.
“POSSIBLE CONDITIONS OF REBUTTAL
A skeptic can attack the warrant and backing.”
• The natural habitat is not always the best
  environment for wild animals.
• Captivity may actually preserve some species.
• Scientists have been able to conduct valuable
  studies of dolphins and learn more about orcas
  in captivity, which would have been impossible
  in the wild.
Evidence and arguments showing stressful difference
between dolphin behavior in the wild and in captivity:
• In the wild, dolphins and orcas swim in pods, dolphins
  about forty miles a day in the open ocean and orcas about
  sixty, whereas marine park tanks provide only a tiny
  fraction of that space.
• Evidence that the echoes from concrete pools, music of
 dolphin shows, and the applause and noise of audiences
 are stressful and harmful
• Statistics about the excessive number of performances or
 about the levels of stress hormones produced in dolphins
Arguments showing why it is unwise, unethical, or
otherwise wrong to separate wild animals from their
natural environments:
• Examples of wild animals (those in aquariums and zoos)
 that do not thrive in artificially constructed environments,
 that don’t live long, or that suffer psychological stress
 from confinement
• An ecological argument about the beauty of animals in
 the wild and of the complexity of the natural webs of
 which animals are a part
• A philosophical argument that humans shouldn’t treat
 animals as instruments for their own enjoyment or profit

	
Chapter 4    The Logical Structure of Arguments	
63
strong, you will have to qualify your claim. For example, you might say, “Except for 
limited cases of scientific research, dolphins and orcas should not be held in captiv-
ity.” In our future displays of the Toulmin scheme we will omit the qualifiers, but you 
should always remember that no argument is 100 percent conclusive.
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Developing Enthymemes with the Toulmin Schema
Working individually or in small groups, imagine that you have to write arguments 
­developing the five enthymemes listed in the For Class Discussion exercise on pages 58–59. 
Use the Toulmin schema to help you determine what you need to consider when 
­developing each enthymeme. We suggest that you try a four-box diagram structure 
as a way of visualizing the schema. We have applied the Toulmin schema to the first 
­enthymeme: “We shouldn’t elect Joe as committee chair because he is too bossy.”
ENTHYMEME
CLAIM We shouldn’t elect Joe as committee chair
REASON because he is too bossy.
GROUNDS
Evidence of Joe’s bossiness:
• Examples of the way he dominates meetings—doesn’t
 call on people, talks too much
• Testimony about his bossiness from people who have
 served with him on committees
• Anecdotes about his abrasive style
CONDITIONS OF REBUTTAL
Attacking the warrant and backing
• Arguments that bossiness can be a good trait
 
• Sometimes bossy people make good chairpersons.
 
• This committee needs a bossy person who can
       make decisions and get things done.
• Argument that Joe has other traits of good
 leadership that outweigh his bossiness
CONDITIONS OF REBUTTAL
Attacking the reason and grounds
Evidence that Joe is not bossy or is only
occasionally bossy:
• Counterevidence showing his collaborative style
• Testimony from people who have liked Joe as a
 leader and claim he isn’t bossy; testimony about his
 cooperativeness and kindness
• Testimony that anecdotes about Joe’s bossiness
 aren’t typical
WARRANT
Bossy people make bad committee chairs.
BACKING
Problems caused by bossy committee chairs:
• Bossy people don’t inspire cooperation and enthusiam.
• Bossy people make others angry.
• Bossy people tend to make bad decisions because
 they don’t incorporate advice from others.
■ ■ ■
Using Toulmin’s Schema to Plan and Test Your Argument
So far we have seen that a claim, a reason, and a warrant form 
the frame for a line of reasoning in an argument. Most of the 
words in an argument, however, are devoted to grounds and 
backing.
4.3  To use the Toulmin 
system to generate ideas for 
your argument and test it 
for completeness

64	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
Hypothetical Example: Cheerleaders as Athletes
For an illustration of how a writer can use the Toulmin schema to generate ideas for an 
argument, consider the following case. In April 2005, the Texas house of representatives 
passed a bill banning “sexually suggestive” cheerleading. Across the nation, evening 
television show comics poked fun at the bill, while newspaper editorialists debated its 
wisdom and constitutionality. In one of our classes, however, several students, including 
one who had earned a high school varsity letter in competitive cheerleading, defended 
the bill by contending that provocative dance moves hurt the athletic image of cheer-
leading. In the following example, which draws on ideas developed in class discussion, 
we create a hypothetical student writer (we’ll call her Chandale) who argues in defense 
of the Texas bill. Chandale’s argument is based on the following enthymeme:
The bill banning suggestive dancing for high school cheerleaders is a good law because it 
promotes a view of female cheerleaders as athletes rather than exotic dancers.
Chandale used the Toulmin schema to brainstorm ideas for developing her argument. 
Here are her notes:
Chandale’s Planning Notes Using the Toulmin Schema
Enthymeme: The bill banning suggestive dancing is a good law because it promotes a view 
of female cheerleaders as athletes.
Grounds: First, I’ve got to use evidence to show that cheerleaders are athletes.
■	 Cheerleaders at my high school are carefully chosen for their stamina and skill after 
exhausting two-week tryouts.
■	 We begin all practices with a mile run and an hour of warm-up exercises. We are also 
expected to work out on our own for at least an hour on weekends and on days without 
practice.
■	 We learned competitive routines and stunts consisting of lifts, tosses, flips, catches, and 
gymnastic moves. This requires athletic ability! We’d practice these stunts for hours 
each week.
■	 Throughout the year cheerleaders have to attend practices, camps, and workshops to 
learn new routines and stunts.
■	 Our squad competed in competitions around the state.
■	 Competitive cheerleading is a growing movement across the country—University of 
Maryland has made it a varsity sport for women.
■	 Skimpy uniforms and suggestive dance moves destroy this image by making women eye 
candy like the Dallas Cowboys cheerleaders.
Warrant: It is a good thing to view female cheerleaders as athletes.
Backing: Now I need to make the case that it is good to see cheerleaders as athletes 
rather than as eye candy.
■	 Athletic competition builds self-esteem, independence, a powerful sense of achievement—
it contributes to health, strength, conditioning.

	
Chapter 4    The Logical Structure of Arguments	
65
■	 Competitive cheerleading is one of the few sports where teams are made up of both 
men and women. (Why is this good? Should I use this?)
■	 The suggestive dance moves turn women into sex objects whose function is to be gazed 
at by men, which suggests that women’s value is based on their beauty and sex appeal.
■	 We are talking about HIGH SCHOOL cheerleading—it is a very bad early influence 
on girls to model themselves on Dallas Cowboys cheerleaders or sexy MTV videos of 
rock stars.
■	 Junior high girls want to do what senior high girls do—suggestive dance moves promote 
sexuality way too early.
Conditions of Rebuttal: Would anybody try to rebut my reasons and grounds that cheer-
leading is an athletic activity?
■	 No. I think it is obvious that cheerleading is an athletic activity once they see my 
evidence.
■	 However, they might not think of cheerleading as a sport. They might say that the 
University of Maryland just declared it a sport as a cheap way to meet Title IX federal 
rules to have more women’s sports. I’ll have to make sure that I show this is really a sport.
■	 They also might say that competitive cheerleading shouldn’t be encouraged because it 
is too dangerous—lots of serious injuries including paralysis have been caused by mis-
takes in doing flips, lifts, and tosses. If I include this, maybe I could say that other sports 
are dangerous also—and it is in fact danger that makes this sport so exciting.
Would anyone doubt my warrant and backing that it is good to see female cheerleaders as 
athletes?
■	 Yes, all those people who laughed at the Texas legislature think that people are being too 
prudish and that banning suggestive dance moves violates free expression. I’ll need to 
make my case that it is bad for young girls to see themselves as sex objects too early.
The information that Chandale lists under “grounds” is what she sees as the facts of the 
case—the hard data she will use as evidence to support her contention that cheerlead-
ing is an athletic activity. The paragraph that follows shows how this argument might 
look when placed in written form.
First Part of Chandale’s Argument
Although evening television show comedians have made fun of the Texas 
legislature’s ­desire to ban “suggestive” dance moves from cheerleading ­routines, 
I applaud this bill because it promotes a healthy view of ­female cheerleaders as 
athletes rather than showgirls. I was lucky enough to attend a high school 
where cheerleading is a sport, and I earned a varsity letter as a cheerleader.  
Summarizes opposing 
view
States her claim

66	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
To get on my high school’s cheerleading squad, students have to go through an 
exhausting two-week tryout of workouts and instruction in the basic routines; 
then they are chosen based on their stamina and skill. Once on the squad, 
cheerleaders begin all practices with a mile run and an hour of grueling warm-
up exercises and are expected to exercise on their own on weekends. As a result 
of this regimen, cheerleaders achieve and maintain a top level of physical fit-
ness. In addition, to get on the squad, students must be able to do handstands, 
cartwheels, handsprings, high jumps, and the splits. Each year the squad builds 
up to its complex routines and stunts consisting of lifts, tosses, flips, catches, 
and gymnastic moves that only trained athletes can do. In tough competitions 
at the regional and state levels, the cheerleading squad demonstrates its athletic 
talent. This view of cheerleading as a competitive sport is also spreading to col-
leges. As reported recently in a number of newspapers, the University of 
Maryland has made cheerleading a varsity sport, and many other universities 
are following suit. Athletic performance of this caliber is a far cry from the sexy 
dancing that many high school girls often associate with cheerleading. By ban-
ning suggestive dancing in cheerleading routines, the Texas legislature creates 
an opportunity for schools to emphasize the athleticism of cheerleading.
For grounds, uses 
personal experience 
details to show that 
cheerleading is an ath-
letic activity
Provides more grounds 
by showing emerging 
views of cheerleading 
as a competitive sport
As you can see, Chandale has plenty of evidence for arguing that competitive 
cheerleading is an athletic activity quite different from sexy dancing. But how effective 
is this argument as it stands? Is this all she needs? The Toulmin schema encourages 
writers to include—if needed for the intended audience—explicit support for their war-
rants as well as attention to conditions for rebuttal. Because the overwhelming national 
response to the Texas law was ridicule at the perceived prudishness of the legislators, 
Chandale decides to expand her argument as follows:
Continuation of Chandale’s Argument
This emphasis on cheerleaders as athletes rather than sexy dancers 
is good for girls. The erotic dance moves that many high school cheer-
leaders now incorporate into their routines show that they are emulat-
ing the Dallas Cowboys cheerleaders or pop stars on MTV. Our 
­already sexually saturated culture (think of the suggestive clothing 
marketed to little girls) pushes girls and women to measure their 
value by their beauty and sex appeal. It would be far healthier, both 
physically and psychologically, if high school cheerleaders were iden-
tified as athletes. For women and men both, competitive cheerleading 
can build self-esteem, pride in teamwork, and a powerful sense of 
achievement, as well as promote health, strength, and fitness.
Supplies warrant: It is 
good to see cheerlead-
ers as athletic and bad 
to see them as sex 
objects
Supplies backing: 
Shows benefits that 
come from seeing 
cheerleaders as athletes

	
Chapter 4    The Logical Structure of Arguments	
67
Some people might object to competitive cheerleading by saying 
that cheerleading isn’t really a sport. Some have accused the University 
of Maryland of making cheerleading a varsity sport only as a cheap 
way of meeting Title IX requirements. But anyone who has watched 
competitive cheerleading, and imagined what it would be like to be 
thrown high into the air, knows instinctively that this is a sport indeed. 
In fact, other persons might object to competitive cheerleading be-
cause it is too dangerous, with potential for very severe injuries, in-
cluding paralysis. Obviously the sport is dangerous—but so are many 
sports, including football, gymnastics, diving, and trampoline. The 
danger and difficulty of the sport is part of its appeal. Part of what 
can make cheerleaders as athletes better role models for girls than 
cheerleaders as erotic dancers is the courage and training needed for 
success. Of course, the Texas legislators might not have had athleticism 
in mind when they banned suggestive dancing. They might only have 
been promoting their vision of morality. But at stake are the role mod-
els we set for young girls. I’ll pick an athlete over a Dallas Cowboys 
cheerleader every time.
Anticipates an 
objection
Responds to objection 
by supplying more  
evidence that  
cheerleading is a sport; 
in fact it is a dangerous 
sport
Sums up by returning 
to claim
Our example suggests how a writer can use the Toulmin schema to generate ideas 
for an argument. For evidence, Chandale draws primarily on her personal experiences 
as a cheerleader/athlete and on her knowledge of popular culture. She also draws on her 
reading of several newspaper articles about the University of Maryland’s making cheer-
leading a varsity sport. A more detailed discussion of evidence in arguments ­occurs in 
Chapter 5.
Extended Student Example: Girls and Violent Video Games
Let’s look at one more example of how the Toulmin system can help you generate 
ideas for your argument. In this case we will look at a complete essay from student 
writer Carmen Tieu, whose evolving argument about girls and violent video games 
was introduced in the last chapter. Carmen’s assignment was to write a “supporting 
reasons” argument, which is a shortened form of the classical argument ­described 
on pages 44–46. It has all the features of a classical argument except for the re-
quirement to summarize and rebut opposing views. In planning her argument, 
Carmen decided to use four lines of reasoning, as shown in her because clauses 
listed on page 54. She then created basic Toulmin frames for each reason and used 
those frames to plan out the needed examples and evidence. Based on her plan-
ning notes, Carmen’s composed argument went through several drafts. Here is her 
final version.

68	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
Why Violent Video Games Are Good for Girls
Carmen Tieu (Student)
It is ten o’clock p.m., game time. My entire family knows by now that 
when I am home on Saturday nights, ten p.m. is my gaming night when I 
play my favorite first-person-shooter games, usually Halo 3, on Xbox Live. 
Seated in my mobile chair in front of my family’s 42-inch flat screen 
HDTV, I log onto Xbox Live. A small message in the bottom of the screen 
appears with the words “Kr1pL3r is online,” alerting me that one of my 
male friends is online and already playing. As the game loads, I  send 
Kr1pL3r a game invite, and he joins me in the pre-game room lobby.
In the game room lobby, all the players who will be participating in 
the match are chatting aggressively with each other: “Oh man, we’re 
gonna own you guys so bad.” When a member of the opposing team 
notices my gamer tag, “embracingapathy,” he begins to insult me by 
calling me various degrading, gay-associated names: “Embracing 
apa-what? Man, it sounds so emo. Are you some fag? I bet you want 
me so bad. You’re gonna get owned!” Players always assume from my 
gamer tag that I am a gay male, never a female. The possibility that 
I am a girl is the last thing on their minds. Of course, they are right 
that girls seldom play first-person-shooter games. Girls are socialized 
into activities that promote togetherness and talk, not high intensity 
competition involving fantasized shooting and killing. The violent 
nature of the games tends to repulse girls. Opponents of violent video 
games typically hold that these games are so graphically violent that 
they will influence players to become amoral and sadistic. Feminists 
also argue that violent video games often objectify women by por-
traying them as sexualized toys for men’s gratification. Although I 
understand these objections, I argue that playing first-person-shooter 
games can actually be good for girls.
First, playing FPS games gives girls the chance to beat guys at their 
own game. When I first began playing Halo 2, I was horrible. My male 
friends constantly put me down for my lack of skills, constantly telling 
me that I was awful, “but for a girl, you’re good.” But it didn’t take 
much practice until I learned to operate the two joy sticks with preci-
sion and with quick instinctual reactions. While guys and girls can 
play many physical games together, such as basketball or touch foot-
ball, guys will always have the advantage because on average they are 
taller, faster, and stronger than females. However, when it comes to 
video games, girls can compete equally because physical strength isn’t 
required, just quick reaction time and manual dexterity—skills that 
women possess in abundance. The adrenaline rush that I receive from 
Title makes persuasive 
claim
Attention-grabbing 
scene
Continues scene 
and provides more 
background
Sums up an opposing 
view
States claim
States first reason
For grounds, uses 
personal narrative to 
show how she can 
beat guys
Briefly backs warrant

	
Chapter 4    The Logical Structure of Arguments	
69
beating a bunch of testosterone-driven guys at something they suppos-
edly excel at is empowering and exciting; I especially savor the look of 
horror on their faces when I completely destroy them.
Since female video gamers are so rare, playing shooter games allows 
girls to be freed from feminine stereotypes and increases their confi-
dence. Culture generally portrays females as caring, nonviolent, and 
motherly beings who are not supposed to enjoy FPS games with their 
war themes and violent killings. I am in no way rejecting these tradi-
tional female values since I myself am a compassionate, tree-hugging 
vegan. But I also like to break these stereotypes. Playing video games 
offers a great way for females to break the social mold of only doing 
“girly” things and introduces them to something that males commonly 
enjoy. Playing video games with sexist males has also helped me be-
come more outspoken. Psychologically, I can stand up to aggressive 
males because I know that I can beat them at their own game. The con-
fidence I’ve gotten from excelling at shooter games may have even car-
ried over into the academic arena because I am majoring in chemical 
engineering and have no fear whatsoever of intruding into the male-
dominated territory of math and science. Knowing that I can beat all 
the guys in my engineering classes at Halo gives me that little extra con-
fidence boost during exams and labs.
Another reason for girls to play FPS games is that it gives us a dif-
ferent way of bonding with guys. Once when I was discussing my latest 
Halo 3 matches with one of my regular male friends, a guy whom I 
didn’t know turned around and said, “You play Halo? Wow, you just 
earned my respect.” Although I was annoyed that this guy apparently 
didn’t respect women in general, it is apparent that guys will talk to me 
differently now that I can play video games. From a guy’s perspective I 
can also appreciate why males find video games so addicting. You get 
joy from perfecting your skills so that your high-angle grenade kills 
become a thing of beauty. While all of these skills may seem trivial to 
some, the acknowledgment of my skills from other players leaves me 
with a perverse sense of pride in knowing that I played the game better 
than everyone else. Since I have started playing, I have also noticed 
that it is much easier to talk to males about lots of different subjects. 
Talking video games with guys is a great ice-breaker that leads to dif-
ferent kinds of friendships outside the realm of romance and dating.
Finally, playing violent video games can be valuable for girls because 
it gives them insights into a disturbing part of male subculture. When 
the testosterone starts kicking in, guys become blatantly homophobic 
and misogynistic. Any player, regardless of gender, who cannot play 
well (as measured by having a high number of kills and a low number 
of deaths) is made fun of by being called gay, a girl, or worse. Even 
by showing the 
good feeling of 
empowerment
States second 
reason
Details focus on  
backing for warrant: 
It is good for girls to be 
freed from feminine 
stereotypes
Provides third reason
Uses a narrative  
example for grounds; 
shows how FPS games 
give her a different  
way of bonding with 
males
Backing for warrant: 
This new kind of  
bonding is good
Provides final reason
Provides grounds:  
gives examples of  
what she learned  
about male subculture
5

70	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
when some guys finally meet a female player, they will also insult her by 
calling her a lesbian or an ugly fat chick that has no life. Their insults 
towards the girl will dramatically increase if she beats them because 
they feel so humiliated. In their eyes, playing worse than a girl is embar-
rassing because girls are supposed to be inept at FPS games. Whenever 
I play Halo better than my male friends, they often comment on how 
“it makes no sense that we’re getting owned by Carmen.”
When males act like such sexist jerks it causes one to question if they 
are always like this. My answer is no because I know, first hand, that 
when guys like that are having one-on-one conversations with a female, 
they show a softer side, and the macho side goes away. They don’t talk 
about how girls should stay in the kitchen and make them dinner, but 
rather how they think it is cool that they share a fun, common interest 
with a girl. But when they are in a group of males their fake, offensive 
macho side comes out. I find this phenomenon troubling because it 
shows a real problem in the way boys are socialized. To be a real “man” 
around other guys, they have to put down women and gays in activities 
involving aggressive behavior where men are supposed to excel. But 
they don’t become macho and aggressive in activities like reading and 
writing, which they think of as feminine. I’ve always known that guys 
are more physically aggressive than women, but until playing violent 
video games I had never realized how this aggression is related to mi-
sogyny and homophobia. Perhaps these traits aren’t deeply ingrained in 
men but come out primarily in a competitive male environment. 
Whatever the cause, it is an ugly phenomenon, and I’m glad that 
I learned more about it. Beating guys at FPS games has made me a 
more confident woman while being more aware of gender differences in 
the way men and women are socialized. I joined the guys in playing 
Halo, but I didn’t join their subculture of ridiculing women and gays.
Provides backing for 
warrant: Shows value 
of learning about male 
subculture while keep-
ing separate from it
Sums up why her 
playing FPS games is 
valuable
The Thesis-Governed “Self-Announcing” Structure  
of Classical Argument
Like the complete classical argument explained on pages 44–46, Carmen’s supporting-
reasons argument has a thesis-governed structure in which she states her claim near 
the end of the introduction, begins body paragraphs with clearly stated reasons, and 
uses effective transitions throughout to keep her reader on track. This kind of tightly 
organized structure is sometimes called a self-announcing or closed-form structure be-
cause the writer states his or her claim before beginning the body of the argument and 
forecasts the structure that is to follow. In contrast, an unfolding or open-form struc-
ture often doesn’t give away the writer’s position until late in the essay. (We discuss 

	
Chapter 4    The Logical Structure of Arguments	
71
delayed-thesis arguments in Chapter 7.) A general rule of thumb for arguments using 
more than one line of reasoning is to place your most important or interesting reason 
last, where it will have the greatest impact on your readers.
In writing a self-announcing argument, students often ask how much of the argu-
ment to summarize in the thesis statement. Consider Carmen’s options:
■	 She might announce only her claim:
Playing first-person-shooter games can be good for girls.
■	 She might forecast a series of parallel reasons:
There are several reasons that playing first-person-shooter games can be good for girls.
■	 She might forecast the actual number of reasons:
I will present four reasons that playing first-person-shooter games can be good for girls.
■	 Or she might forecast the whole argument by including her because clauses with 
her claim:
Playing first-person-shooter games can be good for girls because it lets girls feel empow-
ered by beating guys at their own game, because it frees girls from feminine stereotypes, 
because it gives girls a different way of bonding with males, and because it gives girls new 
insights into a male subculture.
This last thesis statement forecasts not only the claim, but also the supporting rea-
sons that will serve as topic sentences for key paragraphs throughout the body of 
the paper.
No formula can tell you precisely how much of your argument to forecast in the 
introduction. However, these suggestions can guide you. In writing a self-announcing 
argument, forecast only what is needed for clarity. In short arguments, readers often 
need only your claim. In longer arguments, however, or in especially complex ones, 
readers appreciate your forecasting the complete structure of the argument (claim with 
reasons). Also, as we explain in later chapters, the directness of classical argument is 
not always the best way to reach all audiences. On many occasions more open form or 
delayed thesis approaches are more effective.
■ ■ ■ 	 For Class Discussion  Reasons, Warrants, and Conditions of Rebuttal
Individual task: 
	 1.	 Choose one of the following reasons. Then write a passage that provides grounds 
to support the reason. Use details from personal experience or imagine plausible, 
hypothetical details.
a.	 For college students, Web surfing or checking social media can be harmful ­because 
it causes you to waste so much study time.
b.	 Rap has a bad influence on teenagers because it celebrates angry violence.
c.	 The university’s decision to charge more for parking permits for solo drivers is a good 
environmental plan because it encourages students to use public transportation.

72	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
	 2.	 Now create an argument to support the warrant for the reason you chose in task 1. 
The warrants for each of the arguments are stated below.
a.	 Support this warrant: Wasting study time is harmful for college students.
b.	 Support this warrant: It is bad to celebrate angry violence.
c.	 Support this warrant: It is good for the environment to encourage students to use 
public transportation.
Group task: Working in pairs, small groups, or as a whole class, share your strategies 
for supporting your chosen reason and warrant.
Writing Assignment  Plan of an Argument’s Details
This assignment asks you to return to the working thesis statement that you created 
for the brief writing assignment in Chapter 3. From that thesis statement extract one 
of your enthymemes (your claim with one of your because clauses). Write out the war-
rant for your enthymeme. Then use the Toulmin schema to brainstorm the details you 
might use (grounds, backing, conditions of rebuttal) to convert your enthymeme into 
a fleshed-out argument. Use as your model Chandale’s planning notes on pages 64–65. 
Note that this is a process-oriented brainstorming task aimed at helping you generate 
ideas for an argument-in-process. You may end up changing your ideas substantially 
as you compose the actual argument. (An assignment to write a complete “support-
ing reasons” argument like Carmen’s comes at the end of the next chapter on uses of 
evidence.)  ■
■ ■ ■

	
	
73
What you will learn in this chapter:
	
5.1	 To explain the different kinds of evidence
	
5.2	 To make your evidence persuasive by using the STAR criteria and other 
strategies
	
5.3	 To understand evidence rhetorically by explaining how the selection 
and framing of evidence reveals an angle of vision
In Chapters 3 and 4, we introduced you to the concept of logos—the logical 
structure of reasons and evidence in an argument. In this chapter, we turn 
to the uses of evidence in argument. By “evidence,” we mean all the verifi-
able data and information a writer might use as support for an argument. In 
Toulmin’s terms, evidence is part of the grounds or backing of an argument in 
support of reasons or warrants.
Kinds of Evidence
Writers have numerous options for the kinds of evidence they can 
use in an argument, including personal experience, observations, 
interviews, questionnaires, field or laboratory research, or findings 
derived from researching primary or secondary sources found in 
libraries, in databases, or on the World Wide Web. Carmen Tieu’s argument in 
the last chapter is based on personal experience. More commonly, college argu-
ments require library and Internet research—what professors call “information 
literacy” (see Appendix 2). This chapter focuses more basically on how evidence 
functions rhetorically in an argument and how it is selected and framed.
We will begin by categorizing different kinds of evidence, illustrating 
how each kind might be incorporated into an argument, and suggesting the 
strengths and limitations of each.
5.1  To explain the 
different kinds of 
evidence
Using Evidence Effectively
5

74	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
Data from Personal Experience  One powerful kind of evidence comes from 
personal experience:
Example
Strengths and Limitations
Despite recent criticism that Ritalin 
is overprescribed for attention deficit 
and hyperactivity disorder, it can ­often 
seem like a miracle drug. My little 
brother is a perfect example. Before 
he was given Ritalin he was a terror in 
school . . . [Tell the “before” and “after” 
story of your little brother]
■	 Personal-experience examples help read-
ers identify with writer; they show writer’s 
­personal connection to issue.
■	 Vivid stories capture the imagination and 
­appeal to pathos.
■	 Skeptics may argue that personal ­examples 
are insufficient (writer is guilty of hasty 
­generalization), not typical, or not adequately 
scientific or verifiable.
Data from Observation or Field Research  You can also develop evidence from 
personally observing a phenomenon or from doing your own field research:
Example
Strengths and Limitations
The intersection at 5th and Montgomery 
is particularly dangerous because pedestri-
ans almost never find a comfortable break 
in the heavy flow of cars. On April 29, 
I watched fifty-seven pedestrians cross the 
street. Not once did cars stop in both direc-
tions before the pedestrian stepped off the 
sidewalk onto the street. [Continue with 
observed data about danger.]
■	 Field research gives feeling of scientific 
credibility.
■	 It increases typicality by expanding ­database 
beyond one example.
■	 It enhances the ethos of writer as ­personally 
invested and reasonable.
■	 Skeptics may point to flaws in how observa-
tions were conducted, showing how data are 
insufficient, inaccurate, or nontypical.
Data from Interviews, Questionnaires, Surveys  You can also gather data by inter-
viewing stakeholders in a controversy, creating questionnaires, or doing surveys.
Example
Strengths and Limitations
Another reason to ban laptops from 
classrooms is the extent to which lap-
top users disturb other students. In a 
questionnaire distributed to 50 students 
in my residence hall, a surprising 60 
percent said that they were annoyed 
by fellow students’ checking Facebook, 
paying their bills, or surfing the Web 
while pretending to take notes in class. 
Additionally, I interviewed five students, 
who gave me specific examples of how 
these distractions interfere with learning. 
[Report the examples.]
■	 Interviews, questionnaires, and surveys 
­enhance sufficiency and typicality of ­evidence 
by expanding database beyond ­experiences of 
one person.
■	 Quantitative data from questionnaires and sur-
veys often increase scientific feel of argument.
■	 Surveys and questionnaires often uncover local 
or recent data not available in published research.
■	 Interviews can provide engaging personal 
­stories, thus enhancing pathos.
■	 Skeptics can raise doubts about research meth-
odology, questionnaire design, or ­typicality of 
interview subjects.

	
Chapter 5    Using Evidence Effectively	
75
Data from Library or Internet Research  For many arguments, evidence is derived 
from reading, particularly from library or Internet research. Appendix 2 helps you con-
duct effective research and incorporate research sources into your arguments:
Example
Strengths and Limitations
The belief that a high-carbohydrate, low-fat 
diet is the best way to lose weight has been 
challenged by research conducted by Walter 
Willett and his colleagues in the department 
of nutrition in the Harvard School of Public 
Health. Willett’s research suggests that com-
plex carbohydrates such as pasta and pota-
toes spike glucose levels, increasing risk of 
diabetes. Additionally, some fats—especially 
monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats 
found in nuts, fish, and most vegetable oils—
help lower “bad” cholesterol levels (45).
■	 Researched evidence is often powerful, 
especially when sources are respected 
by your audience.
■	 Researched data may take the form of 
facts, examples, summaries of research 
studies, quotations from experts, and 
so forth.
■	 Skeptics might doubt the accuracy 
of facts, the credentials of a source, or 
the research design of a study. They 
might also cite studies with different 
results.
■	 Skeptics might raise doubts about 
­sufficiency, typicality, or relevance of 
your research data.
Testimony  Writers frequently use testimony when direct data are either unavailable 
or highly technical or complex. Testimonial evidence can come from research or from 
interviews:
Example
Strengths and Limitations
Although the Swedish economist Bjorn 
Lomborg claims that acid rain is not a 
­significant problem, many environmental-
ists disagree. According to David Bellamany, 
president of the Conservation Foundation, 
“Acid rain does kill forests and people 
around the world, and it’s still doing so in 
the most polluted places, such as Russia” 
(qtd. in BBC News).
■	 By itself, testimony generally is less 
­persuasive than direct data.
■	 Persuasiveness can be increased if 
source has impressive credentials, 
which the writer can state through 
attributive tags introducing the 
testimony.
■	 Skeptics might undermine testimonial 
evidence by questioning credentials of 
source, showing source’s bias, or quoting 
a countersource.

76	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
Statistical Data  Many contemporary arguments rely heavily on statistical data, often 
supplemented by visual graphics such as tables, pie charts, and graphs. (See Chapter 9 
for a discussion of the use of graphics in argument.)
Example
Strengths and Limitations
Americans are delaying marriage at a surpris-
ing rate. In 1970, 85 percent of Americans 
­between the ages of 15 and 29 were married. 
In 2010, however, only 45 percent were  
married (U.S. Census Bureau).
■	 Statistics can give powerful snapshots  
of aggregate data from a wide 
database.
■	 They are often used in conjunction with 
graphics (see pages 159–165).
■	 They can be calculated and displayed 
in different ways to achieve different 
­rhetorical effects, so readers must be 
wary (see pages 85–86).
■	 Skeptics might question statistical 
­methods, research design, and interpre-
tation of data.
Hypothetical Examples, Cases, and Scenarios  Arguments occasionally use hypo-
thetical examples, cases, or scenarios, particularly to illustrate conjectured consequences 
of an event or to test philosophical hypotheses.
Example
Strengths and Limitations
Consider what might happen if we continue 
to use biotech soybeans that are resistant 
to herbicides. The resistant gene, through 
cross-pollination, might be transferred to an 
ordinary weed, creating an out-of-control 
­superweed that herbicides couldn’t kill. Such 
a superweed could be an ecological disaster.
■	 Scenarios have strong imaginative 
appeal.
■	 They are persuasive only if they seem 
plausible.
■	 A scenario narrative often conveys a 
sense of inevitability, even if the actual 
scenario is unlikely; hence, rhetorical 
­effect may be illogical.
■	 Skeptics might show implausibility 
of the scenario or offer an alternative 
scenario.
Reasoned Sequence of Ideas  Sometimes arguments are supported with a reasoned 
sequence of ideas rather than with concrete facts or other forms of empirical evidence. 
The writer’s concern is to support a point through a logical progression of ideas. Such 
arguments are conceptual, supported by linked ideas, rather than evidential. This kind 
of support occurs frequently in arguments and often is intermingled with evidentiary 
support.

	
Chapter 5    Using Evidence Effectively	
77
Example
Strengths and Limitations
Embryonic stem cell research, despite its 
promise in fighting diseases, may have 
­negative social consequences. This research 
encourages us to place embryos in the 
­category of mere cellular matter that can be 
manipulated at will. Currently we reduce 
animals to this category when we genetically 
alter them for human purposes, such as engi-
neering pigs to grow more human-like heart 
valves for use in transplants. Using human 
embryos in the same way—as material that 
can be altered and destroyed at will—may 
benefit society materially, but this quest for 
greater knowledge and control involves a 
­reclassifying of embryos that could poten-
tially lead to a devaluing of human life.
■	 These sequences often are used in causal 
arguments to show how causes are linked 
to effects or in definitional or values 
­arguments to show links among ideas.
■	 They have great power to clarify values 
and show the belief structure upon 
which a claim is founded.
■	 They can sketch out ideas and connec-
tions that would otherwise remain latent.
■	 Their effectiveness depends on the 
­audience’s acceptance of each link in the 
sequence of ideas.
■	 Skeptics might raise objections at any 
link in the sequence, often by pointing 
to different values or outlining different 
consequences.
The Persuasive Use of Evidence
We turn now from kinds of evidence to strategies for making evidence as 
convincing and persuasive as possible. Consider a target audience of edu-
cated, reasonable, and careful readers who approach an issue with healthy 
skepticism; open-minded but cautious. What demands would such readers 
make on a writer’s use of evidence? To begin to answer that question, let’s 
look at some general principles for using evidence persuasively.
Apply the STAR Criteria to Evidence
Our open-minded but skeptical audience would first of all expect your evidence to 
meet what rhetorician Richard Fulkerson calls the STAR criteria:*
Sufficiency: Is there enough evidence?
Typicality: Is the chosen evidence representative and typical?
Accuracy: Is the evidence accurate and up-to-date?
Relevance: Is the evidence relevant to the claim?
Let’s examine each in turn.
Sufficiency of Evidence  How much evidence you need is a function of your rhe-
torical context. In a court trial, opposing attorneys often agree to waive evidence for 
points that aren’t in doubt in order to concentrate on contested points. The more a 
5.2  To make your 
evidence persua-
sive by using the 
STAR criteria and 
other strategies
*Richard Fulkerson, Teaching the Argument in Writing (Urbana: National Council of Teachers of 
English, 1996), 44–53. In this section, we are indebted to Fulkerson’s discussion.

78	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
claim is contested or the more your audience is skeptical, the more evidence you may 
need to present. If you provide too little evidence, you may be accused of hasty gen-
eralization (see Appendix 1, page 273), a reasoning fallacy in which a person makes 
a sweeping conclusion based on only one or two instances. On the other hand, if you 
provide too much evidence, your argument may become overly long and tedious. You 
can guard against having too little or too much evidence by appropriately qualifying 
the claim your evidence supports.
Strong claim: Working full time seriously harms a student’s grade point average. [much 
data needed—probably a combination of examples and statistical studies]
Qualified claim: Working full time often harms a student’s grade point average.
Typicality of Evidence  Whenever you select data, readers need to believe the 
data are typical and representative rather than extreme instances. Suppose that you 
want to argue that students can combine full-time work with full-time college and 
cite the case of your friend Pam who pulled a straight-A grade average while work-
ing forty hours per week as a night receptionist in a small hotel. Your audience might 
doubt the typicality of Pam’s case since a night receptionist often can use work hours 
for studying. What about more typical jobs, they’ll ask, where you can’t study while 
you work?
Accuracy of Evidence  Evidence can’t be used ethically unless it is accurate and 
up-to-date, and it can’t be persuasive unless the audience believes in the credibility of 
the writer’s sources. We’ll develop this point more fully later in this section.
Relevance of Evidence  Finally, evidence will be persuasive only if the reader 
considers it relevant to what is at stake in the dispute. Consider the following stu-
dent argument: “I deserve an A in this course because I worked exceptionally hard.” 
The student then cites substantial evidence of how hard he worked—a log of study 
hours, copies of multiple drafts of papers, testimony from friends, and so forth. Such 
evidence is ample support for the claim “I worked very hard” but is irrelevant to the 
claim that “I deserve an A.”
Establish a Trustworthy Ethos
Besides supplying evidence that meets the STAR criteria, you can make your evidence 
more persuasive by establishing your own credibility and fairness (see the discussion 
of ethos in Chapter 6, page 90). To be credible you must identify the sources of your 
evidence through attributive tags (phrases like “according to T. Alvarez” or “as stated 
by a recent EPA report”) along with, in academic papers, in-text citations and a con-
cluding bibliography (see Appendix 2). Also, you need to be fair in the way you ­select 
evidence. For example, it is unethical to take quotations out of context or to write an 
unfair summary that oversimplifies or distorts a source author’s intended meaning 
(see straw man fallacy in Appendix 1, page 273).

	
Chapter 5    Using Evidence Effectively	
79
Be Mindful of a Source’s Distance from the Original Data
When you support an argument through library/Internet research, you often encounter 
sources that report evidence from a second- or third-hand perspective. You need to 
imagine where your source author found the information that you now want to use in 
your own argument. Let’s take as an example a passage from James Surowiecki’s article 
on the minimum wage reprinted in Chapter 2. Because this is a magazine article rather 
than an academic paper, it contains no footnotes or bibliography, but Surowiecki never-
theless uses attributive tags to identify his main sources. Here is a passage from page 26:
Passage from “The Pay Is Too Damn Low”  
by James Surowieki
[O]ver the past three decades, the U.S. economy has done a poor job 
of  creating good middle-class jobs; five of the six fastest-growing job 
­categories today pay less than the median wage. That’s why, as a recent 
study by the economists John Schmitt and Janelle Jones has shown, low-
wage workers are older and better educated than ever. More important, 
more of them are relying on their paychecks not for pin money or to pay 
for Friday-night dates but, rather, to support families.
Attributive tag 
(cites this study as 
his source)
purported factual 
statement that we are  
examining
Much of Surowiecki’s argument for increasing the minimum wage depends on evidence 
that low-wage workers are “older and better educated than ever.” But we might ask, 
How does Surowiecki know about the age and education of low-wage workers? Why 
should we trust him? Using an attributive tag, he identifies his source as a recent study 
by economists John Schmitt and Janelle Jones. We plugged these names into a Google 
search and quickly located the source: A white paper titled “Low-wage Workers Are 
Older and Better Educated Than Ever,” dated April 2012, from the Center for Economic 
and Policy Research, which, according to its website, is a nonprofit, nonpartisan re-
search center aimed at providing factual economic data for public policy makers. So 
where did Schmitt and Jones get their data? They cite statistical tables compiled by the 
“Current Population Survey,” which is a joint effort of the Census Bureau and Bureau 
of Labor Statistics. Based on these original data, Schmitt and Jones constructed two 
graphs showing shifts in distribution of low-wage workers by age and then by education 
from 1971 to 2011. One of these graphs, for example, shows that in 1979 teenagers held 
26 percent of low-wage jobs, but by 2011 that number was only 12 percent. (You can see 
this graph in Chapter 2, Figure 2.2, page 16). Conversely, the second graph shows that 
in 1979, only 25 percent of low-wage job holders had completed at least some college, 
but by 2011, 43 percent had completed some college.
Let’s summarize the process we have just traced: The original data came from gov-
ernment statistics collected by the Census Bureau and the Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
Schmitt and Jones then converted these data into detailed graphs. Surowiecki then 
summarized the message of the graphs into his single sentence. If you were then to 
cite Surowiecki as your source for this same information, you would be depending 

80	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
on a chain of trust stretching from the original data through Schmitt and Jones and 
Surowiecki to you. Of course, you can’t be expected to trace all your research-gathered 
evidence back to the original data, but you need to imagine that it is possible to do so.
Rhetorical Understanding of Evidence
In the previous section, we presented some general principles for 
the effective use of evidence. We now ask you to look more closely 
at the rhetorical context in which evidence operates. We’ll look 
first at the kinds of evidence used in arguments, and then show 
you how writers select and frame evidence for persuasive effect.
Angle of Vision and the Selection and Framing of Evidence
When we enter the argumentative arena, we come as complex, whole persons, not as 
disembodied computers that reach claims through a value-free calculus. We enter with 
our own ideologies, beliefs, values, and guiding assumptions as formed by our par-
ticular lived lives. These differences help explain why one person’s terrorist might be 
another person’s freedom fighter, or why a hand gun in a drawer might be one person’s 
defense against intruders and another person’s child accident waiting to happen. In 
writing about guns, a believer in second amendment rights is apt to cite evidence that 
having a gun can stop a violent intruder or prevent a rape. Conversely, proponents of 
gun control are apt to cite evidence about accidental deaths or suicides. In an argument, 
evidence is always selected to further the arguer’s claim and is never simply an inert, 
neutral “fact.”
These guiding beliefs and values work together to create a writer’s “angle of vision.” 
By this term we mean a perspective, bias, lens, filter, frame, or screen that helps deter-
mine what a writer sees or doesn’t see. This angle of vision makes certain items stand 
out in a field of data and other items become invisible. It both determines and reveals 
the writer’s view of which data are important and which are trivial, which are significant 
and which can be ignored.
To illustrate how angle of vision creates this kind of selective seeing, consider how 
two hypothetical speakers might select different data about homeless people when 
presenting speeches to their city council. The first speaker argues that the city should 
increase its services to the homeless. The second asks the city to promote tourism more 
aggressively. Their differing angles of vision will cause the two speakers to select dif-
ferent data about homeless people and to frame these data in different ways. Because 
the first speaker wants to increase the council’s sympathy for the homeless, she frames 
homeless people positively by telling the story of one homeless man’s struggle to find 
shelter and nutritious food. Her speech focuses primarily on the low number of tax 
dollars devoted to helping the homeless. In contrast, the second speaker, using data 
about lost tourist income, might frame the homeless as “panhandlers” by telling the 
story of obnoxious, urine-soaked winos who pester shoppers for handouts. As arguers, 
both speakers want their audience to see the homeless from their own angles of vision. 
5.3  To understand evidence 
rhetorically by ­explaining 
how the selection and fram-
ing of evidence reveals an 
angle of vision

	
Chapter 5    Using Evidence Effectively	
81
Consequently, lost tourist dollars don’t show up at all in the first speaker’s argument, 
whereas the story of a homeless man’s night in the cold doesn’t show up in the second 
speaker’s argument. As this example shows, one goal writers have in selecting and fram-
ing evidence is to bring the reader’s view of the subject into alignment with the writer’s 
angle of vision. The writer selects and frames evidence to limit and control what the 
reader sees.
To help you better understand the concept of selection and framing, we offer the 
following exercise based on different angles of vision regarding “festival seating” at 
rock concerts. Because of nationally reported injuries and near-death experiences 
resulting from stage diving and crowd surfing at rock concerts, many cities have 
tried to ban festival seating that allows for the spontaneous creation of mosh pits. 
Critics of mosh pits have pointed to the injuries caused by crowd surfing and to 
the ensuing lawsuits against concert venues. Meanwhile, supporters cite the almost 
ecstatic enjoyment of crowd-surfing rock fans who seek out concerts with “festival 
seating.”
Suppose your city has scheduled a public hearing on a proposed city ordinance to 
ban mosh pits at rock concerts. Among the possible data available to various speakers 
for evidence are the following:
■	 Some bands, like Nine Inch Nails, specify festival seating that allows a mosh pit area.
■	 A female mosher writing on the Internet says: “I experience a shared energy that 
is like no other when I am in the pit with the crowd. It is like we are all a bunch of 
atoms bouncing off of each other. It’s great. Hey, some people get that feeling from 
basketball games. I get mine from the mosh pit.”
■	 A student conducted a survey of fifty students on her campus who had attended 
rock concerts in the last six months. Of the respondents, 80 percent thought that 
mosh pits should be allowed at concerts.
■	 Narrative comments on these questionnaires included the following:
	 ■	 Mosh pits are a passion for me. I get an amazing rush when crowd surfing.
	 ■	 I don’t like to be in a mosh pit or do crowd surfing. But I love festival seating 
and like to watch the mosh pits. For me, mosh pits are part of the ambience of a 
concert.
	 ■	 I know a girl who was groped in a mosh pit, and she’ll never do one again. But 
I have never had any problems.
	 ■	 Mosh pits are dangerous and stupid. I think they should be outlawed.
	 ■	 If you are afraid of mosh pits, just stay away. It is ridiculous to ban them because 
they are totally voluntary. They should just post big signs saying, “City assumes 
no responsibility for accidents occurring in mosh pit area.”
	 ■	 On September 14, 2013, six people were taken to hospitals with injuries after a 
mosh pit fight broke out at the Riot Fest music festival in Chicago.
■	 According to a 2008 ABC news special, a company specializing in crowd man-
agement at rock festivals estimated “that 10,000 people have been injured in 
and around mosh pits in the last decade.” The company said further that “most 
injuries incurred from mosh pits aren’t actually by the moshers but by innocent 
bystanders.”

82	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
■	 In 2005, a blogger reported breaking his nose on an elbow while another described 
having his lip ring pulled out. Another blogger on the same site described having 
his lip nearly sliced off by the neck of a bass guitar. The injury required seventy-
eight stitches. In May 2008, fifty people were treated at emergency rooms for mosh 
pit injuries acquired at a Bamboozle concert in New Jersey.
■	 Twenty-four concert deaths were recorded in 2001, most of them in the area closest 
to the stage, where people are packed in.
■	 A teenage girl suffered brain damage at a 1998 Pearl Jam concert in Rapid City, 
South Dakota. According to her attorney, she hadn’t intended to bodysurf or enter 
the mosh pit but “got sucked in while she was standing at its fringe.”
■	 The website Wikihow offers tips on staying safe in a mosh pit. According to the 
site, “While it may seem otherwise, moshing is by no means a way to hurt some-
one. Moshing is about releasing aggression, and having fun while enjoying some 
awesome music.”
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Creating Contrasting Angles of Vision
Tasks: Working individually or in small groups, complete the following tasks:
	 1.	 Compose two short speeches, one supporting the proposed city ordinance to ban 
mosh pits and one opposing it. How you use these data is up to you, but be able to 
explain your reasoning in the way you select and frame your evidence.
	 2.	 After you have shared examples of different speeches, explain the approaches that 
different classmates employed. What principle of selection was used? If arguers 
included evidence contrary to their positions, how did they handle it, respond to 
it, minimize its importance, or otherwise channel its rhetorical effect?
Rhetorical Strategies for Framing Evidence
What we hope you learned from the preceding exercise is that an arguer’s angle of 
vision causes the arguer to select evidence from a wide field of data and then frame 
these data through rhetorical strategies that emphasize some data, minimize others, 
and guide the reader’s response. Now that you have a basic idea of what we mean by 
framing evidence, here are some strategies writers can use to guide what the reader 
sees and feels.
Strategies for Framing Evidence
■	 Controlling the space given to supporting versus contrary evidence: Depending 
on their audience and purpose, writers can devote most of their space to support-
ing evidence and minimal space to contrary evidence (or omit it entirely). Thus, 
those arguing in favor of mosh pits may have used lots of evidence supporting 
mosh pits, including enthusiastic quotations from concertgoers, while omitting 
(or summarizing very rapidly) the data about the dangers of mosh pits.
■ ■ ■

	
Chapter 5    Using Evidence Effectively	
83
■	 Emphasizing a detailed story versus presenting lots of facts and statistics: 
Often, writers can choose to support a point with a memorable individual case or 
with aggregate data such as statistics or lists of facts. A memorable story can have 
a strongly persuasive effect. For example, to create a negative view of mosh pits, a 
writer might tell the heartrending story of a teenager suffering permanent brain 
damage from being dropped on a mosh pit floor. In contrast, a supporter of mosh 
Angle of Vision
Angle of vision can be conveyed visually as well as 
verbally. These photos display different angles of 
vision toward mosh pits. Suppose you were writing 
a blog in support of festival seating and mosh pits. 
Which image would you include in your posting? 
Why? Suppose, alternatively, that you were blogging 
against mosh pits, perhaps urging local officials to 
outlaw them. Which image would you choose? Why?
Analyze the visual features of these photographs 
in order to explain how they are constructed to create 
alternative angles of vision on mosh pits.
Examining Visual Arguments
Crowd surfing in a mosh pit
An alternative view of a mosh pit

84	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
pits might tell the story of a happy music lover turned on to the concert scene by 
the rush of crowd surfing. A different strategy is to use facts and statistics rather 
than case narratives—for example, data about the frequency of mosh pit acci-
dents, financial consequences of lawsuits, and so forth. The single narrative case 
often has a more powerful rhetorical effect, but it is always open to the charge 
that it is an insufficient or nonrepresentative example. Vivid anecdotes make for 
interesting reading, but by themselves they may not be compelling logically. In 
contrast, aggregate data, often used in scholarly studies, can provide more com-
pelling logical evidence but sometimes make the prose wonkish and dense.
■	 Providing contextual and interpretive comments when presenting data: When 
citing data, writers can add brief contextual or interpretive comments that act like 
lenses over the readers’ eyes to help them see the data from the writer’s perspective. 
Suppose you want to support mosh pits, but want to admit that mosh pits are dan-
gerous. You could make that danger seem irrelevant or inconsequential by saying: 
“It is true that occasional mosh pit accidents happen, just as accidents happen in 
any kind of recreational activity from swimming to weekend softball games.” The 
concluding phrase frames the danger of mosh pits by comparing them to other rec-
reational accidents that don’t require special laws or regulations. The implied argu-
ment is this: banning mosh pits because of an occasional accident would be as silly 
as banning recreational swimming because of occasional accidents.
■	 Putting contrary evidence in subordinate positions: Just as a photographer can 
place a flower at the center of a photograph or in the background, a writer can place 
a piece of data in a subordinate clause or main clause of a sentence. Note how the 
structure of the following sentence minimizes the fact that mosh pit accidents are 
rare: “Although mosh pit accidents are rare, the danger to the city of multimillion-
dollar liability lawsuits means that the city should nevertheless ban them for 
reasons of fiscal prudence.” The factual datum that mosh pit accidents are rare is 
summarized briefly and tucked away in a subordinate “although clause,” while the 
writer’s own position is elaborated in the main clause where it receives grammatical 
emphasis. A writer with a different angle of vision might say, “Although some cit-
ies may occasionally be threatened with a lawsuit, serious accidents resulting from 
mosh pits are so rare that cities shouldn’t interfere with the desires of music fans to 
conduct concerts as they please.”
■	 Choosing labels and names that guide the reader’s response to data: One of the 
most subtle ways to control your reader’s response to data is to choose labels and 
names that prompt them to see the issue as you do. If you like mosh pits, you might 
refer to the seating arrangements in a concert venue as “festival seating, where con-
certgoers have the opportunity to create a free-flowing mosh pit.” If you don’t like 
mosh pits, you might refer to the seating arrangements as “an accident-inviting use 
of empty space where rowdies can crowd together, slam into each other, and occa-
sionally punch and kick.” The labels you choose, along with the connotations of the 
words you select, urge your reader to share your angle of vision.
■	 Using images (photographs, drawings) to guide the reader’s response to data: 
Another strategy for moving your audience toward your angle of vision is to include 
a photograph or drawing that portrays a contested issue from your perspective. 

	
Chapter 5    Using Evidence Effectively	
85
Consider how the photographs on page 83 make arguments about mosh pits. Most 
people agree that the first photo supports a positive view of mosh pits. The crowd 
looks happy and relaxed (rather than rowdy or out of control), and the young 
woman lifted above the crowd smiles broadly, her body relaxed, her arms extended. 
In contrast, the second photo emphasizes muscular men and threatens danger 
rather than harmony. The crowd seems on the verge of turning ugly. (See Chapter 9 
for a complete discussion of the use of visuals in argument.)
■	 Revealing the value system that determines the writer’s selection and framing of 
data: Ultimately, how a writer selects and frames evidence is linked to the system of 
values that organize his or her argument. If you favor mosh pits, you probably favor 
maximizing the pleasure of concertgoers, promoting individual choice, and letting 
moshers assume the risk of their own behavior. If you want to forbid mosh pits, you 
probably favor minimizing risks, protecting the city from lawsuits, and protecting 
individuals from the danger of their own out-of-control actions. Sometimes you 
can foster connections with your audience by openly addressing your underlying 
values that you hope your audience shares with you. You can often frame your 
­selected data by stating explicitly the values that guide your argument.
Special Strategies for Framing Statistical Evidence
Numbers and statistical data can be framed in so many ways that this category of 
evidence deserves its own separate treatment. By recognizing how writers frame num-
bers to support the story they want to tell, you will always be aware that other stories 
are also possible. Ethical use of numbers means that you use reputable sources for 
your basic data, that you don’t invent or intentionally distort numbers for your own 
purposes, and that you don’t ignore alternative points of view. Here are some of the 
choices writers make when framing statistical data:
■	 Raw numbers versus percentages. You can alter the rhetorical effect of a statis-
tic by choosing between raw numbers and percentages. In summer 2002, many 
American parents panicked over what seemed like an epidemic of child abduc-
tions. If you cited the raw number of these abductions reported in the national 
news, this number, although small, could seem scary. But if you computed the 
actual percentage of American children who were abducted, that percentage was 
so infinitesimally small as to seem insignificant. You can apply this framing ­option 
directly to the mosh pit case. To emphasize the danger of mosh pits, you can say 
that twenty deaths occurred at rock concerts in a given year. To minimize this 
statistic, you could compute the percentage of deaths by dividing this number by 
the total number of persons who attended rock concerts during the year, certainly 
a number in the several millions. From the perspective of percentages, the death 
rate at concerts is extremely low.
■	 Median versus mean. Another way to alter the rhetorical effect of numbers is to 
choose between the median and the mean. The mean is the average of all numbers 
on a list. The median is the middle number when all the numbers are arranged 
sequentially from high to low. In 2006, the mean annual income for retired families 

86	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
in the United States was $41,928—not a wealthy amount but enough to live on 
comfortably if you owned your own home. However, the median income was only 
$27,798, a figure that gives you a much more striking picture of income distribu-
tion among older Americans. This median figure means that half of all retired fam-
ilies in the United States had annual incomes of $27,798 or less. The much higher 
mean income indicates that many retired Americans are quite wealthy. This wealth 
raises the average of all incomes (the mean) but doesn’t affect the median.
■	 Unadjusted versus adjusted numbers. Suppose your boss told you that you were 
getting a 5 percent raise. You might be happy—unless inflation rates were running 
at 6 percent. Economic data can be hard to interpret across time unless the dollar 
amounts are adjusted for inflation. This same problem occurs in other areas. For 
example, comparing grade point averages of college graduates in 1970 versus 2012 
means little unless one can somehow compensate for grade inflation.
■	 Base point for statistical comparisons. Suppose you create a graph of global aver-
age temperatures from 1998 to the present. This graph, with 1998 as a base starting 
point, will suggest that the earth may be cooling slightly, not heating up. However, 
if you begin the graph in 1980, the line, though fluctuating, rises steadily. (See 
graph on page 202). One’s choice of the base point for a comparison often makes a 
significant rhetorical difference.
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Using Strategies to Frame Statistical Evidence
A proposal to build a new publicly-funded sports stadium in a major American city 
yielded a wide range of statistical arguments. All of the following statements are rea-
sonably faithful to the same facts:
	
■	 The stadium would be paid for by raising the sales tax from 8.2 percent to 8.3 per-
cent over a twenty-year period.
	
■	 The sales tax increase is one-tenth of 1 percent.
	
■	 This increase represents an average of $7.50 per person per year—about the price 
of a large special coffee drink and a pastry.
	
■	 This increase represents $750 per five-person family over the twenty-year period 
of the tax.
	
■	 For a family building a new home in this city, this tax will increase building costs 
by $200.
	
■	 This is a $250 million tax increase for city residents.
How would you describe the costs of the proposed ballpark if you opposed the pro-
posal? How would you describe the costs if you supported the proposal?
Creating a Plan for Gathering Evidence
We conclude this chapter with a list of brainstorming questions that may help you 
think of possible sources for evidence in your own argument. As you begin contem-
plating an argument, you can use the following checklist to help you think of possible 
sources for evidence.
■ ■ ■

	
Chapter 5    Using Evidence Effectively	
87
A Checklist for Brainstorming Sources of Evidence
■	 What personal experiences have you had with this issue? What details from your 
life or the lives of your friends, acquaintances, or relatives might serve as examples 
or other kinds of evidence?
■	 What observational studies would be relevant to this issue?
■	 What people could you interview to provide insights or expert knowledge on 
this issue?
■	 What questions about your issue could be addressed in a survey or questionnaire?
■	 What useful information on this issue might encyclopedias or specialized refer-
ences in your university library provide?
■	 What evidence might you seek on this issue using licensed databases to search for 
relevant articles from magazines, newspapers, and scholarly journals?
■	 How might an Internet search engine help you research this issue?
■	 What evidence might you find on this issue from reliable statistical resources such 
as U.S. Census Bureau data, the Centers for Disease Control, or Statistical Abstract 
of the United States?
Writing Assignment  A Supporting-Reasons Argument
Write an argument that uses at least two reasons to support your claim. Your argu-
ment should include all the features of a classical argument, except that you can omit 
the section on summarizing and responding to opposing views, which we will cover 
in Chapter 7. This assignment builds on the brief writing assignments in Chapter 3 
(create a thesis statement for an argument) and Chapter 4 (brainstorm support for one 
of your enthymemes using the Toulmin schema). Like a complete classical argument, 
a supporting-reasons argument has a thesis-governed structure in which you state 
your claim at the end of the introduction, begin body paragraphs with clearly stated 
reasons, and use effective transitions throughout to keep your reader on track. In 
developing your own argument, place your most important, persuasive, or interesting 
reason last, where it will have the greatest impact on your readers. A model for a sup-
porting reasons argument is Carmen Tieu’s “Why Violent Video Games are Good for 
Girls” on pages 68–70.  ■

88	
What you will learn in this chapter:
	
6.1	 To explain how the classical appeals of logos, ethos, and pathos work together 
to move your audience
	
6.2	 To create effective appeals to ethos
	
6.3	 To create effective appeals to pathos
	
6.4	 To be mindful of kairos or the “timeliness” of your argument
	
6.5	 To explain how images make visual appeals to logos, ethos, pathos, and kairos
	
6.6	 To explain how audience-based reasons appeal to logos, ethos, pathos, 
and kairos
In Chapters 4 and 5 we focused on logos—the logical structure of reasons 
and evidence in argument. In this chapter we turn to ethos and pathos, 
which comprise the other two points of the rhetorical triangle introduced 
in Chapter 3, page 46. We also consider the kairos, or timeliness of the argu-
ment, and conclude by showing how audience-based reasons appeal simulta-
neously to logos, ethos, pathos, and kairos.
Ethos and Pathos as Persuasive Appeals:  
An Overview
To see how logos, ethos, and pathos work together to create an im-
pact on the reader, consider the different impacts of the following 
arguments, each of which has roughly the same logical appeal.
6.1  To explain how the 
classical appeals 
of logos, ethos, 
and pathos work 
together to move 
your audience
Moving Your Audience
Ethos, Pathos, and Kairos
6
	 1.	 People should adopt a vegetarian diet because doing so 
will help prevent the cruelty to animals caused by factory 
farming.
	 2.	 If you are planning to eat chicken tonight, please consider how much that 
chicken suffered so that you can have a tender and juicy meal. Commercial 
growers cram the chickens so tightly together into cages that they never 
walk on their own legs, see sunshine, or flap their wings. In fact, their beaks 
must be cut off to keep them from pecking each other’s eyes out. One way 
to prevent such suffering is for more people to become vegetarians.

	
Chapter 6    Moving Your Audience	
89
	 3.	 People who eat meat are no better than sadists who torture other sentient creatures 
to enhance their own pleasure. Unless you enjoy sadistic tyranny over others, you 
have only one choice: Become a vegetarian.
	 4.	 People committed to justice might consider the extent to which our love of eating 
meat requires the agony of animals. A visit to a modern chicken factory—where 
chickens live their entire lives in tiny darkened coops without room to spread their 
wings—might raise doubts about our right to inflict such suffering on sentient 
creatures. Indeed, such a visit might persuade us that vegetarianism is a more just 
alternative.
Each argument has roughly the same logical core:
ENTHYMEME
CLAIM People should adopt a vegetarian diet
REASON because doing so will help prevent
the cruelty to animals caused by factory
farming.
GROUNDS
• Evidence of suffering in commercial chicken
  farms, where  chickens are crammed together
  and lash out at one another
• Evidence that only widespread adoption of
  vegetarianism will  end factory farming
WARRANT
If we have an alternative to making animals
suffer, we should use it.
But the impact of each argument varies. The difference between arguments 1 and 
2, most of our students report, is the greater emotional power of 2. Whereas argu-
ment 1 refers only to the abstraction “cruelty to animals,” argument 2 paints a vivid 
picture of chickens with their beaks cut off to prevent their pecking each other blind. 
Argument 2 makes a stronger appeal to pathos (not necessarily a stronger argument), 
stirring feelings by appealing simultaneously to the heart and to the head.
The difference between arguments 1 and 3 concerns both ethos and pathos. 
Argument 3 appeals to the emotions through highly charged words such as torture, 
sadists, and tyranny. But argument 3 also draws attention to its writer, and most of 
our students report not liking that writer very much. His stance is self-righteous 
and insulting. In contrast, argument 4’s author establishes a more positive ethos. He 

90	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
establishes rapport with members of his audience by assuming they are committed 
to justice and by qualifying his argument with conditional terms such as might and 
perhaps. He also invites sympathy for his problem—an appeal to pathos—by offering a 
specific description of chickens crammed into tiny coops.
Which of these arguments is best? The answer depends on the intended audience. 
Arguments 1 and 4 seem aimed at receptive audiences reasonably open to exploration 
of the issue. Arguments 2 and 3 seem designed to shock complacent audiences or to 
rally a group of true believers. Even argument 3, which is too abusive to be effective in 
most instances, might work as a rallying speech at a convention of animal liberation 
activists.
Our point thus far is that logos, ethos, and pathos are different aspects of the same 
whole, different lenses for intensifying or softening the light beam you project onto the 
screen. Every choice you make as a writer affects in some way each of the three appeals. 
The rest of this chapter examines these choices in more detail.
How to Create an Effective Ethos:  
The Appeal to Credibility
The ancient Greek and Roman rhetoricians recognized that an argument 
will be more persuasive if the audience trusts the speaker. Aristotle argued 
that such trust resides within the speech itself, not in the prior reputation 
of the speaker. In the speaker’s manner and delivery; in tone, word choice, 
and arrangement of reasons; and in the sympathy with which the speaker treats alter-
native views, he or she creates a trustworthy persona. Aristotle called the impact of the 
speaker’s credibility the appeal from ethos. How does a writer create credibility? We 
suggest four ways:
■	 Be knowledgeable about your issue. The first way to gain credibility is to be 
credible—that is, to argue from a strong base of knowledge, to have at hand the 
examples, personal experiences, statistics, and other empirical data needed to make 
a sound case. If you have done your homework, you will command the attention of 
most audiences.
■	 Be fair. Demonstrate fairness and courtesy to alternative views. Because true 
argument can occur only where persons may reasonably disagree with one an-
other, your ethos will be strengthened if you demonstrate that you understand 
and empathize with other points of view.
■	 Build a bridge to your audience. A third means of establishing credibility—
building a bridge to your audience—has been treated in our earlier discussions 
of audience-based reasons. By grounding your argument in shared values and 
assumptions, you demonstrate your goodwill and enhance your image as a trust-
worthy person respectful of your audience’s views.
■	 Demonstrate professionalism. Finally, you can enhance your ethos by the profes-
sionalism revealed in your own writing: If your manuscript is sloppy, marred by 
spelling or grammatical errors, poorly documented, or inattentive to the tone and 
style of the expected genre, your own credibility will be damaged.
6.2  To create 
­effective appeals 
to ethos

	
Chapter 6    Moving Your Audience	
91
How to Create Pathos: The Appeal to Beliefs and Emotions
Although commonly defined as an “appeal to the emotions,” pathos evokes 
effects that are subtler and more complex than the word emotions suggests. 
Because our understanding of something is a matter of feeling as well as 
perceiving, pathos can evoke nonlogical, but not necessarily nonrational, 
ways of knowing. When used effectively, pathetic appeals reveal the fullest human 
meaning of an issue, touching the heart and mind simultaneously. Although it is diffi-
cult to classify all the ways that writers can create appeals from pathos, we will focus on 
four strategies: concrete language; specific examples and illustrations; narratives; and 
word connotations, metaphors, and analogies.
Use Concrete Language
Concrete language can increase the liveliness, interest level, and personality of one’s 
prose and typically heightens pathos in an argument. Consider the differences between 
the first and second drafts of the following student argument:
First Draft
People who prefer driving a car to taking a bus think that taking the bus will increase the 
stress of the daily commute. Just the opposite is true. Not being able to find a parking spot 
when in a hurry to work or school can cause a person stress. Taking the bus gives a person 
time to read or sleep, etc. It could be used as a mental break.
Second Draft (with Concrete Language)
Taking the bus can be more relaxing than driving a car. Having someone else behind the 
wheel gives people time to chat with friends or cram for a test. They can balance their 
checkbooks, do homework, doze off, read the daily newspaper, or get lost in a novel rather 
than foaming at the mouth looking for a parking space.
In this revision, specific details enliven the prose by creating images that trigger 
positive feelings. Who wouldn’t want some free time to doze off or to get lost in a novel?
Use Specific Examples and Illustrations
Specific examples and illustrations serve two purposes in an argument: they provide 
evidence that supports your reasons, and they give your argument presence and emo-
tional resonance. Note the flatness of the following draft, arguing for the value of 
multicultural studies in a university core curriculum:
First Draft
Another advantage of a multicultural education is that it will help us see our own culture 
in a broader perspective. If all we know is our own heritage, we might not be inclined to 
see anything bad about this heritage because we won’t know anything else. But if we study 
other heritages, we can see the costs and benefits of our own heritage.
Now note the increase in “presence” when the writer adds a specific example.
6.3  To create 
­effective appeals 
to pathos

92	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
Second Draft (Example Added)
Another advantage of multicultural education is that it raises questions about traditional 
Western values. For example, owning private property (such as buying your own home) is 
part of the American dream and is a basic right guaranteed in our Constitution. However, 
in studying the beliefs of American Indians, students are confronted with a very differ-
ent view of private property. When the U.S. government sought to buy land in the Pacific 
Northwest from Chief Sealth, he is alleged to have replied:
The president in Washington sends words that he wishes to buy our land. But how can 
you buy or sell the sky? The land? The idea is strange to us. If we do not own the fresh-
ness of the air and the sparkle of the water, how can you buy them?[. . .]We are part of 
the earth and it is part of us[. . . .]This we know: The earth does not belong to man, man 
belongs to the earth.
Our class was shocked by the contrast between traditional Western views of property and 
Chief Sealth’s views. One of our best class discussions was initiated by this quotation from 
Chief Sealth. Had we not been exposed to a view from another culture, we would have 
never been led to question the “rightness” of Western values.
The writer begins his revision by evoking a traditional Western view of private 
property, which he then questions by shifting to Chief Sealth’s vision of land as open, 
endless, and as unobtainable as the sky. Through the use of a specific example, the writer 
brings to life his previously abstract point about the benefit of multicultural education.
Use Narratives
A particularly powerful way to evoke pathos is to tell a story that either leads into your 
claim or embodies it implicitly and that appeals to your readers’ feelings and imagi-
nation. Brief narratives—whether real or hypothetical—are particularly effective as 
opening attention grabbers for an argument. To illustrate how an introductory narrative 
(either a story or a brief scene) can create pathetic appeals, consider the following first 
paragraph to an argument opposing jet skis:
I dove off the dock into the lake, and as I approached the surface I could see the sun shining 
through the water. As my head popped out, I located my cousin a few feet away in a rowboat 
waiting to escort me as I, a twelve-year-old girl, attempted to swim across the mile-wide, 
pristine lake and back to our dock. I made it, and that glorious summer day is one of my 
most precious memories. Today, however, no one would dare attempt that swim. Jet skis have 
taken over this small lake where I spent many summers with my grandparents. Dozens of 
whining jet skis crisscross the lake, ruining it for swimming, fishing, canoeing, rowboating, 
and even waterskiing. More stringent state laws are needed to control jet skiing because it 
interferes with other uses of lakes and is currently very dangerous.
This narrative makes a case for a particular point of view toward jet skis by 
­winning our identification with the writer’s experience. She invites us to relive that 
experience with her while she also taps into our own treasured memories of summer 
experiences that have been destroyed by change.

	
Chapter 6    Moving Your Audience	
93
Opening narratives to evoke pathos can be powerfully effective, but they are also 
risky. If they are too private, too self-indulgent, too sentimental, or even too dramatic 
and forceful, they can backfire on you. If you have doubts about an opening narrative, 
read it to a sample audience before using it in your final draft.
Use Words, Metaphors, and Analogies with Appropriate 
Connotations
Another way of appealing to pathos is to select words, metaphors, or analogies with con-
notations that match your aim. We have already described this strategy in Chapter 5 in 
our discussion of the “framing” of evidence (pages 80–85). By using words with particular 
connotations, a writer guides readers to see the issue through the writer’s angle of vision. 
Thus if you want to create positive feelings about a recent city council decision, you can 
call it “bold and decisive”; if you want to create negative feelings, you can call it “haughty 
and autocratic.” Similarly, writers can use favorable or unfavorable metaphors and analo-
gies to evoke different imaginative or emotional responses. A tax bill might be viewed as a 
“potentially fatal poison pill” or as “unpleasant but necessary economic medicine.” In each 
of these cases, the words create an emotional as well as ­intellectual response.
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Incorporating Appeals to Pathos
Outside class, rewrite the introduction to one of your previous papers (or a current 
draft) to include more appeals to pathos. Use any of the strategies for giving your argu-
ment presence: concrete language, specific examples, narratives, metaphors, analogies, 
and connotative words. Bring both your original and your rewritten introductions to 
class. In pairs or in groups, discuss the comparative effectiveness of these introduc-
tions in trying to reach your intended audience.
Kairos: The Timeliness and Fitness of Arguments
To increase your argument’s effectiveness, you need to consider not only 
its appeals to logos, ethos, and pathos, but also its kairos—that is, its timing, 
its appropriateness for the occasion. In Greek, kairos means “right time,” 
“season,” or “opportunity.” It differs from the ordinary Greek word for 
time, chronos, the root of our words “chronology” and “chronometer.” You 
can measure chronos by looking at your watch, but you measure kairos by sensing the 
­opportune time through psychological attentiveness to situation and meaning. To think 
kairotically is to be attuned to the total context of a situation in order to act in the right 
way at the right moment. If you have ever written an angry e-mail but then debated 
whether to hit “send,” you have been thinking kairotically. Here are some examples that 
illustrate the range of insights contained by the term kairos:
■	 If you write a letter to the editor of a newspaper or post a response to a blog, you 
usually have a one- or two-day window before a current event becomes “old news” 
and is no longer interesting. An out-of-date response may go unread, not because 
it is poorly written or argued but because it misses its kairotic moment.
■ ■ ■
6.4  To be mind-
ful of kairos or the 
“timeliness” of your 
argument

94	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
■	 Similar instances of lost timeliness occur in class discussions: You have an impor-
tant point that you want to contribute, but the professor doesn’t acknowledge your 
raised hand. When you finally are called on, the kairotic moment has passed.
■	 A sociology major is writing a senior capstone paper for graduation. The due date 
for the paper is fixed, so the timing of the paper isn’t at issue. But kairos is still 
relevant. It urges the student to ask about the “right way” to produce a sociology 
paper at this moment in the discipline’s history. Currently what are leading-edge 
versus trailing-edge questions in sociology? What theorists or research methods 
are now in vogue? How would a good capstone paper written in 2015 differ from 
one written a decade earlier?
As you can see from these examples, kairos concerns a whole range of questions con-
nected to the timing, fitness, appropriateness, and proportions of a message within 
an evolving rhetorical context. There are no rules to help you determine the kairotic 
moment for your argument, but being attuned to kairos will help you “read” your 
audience and rhetorical situation in a dynamic way.
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Analyzing an Argument’s Appeals
Your instructor will select an argument for analysis. Working in small groups or as a 
whole class, analyze the assigned argument first from the perspective of kairos and 
then from the perspective of logos, ethos, and pathos.
Using Images to Appeal to Logos, Ethos, Pathos, and Kairos
One of the most powerful ways to move your audience is to use photos or 
other images that can appeal to logos, ethos, pathos, and kairos in one glance. 
(Chapter 9 focuses exclusively on visual rhetoric—the persuasive power of 
images.) Although many written arguments do not lend themselves to visual 
illustrations, we suggest that when you construct arguments you consider 
the potential of visual support. When images work well, they are analogous 
to the verbal strategies of concrete language, specific illustrations, narratives, and con-
notative words. As an example, suppose you are writing an argument supporting fund-
raising efforts to help a third-world country that has recently experienced a natural 
catastrophe. To add a powerful appeal to pathos, you might consider incorporating into 
your argument the photograph shown in Figure 6.1 of the devastation and personal loss 
caused by typhoon Haiyan in the Philippines in 2013. A photograph such as this one can 
evoke a strong emotional and imaginative response as well as make viewers think.
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Analyzing Images as Appeals to Pathos
Working in small groups or as a whole class, share your responses to the following 
questions:
	 1.	 How would you describe the emotional/imaginative impact of Figure 6.1? What 
details of the photo specifically create its appeal to pathos?
■ ■ ■
6.5  To explain 
how images make 
visual appeals 
to logos, ethos, 
­pathos, and kairos

	
Chapter 6    Moving Your Audience	
95
	 2.	 Many disaster-relief photos seek to convey the magnitude of the destruc-
tion and suffering, sometimes shockingly, by depicting destroyed buildings, 
mangled bodies, and images of human misery. How is your response to Figure 
6.1 similar to or different from your response to commonly encountered close-
up photographs of grief-stricken victims or to distance shots of wide-spread 
destruction? To what extent is Figure 6.1’s story—told from the perspective of 
a child—different from the more typical photographs of destroyed buildings or 
anguished faces?
How Audience-Based Reasons Enhance Logos, Ethos, 
and Pathos
We conclude this chapter by returning to the concept of audience-
based reasons that we introduced in Chapter 4. Audience-based 
reasons enhance logos because they are built on underlying as-
sumptions (warrants) that the audience is likely to accept. But they 
also enhance ethos and pathos by helping the writer identify with 
6.6  To explain how 
audience-based reasons 
­appeal to logos, ethos, pathos, 
and kairos
Figure 6.1  Photo after Typhoon Haiyan in the Philippines

96	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
Logos, Ethos, Pathos, and Kairos
Efforts to combat sexual assault and the culture of date rape on campuses have figured prominently in public conversation 
recently, with discussions booming on the Web sites of newly formed organizations and stories of rallies on university cam-
puses appearing on news sites. As this advocacy poster shows, the need to bolster bystander intervention is a critical piece 
in addressing this problem.
How does this advocacy poster attempt to move its audience? Analyze the poster’s visual and verbal appeals to logos, 
ethos, pathos and kairos.
Examining Visual Arguments

	
Chapter 6    Moving Your Audience	
97
the audience, entering into their beliefs and values. To consider the needs of your audi-
ence, you can ask yourself the following questions:
Questions for Analyzing Your Audience
What to Ask
Why to Ask It
1. Who is your audience?
Your answer will help you think about audience- 
based reasons.
2. How much does your audience know 
or care about your issue?
Your answer can especially affect your introduction 
and conclusion. The less the audience knows, the 
more background you will have to provide.
3. What is your audience’s current 
­attitude ­toward your issue?
Your answer will help you decide the structure and 
tone of your argument.
4. What will be your audience’s likely 
­objections to your argument?
Your answers will help determine the content of 
your argument and will alert you to extra research 
you may need.
5. What values, beliefs, or assumptions  
about the world do you and your 
­audience share?
Your answer will help you find common ground 
with your audience.
To see how a concern for audience-based reasons can enhance ethos and pathos, 
suppose that you support racial profiling (rather than random selection) for determin-
ing who receives intensive screening at airports. Suppose further that you are writing a 
guest op-ed column for a liberal campus newspaper and imagine readers repulsed by 
the notion of racial profiling (as indeed you are repulsed too in most cases). It’s impor-
tant from the start that you understand and acknowledge the interests of those opposed 
to your position. Middle Eastern males as well as black males with African passports, 
the most likely candidates for racial profiling, will object to your racial stereotyping, 
which lumps all people of Arabic, Semitic, or African appearance into the category “po-
tential terrorists.” African Americans and Hispanics, frequent victims of racial profiling 
by police in U.S. cities, may object to further extension of this hated practice. Also, most 
political liberals, as well as many moderates and conservatives, may object to the racism 
inherent in selecting people for airport screening on the basis of ethnicity.
What shared values might you use to build bridges to those opposed to racial pro-
filing at airports? You need to develop a strategy to reduce your audience’s fears and to 
link your reasons to their values. Your thinking might go something like this:
Problem: How can I create an argument rooted in shared values? How can I reduce 
fear that racial profiling in this situation endorses racism or will lead to further ero-
sion of civil liberties?
Bridge-building goals: I must try to show that my argument’s goal is to increase 
airline safety by preventing terrorism like that of 9/11/01. My argument must 
show my respect for Islam and for Arabic and Semitic people. I must also show my 
rejection of racial profiling as normal police practice.

98	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
Possible strategies:
■	 Stress the shared value of protecting innocent people from terrorism.
■	 Show how racial profiling significantly increases the efficiency of secondary 
searches. (If searches are performed at random, then we waste time and resources 
searching those statistically unlikely to be terrorists.)
■	 Argue that airport screeners must also use indicators other than race to select in-
dividuals for searches (for example, traits that might indicate a domestic terrorist).
■	 Show my respect for Islam.
■	 Show sympathy for people selected for searching via racial profiling and acknowl-
edge that this practice would normally be despicable except for the extreme im-
portance of airline security, which overrides personal liberties in this case.
■	 Show my rejection of racial profiling in situations other than airport screening—
for example, stopping African Americans for traffic violations more often than 
whites and then searching their cars for drugs or stolen goods.
These thinking notes about your audience allow you to develop a plan for your 
argument. Perhaps you might formulate a claim with reasons as follows:
■	 Airport screeners should use racial profiling rather than random selection to 
­determine which people undergo intensive screening
	 ■	 because doing so will be more efficient use of airport screeners’ time, 
­increase the odds of finding terrorists, and thus lead to greater airline safety. 
(WARRANT: Increased airline safety is good; or, at a deeper level, The positive 
consequences of increasing airline safety through racial profiling outweigh the 
negative consequences.)
	 ■	 because racial profiling in this specific case does not mean allowing it in every-
day police activities, nor does it imply disrespect for Islam or for Middle Eastern 
or African males. (WARRANT: Racial profiling is unacceptable in everyday 
police practices. It is wrong to show disrespect for Islam or Middle Eastern or 
African males.)
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Planning an Audience-Based  
Argumentative Strategy
Working individually or in small groups, plan an audience-based argumentative strat-
egy for one or more of the following cases. Follow the thinking process used by the 
writer of the racial profiling argument: (1) state several problems that the writer must 
solve to reach the audience, and (2) develop possible solutions to those problems.
	 1.	 An argument for the right of software companies to continue making and selling 
violent video games: aim the argument at parents who oppose their children play-
ing these games.
	 2.	 An argument to reverse grade inflation by limiting the number of As and Bs a pro-
fessor can give in a course: aim the argument at students who fear getting lower 
grades.
	 3.	 An argument supporting the legalization of cocaine: aim your argument at readers 
of Reader’s Digest, a conservative magazine that supports the current war on drugs.
■ ■ ■

	
Chapter 6    Moving Your Audience	
99
Writing Assignment  Revising a Draft for Ethos, Pathos,  
and Audience-Based Reasons
Part 1: Choose an argument that you have previously written or are currently drafting. 
Revise the argument with explicit focus on increasing its appeals to ethos, pathos, and 
logos via audience-based reasons. Consider especially how you might improve ethos by 
building bridges to the audience or improve pathos through concrete language, specific 
examples, metaphors, or connotations of words. Finally, consider the extent to which 
your reasons are audience-based.
Or
Multimodal option: Imagine an argument that you have previously written or are 
currently drafting that could be enhanced with effective photographs or images. ­Revise 
your argument to include these images, perhaps creating a desktop published docu-
ment that wraps text around visuals chosen to enhance pathos. Other multimodal 
possibilities include transforming your argument into a speech supported by Power-
Point images (see Chapter 14, pages 269–270), into a poster argument (see Chapter 9, 
page 152, and Chapter 14, page 257), or even into a podcast that includes music.
Part 2: Attach to your revision or transformed project a reflective letter explaining the 
choices you made in revising your original argument or in transforming it using a multi-
modal approach. Describe for your instructor the changes or transformations you made 
and explain how or why your new version enhances your argument’s effectiveness at 
moving its audience.  ■

100	
7
Responding to Objections 
and Alternative Views
What you will learn in this chapter:
	
7.1	 To explain the differences between one-sided, multisided, and dialogic 
argument
	
7.2	 To determine the degree of your audience’s resistance to your views in order 
to shape the content, structure, and tone of your argument
	
7.3	 To use one-sided argument to appeal to supportive audiences
	
7.4	 To use classical argument to appeal to neutral or undecided audiences, using 
refutation and concession
	
7.5	 To use dialogic, delayed-thesis argument to appeal to resistant audiences
	
7.6	 To use Rogerian communication to open up new channels of understanding 
between you and an opposing audience
In the previous chapter, we discussed strategies for moving your audience 
through appeals to ethos, pathos, and kairos. In this chapter, we examine strat-
egies for addressing opposing or alternative views—whether to omit them, 
refute them, concede to them, or incorporate them through compromise and 
conciliation.
One-Sided, Multisided, and Dialogic Arguments
Arguments are said to be one-sided, multisided, or dialogic:
■  A one-sided argument presents only the writer’s position on 
the issue without summarizing and responding to alternative 
viewpoints.
■  A multisided argument presents the writer’s position, but also 
summarizes and responds to possible objections and alterna-
tive views.
■	 A dialogic argument has a much stronger component of inquiry, where 
the writer presents herself as uncertain or searching, where the audience 
is considered a partner in the dialogue, and where the writer’s purpose is 
to seek common ground, perhaps leading to a consensual solution to a 
problem.
7.1  To explain 
the differences 
­between one-
sided, multisided, 
and dialogic 
argument

	
Chapter 7    Responding to Objections and Alternative Views	
101
How can you determine the kind of argument that would be most effective in a 
given case? As a general rule, one-sided arguments are appropriate when an issue is 
not highly contested. When an issue is highly contested, then one-sided arguments 
tend to strengthen the convictions of those who are already in the writer’s camp, but 
alienate those who aren’t. In contrast, for those initially opposed to a writer’s claim, 
a multisided argument shows that the writer has considered other views and thus 
­reduces some initial hostility. An especially interesting effect can occur with neutral or 
undecided audiences. In the short run, one-sided arguments often are persuasive to a 
neutral audience, but in the long run multisided arguments have more staying power. 
Neutral audiences who’ve heard only one side of an issue tend to change their minds 
when they hear alternative arguments. By anticipating and rebutting opposing views, 
a multisided argument diminishes the surprise and force of subsequent counterargu-
ments. If we move from neutral to highly resistant audiences, adversarial approaches—
even multisided ones—are seldom effective because they increase hostility and harden 
the differences between writer and reader. In such cases, more dialogic approaches 
have the best chance of establishing common ground for inquiry and consensus.
In the rest of this chapter, we will show you how your choice of writing one-sided, 
multisided, or dialogic arguments is a function of how you perceive your audience’s re-
sistance to your views as well as your level of confidence in your own views.
Determining Your Audience’s Resistance to Your Views
When you write an argument, you must always consider your 
audience’s point of view. One way to imagine your relationship to 
members of your audience is to place them on a scale of resistance 
ranging from strong support of your position to strong opposition 
(see Figure 7.1). At the “Accord” end of this scale are like-minded 
people who basically agree with your position on the issue. At the 
“Resistance” end are those who strongly disagree with you, perhaps 
unconditionally, because their values, beliefs, or assumptions sharply differ from your 
own. Between “Accord” and “Resistance” lies a range of opinions. Close to your position 
will be those leaning in your direction but with less conviction than you. Close to the 
resistance position will be those basically opposed to your view but willing to listen to 
your ­argument and perhaps willing to acknowledge some of its strengths. In the middle 
are those undecided people who are still sorting out their feelings, seeking additional 
­information, and weighing the strengths and weaknesses of alternative views.
7.2  To determine the 
degree of your audience’s 
resistance to your views in 
order to shape the content, 
structure, and tone of your 
argument
Accord
Undecided/Neutral
Resistance
strongly opposed
mostly opposed
uncertain
supportive with conditions
strongly supportive 
Figure 7.1  Scale of resistance

102	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
Seldom, however, will you encounter an issue in which all your intended read-
ers fall into one position on the scale of resistance. Often readers will have different 
degrees of resistance or be resistant for different reasons. Sometimes as a writer you 
will simply need to “invent” your audience—that is, to assume that a certain category 
of readers will be your primary audience. Making this decision gives you a stable base 
from which to create audience-based reasons and to craft an appropriate tone and 
structure. The next sections show how you can adjust your arguing strategy depending 
on whether you imagine your audience as supportive, neutral, or hostile.
Appealing to a Supportive Audience: One-sided Argument
One-sided arguments commonly occur when an issue isn’t highly 
contested and the writer’s aim is merely to put forth a new or differ-
ent point of view. When an issue is contested, however, one-sided 
arguments are used mainly to stir the passions of supporters—to 
convert belief into action by inspiring a party member to contribute to a senator’s 
­campaign or a bored office worker to sign up for a change-your-life weekend seminar.
Typically, appeals to a supportive audience are structured as one-sided arguments 
that either ignore opposing views or reduce them to “enemy” stereotypes. Filled with 
motivational language, these arguments list the benefits that will ensue from your 
donations to the cause and the horrors just around the corner if the other side wins. 
One of the authors of this text received a fund-raising letter from an environmental 
lobbying group declaring, “It’s crunch time for the polluters and their pals on Capitol 
Hill.” The “corporate polluters” and “anti-environment politicians,” the letter contin-
ues, have “stepped up efforts to roll back our environmental protections—relying on 
large campaign contributions, slick PR firms and well-heeled lobbyists to get the job 
done before November’s election.” This letter makes the reader feel part of an in-group 
of good guys fighting big business “polluters.” Nothing in the letter examines environ-
mental issues from a business perspective or attempts to examine alternative views 
fairly. Because the intended audience already believes in the cause, nothing in the let-
ter invites readers to consider the issues more complexly. Rather, the goal is to solidify 
support, increase the fervor of belief, and inspire action. Most appeal arguments make 
it easy to act, ending with a toll-free phone number to call, a Web site to visit, a tear-
out postcard to send in, or a congressperson’s address to write to.
Appealing to a Neutral or Undecided Audience:  
Classical Argument
The in-group appeals that motivate an already supportive audience 
can repel a neutral or undecided audience. Because undecided 
­audiences are like jurors weighing all sides of an issue, they distrust 
one-sided arguments that caricature other views. Generally the 
best strategy for appealing to undecided audiences is the classical 
argument described in Chapter 3 (pages 44–46).
7.3  To use one-sided argu-
ment to appeal to supportive 
audiences
7.4  To use classical argu-
ment to appeal to neutral or 
undecided audiences, using 
refutation and concession

	
Chapter 7    Responding to Objections and Alternative Views	
103
What characterizes the classical argument is the writer’s willingness to summarize 
opposing views fairly and to respond to them openly—either by trying to refute them 
or by conceding to their strengths and then shifting to a different field of values. Let’s 
look at these strategies in more depth.
Summarizing Opposing Views
The first step toward responding to opposing views in a classical argument is to sum-
marize them fairly. Follow the principle of charity, which obliges you to avoid loaded, 
biased, or “straw man” summaries that oversimplify or distort opposing arguments, 
making them easy to knock over.
Consider the difference between an unfair and a fair summary of an argument. 
In the following example, a supporter of genetically engineered foods intends to 
­refute the argument of organic food advocate Lisa Turner, who opposes all forms of 
biotechnology.
Unfair Summary of Turner’s Argument
In a biased article lacking scientific understanding of biotechnology, natural foods huck-
ster Lisa Turner parrots the health food industry’s party line that genetically altered crops 
are Frankenstein’s monsters run amok. She ignorantly claims that consumption of biotech 
foods will lead to worldwide destruction, disease, and death—ignoring the wealth of scien-
tific literature showing that genetically modified foods are safe. Her misinformed attacks 
are scare tactics aimed at selling consumers on overpriced “health food” products to be 
purchased at boutique organic food stores.
Fair Summary of Turner’s Argument
In an article appearing in a nutrition magazine, health food advocate Lisa Turner warns 
readers that much of our food today is genetically modified using gene-level techniques 
that differ completely from ordinary crossbreeding. She argues that the potential, unfore-
seen, harmful consequences of genetic engineering offset the possible benefits of increasing 
the food supply, reducing the use of pesticides, and boosting the nutritional value of foods. 
Turner asserts that genetic engineering is imprecise, untested, unpredictable, irreversible, 
and also uncontrollable because of animals, insects, and winds.
In the unfair summary, the writer distorts and oversimplifies Turner’s argument, 
creating a straw man argument that is easy to knock over because it doesn’t make the 
opponent’s best case. In contrast, a fair summary follows the “principle of charity,” 
allowing the strength of the opposing view to come through clearly.
Refuting Opposing Views
Once you have summarized an opposing view, you can either refute it or concede to its 
strengths. In refuting an opposing view, you attempt to convince readers that its argu-
ment is logically flawed, inadequately supported, or based on erroneous assumptions 
or wrong values. In refuting an argument, you can rebut (1) the writer’s stated reason 
and grounds, (2) the writer’s warrant and backing, or (3) both. Put in less specialized 

104	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
language, you can rebut a writer’s reasons and evidence or the writer’s underlying 
­assumptions. Suppose, for example, that you wanted to refute this argument:
Students should limit the number of internships they take because internships are 
time-consuming.
We can clarify the structure of this argument by showing it in Toulmin terms:
One way to refute this argument is to rebut the stated reason that internships are time-
consuming. Your rebuttal might go something like this:
I disagree that internships are time-consuming. In fact, organizations and businesses are 
usually very upfront, realistic, and flexible in the weekly hours that they ask of students. 
The examples that you cite of overly demanding internships are exceptions. Furthermore, 
these internships have since been retailored to students’ schedules. [The writer could then 
provide examples of realistic, limited-time internships.]
Or you could concede that internships are time-consuming but rebut the argument’s 
warrant that using time in these apprentice situations is bad for students:
I agree that internships take sizable chunks of students’ time, but investment in real-world 
work environments is a worthwhile use of students’ time. Through this investment, students 
clarify their professional goals, log work experience, and gain references. Without interning 
in these work environments, students would miss important career preparation.
Let’s now illustrate these strategies in a more complex situation. Consider the 
controversy inspired by a New York Times Magazine article entitled “Recycling Is 
Garbage.” Its author, John Tierney, argued that recycling is not environmentally 
sound and that it is cheaper to bury garbage in a landfill than to recycle it. In criticiz-
ing recycling, Tierney argued that recycling wastes money; he provided evidence that 
“every time a sanitation department crew picks up a load of bottles and cans from the 
curb, New York City loses money.”
A number of environmentalists responded angrily to Tierney’s argument, chal-
lenging either his reason, his warrant, or both. Those refuting the reason offered 
counterevidence showing that recycling isn’t as expensive as Tierney claimed. Those 
refuting the warrant said that even if the costs of recycling are higher than burying 
wastes in a landfill, recycling still benefits the environment by reducing the amount 
of virgin materials taken from nature. These critics, in effect, offered a new warrant: 
Conserving the world’s resources is an important goal of garbage disposal.
Strategies for Rebutting Evidence
Whether you are rebutting an argument’s reasons or its warrant, you will frequently 
need to question a writer’s use of evidence. Here are some strategies you can use:
■	 Deny the truth of the data. Arguers can disagree about the facts of a case. If you 
have reasons to doubt a writer’s facts, call them into question.

	
Chapter 7    Responding to Objections and Alternative Views	
105
■	 Cite counterexamples and countertestimony. You often can rebut an argument 
based on examples or testimony by citing counterexamples or countertestimony, 
which deny the conclusiveness of the original data.
■	 Cast doubt on the representativeness or sufficiency of examples. Examples are 
powerful only if the audience feels that they are representative and sufficient. 
Many environmentalists complained that John Tierney’s attack on recycling was 
based too largely on data from New York City and that it didn’t accurately take 
into account the more positive experiences of other cities and states. When data 
from outside New York City were examined, the cost-effectiveness and positive 
environmental impact of recycling seemed more apparent.
■	 Cast doubt on the relevance or recency of examples, statistics, or testimony. The 
best evidence is up-to-date. In a rapidly changing universe, data even a few years 
out-of-date are often ineffective. For example, as the demand for recycled goods 
increases, the cost of recycling will be reduced. Out-of-date statistics will skew any 
argument about the cost of recycling.
■	 Question the credibility of an authority. If an opposing argument is based on tes-
timony, you can undermine its persuasiveness if you show that the person cited 
lacks up-to-date or relevant expertise in the field.
■	 Question the accuracy or context of quotations. Evidence based on testimony is 
frequently distorted by being either misquoted or taken out of context. Often sci-
entists will qualify their findings heavily, but these qualifications will be omitted 
by the popular media. You can thus attack the use of a quotation by putting it in its 
original context or by restoring the qualifications in its original source.
■	 Question the way statistical data were produced or interpreted. Chapter 5 provides 
fuller treatment of how to question statistics. In general, you can rebut statistical 
evidence by calling into account how the data were gathered, treated mathemat-
ically, or interpreted. It can make a big difference, for example, whether you cite 
raw numbers or percentages, or whether you choose large or small increments for 
the axes of graphs.
Conceding to Opposing Views
In writing a classical argument, a writer must sometimes concede to an opposing argu-
ment rather than refute it. Sometimes you encounter portions of an argument that you 
simply can’t refute. For example, suppose that you are a libertarian who supports the 
legalization of hard drugs such as cocaine and heroin. Adversaries argue that legaliz-
ing hard drugs will increase the number of drug users and addicts. You might dispute 
the size of their numbers, but you reluctantly agree that they are right. Your strategy in 
this case is not to refute the opposing argument but to concede to it by admitting that 
legalization of hard drugs will promote heroin and cocaine addiction. Having made 
that concession, your task is then to show that the benefits of drug legalization still 
outweigh the costs you’ve just conceded.
As this example shows, the strategy of a concession argument is to switch from 
the field of values employed by the writer you disagree with to a different field of 
values more favorable to your position. You don’t try to refute the writer’s stated 

106	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
reason and grounds (by arguing that legalization will not lead to increased drug usage 
and addiction) or his warrant (by arguing that increased drug use and addiction is 
not a problem). Rather, you shift the argument to a new field of values by introduc-
ing a new warrant, one that you think your audience can share (that the benefits of 
­legalization—eliminating the black market and ending the crime and violence associ-
ated with procurement of drugs—outweigh the costs of increased addiction). To the 
extent that opponents of legalization share your desire to stop drug-related crime, 
shifting to this new field of values is a good strategy. Although it may seem that you 
weaken your own position by conceding to an opposing argument, you may actually 
strengthen it by increasing your credibility and gaining your audience’s goodwill. 
Moreover, conceding to one part of an opposing argument doesn’t mean that you 
won’t refute other parts of that argument.
Example of a Student Essay Using Refutation Strategy
The following student essay illustrates how a classical argument appealing to a neutral, 
undecided, or even mildly resistant audience engages with alternative views. Note the 
use of both concession and rebuttal strategies.
Bringing Dignity to Workers: Make the  
Minimum Wage a Living Wage
Trudie Makens (Student)
Having worked as a busser in a pizza restaurant, a part time barista, and a server 
at a dumpling cafe I have had a number of minimum wage jobs. My coworkers have 
ranged from students like myself to single parents and primary providers for their 
families. As a student, I have always had my parents as a safety net protecting me 
from financial hardship. However, my coworkers whose only income is their minimum 
wage endured financial hardships daily. I witnessed one of my coworkers, Maria, lose 
her home trying to balance supporting her two children and paying her rent. At work, 
Maria would describe her anxiety as she bounced from relative to relative, straining 
her family relations and image of herself as an able provider. Without a living wage or 
the government’s providing social insurance programs to ensure financial security for 
all citizens, families like Maria’s are locked into poverty. Raising the federal minimum 
wage to a livable standard is an important and necessary step to eradicate poverty and 
ensure dignified living for individuals and families.
Yet some argue that a higher federal minimum wage will do more harm than 
good. Michael Saltsman, the research director of the employment policy institute, 
elaborates the pro-business objections to a minimum wage in several op-ed pieces 

	
Chapter 7    Responding to Objections and Alternative Views	
107
published in national print or online newspapers. Saltsman primarily makes three 
arguments against raising the minimum wage. Each of them, I contend, is weak or 
flawed.
First, Saltsman warns that raising the minimum wage will force businesses to cut 
jobs. In order to maintain profit and to keep prices low, Saltsman argues, businesses 
will pay for a higher wage by slashing the number of workers. Worse, businesses 
may cut entire departments in favor of automation such as having fast-food custom-
ers order their meals from computer touch screens. Saltsman’s argument, however, 
­depends on older studies that, according to university of California economist 
Michael Reich, are “fundamentally flawed” (Maclay). In a study published in 2010, 
Reich and his coauthors find that these earlier studies fail to account for all the criti-
cal variables besides wages that influence employment levels. By comparing employ-
ment levels between states with higher versus lower minimum-wage levels, Reich and 
his colleagues provide empirical evidence that raising the minimum wage produces 
no “adverse employment effects” (954).
Saltsman’s second objection to a higher minimum wage is that it targets the 
wrong people and thus won’t reduce overall poverty levels. According to Saltsman, 
a majority of people living in poverty are unemployed while a majority of 
minimum-wage workers are from households above the poverty line. Although 
Saltsman may be correct that a higher minimum wage won’t help a jobless person, 
he ignores the benefits of a living wage to the working poor who would be lifted 
out of poverty. Moreover, a higher minimum wage might itself stimulate jobs be-
cause minimum-wage workers with more money in their pockets are apt to spend 
it, increasing demand for goods.
Finally Saltsman argues that the minimum wage is less effective at reducing pov-
erty than the earned income tax credit, which boosts the income of low-wage workers 
while not giving any income boost to workers who are already above the poverty level. 
However, the earned income tax credit, like the minimum wage, does nothing for the 
jobless poor. Moreover, the earned income tax credit puts the burden of poverty relief 
on taxpayers rather than employers and corporate shareholders, doing little to shift 
the economy in an equitable direction. We need both an increased minimum wage and 
the Earned Income Tax Credit.
It seems clear that to combat poverty, the United States needs a many-pronged 
effort with a hike in the minimum wage being only one of the prongs. Although 
a higher minimum wage will not by itself eliminate poverty, it will certainly help. 
It needs to be combined with investments in infrastructure to create jobs, with 
affordable higher education, with better job training, and with other safety-net 
systems such as those in place in Europe to give dignity to all citizens. Rather than 
our government and market system prioritizing corporations and profit, the rights 
and dignity of workers should be held foremost important. Raising the minimum 
wage to a living wage will help change the structure of a market system that often 
exploits workers.
5

108	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
Works Cited
Maclay, Kathleen. “Minimum Wage Hikes Don’t Eliminate Jobs, Study Finds.” UC Berkeley News 
Center. 1 Dec. 2010. Web. 23 Feb. 2014.
Reich, Michael, Arandrajit Dube, and William Lester. "Minimum Wage Effects across State Borders: 
Estimates Using Contiguous Counties." Review Of Economics and Statistics 92.4 (2010): 945-64. 
Irle.berkeley.edu. UC Berkeley. Web. 23 Feb. 2014.
Saltsman, Michael. “The Wrong Way To Reduce Poverty.” USA Today. 20 Sept. 2013. Employment 
Policy Institute. Web. 18 Feb. 2014.
———. “To Help The Poor, Move Beyond Minimum Gestures.” Huffington Post. 26 Apr. 2013. Web. 
17 Feb. 2014.
■ ■ ■	 For Writing and Class Discussion  Refutation Strategies
Individually or in groups, examine Trudi Makens’ classical argument “Bringing 
Dignity to Workers: Making the Minimum Wage a Living Wage.” Annotate the parts 
of this argument (the thesis claim, the reasons, the use of evidence). Particularly note 
the rebuttal strategies that Trudi employs—where she summarizes and rebuts oppos-
ing views. Work out an answer to this question: How persuasive is this argument in its 
acknowledgment of and response to different perspectives on the higher wage issue?
Appealing to a Resistant Audience:  
Dialogic Argument
Whereas classical argument is effective for neutral or undecided audiences, 
it is often less effective for strongly resistant audiences who hold values, 
assumptions, or beliefs widely different from the writer’s. They are often 
unswayed by classical argument, which attacks their worldview too directly. 
Writers, too, may recognize that progress toward communication on some 
values-laden issues may require them to take a more open, problem-solving 
approach. On issues such as abortion, gun control, gay rights, or the role of religion in 
the public sphere, the distance between a writer and a resistant audience can be so great 
that persuasion seems impossible. In these cases the writer’s goal may be simply to open 
dialogue by seeking common ground—that is, by finding places where the writer and 
audience agree. For example, pro-choice and pro-life advocates may never agree on a 
woman’s right to an abortion, but they may share common ground in wanting to reduce 
teenage pregnancy. There is room, in other words, for conversation, if not for agreement.
Because of these differences in basic beliefs and values, the goal of dialogic argu-
ment is seldom to convert resistant readers to the writer’s position. The best a writer can 
hope for is to reduce somewhat the level of resistance, perhaps by increasing the read-
er’s willingness to listen as preparation for future dialogue. In this section and the next, 
we introduce you to two strategies for reducing the resistance of hostile audiences—­
delayed-thesis argument and Rogerian communication.
■ ■ ■
7.5  To use 
dialogic, delayed-
thesis argument to 
appeal to resistant 
audiences

	
Chapter 7    Responding to Objections and Alternative Views	
109
Creating a Dialogic Argument with a Delayed Thesis
Unlike a classical argument, a delayed-thesis argument assumes an exploratory approach 
to a subject. Instead of declaring a claim and reasons early in the argument, you may 
work your way slowly to your claim, devoting a large part of the argument to examining 
different views and re-creating your own inquiry into the subject.
Let’s look at a delayed-thesis argument, examining its form and emotional impact. 
(For another delayed-thesis argument, see Ellen Goodman’s commentary piece “Womb 
for Rent” on pages 137–138.) The following op-ed piece by syndicated columnist Ross 
Douthat appeared in the New York Times during the public debates about the building of 
a Muslim community center near Ground Zero in lower Manhattan. Note how Douthat 
takes a nonthreatening tone and pulls readers into his exploration of the issue.
Islam in Two Americas
Ross Douthat
There’s an America where it doesn’t matter what language you 
speak, what god you worship or how deep your New World roots run. 
An America where allegiance to the Constitution trumps ethnic differ-
ences, language barriers and religious divides. An America where the 
newest arrival to our shores is no less American than the ever-so-great 
granddaughter of the Pilgrims.
But there’s another America as well, one that understands itself as a 
distinctive culture, rather than just a set of political propositions. This 
America speaks English, not Spanish or Chinese or Arabic. It looks back 
to a particular religious heritage: Protestantism originally, and then a 
Judeo-Christian consensus that accommodated Jews and Catholics as well.
These two understandings of America, one constitutional and one 
cultural, have been in tension throughout our history. They’re in tension 
in the controversy over the Islamic mosque and cultural center sched-
uled to go up two blocks from ground zero.
The first America views the project as the consummate expression of 
our nation’s high ideals. “This is America,” President Barack Obama 
intoned last week, “and our commitment to religious freedom must be 
unshakeable.” The construction of the mosque, Mayor Michael 
Bloomberg told New Yorkers, is as important a test of the principle of 
religious freedom “as we may see in our lifetimes.”
The second America begs to differ. It sees the project as an affront to 
the memory of 9/11, and a sign of disrespect for the values of a country 
where Islam has only recently become part of the public consciousness. 
And beneath these concerns lurks the darker suspicion that Islam in 
any form may be incompatible with the American way of life.
Writer frames the 
­controversy as a  
conflict of American 
identities, two  
divergent ways that 
the country thinks of 
itself.
Writer establishes 
problem and its 
­timeliness but doesn’t 
indicate stand.
Writer explores both 
perspectives: inclusive 
constitutional America, 
which defends the 
right of all religious 
groups to worship as 
they please, and the 
melting pot America, 
which emphasizes 
its Judeo-Christian 
heritage.
5

110	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
Both understandings of this country have wisdom to offer, and both 
have been necessary to the American experiment’s success. During the 
great waves of 19th-century immigration, the insistence that new arriv-
als adapt to Anglo-Saxon culture was crucial to their swift assimilation.
The same was true in religion. The steady pressure to conform to 
American norms eventually persuaded the Mormons to abandon 
­polygamy, smoothing their assimilation into the American mainstream. 
Nativist concerns about Catholicism’s illiberal tendencies inspired 
American Catholics to prod their church toward a recognition of the 
virtues of democracy, making it possible for generations of immigrants 
to feel unambiguously Catholic and American.
So it is today with Islam. The first America is correct to insist on 
Muslims’ absolute right to build and worship where they wish. But 
the second America is right to press for something more from Muslim 
Americans—particularly from figures like Feisal Abdul Rauf, the imam 
behind the mosque—than simple protestations of good faith.
Too often, American Muslim institutions have turned out to be entan-
gled with ideas and groups that most Americans rightly consider beyond 
the pale. Too often, American Muslim leaders strike ambiguous notes 
when asked to disassociate themselves completely from illiberal causes.
For Muslim Americans to integrate fully into our national life, they’ll 
need leaders who don’t describe America as “an accessory to the crime” 
of 9/11 (as Rauf did shortly after the 2001 attacks), or duck questions 
about whether groups like Hamas count as terrorist organizations (as 
Rauf did in June). They’ll need leaders whose antennas are sensitive 
enough to recognize that the quest for inter-religious dialogue is ill served 
by throwing up a high-profile mosque two blocks from the site of a mass 
murder committed in the name of Islam.
They’ll need leaders, in other words, who understand that while the 
ideals of the first America protect the e pluribus, it’s the demands the 
second America makes of new arrivals that help create the unum.
Writer keeps the 
­problem open as he 
examines how these 
two identities func-
tioned in American 
history.
Writer applies this 
analysis to Islam and 
begins foreshadowing 
his thesis.
10
Writer reveals his 
­thesis: American 
Muslims would best 
signal their dissociation 
from Islamic terrorist 
groups and their  
respect for melting 
pot America by not 
building the mosque 
close to Ground Zero.
In this delayed-thesis argument, conservative Ross Douthat writes to liberal New 
York Times readers who are apt to support the Muslim project. His strategy is to 
acknowledge the complexity of the issue, admit the legitimacy of different opposing 
views, and only toward the end of the argument state his own position. If Douthat had 
chosen to write a classical argument, he would have declared his position in the first 
paragraph, perhaps with a thesis statement like this:
Muslim Americans should not build their community center near Ground Zero because 
doing so represents disrespect for America’s core cultural identity and insensitivity to 
Americans’ national pain caused by Islamic terrorists.

	
Chapter 7    Responding to Objections and Alternative Views	
111
With this thesis, readers would have no initial doubt where Douthat stands. His 
in-your-face thesis would activate the emotional objections of readers who support 
the Islamic community center and might prevent them from even reading the piece. 
In contrast, both liberal and conservative readers can get drawn into the build-
ing momentum of Douthat’s delayed-thesis version and appreciate its subtlety and 
surprise.
Writing a Delayed-Thesis Argument
Clearly, where you place your claim can affect your argument’s impact on its audi-
ence. We should note, however, that a delayed-thesis argument is not simply a clas-
sical argument turned upside down. Instead it promotes dialogue with the audience 
rather than compelling readers to accept the writer’s views. It strives to enrich and 
complicate the discussion as much as present a stand on the issue. It entails some risk 
to the writer because it leaves space only at the end of the argument for developing 
the writer’s claim. However, it may lead the writer and readers to a deeper under-
standing of an issue, provide clarification, and promote further discussion. Although 
there is no set form, the organization plan below shows characteristic elements often 
found in delayed-thesis arguments.
•   Explore the problem from multiple perspectives,
 
showing the validity of different views.
•   Invite the audience to join with you in considering
 
different perspectives.
•   Show how you are wrestling with the problem.
•   For a good portion of the argument, keep the
 
problem open, building some suspense.
Dialogic Discussion
• Establish the problem under discussion and often
 
the occasion that makes the issue timely (kairos).
• Engage the audience in the problem.
Introduction
• Present your thesis-claim toward the end of the
 
argument.
• Support the thesis with several reasons and a brief
 
discussion that may build on points presented earlier.
Delayed Thesis and Support
Conclusion
• Leave the audience thinking about the problem and 
 
your position.
Organization Plan for a Delayed-Thesis Argument

112	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
A More Open-Ended Approach:  
Rogerian communication
We now turn to a more complex kind of dialogic method: 
Rogerian communication. We use the term “communication” 
rather than “argument” because, as we will explain in more detail 
shortly, this strategy focuses on mutual listening and growth more 
than on persuasion. All dialogic arguments emphasize problem 
solving, collaborative thinking, and negotiation with a resistant 
audience. But Rogerian communication, besides delaying its thesis, works to change 
the writer as well as the reader. Rogerian communication is named after psychothera-
pist Carl Rogers, who developed a communication strategy for helping people resolve 
differences.* The Rogerian strategy emphasizes “empathic listening,” which Rogers 
defined as the ability to see an issue sympathetically from another person’s perspective 
or “frame of reference.” He trained people to withhold judgment of another person’s 
ideas until they had walked in that person’s shoes. What Carl Rogers understood is 
that traditional methods of argumentation are threatening. Because Rogerian commu-
nication stresses the psychological as well as the logical dimensions of argument, it is 
particularly effective when dealing with emotion-laden issues.
With Rogerian communication, the writer tries to reduce the sense of difference 
between writer and reader by releasing her tight hold on her own views. Particularly, 
she tries to show that both writer and resistant audience share many basic values. This 
search for common ground often has the psychological effect of enlarging, complicat-
ing, or deepening the writer’s own worldview. By acknowledging that she has empathy 
for the audience’s views, the writer makes it easier for the audience to listen to her 
views. Ideally, this mutual listening leads to a compromise or synthesis or, at the least, 
better understanding and more open channels of communication.
The art of listening leads to another essential feature of Rogerian communication—
the ability to point out areas of agreement between the writer’s and reader’s positions. 
Suppose, for example, that you support rapid development of alternative energy and 
oppose offshore or wilderness oil exploration. If you are writing to readers who want to 
maximize oil exploration, you can reduce tension and establish conditions for problem 
solving if you point out areas of agreement and shared value with your audience. You 
might begin by sympathetically summarizing your readers’ pro-oil argument and then 
point out areas of agreement. You might say, for example, that you also value U.S. energy 
independence from foreign oil, that you appreciate recent advances in safe drilling tech-
nology, and that you agree that we can’t dispense with our oil needs overnight. Your effort 
to understand your audience’s views helps build a bridge that will encourage dialogue 
and make it more likely that your audience will listen when you offer your perspective.
7.6  To use Rogerian 
­communication to open 
up new channels of under-
standing between you and 
an opposing audience
*See Carl Rogers’s essay “Communication: Its Blocking and Its Facilitation” in On Becoming a Person 
(Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1961), 329–37. For a fuller discussion of Rogerian argument, see Richard 
Young, Alton Becker, and Kenneth Pike, Rhetoric: Discovery and Change (New York: Harcourt Brace, 
1972).

	
Chapter 7    Responding to Objections and Alternative Views	
113
Rogers’s communication strategies have been the subject of intense debate among 
scholars. On the one hand, some rhetoricians don’t like the term “Rogerian argument,” 
preferring instead “Rogerian rhetoric” or “Rogerian communication.” These theorists 
say that Rogerian listening isn’t a form of argument or persuasion at all. Rather, its goal 
is increased mutual understanding and enlarged perspectives on reality for both writer 
and audience. According to rhetorician Nathaniel Teich, Rogerian rhetoric seeks to 
foster discovery of others’ perspectives and revision of both parties’ worldviews.*
In contrast to this perspective, other scholars view Rogerian argument as a means 
of manipulating resistant audiences. According to this view, the best way to persuade a 
hostile audience is to adopt a nonthreatening tone and approach, treat the opponent’s 
views sympathetically, and then lure the opponent into accepting your views. The 
problem with this perspective is that it is purely instrumental and reduces Rogerian 
argument to a technique, a clever means to an end.
Our view of Rogerian communication forges a middle path between these two 
perspectives. Throughout this text, we emphasize that argument includes inquiry. (See 
particularly Chapters 1 and 2.) Here we treat Rogerian communication as dialogic 
inquiry in which the writer negotiates with the audience in a mutual search for provi-
sional solutions.
Rogerian Communication as Growth for the Writer
One of the key features of Rogerian communication is the open relationship it estab-
lishes between the writer and the subject; it recasts argument as a process of growth for 
the writer. Because Rogerian communication asks the writer to listen to the opponent’s 
views—views that the writer may find uncomfortable or threatening—it promotes 
inquiry and self-reflection, a more tentative and exploratory approach to the subject 
than the writer takes in classical argument or delayed-thesis argument. Rogerian com-
munication urges writers to play Peter Elbow’s “believing game,” where the writer must 
try “to get inside the head of someone” who holds unwelcome ideas.** (See our discus-
sion of the believing and doubting game in Chapter 2, pages 17–18). This “dwelling” in 
unappealing ideas often compels writers to articulate their own values and to achieve 
a new understanding of them. Extending Elbow’s strategy and emphasizing the con-
nection between values and identity, rhetorician James Baumlin argues that Rogerian 
rhetoric creates “a realm of plural selves or identities” in the process of taking on 
“another’s beliefs and world-view” through role-playing.† Rogerian communication 
*For one of the most thorough analyses of Carl Rogers’s influence on rhetoric and composition, see 
Nathaniel Teich’s scholarly anthology Rogerian Perspectives: Collaborative Rhetoric for Oral and 
Written Communication (Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing Corporation, 1992).
**For more suggestions on how to encourage empathic listening, see Elbow’s “Bringing the Rhetoric 
of Assent and the Believing Game Together—and into the Classroom” College English (67.4, March 
2005), 389.
†For more discussion of the relationship between role-playing, understanding, and identity, see 
James S. Baumlin’s “Persuasion, Rogerian Rhetoric, and Imaginative Play” Rhetoric Society Quarterly 
(17.1, Winter 1987), 36.

114	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
Introduction
•   Address the audience and identify the problem that
 
you and your audience want to solve. 
•   Possibly, show the timeliness (kairos) of the problem.
•   Try to establish a friendly or cordial relationship with
 
the audience.
•   Possibly include information that shows your
 
familiarity with the audience.
Summary of the Audience’s Views
•   Summarize the audience’s views in a fair and
 
neutral way that the audience would accept.
•   Show that you understand the audience’s position.
•   Also show an understanding of, and respect for,
 
the audience’s values and beliefs; the goal of this
 
“saying back” (Rogers’s term) is to summarize these
 
views in a way that will be entirely acceptable to
 
the audience.
Common Ground
•   Identify common ground you share with your
 
audience.
•   Demonstrate your growth through empathic
 
consideration of views that you would otherwise
 
find threatening or unwelcome. 
•   Show understanding of the audience’s views by
 
“indwelling” with them and perhaps by extending
 
them to other situations through new examples.
•   Show how your views have been enlarged by
 
empathic listening to the audience’s ideas.
Contribution of  New Points to the
Negotiation
•   Respectfully propose your own way of looking at
 
this issue.
•   Through a respectful and inquiring tone, encourage
 
the audience to listen and work with you to solve
 
the problem.
Conclusion
•   Possibly propose a synthesis of the two positions,
 
discuss how both parties gain from an enlarged
 
vision, or invite the audience to ongoing negotiation.
Organization Plan for Rogerian Communication

	
Chapter 7    Responding to Objections and Alternative Views	
115
thus promotes a writer’s self-examination and exploration of multiple perspectives 
on a problem. This double process of exploration and reflection can in turn lead to a 
change of mind or at least a deeper understanding of a problem.
Rogerian Communication as Collaborative Negotiation
A second key feature of Rogerian communication is its altered argumentative purpose 
and attitude toward the audience. In the absence of the possibility of persuading a 
­resistant audience to accept the writer’s views, the writer seeks different goals through 
a relationship with the audience. These goals include reducing antagonism toward 
those with different beliefs, initiating small steps in understanding, cultivating mutual 
­respect, and encouraging further problem solving—in short, nurturing conditions for 
future exchanges. The focus shifts from persuasion toward collaborative negotiation. 
Thus Rogerian communication is appropriate whenever writers are seeking to open up 
communication with a resistant audience and are themselves willing to work toward a 
synthesis of views.
Writing Rogerian Communication
A major thrust of Rogerian communication is building bridges between writer and 
audience. Because Rogers’s principles originated as a communication strategy between 
two parties in conversation, Rogerian communication most commonly takes the form 
of a letter or an open letter directed to a specific person or group. Rogerian communi-
cation will most likely include the features shown in the chart on page 114, although 
not necessarily in any set form.
In the following example of a Rogerian letter, student writer Colleen Fontana 
responds to an article written by Robert A. Levy, a senior fellow for constitutional 
studies at the Cato Institute, a libertarian think tank. In this open letter, Colleen con-
ducts a collaborative discussion directed toward solving the problem of gun violence.* 
Annotations in the margins indicate how Colleen is practicing Rogerian principles.
*We are indebted to Doug Brent for his insight that Rogerian arguments can often be addressed to the 
author of an article that a reader finds disturbing. See “Rogerian Rhetoric: Ethical Growth Through 
Alternative Forms of Argumentation” in Barbara Emmel, Paula Resch, and Deborah Tenney (eds.), 
Argument Revisited; Argument Redefined (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1996), 81.

116	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
An Open Letter to Robert Levy in Response 
to His Article “They Never Learn”
Colleen Fontana (student)
Dear Robert Levy,
My recent interest in preventing gun violence led me to find your 
article “They Never Learn” in The American Spectator about the mass 
shooting at Virginia Tech in 2007. I was struck by the similarities 
­between that incident and the recent shooting in Tucson, Arizona, 
where a young man gunned down U.S. Representative Gabrielle 
Giffords and nineteen others in a supermarket parking lot. Although 
your article came several years before this Arizona incident, we can see 
that gun violence remains an enduring issue. I have long struggled with 
the question of how we can reduce gun-related violence without 
­detracting from an individual’s right to own a gun. Your article shed 
new light on this question for me.
Your article stresses the need for something different from our 
­nation’s current gun policies. You assert that the solution lies, not in 
stricter gun control policies, but rather in “liberalized laws.” According 
to you, Mr. Levy, it was primarily the existence of anti-gun laws on the 
Virginia Tech. campus that prevented an armed citizen from saving the 
victims of the 2007 shooting. You comment that “gun control does not 
work. It just prevents weaker people from defending themselves against 
stronger predators.” Your article gives detailed examples of studies that 
have substantiated that stricter gun laws have not resulted in lower mur-
der rates. You also cite evidence that fewer crimes are likely to happen 
if the victim brandishes a gun, even if he or she never fires it. According 
to your article, stricter gun laws are doing nothing to help society, and 
your solution lies in relaxed laws, allowing more responsible citizens to 
carry concealed weapons.
Living currently on a college campus myself, I identify immediately 
with your concern for preventing school shootings. I appreciate that 
you are concerned with the safety of the students and the public, and I 
agree that there exists a need for greater safety on school campuses. I 
also agree that current gun laws are not effective as is shown by the 
number of gun-related deaths that happen annually. Even though such 
laws exist, they are not likely to stop “crazed fanatics undeterred by 
laws of murder,” as you say, from committing certain crimes. I particu-
larly agree with you when you discuss the right of self-defense. I strug-
gle with laws that forbid carrying a gun because I believe in the right of 
self-defense. As you mentioned in your article, instances do occur in 
Writer addresses the 
audience.
Writer identifies the 
problem, shows its  
current timeliness  
(kairos), and establishes  
a cordial relationship 
with the audience.
Summary: In neutral,  
fair terms, the writer 
summarizes the 
audience’s previous 
argument, the arti-
cle to which she is 
responding.
Common ground: 
Writer identifies 
common values that 
she shares with her 
audience; she dem-
onstrates empathic 
listening; she imagines 
instances where the 
audience’s values make 
the most sense.

	
Chapter 7    Responding to Objections and Alternative Views	
117
which civilians carrying guns have the ability to save themselves and 
others. Although I have not experienced this situation personally, I 
have read of brave acts of self-defense and intervention. For example, 
my research turned up an article by John Pierce on Minneapolis 
Examiner.com, “It Takes a Gun to Stop a Gunman.” In this article 
Pierce describes an occurrence in Richmond, Virginia, in July of 2009 
where a store owner and several customers were saved from an armed 
robber by a civilian in the store who happened to be carrying a firearm. 
Granted that Pierce is a long-time gun rights advocate and an NRA 
certified instructor, the points he brought up were nevertheless striking. 
If that civilian hadn’t been carrying a gun in that store on that day, then 
everyone in the store might have been killed by the robber. This realiza-
tion resonates with me. I imagine myself in that store, and I know I 
would have been quite grateful that he was carrying a weapon that 
saved my life. Reading this story has forced me to think of the responsi-
bility many gun-owning citizens must feel—a responsibility to protect 
not only themselves but those around them as well. A similar event 
happened recently in New York where a person attempting to rob a 
jewelry shop was shot by the owner in an act of self-defense. His neigh-
bors regard him as a hero (Kilgannon).
While I agree with you that self-defense is an important right and that 
armed citizens can sometimes prevent the death of innocent people, I 
wonder whether the possibility of allowing more guns in public through 
liberalized gun laws is the best solution. Is there a chance more guns in the 
hands of more people would foster a more danger-prone climate both 
from accidents and from sudden fits of rage? I was surprised to learn in a 
recent New York Times article by Charles M. Blow that for every ten peo-
ple in America there are nine guns. Among major nations, according to a 
U.N. study, we have both the highest ratio of guns to people and the high-
est incidence of violence. If liberalizing gun ownership will lead to even 
more guns, then my concern is that there is a higher chance of children 
finding a loaded gun in a parent’s bed stand or of deaths caused by gang 
warfare or from momentary rage in an escalating fight between neighbors. 
Such danger could also exist on school campuses if guns were allowed. 
On a campus where drinking nurtures the party scene, I worry that rowdy 
people waving a gun perhaps as a joke might turn a party into a tragedy. 
Do you have any ideas, Mr. Levy, for reducing gun accidents or irrespon-
sible use of firearms if they are widely available?
I found your point about owning a firearm for self-defense really 
thought provoking. But even if Virginia Tech had allowed guns on 
campus, what are the odds that an armed student or teacher would be 
at the right place at the right time with an actual chance of shooting 
the gunman? Only in the movies are good guys and heroes always on 
Writer moves respect-
fully to presenting her 
own questions and 
differing perspectives 
on the problem. Note 
her tone of negotiation 
and her willingness 
to engage in further 
discussion.
Writer expresses a 
­second concern, 
one that Levy did 
not ­mention: assault 
weapons.
5

118	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
the spot and capable of taking the right action to protect potential 
victims. Although I can really see your point about using handguns 
for self-­defense, I don’t think self-defense can be used as a justifica-
tion for assault weapons or automatic weapons with large clips. If 
guns were freely allowed on campuses, perhaps massacres such as 
Virginia Tech. might occur more often. Or is there a way to allow 
people to carry concealed handguns on campus but still to forbid ri-
fles, shotguns, or other weapons more useful for massacres than for 
self-defense?
After reading your article I have more understanding of the argu-
ments in favor of guns, and I continue to ponder the ethical and prac-
tical issues of gun control versus the right to self-defense. You have 
underscored for me the importance of our continuing to seek means 
of preventing these terrible massacres from happening in our nation’s 
schools. You have also opened my eyes to the fact that no amount of 
enforcement of gun laws can deter determined people from using guns 
to harm others. I am not sure, however, that your proposal to eliminate 
gun control laws is the best solution, and I am hoping that you might 
be willing to consider some of my reasons for fearing guns, especially 
assault weapons and automatic weapons that can be fired like machine 
guns. Perhaps we could both agree that pursuing responsible gun own-
ership is a step in the right direction so that we reduce the number of 
accidents, keep guns away from children, and reduce access to guns 
­capable of unleashing mass murder. I am hopeful that with our com-
mon concern over the current ineffectiveness of gun laws and the de-
sire for safety in our schools, we can find a reasonable solution while 
still preserving the human right of self-defense.
Sincerely,
Colleen Fontana
Works Cited
Blow, Charles M. “Obama’s Gun Play.” New York Times. New York Times, 21 Jan. 
2011. Web. 21 Mar. 2011.
Kilgannon, Cory. “After Shooting, Merchant Is Hero of Arthur Avenue.” New York 
Times. New York Times, 12 Feb. 2011. Web. 21 Mar. 2011.
Levy, Robert A. “They Never Learn.” American Spectator. American Spectator, 25 
Apr. 2007. Web. 13 Mar. 2011.
Pierce, John. “It Takes a Gun to Stop a Gunman.” Examiner.com. Clarity Digital 
Group, 15 July 2009. Web. 15 Mar. 2011.
Writer concludes 
her letter with a reit-
eration of the mutual 
concerns she shares 
with her audience; 
she acknowledges 
how her perspectives 
have been widened by 
Levy’s views; she seeks 
to keep the channel of 
communication open 
and expresses inter-
est in further problem 
solving.

	
Chapter 7    Responding to Objections and Alternative Views	
119
Writing Assignment  A Classical Argument or a Rogerian Letter
Option 1: A Classical Argument Write a classical argument following the explana-
tions in Chapter 3, pages 44–46, using the guidelines for developing such an argument 
throughout Chapters 3–7. Depending on your instructor’s preferences, this argument 
could focus on a new issue, or it could be a final stage of an argument-in-progress 
throughout Part Two. This assignment expands the supporting-reasons assignment 
from Chapter 5 by adding sections that summarize opposing views and respond to 
them through refutation or concession. For an example of a classical argument, see 
“The Dangers of Digital Distraction” by Lauren Shinozuka (pages 119–122).
Option 2: A Rogerian Letter Write a Rogerian communication in the form of a letter 
addressed to a specific person, either someone you know, someone you have heard ­deliver 
a speech, or the author of an article that has disturbed you. Follow the suggestions in the 
chart that explains the elements of a Rogerian letter on page 114 for determining a pur-
pose and structure for your argument. For an example of a Rogerian letter, see Colleen 
Fontana’s “Open Letter to Robert Levy” on pages 116–118. Your instructor may ask you 
to attach a reflective response in which you describe how your experience of writing this 
Rogerian letter differed from your experience of writing classical arguments.  ■
Reading
The following essay by student writer Lauren Shinozuka illustrates a classical argument. 
This essay grew out of Lauren’s own wrestling with her immersion in social media. She 
decided to persuade her peers to see the problem her way with the goal that they will 
join her in new awareness and new habits.
The Dangers of Digital Distractedness
Lauren Shinozuka (Student)
We are the Net Generation, the Facebook Generation—digital natives. Cultural 
critics praise us for our digital skills, our facility with multimedia, and our ability to 
interact electronically with others through collaboration and co-creation. But at what 
cost? If we are honest, the following anti-social scene is familiar. You are sitting at a 
table with friends, and then you hear various pings and look up to see every one of 
your friends with squinted eyes, checking social media apps and text messages, scroll-
ing away on their phones and furiously punching a reply. What kind of togetherness 
is this? We seem to feel some urgency or need to know what the world wants from us 
in that moment, prompting us to check our smartphones every six and a half minutes 
a day. Rather than being skillfully technologically interactive, I argue that our behav-
ior represents dependence, even addiction, that has deep, pervasive consequences. 

120	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
It harms us by promoting an unproductive habit of multitasking, by dehumanizing 
our relationships, and by encouraging a distorted self-image.
I can hear my peers immediately rejecting these claims as too extreme and too crit-
ical, and I acknowledge that a good case can be made for our digital savvy and the 
benefits that brings. Armed with smartphones and laptops, we believe we are masters 
of technology because we can access so much information easily and immediately. 
Thanks to our cell phones, all of our friends are only a mere click or swipe away for 
starting a conversation or sending an invitation to meet up. I also have to admit that 
our digital knowledge gives us on-the-job advantages. At my part-time job at a high-
end retail store, I constantly use a mobile point-of-sale system to ring up customers for 
fast and easy “on-the-spot checkout,” receiving compliments for my competence. With 
my comfort with the company’s technology, I can troubleshoot easily and help other 
employees. Because technology facilitates much of what we do and keeps us plugged 
into the rest of the world, I recognize that it can be difficult to see the negative aspects 
of our relationship to digital technology, but it is time for serious self-examination.
In college, we tell ourselves that multitasking with technology helps us use our time 
wisely, but in actuality we become even less productive. I notice that while I study, I 
feel the need to stop every five or ten minutes to check my phone, or log on to a Web 
site and allow myself to get distracted before going back to my task. These momen-
tary distractions eat away at my time; when I sit down to write a paper at 9 p.m. I am 
often startled to find that it is suddenly 12 a.m. and I have less than a page written. 
We Millennials think we are so cutting edge with our multitasking, yet we get little 
done with our time. We submerge ourselves into a technological bubble consisting 
of laptops and music and cell phones, convinced that by arming ourselves with these 
tools, we can really do it all. In actuality, as writer John Hamilton explains in his 
­report for National Public Radio, our brains cannot “focus on more than one thing 
at a time.” Hamilton cites MIT neuroscientist Earl Miller who says that our minds 
are “not paying attention to . . . two things simultaneously, but switching between 
them very rapidly”; thus, multitasking in itself is a myth. Furthermore, as we con-
tinue to overload our brains with multiple tasks, we also begin to reshape our thought 
­processes. Technology—the Internet in particular—helps us avoid the hard work of 
concentration and contemplation. In the article “Is Google Making Us Stupid?” non-
fiction business and technology writer Nicholas Carr describes this way we take in 
and distribute information as a “swiftly moving stream of particles.” We skim rather 
than read; we rapidly switch tasks rather than truly multitask. I recognize this super-
ficial way of operating in the world in my own behavior. I often turn to Google for an 
immediate answer to a question I have: Who’s the current Speaker of the House? How 
many ounces are in a cup? Then I click on the first link I see, and more often than 
not, I see the little subheading that states, “You’ve visited this page X times.” I realize 
my mental instincts tell me that it’s much easier to Google an answer multiple times 
rather than just learn the information. Because I constantly overindulge in my tech-
nology, I have engrained the habits of skimming streams of information, constantly 
bouncing from one task to another, but never stopping to bask in its depths.

	
Chapter 7    Responding to Objections and Alternative Views	
121
Our obsession with technology and social media not only reshapes the way we 
think, but also fosters a type of false superficial friendship with people we barely 
know, dehumanizing the kinds of relationships we have. Since coming to college, I’ve 
had hundreds of new Facebook friends and dozens of new followers on Twitter. To 
be fair, a number of these people are truly my good friends, but most of these “friend-
ships” came from a one-time meeting at a party or a class I had with them during 
my sophomore year. Although some will insist on the vital role social media plays 
in keeping them connected to distant family and friends, we need to address more 
directly the extent and pervasive effects of our more common arbitrary cyber friend-
ships. Last summer, while I taught a program at a local elementary school, I would 
occasionally post a Facebook status of something funny that happened that day, or a 
picture of my class. Back home later for a short vacation, I ran into a girl from high 
school whom I hadn’t seen in four years and barely knew then. When we stopped to 
chat, she asked me all about my summer program, and commented that all my stu-
dents were so cute! After our chat, I left feeling perturbed and uneasy. Immediately, 
I thought she was so “creepy,” but I realized that ultimately I chose to share my life 
with the rest of the world. Speaking about these digital relationships, Sherry Turkle, 
MIT professor and author of Alone Together: Why We Expect More from Technology 
and Less from Each Other, labels our behavior “a Goldilocks effect”: “we can’t get 
enough of one another if we can use technology to keep one another at distances we 
can control: not too close, not too far, just right” (“The Flight from Conversation”). 
That moment when my distant “friend” reached out to me about my summer felt so 
disturbing because she crossed that Goldilocks line through a personal face-to-face 
conversation. I am embarrassed to say that I was comfortable only when she was one 
of the masses; I didn’t want to engage in a true interpersonal connection.
This lack of intimacy through false relationships leads to the creation of a distorted 
identity. We begin to form a social identity through our conscious decisions of what we 
choose to share with the rest of the digital world. We want to post pretty pictures that 
will garner us a number of “likes,” and we want to tweet something witty or profound 
so others will retweet us. When I began to reevaluate my own social media identity, I 
found that I consciously try to word my Facebook status in order for people to find it 
funny, and I’m obsessed with editing my pictures with the right filters to achieve that 
hipster artist effect. I realized that I was interpreting my own life experiences in such 
a way that I would seem interesting or entertaining to all of my “friends,” as if I were 
performing for an audience I was trying to please. That image of myself is dishonest: It 
conveys the person I want people to think I am, not the real me.
We see this willful self-distortion in a growing trend called “catfishing”: an Internet 
phenomenon where one person creates a false online identity to engage in a romantic 
relationship with another person physically far removed. The “catfisher” uses fake pic-
tures of attractive people and an image of talent to create a different person. Coined by 
a documentary of the same name, Catfish, a reality show spin-off, features these long-
distance lovers traveling across the country for a chance to meet who really is on the 
other side of the screen. Often that person’s appearance and even gender and motives 
5

122	
Part 2	
Writing an Argument
are strikingly at odds with the self-portrayal. While it is easy for us to judge negatively 
these extreme cases of catfishing, Molly McHugh, writer for Digital Trends, points out 
what she calls the “slippery slope of catfishdom.” These cases may seem extreme, but 
to an extent, all of us who embrace social media are indeed “catfish” as well. We suc-
cumb to what McHugh calls the “aspirational beast” of social media, bending the truth 
­online to some degree in order to portray the self that we want to be. With our growing 
reliance on social media and technology, the tendency for our romantic relationships to 
blend into our digital selves becomes even more prevalent. When we continue to mix 
this intimate, personal self with the demands and desires of social media, we produce 
tragic, ill-formed identities that no longer resemble our true selves.
Of course, we may draw a sharp distinction between our own digital depen-
dence and the growing number of young users who are actual technological addicts. 
(According to Carolyn Gregoire’s Huffington Post article, there is now an inpatient 
Internet rehabilitation center designed specifically for true addicts.) However, our own 
participation in the more wide-spread digital craze remains a serious problem too. Yet 
by taking the first step of making the unconscious conscious, I believe we can combat 
the digital damage in our lives. I have begun by taking several steps. I purposefully put 
my phone across the table so I physically need to get up to check it; I only let myself 
binge-check all my social media apps just before going to bed rather than ten times a 
day, and I have stopped trying to take pictures of every pretty meal I consume or sun-
set I see because I know that those are my own special moments, not some glamorous, 
envious image I want to project. I have begun to avoid friends who find their phones 
more interesting than the immediate world around them, and this new company has 
made it easier to break away from my own addiction. I am trying to rehumanize my 
friendships, and I am finding solace in deep reading once more without the distrac-
tions of cell phone vibrations. I invite members of my generation to join me, so we can 
be together, no longer alone together.
Works Cited
Carr, Nicholas. “Is Google Making Us Stupid?” Atlantic. The Atlantic, 1 July 2008. Web. 25 Feb. 
2014.
Gregoire, Carolyn. “Welcome to Internet Rehab.” Huffington Post. Huffington Post, 25 Sept. 2013. 
Web. 4 Mar. 2014.
Hamilton, John. “Think You’re Multitasking? Think Again.” Nat’l Public Radio. Nat’l Public Radio, 
2 Oct. 2008. Web. 10 Feb. 2014.
McHugh, Molly. “It’s Catfishing Season! How to Tell Lovers from Liars Online, and More.” Digital 
Trends. Digital Trends, 23 Aug. 2013. Web. 25 Feb. 2014.
Turkle, Sherry. “The Flight from Conversation.” New York Times. New York Times, 21 Apr. 2012. 
Web. 25 Feb. 2014.

123
Analyzing Arguments
Part Three
	 8	 Analyzing Arguments Rhetorically
	 9	 Analyzing Visual Arguments
To meet their energy needs, countries are increasingly using hydraulic fracturing (called fracking), which extracts 
natural gas from deeply buried shale. Burning natural gas is cleaner than burning gasoline, oil, and coal and emits 
less carbon dioxide. However, each fracking site uses millions of gallons of water, leaves contaminated waste water, 
and often emits methane. Also, environmentalists fear that fracking may contaminate aquifers. This photo depicts 
anti-fracking views in a protest near Manchester, England, in January 2014. How does this protestor try to make 
verbal and visual appeals to logos and pathos to turn viewers against fracking?

124	
Analyzing Arguments 
Rhetorically
8
What you will learn in this chapter:
	
8.1	 To explain what it means to think rhetorically about texts
	
8.2	 To conduct a rhetorical analysis of a specific text
	
8.3	 To construct essays that analyze the rhetorical effectiveness of arguments
In Part Two of this book, we explained thinking and writing strategies for 
composing your own arguments. Now, in Part Three, we show you how to use 
your new rhetorical knowledge to conduct in-depth analyses of other people’s 
arguments. To analyze an argument rhetorically means to examine closely 
how it is composed and what makes it an effective or ineffective piece of per-
suasion. A rhetorical analysis identifies the text under scrutiny, summarizes 
its main ideas, presents some key points about the text’s rhetorical strategies 
for persuading its audience, and elaborates on these points.
Becoming skilled at analyzing arguments rhetorically will provide multi-
ple payoffs for you. Rhetorical analyses are common assignments in courses 
in critical thinking and argument. Additionally, thinking rhetorically about 
texts is crucial for writing the “literature review” section of research assign-
ments across the disciplines and for summarizing and responding to oppos-
ing views in your own arguments. This chapter focuses on the rhetorical anal-
ysis of written arguments; Chapter 9 equips you to analyze visual arguments.
Thinking Rhetorically about a Text
Before we turn directly to rhetorical analysis of specific texts, let’s 
focus on the key word “rhetoric.” In popular usage, rhetoric often 
means empty or deceptive language, as in the phrase, “Well, that’s 
just rhetoric.” Another related meaning of rhetoric is decorative 
or artificial language. Most contemporary rhetoricians, however, 
adopt a larger view of rhetoric articulated by Greek philosopher Aristotle: 
the art of determining what will be persuasive in every situation. Focusing 
on this foundational meaning of rhetoric, this chapter will show you how to 
analyze a writer’s motivation, purpose, and rhetorical choices for persuading 
a targeted audience. This chapter draws primarily on rhetorical concepts with 
which you are already familiar: audience-based reasons, the STAR criteria for 
evidence, and the classical appeals of logos, ethos, and pathos.
8.1  To explain 
what it means to 
think rhetorically 
about texts

	
Chapter 8    Analyzing Arguments Rhetorically	
125
Questions for Rhetorical Analysis
Conducting a rhetorical analysis asks you to bring to bear on an argument your 
knowledge of argument and your repertoire of reading strategies. The questions in 
the following table can help you examine an argument in depth. Although a rhetorical 
analysis will not include answers to all these questions, using some of them in your 
thinking stages can give you a thorough understanding of the argument while helping 
you generate insights for your own rhetorical analysis essay.
Questions for Rhetorical Analysis
What to Focus On
Questions to Ask
Applying These Questions
The kairotic  
moment and  
writer’s motivat-
ing occasion
■	 What motivated the writer  
to produce this piece?
■	 What social, cultural, political, 
legal, or economic conversations 
does this argument join?
■	 Is the writer responding to a 
bill pending in Congress, a 
recent speech by a political 
leader, or a local event that 
provoked controversy?
■	 Is the writer addressing 
­cultural trends such as 
the impact of science or 
technology on values?
Rhetorical 
­context: Writer’s 
purpose and 
audience
■	 What is the writer’s purpose?
■	 Who is the intended audience?
■	 What assumptions, values, 
or beliefs would readers have 
to hold to find this argument 
persuasive?
■	 How well does the text suit 
its particular audience and 
purpose?
■	 Is the writer trying to 
change readers’ views by  
offering a new interpretation 
of a phenomenon, ­calling 
readers to action, trying to 
muster votes, or inspiring 
further investigations?
■	 Does the audience share 
a political or religious 
­orientation with the writer?
Rhetorical 
­context: Writer’s 
identity and angle 
of vision
■	 Who is the writer and what 
is his or her profession, 
­background, and expertise?
■	 How does the writer’s personal 
history, education, gender, 
ethnicity, age, class, sexual 
­orientation, and political  
leaning influence the angle 
of vision?
■	 What is emphasized and what 
is omitted in this text?
■	 How much does the writer’s  
angle of vision dominate 
the text?
■	 Is the writer a scholar, 
­researcher, scientist,  
policymaker, politician, 
professional journalist, or 
citizen blogger?
■	 Is the writer affiliated with 
conservative or liberal, 
­religious or lay publications?
■	 Is the writer advocating a 
stance or adopting a more 
inquiry-based mode?
■	 What points of view and 
pieces of evidence are “not 
seen” by this writer?
(Continued)

126	
Part 3	
Analyzing Arguments
What to Focus On
Questions to Ask
Applying These Questions
Rhetorical 
­context: Genre
■	 What is the argument’s original 
genre?
■	 What is the original medium of 
publication? How do the genre 
and its place of publication 
­influence its content, structure, 
and style?
■	 How popular or scholarly, 
informal or formal is this 
genre?
■	 Does the genre allow for 
­in-depth or only sketchy 
coverage of an issue? 
(See Chapter 2, pages 19–22, 
for detailed explanations 
of genre.)
Logos of the 
argument
■	 What is the argument’s claim, 
either explicitly stated or 
implied?
■	 What are the main reasons in 
support of the claim? Are the 
reasons audience-based?
■	 How effective is the writer’s  
use of evidence? How is the 
argument supported and 
developed?
■	 How well has the argument 
­recognized and responded  
to alternative views?
■	 Is the core of the argument 
clear and soundly developed? 
Or do readers have to unearth 
or reconstruct the argument?
■	 Is the argument one-sided, 
multisided, or dialogic?
■	 Does the argument depend 
on assumptions the audience 
may not share?
■	 What evidence does the 
writer employ? Does this 
evidence meet the STAR 
­criteria? (See pages 77–78.)
Ethos of the 
argument
■	 What ethos does the writer 
project?
■	 How does the writer try to seem 
credible and trustworthy to the 
intended audience?
■	 How knowledgeable does the 
writer seem in recognizing 
­opposing or alternative views 
and how fairly does the writer 
respond to them?
■	 If you are impressed or won 
over by this writer, what has 
earned your respect?
■	 If you are filled with doubts 
or skepticism, what has 
caused you to question this 
writer?
■	 How important is the 
­character of the writer in 
this argument?
Pathos of the 
argument
■	 How effective is the writer in 
using audience-based reasons?
■	 How does the writer use 
­concrete language, word choice, 
narrative, example, and anal-
ogies to tap readers’ emotions, 
values, and imaginations?
■	 What examples, connotative 
language, and uses of narra-
tive or analogy stand out for 
you in this argument?
■	 Does this argument rely 
heavily on appeals to ­pathos? 
Or is this argument more 
brainy and logical?

	
Chapter 8    Analyzing Arguments Rhetorically	
127
What to Focus On
Questions to Ask
Applying These Questions
Writer’s style
■	 How do the writer’s language 
choices and sentence length and 
complexity contribute to the 
­impact of the argument?
■	 How well does the writer’s tone 
(attitude toward the subject) 
suit the argument?
■	 How readable is this 
argument?
■	 Is the argument formal, 
scholarly, journalistic, 
­informal, or casual?
■	 Is the tone serious, mocking, 
humorous, exhortational, 
confessional, urgent, or 
something else?
Design and visual 
elements
■	 How do design elements—­
layout, font sizes and styles, and 
use of color—influence the effect 
of the argument? (See Chapter 9 
for a detailed discussion of these 
elements.)
■	 How do graphics, images, or 
other visuals contribute to the 
persuasiveness of the argument?
■	 Do design features 
­contribute to the logical or 
the ­emotional/imaginative 
appeals of the argument?
■	 How would this argument 
benefit from visuals and 
graphics or some different 
document design?
Overall 
­persuasiveness 
of the argument
■	 What features of this argument 
contribute most to making it 
persuasive or not persuasive for 
its target audience and for you 
yourself?
■	 How would this argument be 
received by different audiences?
■	 What features contribute to the 
rhetorical complexity of this 
argument?
■	 What is particularly memorable, 
disturbing, or problematic about 
this argument?
■	 What does this argument 
­contribute to its kairotic 
­moment and the argumentative 
controversy of which it is a part?
■	 For example, are appeals to 
pathos legitimate and suit-
able? Does the quality and 
quantity of the evidence 
help to build a strong case 
or fall short?
■	 What specifically would 
count as a strength for the 
target audience?
■	 If you differ from the target 
audience, how do you differ 
and where does the argu-
ment derail for you?
■	 What gaps, contradictions, 
or unanswered questions are 
you left with?
■	 How does this argument 
­indicate that it is engaged 
in a public conversation? 
How does it “talk” to other 
arguments you have read on 
this issue?

128	
Part 3	
Analyzing Arguments
Conducting Rhetorical Analysis
To illustrate rhetorical analysis in this section and in the student example at 
the end of the chapter, we will use two articles on reproductive technology—a 
subject that continues to generate arguments in the public sphere. By repro-
ductive technology we mean scientific advances in the treatment of infertil-
ity such as egg and sperm donation, artificial insemination, in vitro fertilization, and 
­surrogate motherhood. Our first article, from a decade ago, springs from the early and 
increasing popularity of these technological options. Our second article—to be used later 
in our student example—responds to the recent globalization of this technology.
At this point, please read our first article, “Egg Heads” by Kathryn Jean Lopez, and 
then proceed to the discussion questions that follow. Lopez’s article was originally pub-
lished in the September 1, 1998, issue of the biweekly conservative news commentary 
magazine National Review.
Egg Heads
Kathryn Jean Lopez
8.2  To conduct a 
rhetorical analysis 
of a specific text
Filling the waiting room to capacity and spill-
ing over into a nearby conference room, a group of 
young women listen closely and follow the instruc-
tions: Complete the forms and return them, with 
the clipboard, to the receptionist. It’s all just as in 
any medical office. Then they move downstairs, 
where the doctor briefs them. “Everything will be 
pretty much normal,” she explains. “Women com-
plain of skin irritation in the local area of injection 
and bloating. You also might be a little emotional. 
But, basically, it’s really bad PMS.”
This is not just another medical office. On a 
steamy night in July, these girls in their twenties are 
attending an orientation session for potential egg 
donors at a New Jersey fertility clinic specializing 
in in-vitro fertilization. Within the walls of IVF 
New Jersey and at least two hundred other clin-
ics throughout the United States, young women 
answer the call to give “the gift of life” to infertile 
couples. Egg donation is a quietly expanding in-
dustry, changing the way we look at the family, 
young women’s bodies, and human life itself.
It is not a pleasant way to make money. Unlike 
sperm donation, which is over in less than an hour, 
egg donation takes the donor some 56 hours and 
includes a battery of tests, ultrasound, self-admin-
istered injections, and retrieval. Once a donor is 
accepted into a program, she is given hormones 
to stimulate the ovaries, changing the number of 
eggs matured from the usual one per month up to 
as many as fifty. A doctor then surgically removes 
the eggs from the donor’s ovary and fertilizes them 
with the designated sperm.
Although most programs require potential do-
nors to undergo a series of medical tests and 
counseling, there is little indication that most of 
the young women know what they are getting 
themselves into. They risk bleeding, infection, and 
scarring. When too many eggs are matured in one 
cycle, it can damage the ovaries and leave the donor 
with weeks of abdominal pain. (At worst, com-
plications may leave her dead.) Longer term, the 
possibility of early menopause raises the prospect 
of future regret. There is also some evidence of a 

	
Chapter 8    Analyzing Arguments Rhetorically	
129
connection between the fertility drugs used in the 
process and ovarian cancer.
But it’s good money—and getting better. New 
York’s Brooklyn IVF raised its “donor compensation” 
from $2,500 to $5,000 per cycle earlier this year in 
order to keep pace with St. Barnabas Medical Center 
in nearby Livingston, New Jersey. It’s a bidding war. 
“It’s obvious why we had to do it,” says Susan Lobel, 
Brooklyn IVF’s assistant director. Most New York–
area IVF programs have followed suit.
Some infertile couples and independent brokers 
are offering even more for “reproductive material.” 
The International Fertility Center in Indianapolis, 
Indiana, for instance, places ads in the Daily 
Princetonian offering Princeton girls as much as 
$35,000 per cycle. The National Fertility Registry, 
which, like many egg brokerages, features an on-
line catalogue for couples to browse in, advertises 
$35,000 to $50,000 for Ivy League eggs. While 
donors are normally paid a flat fee per cycle, there 
have been reports of higher payments to donors 
who produce more eggs.
College girls are the perfect donors. Younger eggs 
are likelier to be healthy, and the girls themselves 
frequently need money—college girls have long 
been susceptible to classified ads offering to pay 
them for acting as guinea pigs in medical research. 
One 1998 graduate of the University of Colorado 
set up her own website to market her eggs. She had 
watched a television show on egg donation and fig-
ured it “seemed like a good thing to do”—especially 
since she had spent her money during the past year 
to help secure a country-music record deal. “Egg 
donation would help me with my school and music 
expenses while helping an infertile couple with a 
family.” Classified ads scattered throughout cyber-
space feature similar offers.
The market for “reproductive material” has been 
developing for a long time. It was twenty years ago 
this summer that the first test-tube baby, Louise 
Brown, was born. By 1995, when the latest tally 
was taken by the Centers for Disease Control, 
15 percent of mothers in this country had made 
use of some form of assisted-reproduction technol-
ogy in conceiving their children. (More recently, 
women past menopause have begun to make use 
of this technology.) In 1991 the American Society 
for Reproductive Medicine was aware of 63 IVF 
programs offering egg donation. That number had 
jumped to 189 by 1995 (the latest year for which 
numbers are available).
Defenders argue that it’s only right that women 
are “compensated” for the inconvenience of egg 
donation. Brooklyn IVF’s Dr. Lobel argues, “If it is 
unethical to accept payment for loving your neigh-
bor, then we’ll have to stop paying babysitters.” As 
long as donors know the risks, says Glenn McGee of 
the University of Pennsylvania’s Center for Bioethics, 
this transaction is only “a slightly macabre version 
of adoption.”
Not everyone is enthusiastic about the “prog-
ress.” Egg donation “represents another rather large 
step into turning procreation into manufacturing,” 
says the University of Chicago’s Leon Kass. “It’s 
the dehumanization of procreation.” And as in 
manufacturing, there is quality control. “People 
don’t want to say the word any more, but there 
is a strong eugenics issue inherent in the notion 
that you can have the best eggs your money can 
buy,” observes sociology professor Barbara Katz 
Rothman of the City University of New York.
The demand side of the market comes mostly 
from career-minded baby-boomers, the frontiers-
women of feminism, who thought they could “have 
it all.” Indeed they can have it all—with a little help 
from some younger eggs. (Ironically, feminists are 
also among its strongest critics; The Nation’s Katha 
Pollitt has pointed out that in egg donation and 
surrogacy, once you remove the “delusion that they 
are making babies for other women,” all you have 
left is “reproductive prostitution.”)
Unfortunately, the future looks bright for the 
egg market. Earlier this year, a woman in Atlanta 
gave birth to twins after she was implanted with 
frozen donor eggs. The same technology has also 
been successful in Italy. This is just what the egg 
5
10

130	
Part 3	
Analyzing Arguments
market needed, since it avoids the necessity of 
­coordinating donors’ cycles with recipients’ cycles. 
Soon, not only will infertile couples be able to 
choose from a wider variety of donor offerings, 
but in some cases donors won’t even be needed. 
Young women will be able to freeze their own eggs 
and have them thawed and fertilized once they are 
ready for the intrusion of children in their lives.
There are human ovaries sitting in a freezer in 
Fairfax, Virginia. The Genetics and IVF Institute 
offers to cut out and remove young women’s ova-
ries and cryopreserve the egg-containing tissue for 
future implantation. Although the technology was 
originally designed to give the hope of fertility to 
young women undergoing treatment for cancer, it 
is now starting to attract the healthy. “Women can 
wait to have children until they are well established 
in their careers and getting a little bored, some-
time in their forties or fifties,” explains Professor 
Rothman. “Basically, motherhood is being reduced 
to a good leisure-time activity.”
Early this summer, headlines were made in 
Britain, where the payment of egg donors is for-
bidden, when an infertile couple traveled to a 
California clinic where the woman could be insemi-
nated with an experimental hybrid egg. The egg was 
a combination of the recipient’s and a donor’s eggs. 
The clinic in question gets its eggs from a Beverly 
Hills brokerage, the Center for Surrogate Parenting 
and Egg Donation, run by Karen Synesiou and Bill 
Handel, a radio shock-jock in Los Angeles. Miss 
Synesiou recently told the London Sunday Times 
that she is “interested in redefining the family. 
That’s why I came to work here.’’
The redefinition is already well under way. 
Consider the case of Jaycee Buzzanca. After John 
and Luanne Buzzanca had tried for years to have 
a child, an embryo was created for them, using 
sperm and an egg from anonymous donors, and 
implanted in a surrogate mother. In March 1995, 
one month before the baby was born, John filed 
for divorce. Luanne wanted child support from 
John, but he refused—after all, he’s not the father. 
Luanne argued that John is Jaycee’s father legally. 
At this point the surrogate mother, who had agreed 
to carry a baby for a stable two-parent household, 
decided to sue for custody.
Jaycee was dubbed “Nobody’s Child’’ by the 
media when a California judge ruled that John was 
not the legal father nor Luanne the legal mother 
(neither one was genetically related to Jaycee, 
and Luanne had not even borne her). Enter Erin 
Davidson, the egg donor, who claims the egg was 
used without her permission. Not to be left out, 
the sperm donor jumped into the ring, saying that 
his sperm was used without his permission, a claim 
he later dropped. In March of this year, an appeals 
court gave Luanne custody and decided that John 
is the legal father, making him responsible for child 
support. By contracting for a medical procedure 
resulting in the birth of a child, the court ruled, 
a couple incurs “the legal status of parenthood.’’ 
(John lost an appeal in May.) For Jaycee’s first three 
years on earth, these people have been wrangling 
over who her parents are.
In another case, William Kane left his girl-
friend, Deborah Hect, 15 vials of sperm before he 
killed himself in a Las Vegas hotel in 1991. His 
two adult children (represented by their mother, 
his ex-wife) contested Miss Hect’s claim of own-
ership. A settlement agreement on Kane’s will was 
eventually reached, giving his children 80 percent 
of his estate and Miss Hect 20 percent. Hence she 
was allowed three vials of his sperm. When she did 
not succeed in conceiving on the first two tries, she 
filed a petition for the other 12 vials. She won, and 
the judge who ruled in her favor wrote, “Neither 
this court nor the decedent’s adult children possess 
reason or right to prevent Hect from implement-
ing decedent’s pre-eminent interest in realizing his 
‘fundamental right’ to procreate with the woman of 
his choice.’’ One day, donors may not even have to 
have lived. Researchers are experimenting with us-
ing aborted female fetuses as a source of donor eggs.
And the market continues to zip along. For over-
seas couples looking for donor eggs, Bill Handel 
15

	
Chapter 8    Analyzing Arguments Rhetorically	
131
has the scenario worked out. The couple would 
mail him frozen sperm of their choice (presumably 
from the recipient husband); his clinic would use 
it to fertilize donor eggs, chosen from its catalogue 
of offerings, and reply back within a month with a 
frozen embryo ready for implantation. (Although 
the sperm does not yet arrive by mail, Handel 
has sent out embryos to at least one hundred in-
ternational customers.) As for the young women 
at the New Jersey clinic, they are visibly upset by 
one aspect of the egg-donation process: they can’t 
have sexual intercourse for several weeks after the 
retrieval. For making babies, of course, it’s already 
obsolete.
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Identifying Rhetorical Features
Working in groups, develop responses to the following questions:
	 1.	 How does Lopez appeal to logos? What is her main claim and what are her reasons? 
What does she use for evidence? What ideas would you have to include in a short 
summary?
	 2.	 What appeals to pathos does Lopez make in this argument? How well are these 
suited to the conservative readers of the National Review?
	 3.	 How would you characterize Lopez’s ethos? Does she seem knowledgeable and 
credible? Does she seem fair to stakeholders in this controversy?
	 4.	 Choose an additional focus from the “Questions for Rhetorical Analysis” on 
pages 125–127 to apply to “Egg Heads.” How does this question expand your under-
standing of Lopez’s argument?
	 5.	 What strikes you as problematic, memorable, or disturbing in this argument?
Our Own Rhetorical Analysis of “Egg Heads”
Now that you have identified some of the rhetorical features of “Egg Heads,” we offer 
our own notes for a rhetorical analysis of this argument.
Rhetorical Context  As we began our analysis, we reconstructed the rhetorical con-
text in which “Egg Heads” was published. In the late 1990s, a furious debate about egg 
donation rippled through newspapers, popular journalism, Web sites, and scholarly 
commentary. This debate had been kicked off by several couples placing ads in the 
newspapers of the country’s most prestigious colleges, offering up to $50,000 for the 
eggs of brilliant, attractive, athletic college women. Coinciding with these consumer 
demands, advances in reproductive technology provided an increasing number of 
complex techniques to surmount the problem of infertility, including fertilizing eggs 
in petri dishes and implanting them into women through surgical procedures. These 
procedures could use either a couple’s own eggs and sperm or donated eggs and sperm. 
All these social and medical factors created the kairotic moment for Lopez’s article and 
motivated her to protest the increasing use of these procedures.
Genre and Writer  When we considered the genre and writer of this article and its 
site of publication, we noted that this article appeared in the National Review, which 
■ ■ ■

132	
Part 3	
Analyzing Arguments
describes itself as “America’s most widely read and influential magazine and web site 
for Republican/conservative news, commentary, and opinion.” Currently the editor-
at-large of National Review Online, she has also been published in the Wall Street 
Journal, New York Post, and Washington Times. This information told us that in her 
article “Egg Heads,” Lopez is definitely on home territory, aiming her article at a con-
servative audience.
Logos  Turning to the logos of Lopez’s argument, we decided that the logical 
structure of Lopez’s argument is clear throughout the article. Her claim is that egg 
donation and its associated reproductive advances have harmful, long-reaching con-
sequences for society. Basically, she argues that egg donation and reproductive tech-
nology represent bad scientific developments for society because they are potentially 
harmful to the long-range health of egg donors and because they are dehumanizing 
of human sexuality. She states a version of this last point at the end of the second 
paragraph: “Egg donation is a quietly expanding industry, changing the way we look 
at the family, young women’s bodies, and human life itself” (126).
The body of her article elaborates on each of these reasons. In developing her 
reason that egg donation endangers donors, Lopez lists the risks but doesn’t supply 
supporting evidence about the frequency of these problems: damage to the ovaries, 
persistent pain, early menopause, possible ovarian cancer, and even death. She supports 
her claim about “the expanding industry” by showing how the procedures have become 
commercialized. To show the popularity of these procedures as well as their commer-
cial value, she quotes a variety of experts such as directors of in vitro clinics, fertility 
centers, bioethicists, and the American Society for Reproductive Medicine. She also 
cleverly bolsters her own case by showing where even liberal cultural critics agree with 
her views about the big ethical questions raised by the reproductive technology busi-
ness. In addition to quoting experts, Lopez has sprinkled impressive numbers and vivid 
examples throughout the body of her argument, which give her argument momentum 
as it progresses from the potential harm to young egg donors to a number of case stud-
ies that depict increasingly disturbing ethical problems.
Pathos  Much of the impact of this argument, we noted, comes from Lopez’s appeals 
to pathos. By describing in detail the waiting rooms for egg donors at fertility clinics, 
Lopez relies heavily on pathetic appeals to move her audience to see the physical and 
social dangers of egg donation. She conveys the growing commercialism of reproduc-
tive technology by giving readers an inside look at the egg donation process as these 
young college women embark on the multi-step process of donating their eggs. These 
young women, she suggests in her title “Egg Heads,” are largely unaware of the poten-
tial physical dangers to themselves and of the ethical implications and consequences of 
their acts. She asserts that they are driven largely by the desire for money. Lopez also 
appeals to pathos in her choice of emotionally loaded and often cynical language that 
creates an angle of vision opposing reproductive technology: “turning procreation into 
manufacturing”; “reproductive prostitution”; “the intrusion of children in their lives”; 
“motherhood . . . reduced to a leisure-time activity”; “aborted female fetuses as a source 
of donor egg”; and intercourse as an “obsolete” way “to make babies” (pages 128–131).

	
Chapter 8    Analyzing Arguments Rhetorically	
133
Audience  Despite Lopez’s success at spotlighting serious medical and ethical ques-
tions, her lack of attention to alternative views and the alarmism of her language 
caused us to wonder: who might find this argument persuasive and who would chal-
lenge it? What is noticeably missing from her argument is the perspective of infertile 
couples hoping for a baby. Pursuing our question, we decided that a very provocative 
feature of this argument—one worthy of deeper analysis—is the disparity between 
how well this argument is suited to its target audience and yet how unpersuasive it 
is for readers who do not share the assumptions, values, and beliefs of this primary 
audience.
To Lopez’s credit, she has attuned her reasons to the values and concerns of her 
conservative readers of the National Review who believe in traditional families, gen-
der differences, and gender roles. Lopez’s choice and orchestration of evidence are 
intended to play to her audience’s fears that science has fallen into the hands of those 
who have little regard for the sanctity of the family or traditional motherhood. For 
example, in playing strongly to the values of her conservative readers, Lopez belabors 
the physical, social, and ethical dangers of egg donation, mentioning worst-case sce-
narios; however, these appeals to pathos will most likely strike other readers who do 
some investigation into reproductive technology as overblown. She emphasizes the 
commercialism of the process as her argument moves from college girls as egg donors 
to a number of sensationalist case studies that depict intensifying ethical ambiguity. In 
other words, both the logos and pathos of her argument skillfully focus on details that 
tap her target audience’s values and beliefs and feed their fears and revulsion.
Use of Evidence  For a broader or skeptical audience, the alarmism of Lopez’s 
­appeals to pathos, her use of atypical evidence, and her distortion of the facts weaken 
the logos and ethos of her argument. First, Lopez’s use of evidence fails to measure up 
to the STAR criteria (that evidence should be sufficient, typical, accurate, and rele­
vant). She characterizes all egg donors as young women seeking money. But she pro-
vides little evidence that egg donors are only out to make a buck. She also paints these 
young women as short-sighted, uninformed, and foolish. Lopez weakens her ethos by 
not considering the young women who have researched the process and who may be 
motivated, at least in part, by compassion for couples who can’t conceive on their own. 
Lopez also misrepresents the people who are using egg donation, placing them all into 
two groups: (1) wealthy couples eugenically seeking designer babies with prerecorded 
special traits and (2) feminist career women. She directs much of her criticism toward 
this latter group: “The demand side of the market comes mostly from career-minded 
baby boomers, the frontierswomen of feminism, who thought they could ‘have it all’” 
(page 129). However, readers who do a little research on their own, as we did, will 
learn that infertility affects one in seven couples; that it is often a male and female 
problem, sometimes caused by an incompatibility between the husband’s and wife’s 
reproductive material; and that most couples who take the big step of investing in 
these expensive efforts to have a baby have been trying to get pregnant for a number of 
years. Rather than being casual about having children, they are often deeply desirous 
of children and depressed about their inability to conceive. In addition, far from being 
the sure thing and quick fix that Lopez suggests, reproductive technology has a success 

134	
Part 3	
Analyzing Arguments
rate of only 50 percent overall and involves a huge investment of time, money, and 
physical discomfort for women receiving donor eggs.
Another way that Lopez violates the STAR criteria is her choice of extreme cases. 
For readers outside her target audience, her argument appears riddled with straw man 
and slippery slope fallacies. (See Appendix 1 on Informal Fallacies). Here are some 
specific instances of extreme, atypical cases:
■	 her focus on career women casually and selfishly using the service of young egg 
donors
■	 the notorious case of Jaycee Buzzanca dubbed “Nobody’s Child” because her 
adoptive parents who commissioned her creation divorced before she was born
■	 the legal contest between a dead man’s teen girlfriend and his ex-wife and adult 
children over his vials of sperm
■	 the idea of taking eggs from aborted female fetuses
By keeping invisible the vast majority of ordinary couples who come to fertility clinics 
out of desperation, Lopez uses extreme cases to create a “brave new world” ­intended to 
evoke a vehement rejection of these reproductive advances. Skeptical readers would of-
fer the alternative view of the sad, ordinary couples of all ages sitting week after week in 
fertility clinics, hoping to conceive a child through the “miracle” of these reproductive 
advances and grateful to the young women who have contributed their eggs.
Concluding points  In short, we concluded that Lopez’s angle of vision, although 
effectively in sync with her conservative readers of the National Review, exaggerates 
and distorts her case against these reproductive advances. Lopez’s traditional values 
and slanting of the evidence undermine her ethos, limit the value of this argument for 
a wider audience, and compel that audience to seek out alternative perspectives for a 
more complete view of egg donation.
Writing Assignment  A Rhetorical Analysis
Write a thesis-driven rhetorical analysis essay in which you 
­examine the rhetorical effectiveness of an argument specified 
by your instructor. Unless otherwise stated, direct your analysis 
to an audience of your classmates. In your introduction, estab-
lish the argumentative conversation to which this argument is contributing. Briefly 
­summarize the argument and present your thesis highlighting two or more rhetorical 
features of the argument that you find central to the effectiveness or ineffectiveness 
of this argument. To develop and support your own points, you will need to include 
textual evidence in the form of examples or short quotations from the argument. 
Use ­attributive tags to distinguish your ideas from those of the writer of the argu-
ment. Use MLA documentation to cite points and quotations in your essay and in a 
Works Cited list at the end. For an example of an essay written to this assignment, see 
Zachary Stumps’s analysis of Ellen Goodman’s “Womb for Rent” on pages 138–141.
8.3  To construct essays that  
analyze the rhetorical  
effectiveness of arguments

	
Chapter 8    Analyzing Arguments Rhetorically	
135
Generating Ideas for Your Rhetorical Analysis
To develop ideas for your essay, you might follow these steps:
Steps for Writing a Rhetorical Analysis
Step
How to Do It
Familiarize yourself with the article you 
are analyzing.
Read your article several times.
Divide it into sections to understand its 
structure.
Place the article in its rhetorical context.
Follow the strategies in Chapter 2 and use 
the “Questions for Rhetorical Analysis” on 
pages 125–127.
Summarize the article.
Follow the steps in Chapter 2 on pages 27–29. 
You may want to produce a longer summary of 
150–200 words as well as a short one-sentence 
summary.
Reread the article, identifying “hot spots.”
Note hot spots in the article—points that impress 
you, disturb you, confuse you, or puzzle you.
Use the “Questions for Rhetorical 
Analysis” on pages 125–127.
Choose several of these questions and freewrite 
responses to them.
From your notes and freewriting, identify 
the focus for your analysis.
Choose several features of the article that you 
find particularly important and that you want 
to discuss in depth in your essay. Identify points 
that will bring something new to your readers 
and that will help them see this article with new 
understanding. You may want to list your ideas 
and then look for ways to group them together 
around main points.
Write a thesis statement for your essay.
Articulate your important points of interest in 
one or two sentences that will set up these points 
clearly for your audience.
In finding a meaningful focus for your rhetorical analysis essay, you will need to 
create a focusing thesis statement that avoids wishy-washy formulas such as, “This 
­argument has some strengths and some weaknesses.” To avoid a vapid thesis state-
ment, focus on the complexity of the argument, the writer’s strategies for persuading 
the target audience, and the features that might impede its persuasiveness for skeptics. 

136	
Part 3	
Analyzing Arguments
These thesis statements articulate how their writers see the inner workings of these 
arguments as well as the arguments’ contributions to their public conversations.
Lopez’s angle of vision, although effectively in sync with her conservative readers of the 
National Review, exaggerates and distorts her case against these reproductive advances, 
weakening her ethos and the value of her argument for a wider audience. [This is the thesis 
we would use if we were writing a stand-alone essay on Lopez.]
In his New Yorker article “The Pay is Too Damn Low,” Surowiecki adopts an angle of vision 
empathetic to low-wage workers rather than owners; by linking an increase in minimum 
wage with other liberal causes such as universal health care, investment in infrastructure, 
and establishing European style safety nets, Surowiecki appeals to his liberal audience but 
may alienate the business community by under-representing economic arguments opposing 
the minimum wage.
To make your rhetorical analysis of your article persuasive, you will need to develop 
each of the points stated or implied in your thesis statement using textual evidence, 
including short quotations. Your essay should show how you have listened carefully to 
the argument you are analyzing, summarized it fairly, and probed it deeply.
Organizing Your Rhetorical Analysis
The organization plan that follows provides a possible structure for your rhetorical 
analysis.  ■
• Introduce the issue and set the context for the
 
argument you are analyzing.
• Explain your interest in the argument, if
 
appropriate.
• State your thesis here or wait until after you have
 
summarized the argument.
Introduction
Summary of Argument
• Provide a brief summary of the argument to help
 
readers understand your analysis.
Rhetorical Analysis
• Develop your thesis by presenting and evaluating
 
the rhetorical strategies used by the writer to appeal
 
to his or her target audience in light of the author’s
 
rhetorical context and purpose.
Conclusion
• Wrap up your analysis and comment on the
 
significance of the argument, if appropriate.
Organization Plan for a Rhetorical Analysis of an Argument

	
Chapter 8    Analyzing Arguments Rhetorically	
137
Readings
Our first reading is by Pulitzer Prize–winning columnist, author, and speaker Ellen 
Goodman. This op-ed piece is analyzed rhetorically by student Zachary Stumps in our 
second reading.
Womb for Rent
Ellen Goodman
By now we all have a story 
about a job outsourced beyond our 
reach in the global economy. My 
own favorite is about the California 
publisher who hired two reporters 
in India to cover the Pasadena city 
government. Really.
There are times as well when 
the offshoring of jobs takes on a 
quite literal meaning. When the 
labor we are talking about is, well, 
labor.
In the last few months we’ve 
had a full nursery of international 
stories about surrogate mothers. 
Hundreds of couples are crossing 
borders in search of lower-cost 
ways to fill the family business. In 
turn, there’s a new coterie of inter-
national workers who are gestating 
for a living.
Many of the stories about the 
globalization of baby production 
begin in India, where the gov-
ernment seems to regard this as, 
literally, a growth ­industry. In 
the little town of Anand, dubbed 
“The Cradle of the World,” 
45 women were recently on 
the books of a local clinic. For 
the production and delivery of 
a child, they will earn $5,000 
to $7,000, a decade’s worth of 
women’s wages in rural India.
But even in America, some 
women, including Army wives, 
are supplementing their income 
by contracting out their wombs. 
They have become surrogate 
mothers for wealthy couples from 
European countries that ban the 
practice.
This globalization of baby-
making comes at the peculiar in-
tersection of a high reproductive 
technology and a low-tech work 
force. The biotech business was 
created in the same petri dish as 
Baby Louise, the first IVF baby. 
But since then, we’ve seen con-
ception outsourced to egg donors 
and sperm donors. We’ve had 
motherhood divided into its parts 
from genetic mother to gestational 
mother to birth mother and now 
contract mother.
We’ve also seen the growth of 
an international economy. Frozen 
sperm is flown from one conti-
nent to another. And patients have 
become medical tourists, searching 
for cheaper health care whether 
it’s a new hip in Thailand or an 
IVF treatment in South Africa that 
comes with a photo safari thrown 
in for the same price. Why not 
then rent a foreign womb?
I don’t make light of infertil-
ity. The primal desire to have 
a child underlies this multina-
tional Creation, Inc. On one 
side, couples who choose sur-
rogacy want a baby with at least 
half their own genes. On the 
other side, surrogate mothers, 
who are rarely implanted with 
their own eggs, can believe that 
the child they bear and deliver is 
not really theirs.
As one woman put it, “We 
give them a baby and they give 
5
“Womb for Rent” (The Globalization of Baby Making) by Ellen Goodman. From The Washington 
Post, April 11 © 2008 Washington Post Company. All rights reserved. Used by permission and 
protected by the Copyright Laws of the United States. The printing, copying, redistribution, or 
retransmission of this Content without express written permission is prohibited.

138	
Part 3	
Analyzing Arguments
us much-needed money. It’s good 
for them and for us.” A surro-
gate in Anand used the money 
to buy a heart operation for her 
son. Another raised a dowry for 
her daughter. And before we talk 
about the “exploitation” of the 
pregnant woman, consider her 
alternative in Anand: a job crush-
ing glass in a factory for $25 a 
month.
Nevertheless, there is—and 
there should be—something un-
comfortable about a free mar-
ket approach to baby-making. 
It’s easier to accept surrogacy 
when it’s a gift from one woman 
to another. But we rarely see 
a rich woman become a surro-
gate for a poor family. Indeed, 
in Third World countries, some 
women sign these contracts with 
a fingerprint because they are 
illiterate.
For that matter, we have not 
yet had stories about the contract 
workers for whom pregnancy was a 
dangerous occupation, but we will. 
What obligation does a family that 
simply contracted for a child have 
to its birth mother? What con-
trol do—should—contractors have 
over their “employees” lives while 
incubating “their” children? What 
will we tell the offspring of this in-
ternational trade?
“National boundaries are com-
ing down,” says bioethicist Lori 
Andrews, “but we can’t stop hu-
man emotions. We are expanding 
families and don’t even have terms 
to deal with it.”
It’s the commercialism that is 
troubling. Some things we can-
not sell no matter how good “the 
deal.” We cannot, for example, sell 
ourselves into slavery. We cannot 
sell our children. But the surrogacy 
business comes perilously close to 
both of these deals. And interna-
tional surrogacy tips the scales.
So, these borders we are crossing 
are not just geographic ones. They 
are ethical ones. Today the global 
economy sends everyone in search 
of the cheaper deal as if that were 
the single common good. But in 
the biological search, humanity is 
sacrificed to the economy and the 
person becomes the product. And, 
step by step, we come to a stunning 
place in our ancient creation story. 
It’s called the marketplace.
10
A Rhetorical Analysis of Ellen Goodman’s 
“Womb for Rent”
Zachary Stumps (student)
With her op-ed piece “Womb for Rent,” published in the Seattle 
Times on April 11, 2008 (and earlier in the Washington Post), ­syndicated 
columnist Ellen Goodman enters the murky debate about reproductive 
technology gone global. Since Americans are outsourcing everything 
else, “Why not then rent a foreign womb?” (137) she asks. Goodman, a 
Pulitzer Prize–winning columnist for the Washington Post Writers 
Group, is known for helping readers understand the “tumult of social 
change and its impact on families” and for shattering “the mold of men 
writing exclusively about politics” (“Ellen Goodman”). This op-ed 
piece continues her tradition of examining social change from the 
­perspective of family issues.
Introduction provides 
context and poses 
­issue to be addressed
Provides background 
on Goodman

	
Chapter 8    Analyzing Arguments Rhetorically	
139
Goodman launches her short piece by asserting that one of the most 
recent and consequential “jobs” to be outsourced is having babies. 
She  explains how the “globalization of baby production” is thriving 
because it brings together the reproductive desires of people in devel-
oped countries and the bodily resources of women in developing coun-
tries such as India. Briefly tracing how both reproductive technology 
and medical tourism have taken advantage of global possibilities, 
Goodman acknowledges that the thousands of dollars Indian women 
earn by carrying the babies of foreign couples represent a much larger 
income than these women could earn in any other available jobs.
After appearing to legitimize this global exchange, however, Goodman 
shifts to her ethical concerns by raising some moral questions that she 
says are not being addressed in this trade. She concludes with a full state-
ment of her claim that this global surrogacy is encroaching on human 
respect and dignity, exploiting business-based science, and turning babies 
into products.
In this piece, Goodman’s delay of her thesis has several rhetorical 
benefits: it gives Goodman space to present the perspective of poor 
women, enhanced by her appeals to pathos, and it invites readers to join 
her journey into the complex contexts of this issue; however, this strat-
egy is also risky because it limits the development of her own argument.
Instead of presenting her thesis up front, Goodman devotes much 
of the first part of her argument to looking at this issue from the per-
spective of foreign surrogate mothers. Using the strategies of pathos to 
evoke sympathy for these women, she creates a compassionate and 
progressively minded argument that highlights the benefits to foreign 
surrogate mothers. She cites factual evidence showing that the average 
job for a woman in Anand, India, yields a tiny “$25 a month” gotten 
through the hard work of “crushing glass in a factory,” compared to 
the “$5,000 to $7,000” made carrying a baby to term (137). To carry a 
baby to term for a foreign couple represents “a decade’s worth of 
women’s wages in rural India” (137). Deepening readers’ understand-
ing of these women, Goodman cites one woman who used her earn-
ings to finance her son’s heart operation and another who paid for her 
daughter’s dowry. In her fair presentation of these women, Goodman 
both builds her own positive ethos and adds a dialogic dimension to 
her argument by helping readers walk in the shoes of otherwise impov-
erished surrogate mothers.
The second rhetorical benefit of Goodman’s delayed thesis is that 
she invites readers to explore this complex issue of global surrogacy 
with her before she declares her own view. To help readers understand 
and think through this issue, she relates it to two other familiar global 
topics: outsourcing and medical tourism. First, she introduces foreign 
Summarizes the op-ed 
piece
Thesis paragraph
Develops first point in 
thesis: use of pathos in 
exploring perspective 
of poor women
5
Develops second point 
in thesis: the complex 
contexts of this  
issue—outsourcing 
and medical tourism

140	
Part 3	
Analyzing Arguments
surrogacy as one of the latest forms of outsourcing: “This globaliza-
tion of baby-making comes at the peculiar intersection of a high repro-
ductive technology and a low-tech work force” (137). Presenting these 
women as workers, she explains that women in India are getting paid 
for “the production and delivery of a child” (137) that is analogous to 
the production and delivery of sneakers or bicycle parts. Goodman 
also sets this phenomenon in the context of global medical tourism. If 
people can pursue lower-cost treatment for illnesses and health condi-
tions in other countries, why shouldn’t an infertile couple seeking to 
start a family not also have such access to these more affordable and 
newly available means? This reasoning provides a foundation for read-
ers to begin understanding the many layers of the issue.
The result of Goodman’s delayed-thesis strategy is that the first two-
thirds of this piece seem to justify outsourcing surrogate motherhood. 
Only after reading the whole op-ed piece can readers see clearly that 
Goodman has been dropping hints about her view all along through 
her choice of words. Although she clearly sees how outsourcing surro-
gacy can help poor women economically, her use of market language 
such as “production,” “delivery,” and “labor” carry a double meaning. 
On first reading of this op-ed piece, readers don’t know if Goodman’s 
punning is meant to be catchy and entertaining or serves another pur-
pose. This other purpose becomes clear in the last third of the article 
when Goodman forthrightly asserts her criticism of the commercialism 
of the global marketplace that promotes worldwide searching for a 
“cheaper deal”: “humanity is sacrificed to the economy and the person 
becomes the product” (138). This is a bold and big claim, but does the 
final third of her article support it?
In the final five paragraphs of this op-ed piece, Goodman begins to 
develop the rational basis of her argument; however, the brevity of the 
op-ed genre and her choice not to state her view openly initially have 
left Goodman with little space to develop her own claim. The result is 
that she presents some profound ideas very quickly. Some of the ethi-
cally complex ideas she introduces but doesn’t explore much are these:
	 The idea that there are ethical limits on what can be “sold”
	 The idea that surrogate motherhood might be “dangerous work”
	 The idea that children born from this “international trade” may be 
confused about their identities
Goodman simply has not left herself enough space to develop these 
issues and perhaps leaves readers with questions rather than with 
changed views. I am particularly struck by several questions. Why have 
European countries banned surrogacy in developing countries and why 
has the United States not banned this practice? Does Goodman intend 
to argue that the United States should follow Europe’s lead? She could 
Shows how the 
­delayed-thesis 
­structure creates two 
perspectives in conflict
Restates the third 
point in his thesis: 
lack of space limits 
development of 
Goodman’s argument
Discusses examples 
of ideas raised by 
Goodman but not 
developed

	
Chapter 8    Analyzing Arguments Rhetorically	
141
explore more how this business of finding illiterate women to bear chil-
dren for the wealthy continues to exploit third-world citizens much as 
sex tourism exploits women in the very same countries. It seems to per-
petuate a tendency for the developed world to regard developing coun-
tries as a poor place of lawlessness where practices outlawed in the rest 
of the world (e.g. child prostitution, slave-like working conditions) are 
somehow tolerable. Goodman could have developed her argument more 
to state explicitly that a woman who accepts payment for bearing a baby 
becomes an indentured servant to the family. Yet another way to think 
of this issue is to see that the old saying of “a bun in the oven” is more 
literal than metaphoric when a woman uses her womb as a factory to 
produce children, a body business not too dissimilar to the commercial-
ism of prostitution. Goodman only teases readers by mentioning these 
complex problems without producing an argument.
Still, although Goodman does not expand her criticism of out-
sourced surrogate motherhood or explore the issues of human dignity 
and rights, this argument does introduce the debate on surrogacy in the 
global marketplace, raise awareness, and begin to direct the conversa-
tion toward a productive end of seeking a responsible, healthy, and 
ethical future. Her op-ed piece lures readers into contemplating deep, 
perplexing ethical and economic problems and lays a foundation for 
readers to create an informed view of this issue.
Works Cited
“Ellen Goodman.” Postwritersgroup.com. Washington Post Writer’s Group, 2008. 
Web. 19 May 2008.
Goodman, Ellen. “Womb for Rent.” Washington Post 11 Apr. 2008: B6. Rpt. in 
Writing Arguments. John D. Ramage, John C. Bean, and June Johnson. Concise 
7th ed. New York: Pearson Education, 2016. 137–138. Print.
Conclusion
10
Uses MLA format to 
list sources cited in the 
essay

142	
Analyzing Visual Arguments 9
What you will learn in this chapter:
	
9.1	 To explain the elements of design in visual arguments
	
9.2	 To analyze the compositional features of photographs and drawings 
rhetorically
	
9.3	 To explain the genres of visual argument
	
9.4	 To construct your own visual argument
	
9.5	 To use information graphics rhetorically in arguments
To see how images can make powerful arguments, consider the rhetorical 
­persuasiveness of the “polar bear” marching in a small-town parade (Figure 9.1). 
Sponsored by local environmentalists advocating action against global warm-
ing, the polar bear uses arguments from logos (drawing on audience knowledge 
Figure 9.1  A visual argument about climate change

	
Chapter 9    Analyzing Visual Arguments	
143
that climate change threatens polar bears), pathos (evoking the bears’ vulnerability), and 
ethos (conveying the commitment of the citizens group). Delighting children and adults 
alike, the bear created a memorable environmental argument.
When an image such as the parade photograph is joined with words, the resulting 
text is often called a “multimodal argument.” The word multimodal combines the con-
cept of “multi” (more than one) and “modality” (a channel, medium, mode of commu-
nication). Multimodal arguments published on the Web might take the form of videos, 
podcasts, blogs, and advocacy Web pages with arguments blending texts and images, 
all of which make complex rhetorical appeals to viewers. In static print texts, the visual 
element of a multimodal text might be an image, a drawing, or a graph, but it might 
also include purposeful uses of fonts, type size, and document design. This chapter 
focuses on the visual component of such multimodal texts.
Understanding Design Elements in Visual Argument
To understand how visual images can produce an argument, you 
need to understand the design elements that work together to 
create a visual text.
The Components of Visual Design
There are four basic components of visual design: use of type, use of space and layout, 
use of color, and use of images. The most important considerations in using these design 
components to achieve readability, visual appeal, and suitability are show in Table 9.1.
9.1  To explain the elements 
of design in visual arguments
Table 9.1  Components of Visual Design
Design Component
Key Variables
Key Principles
Use of type
■	Font style ranging from 
­conservative (Times New 
Roman, Courier) to playful 
and decorative (Zapf Chancery 
and other specialty fonts)
■	Font size
■	Variables for emphasis  
(boldface, italics, underlining, 
ALL CAPS)
■	Choose display type (sans serif—without the 
little extensions on letters—like Century 
Gothic and Ariel) for headings, titles, and 
slogans.
■	Choose body type (serif—with the little 
­extensions on letters—like Times New 
Roman and Courier New) for long 
­documents and main text.
■	Make type functional and appealing by using 
only two or three typestyles per document.
■	Use consistent patterns of type to indicate 
relationships among items.
■	Choose type to project a specific impression. 
To create a formal, businesslike impression, 
as in scholarly publications, use a structured 
combination of serif and sans serif type. To 
create an informal look, as in popular mag-
azine publications and highly visual posters 
and fliers, use sans serif and specialty type.
(continued)

144	
Part 3	
Analyzing Arguments
Design Component
Key Variables
Key Principles
Use of ­headings 
and other means of 
breaking text into 
­visual units
■	Page size and type of paper
■	Proportion of text to white 
space
■	Arrangement of text on page 
(space, margins, columns, 
size of paragraphs, spaces 
between paragraphs,  
justification of margins)
■	Use of highlighting elements 
such as bulleted lists, tables, 
sidebars, boxes
■	Use headings and other 
means of breaking text into 
visual units
■	Use layout to make documents highly  
readable and to guide readers with structural 
clues (headings, paragraph breaks, and  
bulleted lists).
■	Focus on creating meaning and coherence 
with layout.
■	For academic arguments, use simple, 
functional layouts. For popular magazine 
arguments and visual arguments, vary the 
layout and make the page visually attractive. 
However, for visual arguments, avoid clutter 
and confusion by limiting the amount of text 
and the number of visual items on a page.
Use of color
■	Variations in font color for 
effect
■	Use of color in images and 
graphics
■	Use of background tints and 
colored shading
■	Use color to meet audience and genre 
­expectations (minimal use of color in 
­academic arguments and often lavish color 
in popular magazines).
■	For visual arguments, use color functionally 
(to indicate relationships) or decoratively (to 
create visual appeal).
■	For visual arguments, decide whether 
color will be used to make images look 
documentary-like (realistic), to create sym-
bolic associations (for example, psychedelic 
colors and the 1960s), or to create a specific 
aesthetic effect (for example, pleasing, 
­disturbing, or soothing).
Images and 
graphics
■	Photographs
■	Drawings
■	Numeric graphics
■	For visual arguments, consider how the 
­image will work in the argument: to convey 
an idea, illustrate a point, evoke an emotional 
response.
■	For all arguments, consider how to ­establish 
the relationship between the image or 
graphic and the verbal text. (Images and 
graphics are described in detail later in 
this chapter.)
As Table 9.1 suggests, in arguments that don’t use images and graphics the writer’s 
primary visual concern is document design. In planning how the document will look, 
the writer hopes to make it easy to read (choosing plain, conventional typefaces); to 
meet the readers’ expectations for format (double-spacing manuscripts, following ex-
pected genre conventions if the argument is to be desktop published); and to provide 
appropriate structural cues that highlight points and guide the reader through the 
­argument (using headings, paragraph breaks, bulleted lists). But in moving from ver-
bal-only arguments to arguments that use visual elements for direct persuasive effect—
for example in producing a flier, poster, or one-page newspaper advertisement—the 

	
Chapter 9    Analyzing Visual Arguments	
145
writer can make creative use of all the elements of visual design, including images and 
quantitative graphics, as we explain in the rest of the chapter.
An Analysis of a Visual Argument Using Type and Spatial Elements
To illustrate the persuasive power of type and layout, we ask you to consider Figure 9.2, 
which shows a public affairs ad sponsored by the Ad Council and an advocacy orga-
nization, StopBullying.gov, as part of an ongoing campaign to curtail bullying among 
young people.
This ad demonstrates how use of type can create powerful visual and verbal rhe-
torical effects to convey its argument. The ad’s creators chose to use lettering—not 
Figure 9.2  Anti-bullying public affairs ad

146	
Part 3	
Analyzing Arguments
an image—to illustrate bullying. The type style, presentation of the letters, and words 
themselves create a strange effect—simultaneously personal and impersonal—that 
draws viewers into the ad more than an image would. The type style and font make 
strong appeals to pathos through the blend of the shocking abusive language and dis-
turbing lettering style. The words “dumb,” “piece,” and “trash” are all harshly derogatory. 
The direct address to the viewer in the word “you” conveys that bullying is an attack, 
sometimes verbal, and often physical.
Note how the blurring of the message in the large bold type makes a visual state-
ment about the act of bullying and about both perception and psychological damage. 
These large, heavy, blurred letters convey multiple messages. Bullying can be crude 
and forceful, but it is often carried on covertly where authority figures cannot see or 
stop it. The lettering itself bullies the viewers while at the same time reinforcing the 
idea that not everyone is aware of bullying. The blurring of these letters also suggests 
that bullying damages and erases the personhood of victims. In addition, the ad makes 
it look as though these dark letters have smudged and stained the yellow background, 
suggesting that bullying harms the social environment.
The layout of this ad also contributes to the logos and ethos of the ad. The shock 
of reading the bold message propels readers to the black sidebar in the lower right side 
of the ad, where the message in smaller type interprets and explains the message of the 
blurred letters. The text speaks directly to parents’ unawareness of the hostility of their 
kids’ environment and makes an urgent appeal to parental responsibility. While the 
lettering and layout convey the causal reasons behind the need for action, the message 
in the smaller letters states the proposal claim: Instruct your kids how to be more than 
passive observers of bullying. In addition to delivering a strong message, this ad conveys 
a positive ethos by demonstrating knowledge of the problem and directing readers to 
authoritative sources of information and help in engaging with this serious social issue.
The Compositional Features of Photographs and Drawings
Now that we have introduced you to the four major elements of 
visual ­design—type, layout, color, and images—we turn to an in-
depth discussion of photographic images and drawings. Used stra-
tegically in product advertisements, photos and drawings can be 
employed with equal shrewdness in posters, fliers, advocacy ads, 
and Web sites. Although such images often are made to seem spontaneous and “natu-
ral,” they are almost always composed: designers consciously select the details of stag-
ing and composition as well as manipulate camera techniques (filters, camera angle, 
lighting) and digital or chemical development techniques (airbrushing, merging of im-
ages). Even news photography can have a composed feel. For example, public officials 
often try to control the effect of photographs by creating “photo-ops” (photographing 
opportunities), wherein news photographers are allowed to photograph an event only 
during certain times and from certain angles. Political photographs appearing in news-
papers often are press releases officially approved by the politician’s staff. To analyze a 
photograph or drawing, or to create visual images for your own arguments, you need 
to think both about the composition of the image and about the camera’s relationship 
9.2  To analyze the com-
positional features of 
photographs and drawings 
rhetorically

	
Chapter 9    Analyzing Visual Arguments	
147
to the subject. Because drawings produce a perspective on a scene analogous to that of 
a camera, ­design considerations for photographs can be applied to drawings as well. 
The following list of questions can guide your analysis of any persuasive image.
■	 Type of photograph or drawing: Is the image documentary-like (representing a 
real event), fictionlike (intended to tell a story or dramatize a scene), or concep-
tual (illustrating or symbolizing an idea or theme)? The two photos of the protest 
for higher wages for fast-food workers on page 1 and of the anti-fracking march 
on page 123 are documentary photos capturing real events in action.
■	 Distance from the subject: Is the image a close-up, medium shot, or long shot? 
Close-ups tend to increase the intensity of the image and suggest the importance of 
the subject; long shots tend to blend the subject into the background. In the baby 
photograph opposing phthalates in children’s toys (Chapter 1, page 4), the effect of 
the baby’s wearing a “poison” bib is intensified by the close-up shot without back-
ground. In contrast, the medium shot of the boy holding the toy he has found in 
the wreckage caused by typhoon Haiyan (Chapter 6, page 95) focuses on both the 
boy and his surroundings. While the photo captures the magnitude of the disaster, 
it also shows the child’s interests and his attempt to recover some of his past life.
■	 Orientation of the image and camera angle: Is the camera (or artist) positioned 
in front of or behind the subject? Is it positioned below the subject, looking up 
(a low-angle shot)? Or is it above the subject, looking down (a high-angle shot)? 
Front-view shots—for example, the photo of the fracking protestor (page 123)—
tend to emphasize the people being photographed. In contrast, rear-view shots 
often emphasize the scene or setting. A low-angle perspective tends to make the 
subject look superior and powerful, whereas a high-angle perspective can reduce 
the size—and by implication, the importance—of the subject. A level angle tends to 
imply equality. The low-angle perspective of Katniss Everdeen, the main character 
of The Hunger Games (page 153), accentuates her heroic stature.
■	 Point of view: Does the camera or artist stand outside the scene and create an 
objective effect? Or is the camera or artist inside the scene as if the photographer 
or artist is an actor in the scene, creating a subjective effect?
■	 Use of color: Is the image in color or in black and white? Is this choice determined 
by the restrictions of the medium (such as images designed to run in black and 
white in newspapers) or is it the conscious choice of the photographer or artist? 
Are the colors realistic or muted? Have special filters been used (a photo made to 
look old through the use of brown tints)? Are bright colors intended to be catchy 
and attractive or dominant or disturbing?
■	 Compositional special effects: Is the entire image clear and realistic? Is any por-
tion of it blurred? Is it blended with other realistic or nonrealistic images (a car ad 
that blends a city and a desert; a body lotion ad that merges a woman and a cactus)? 
Is the image an imitation of some other famous image such as a classic painting (as 
in parodies)?
■	 Juxtaposition of images: Are several different images juxtaposed, suggesting 
rela­tionships between them? Juxtaposition can suggest sequential or causal rela-
tionships or can metaphorically transfer the identity of a nearby image or back-
ground to the subject (as when a bath soap is associated with a meadow). This 

148	
Part 3	
Analyzing Arguments
technique frequently is used in public relations to shape viewers’ perceptions 
of political ­figures by photographing them with the American flag or patriotic 
monuments.
■	 Manipulation of images: Are staged images made to appear real, natural, or 
documentary-like? Are images altered with airbrushing? Are images actually 
composites of a number of images (for instance, using images of different wom-
en’s bodies to create one perfect model in an ad or film)? Are images cropped for 
emphasis? What is left out? Are images downsized or enlarged?
■	 Settings, furnishings, props: Is the photo or drawing an outdoor or indoor scene? 
What is in the background and foreground? What furnishings and props, such as 
furniture, objects in a room, pets, and landscape features, help create the scene? 
What social associations of class, race, and gender are attached to these settings 
and props?
■	 Characters, roles, actions: Does the photo or drawing tell a story? Are the 
people in the scene models? Are the models instrumental (acting out real-life 
roles) or are they decorative (extra and included for visual or sex appeal)? What 
are the facial expressions, gestures, and poses of the people? What are the spatial 
relationships of the figures? (Who is in the foreground, center, and background? 
Who is large and prominent?) What social relationships are implied by these 
poses and positions? In the “Save the Children” advocacy ad in Figure 9.3, the 
pose of the health care worker and baby—the health worker intently treating 
the baby and the baby happily trusting the health worker—tells the story of suc-
cessful health care.
■	 Presentation of images: Are images separated from each other in a larger com-
position or connected to each other? Are the images large in proportion to verbal 
text? How are images labeled? How does the text relate to the image(s)? Does the 
image illustrate the text? Does the text explain or comment on the image?
An Analysis of a Visual Argument Using  
All the Design Components
We would like to illustrate how all four of the design components—use of type, lay-
out, color, and images—can reinforce and support each other to achieve a rhetorical 
effect. Consider the “Save the Children” advocacy ad from Newsweek (Figure 9.3). This 
advocacy ad highlights the design features of image, color, and layout, with type used 
to interpret and reinforce the message delivered by the other features. The layout of 
the page highlights the connection between the adorable baby on the left side and the 
female health care worker on the right. The “story” of the ad is told in unobtrusive text 
(in small white font), which leads the readers’ eyes from the baby’s face to the heart 
of the health worker. Interestingly, from a design perspective, a third figure, probably 
the baby’s mother, is just partly visible in the form of hands holding the baby. The text 
itself celebrates the effectiveness of this local health healer. At the bottom of the page, 
text conveys the call to action in the form of memorable tag lines “HELP ONE. SAVE 
MANY”; and “See where the good goes at GoodGoes.org.”

	
Chapter 9    Analyzing Visual Arguments	
149
This advocacy ad works on readers by blending three themes—the universal ­appeal 
of babies; the beneficial effects of educating local workers, particularly women; and 
the symbolic meaning of helping/healing hands—to convey how those of us in the 
developed world can provide aid that empowers people in developing countries to help 
themselves. These themes are portrayed through various visual strategies. In this ad, a 
baby, the health worker, and a third figure outside the frame of the photo (probably the 
baby’s mother) sit on a woven mat, inside a structure. The use of bright colors to create 
a feeling of warmth and love, the arrangement of the figures, and the close-up shots of 
Figure 9.3  Save the Children advocacy ad

150	
Part 3	
Analyzing Arguments
the baby and health worker draw viewers into the scene. The close-up, slightly low-
angle shot accentuates faces, hands, feet, and traditional clothing. The blurred back-
ground suggests palm trees and the doorway to a house. The building is, most likely, the 
home of the mother and baby, which the health worker is visiting on her rounds. The 
baby, wearing an orange-beaded blouse or smock, pink shorts or skirt, and a necklace 
of purple beads, sits and smiles alertly at the health worker, who is engrossed in taking 
the baby’s temperature. She seems to be holding the thermometer under the baby’s arm 
with one hand and holding a watch with the other. Her focus on her task conveys her 
expertise; she knows what she is doing, an idea reinforced by the caption, which tells 
us that this health worker, Khalada Yesmin, “has helped 122 sick children this year.” 
This caption and the prominence of hands in this photo—Khalada Yesmin’s hands, the 
baby’s hand, and the mother’s hands supporting the baby—accentuate the idea of ­direct, 
grassroots aid that is improving the lives of mothers and children in a community 
through compassion and knowledge. The slogans at the bottom of the ad “Help one. 
Save many” and “See where the good goes” extend this network of help to viewers of the 
ad. If we contribute money to the training and medical supplies of health workers like 
Khalada Yesmin, we will help expand the web of aid.
In choosing to make this ad portray a positive, upbeat scene of medical success, 
instead of portraying scenes of sick and dying children, the designers of this ad 
gave a memorable embodiment to the ideas in the words “help,” “save,” and “good.” 
Perhaps most importantly, unlike some global ads, this one empowers people in 
the developing world. Rather than depict them as victims or helpless people in 
backward countries, this ad shows them as primary agents in the improvements 
in their lives. Rather than take control and rush in to solve problems, viewers in 
developed countries are invited to contribute to this success, figuratively lending a 
hand through financial support.
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Analyzing Photos and Drawings Rhetorically
Working individually or in groups, imagine that you have been asked to compose 
a flier advertising a self-defense workshop for women on your university campus. 
This workshop will include some basic self-defense moves and some fundamentals of 
martial arts and blocking. Your task is to choose one of the four photos or images in 
Figures 9.4–9.7 for the poster. Your goal is to get students to notice your poster, appre-
ciate what is at stake in the workshops, and become motivated to sign up. What image 
might best encourage women to attend? What image might encourage men to urge 
their female friends or girlfriends to attend?
	 1.	 Study the four photos in Figures 9.4 through 9.7, and then answer the following 
questions:
a.	 What camera techniques and composition features do you see in each photo or 
image? Consider all the composition features described on pages 147–148 for 
each image.
b.	 What do you think is the dominant impression of each photo? In other words, 
what is each photo’s implicit argument?
■ ■ ■

	
Chapter 9    Analyzing Visual Arguments	
151
■ ■ ■
Figure 9.4  Photo of girl practicing 
boxing moves
Figure 9.5  Photo of a guy in 
a hoodie
Figure 9.6  Drawing of a girl 
booting a guy
Figure 9.7  Photo of a woman 
­executing a martial arts move
The Genres of Visual Arguments
We have already mentioned that verbal arguments today frequently are 
accompanied by photographs or drawings that contribute to the text’s per-
suasive appeal. For example, a verbal argument promoting U.N. action to 
help AIDS victims in Africa might be accompanied by a photograph of a 
9.3  To explain the 
genres of visual 
argument

152	
Part 3	
Analyzing Arguments
dying mother and child. However, some genres of argument are dominated by visual 
elements. In these genres, the visual design carries most of the argumentative weight; 
verbal text is used primarily for labeling, for focusing the argument’s claim, or for 
commenting on the images. In this section, we describe specifically these highly visual 
genres of argument.
Posters and Fliers
To persuade audiences, an arguer might create a poster designed for placement on 
walls or kiosks or a flier to be passed out on street corners. Posters dramatically attract 
and direct viewers’ attention toward a subject or issue. They often seek to rally sup-
porters to promote a strong stance on an issue, and call people to action. For example, 
during World War II, posters asked Americans to invest in war bonds and urged 
women to join the workforce to free men for active combat. During the Vietnam War, 
famous posters used slogans such as “Make Love Not War” or “Girls say yes to boys 
who say no” to increase national resistance to the war.
The hallmark of an effective poster is the way it focuses and encodes a complex 
meaning in a verbal-visual text, often with one or more striking images. These images 
are often symbolic—for example, using children to symbolize family and home, a soar-
ing bird to symbolize freedom, or three firefighters raising the American flag over the 
World Trade Center rubble in September 2001 to symbolize American heroism, patrio-
tism, and resistance to terrorism. These symbols derive potency from the values they 
share with their target audience. Posters tend to use words sparingly, either as slogans or 
as short, memorable directives. This terse verbal text augments the message encoded in 
an eye-catching, dominant image.
As an example of a contemporary poster, consider the poster on page 153 urging 
people to see the second Hunger Games film, Catching Fire. This poster for this pop-
ular culture film shows actress Jennifer Lawrence as lead character Katniss Everdeen 
aiming her weapon of choice, her bow. She is framed by a large version of her mock-
ingjay pin (a symbol of District 12, her home) and a ring of fire. Readers who know 
Susan Collins’s dystopian novels and/or the films know that Katniss appeared in a 
costume with special effect flames in the first film and that her defiant spirit fuels 
the rebellion against the Capital and its repressive government. The impact of the 
poster is intensified by the angry reds and dark colors and by the centrality and size 
of the image of Katniss (Jennifer Lawrence) that dominates the poster. The tagline at 
the top of the poster “Remember who the enemy is” intimates the plotline of the film 
and calls all potential rebels to be discerning and ready for courageous and risky acts 
of solidarity.
Fliers and brochures often use visual elements similar to those in posters. An 
image might be the top and center attraction of a flier or the main focus of the front 
cover of a brochure. However, unlike posters, fliers and brochures offer additional 
space for verbal arguments, which often present the writer’s claim supported with 
bulleted lists of reasons. Sometimes pertinent data and statistics, along with testi-
mony from supporters, are placed in boxes or sidebars.

	
Chapter 9    Analyzing Visual Arguments	
153
Figure 9.8  Poster for The Hunger Games: Catching Fire

154	
Part 3	
Analyzing Arguments
Public Affairs Advocacy Advertisements
Public affairs advocacy advertisements share with posters an emphasis on visual 
elements, but they are designed specifically for publication in newspapers and maga-
zines or Web sites and, in their persuasive strategies, are directly analogous to product 
advertisements. Public affairs advocacy ads are usually sponsored by a corporation or 
an advocacy organization, often are part of a particular campaign with a theme, and 
have a more immediate and defined target audience than posters. Designed as con-
densed arguments aimed at influencing public opinion on civic issues, these ads are 
characterized by their brevity, audience-based appeals, and succinct, sound bite style. 
Often, in order to sketch out their claim and reasons clearly and concisely, they em-
ploy headings and subheadings, bulleted lists, different sizes and styles of type, and a 
clever, pleasing layout on the page. They usually have some attention-getting slogan 
or headline like “MORE KIDS ARE GETTING BRAIN CANCER. WHY?” or “STOP 
THE TAX REVOLT JUGGERNAUT!” And they usually include a call to action, 
whether it be a donation, a letter of protest to legislators, or an invitation to join the 
advocacy group.
The balance between verbal and visual elements in an advocacy advertisement 
varies. Some advocacy ads are verbal only, with visual concerns focused on docu-
ment design (for example, an “open letter” from the president of a corporation ap-
pearing as a full-page newspaper ad). Other advocacy ads are primarily visual, using 
images and other design elements with the same shrewdness as product advertise-
ments. We looked closely at advocacy ads when we examined the StopBullying.gov 
ads (Figure 9.2) and the Save the Children ad (Figure 9.3).
As another example of a public affairs advocacy ad, consider the ad in Chapter 14, 
page 246, that attempts to counter the influence of the pro-life movement’s growing 
campaign against abortion. As you can see, this ad is dominated by one stark image: a 
question mark formed by the hook of a coat hanger. The shape of the hook draws the 
reader’s eye to the concentrated type centered below it. The hook carries most of the 
weight of the argument. Simple, bold, and harsh, the image of the hanger—tapping 
readers’ cultural knowledge—evokes the dangerous experience of illegal abortions 
performed crudely by nonmedical people in the dark back streets of cities. The ad 
wants viewers to think of the dangerous last resorts that desperate women would have 
to turn to if they could not obtain abortions legally. The hanger itself creates a visual 
pun: as a question mark, it conveys the ad’s dilemma about what will happen if abor-
tions are made illegal. As a coat hanger, it provides the ad’s frightening answer to the 
printed question—desperate women will return to back-street abortionists who use 
coat hangers as tools.
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Analyzing an Advocacy Poster Rhetorically
Working individually or in groups, examine the advocacy poster shown in Figure 9.9 
on page 155 that shows a photo of an attractive girl behind the line “HEATHER’S LIFE 
ENDED TOO SOON.” This poster, which appears on the TxtResponsibly.org Web site, 

	
Chapter 9    Analyzing Visual Arguments	
155
Figure 9.9  Poster argument warning against texting while driving

156	
Part 3	
Analyzing Arguments
reaches out to young drivers and their parents, using both images and text. Use the 
­following questions to guide your analysis.
	 a.	 What visual features of this poster immediately attract your eyes? What principles 
for effective use of type, layout, color, and image does this ad exemplify?
	 b.	 What is the core argument of this ad?
	 c.	 Why did Heather’s parents choose a large photo of her? How does that photo work 
with the other photo of a completely mangled car?
	d.	 How does the frankness of the text and the size and color of the lettering combine 
to convey the message of the ad?
	 e.	 How would you design a poster warning against texting while driving? Consider 
use of type, layout, and image; the core argument; and appeals to ethos, pathos, 
and kairos.
Cartoons
An especially charged kind of visual argument is the editorial or political cartoon 
and its extended forms, the comic strip and graphic novel. Here we focus on political 
cartoons, which are often mini-narratives, portraying an issue dramatically, com-
pactly, and humorously through images and a few well-chosen words that dramatize 
conflicts and problems. Using caricature, exaggeration, and distortion, a cartoonist 
distills an issue down to an image that boldly reveals the creator’s perspective on an 
issue. The purpose of political cartoons is usually satire, or, as one famous cartoon-
ist says, “afflicting the comfortable and comforting the afflicted.”* Because they are 
so condensed and are often connected to current affairs, political cartoons are par-
ticularly dependent on the audience’s background knowledge of cultural and political 
events. When political cartoons work well, through their perceptive combination of 
images and words, they flash a brilliant, clarifying light on a perspective or open a 
new lens on an issue, often giving readers a shock of insight.
As an illustration, note the cartoon by Milt Priggee in Figure 9.10, which was 
posted on the cartoon Web site www.caglecartoons.com. The setting of the cartoon 
envisions a humorous blend of prehistoric and contemporary times. This cartoon 
responds to the recent scientific discussions—with points about dark matter, a kind of 
energy-mass concept from physics and astronomy—of the creation and development 
of the universe and the aging of Earth. However, the main story of the cartoon con-
nects the dinosaur characters with the behavior of people today who go about walking 
and tweeting, oblivious to anything around them, including dangerous environments. 
Thus, the cartoon links discussions of evolution to discussions of the contemporary 
obsession with cell phones and forms of social media.
■ ■ ■
*“The Truth Told in Jest: Interview: Martin Rowson.” Morning Star. Morning Star Online, July 2007 
Web. 6 June 2011.

	
Chapter 9    Analyzing Visual Arguments	
157
■ ■ ■ 	 For Class Discussion  Analyzing Cartoons
Cartoons can provide insight into how the public is lining up on issues. Choose a cur-
rent issue such as health care reform, use of drones, dependence on foreign oil, income 
inequality, or identity theft. Then, using an online cartoon index such as Daryl Cagle’s 
Professional Cartoonists Index (www.cagle.com) or a Web search of your own, find 
several cartoons that capture different perspectives on your issue.
	 1.	 What is the mini-narrative, the main claim, and the use of caricature, exaggeration, 
or distortion in each?
	 2.	 How is kairos, or timeliness, important to each cartoon?
Web Pages
So far we have only hinted at the influence of the World Wide Web in accelerating the 
use of visual images in argument. Multimodal Web pages, with their hypertext design, 
exhibit the Web’s complex mix of text and image, a mix that has changed the way many 
writers think of argument. The home page of an advocacy site, for example, often has 
many features of a poster argument with hypertext links to galleries of images on the 
one hand, and to verbal arguments on the other. These verbal arguments themselves 
often contain photographs, drawings, and graphics. The strategies discussed in this 
chapter for analyzing and interpreting visual texts also apply to Web pages.
■ ■ ■
Figure 9.10  Tweeting and evolution cartoon

158	
Part 3	
Analyzing Arguments
Because the Web is such an important tool in research, we have placed our main 
discussion of Web sites in Appendix 2. There you will find our explanations for read-
ing, analyzing, and evaluating Web sites.
Constructing Your Own Visual Argument
The most common visual arguments you are likely to create are posters 
and fliers, and public affairs advocacy ads. You may also decide that in 
longer verbal arguments, the use of visuals or graphics could clarify your 
points while adding visual variety to your paper. The following guidelines 
will help you apply your understanding of visual elements in the construction of your 
own visual arguments.
Guidelines for Creating Visual Arguments
	 1.	 Genre: Determine where this visual argument is going to appear (bulletin board, 
flier, a one-page magazine or newspaper spread, or as a Web page).
	 2.	 Audience-based appeals: Determine who your target audience is.
■	 What values and background knowledge of your issue can you assume your 
audience has?
■	 What specifically do you want your audience to think or do after reading 
your visual argument?
■	 If you are promoting a specific course of action (sign a petition, send money, 
vote for or against a bill, attend a meeting), how can you make that request 
clear and direct?
	 3.	 Core of your argument: Determine what clear claim and reasons will form the 
core of your argument; decide if this claim and these reasons will be explicitly 
stated or implicit in your visuals and slogans.
■	 How much verbal text will you use?
■	 If the core of your argument will be largely implicit, how can you still make 
it readily apparent and clear for your audience?
	 4.	 Visual design: What visual design and layout will grab your audience’s attention 
and be persuasive?
■	 How can font sizes and styles, layout, and color be used in this argument to 
create a strong impression?
■	 What balance and harmony can you create between the visual and verbal el-
ements of your argument? Will your verbal element be a slogan, express the 
core of the argument, or summarize and comment on the image(s)?
	 5.	 Use of images: If your argument lends itself to images, what photo or drawing 
would support your claim or have emotional appeal? (If you want to use more than 
one image, be careful not to clutter your page and confuse your message. Simplicity 
and clarity are important.)
■	 What image would be memorable and meaningful to your audience? Would 
a photo or a drawing be most effective?
■	 Will your image(s) be used to provide evidence for your claim or illustrate a 
main idea, evoke emotions, or enhance your credibility and authority?
9.4  To construct 
your own visual 
argument

	
Chapter 9    Analyzing Visual Arguments	
159
■ ■ ■ 	 For Class Discussion  Developing Ideas for an Advocacy Ad  
or Poster Argument
This exercise asks you to do the thinking and planning for an advocacy ad or poster 
­argument to be displayed on your college or university campus. Working individually, 
in small groups, or as a whole class, choose an issue that is controversial on your cam-
pus (or in your town or city), and follow the Guidelines for Creating Visual Arguments 
on page 158 to envision the view you want to advocate on that issue. What might the 
core of your argument be? Who is your target audience? Are you representing a group, 
club, or other organization? What image(s) might be effective in attracting and mov-
ing this audience? Possible issues might be commuter parking; poor conditions in the 
computer lab; student reluctance to use the counseling center; problems with dorm life, 
financial aid programs, or intramural sports; ways to improve orientation programs for 
new students, work-study programs, or travel-abroad opportunities; or new initiatives 
such as study groups for the big lecture courses or new service-learning opportunities.
Using Information Graphics in Arguments
Besides images in the form of photographs and drawings, writers often use 
quantitative graphics to support arguments using numbers. In Chapter 5, 
we introduced you to the use of quantitative data in arguments. We dis-
cussed the persuasiveness of numbers and showed you ways to use them 
responsibly in your arguments. With the availability of spreadsheet and pre-
sentation programs, today’s writers often create and import quantitative graphics into 
their documents. These visuals—such as tables, pie charts, and line or bar graphs—can 
have great rhetorical power by making numbers tell a story at a glance. In this section, 
we’ll show you how quantitative graphics can make numbers speak. We’ll also show you 
how to incorporate graphics into your text and reference them effectively.
How Tables Contain a Variety of Stories
Data used in arguments usually have their origins in raw numbers collected from 
surveys, questionnaires, observational studies, scientific experiments, and so forth. 
Through a series of calculations, the numbers are combined, sorted, and arranged in a 
meaningful fashion, often in detailed tables. Some of the tables published by the U.S. 
Census Bureau, for example, contain dozens of pages. The more dense the table, the 
more their use is restricted to statistical experts who pore over them to analyze their 
meanings. More useful to the general public are midlevel tables contained on one or 
two pages that report data at a higher level of abstraction.
Consider, for example, Table 9.2, published by the U.S. Census Bureau and based 
on the 2010 census. This table shows the marital status of people age 15 and older, bro-
ken into gender and age groupings, in March 2010. It also provides comparative data 
on the “never married” percentage of the population in March 2010 and March 1970.
Take a few moments to peruse the table and be certain you know how to read it. 
You read tables in two directions: from top to bottom and from left to right. Always 
begin with the title, which tells you what the table contains and includes elements from 
■ ■ ■
9.5  To use infor-
mation graphics 
rhetorically in 
arguments

Table 9.2  Marital Status of People 15 Years and Over by Age and Sex: March 1970 and March 2010  
(Numbers in Thousands, Except for Percentages)
March 2010
Number
Characteristic
Total
Married  
spouse  
present
Married  
spouse  
absent
Separated
Divorced
Widowed
Never  
married
Percent  
never  
married
March 1970  
percent never  
married*
Both Sexes
Total 15 years old and over
242,047
120,768
3,415
5,539
23,742
14,341
74,243
30.7
24.9
15 to 19 years old
21,079
178
109
151
60
22
20,559
97.5
93.9
20 to 24 years old
21,142
2,655
202
309
195
17
17,765
84.0
44.5
25 to 29 years old
21,445
7,793
406
594
766
60
11,826
55.1
14.7
30 to 34 years old
19,623
10,896
337
632
1,447
72
6,239
31.8
7.8
35 to 44 years old
40,435
25,729
733
1,331
4,697
345
7,599
18.8
5.9
45 to 54 years old
44,373
28,619
703
1,295
6,951
1,080
5,725
12.9
6.1
55 to 64 years old
35,381
23,621
463
763
5,750
1,923
2,861
8.1
7.2
65 years old and over
38,569
21,276
461
465
3,875
10,823
1,668
4.3
7.6
Males
Total 15 years old and over
117,686
60,384
1,789
2,352
9,981
2,974
40,206
34.2
28.1
15 to 19 years old
10,713
61
55
62
30
8
10,498
98.0
97.4
20 to 24 years old
10,677
946
86
123
49
3
9,469
88.7
54.7
25 to 29 years old
10,926
3,343
220
224
318
21
6,800
62.2
19.1
30 to 34 years old
9,759
5,143
188
246
593
28
3,561
36.5
9.4
35 to 44 years old
20,066
12,614
392
578
1,998
81
4,402
21.9
6.7
45 to 54 years old
21,779
14,280
367
539
3,063
284
3,246
14.9
7.5
55 to 64 years old
16,980
11,958
244
343
2,465
424
1,545
9.1
7.8
65 years old and over
16,786
12,039
237
237
1,464
2,124
685
4.1
7.5
Females
Total 15 years old and over
124,361
60,384
1,626
3,187
13,760
11,368
34,037
27.4
22.1
15 to 19 years old
10,365
118
55
90
30
13
10,061
97.1
90.3
20 to 24 years old
10,465
1,708
116
185
146
14
8,296
79.3
35.8
25 to 29 years old
10,519
4,451
186
370
448
39
5,026
47.8
10.5
30 to 34 years old
9,864
5,753
150
386
854
44
2,678
27.1
6.2
35 to 44 years old
20,369
13,115
341
753
2,698
264
3,198
15.7
5.2
45 to 54 years old
22,594
14,339
337
756
3,889
794
2,479
11.0
4.9
55 to 64 years old
18,401
11,663
220
420
3,284
1,499
1,315
7.1
6.8
65 years old and over
21,783
9,238
224
227
2,412
8,700
983
4.5
7.7
*The 1970 percentages include 14-year-olds, and thus are for 14+ and 14–19.
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Survey, March 2010 and March 1970.
160	

	
Chapter 9    Analyzing Visual Arguments	
161
both the vertical and the horizontal dimensions of the table. In this case the vertical di-
mension presents demographic categories for people “15 years old and over” for both 
sexes, males and females. Each of these gender categories is subdivided into age cate-
gories. The horizontal dimension provides information about “marital status.” Seven 
of the columns give total numbers (reported in thousands) for March 2010. The eighth 
column gives the “percent never married” for March 2010, while the last column gives 
the “percent never married” for March 1970. To make sure you know how to read the 
table, pick a couple of rows at random and say to yourself what each number means. 
For example, the first row under “Both sexes” gives total figures for the entire popu-
lation of the United States age 15 and older. In March 2010 there were 242,047,000 
people age 15 and older (remember that the numbers are presented in thousands). 
Of these, 120,768,000 were married and living with their spouses. As you continue 
across the columns, you’ll see that 3,415,000 people were married but not living with 
their spouses (a spouse may be stationed overseas or in prison; or a married couple 
may be maintaining a “commuter marriage” with separate households in different cit-
ies). Continuing across the columns, you’ll see that 5,539,000 people were separated 
from their spouses, 23,742,000 were divorced, and 14,341,000 were widowed, and an 
additional 74,243,000 were never married. In the next-to-last column, the number of 
never-married people is converted to a percentage: 30.7 percent. Finally, the last col-
umn shows the percentage of never-married people in 1970: 24.9 percent. These last 
two columns show us that the number of unmarried people in the United States rose 
5.8 percentage points since 1970.
Now that you know how to read the table, examine it carefully to see the kinds 
of stories it tells. What does the table show you, for example, about the percentage of 
married people age 25–29 in 1970 versus 2010? What does it show about different age-
related patterns of marriage in males and females? By showing you that Americans are 
waiting much later in life to get married, a table like this initiates many causal questions 
for analysis and argument. What happened in American culture between 1970 and 
2010 to explain the startling difference in the percentage of married people within, say, 
the 20–24 age bracket? In 2010 only 16 percent of people in this age bracket were mar-
ried (we converted “unmarried” to “married” by subtracting 84 from 100). However, in 
1970, 55.5 percent of people in this age bracket were married.
Using a Graph to Tell a Story
Table 9.2, as we have seen, tells the story of how Americans are postponing marriage. 
However, one has to tease out the story from the dense columns of numbers. To focus 
on a key story and make it powerfully immediate, you can create a graph.
Bar Graphs  Suppose you are writing an argument in which you want to show that 
the percentage of married women in the 20–29 age bracket has dropped significantly 
since 1970. You could tell this story through a bar graph (Figure 9.11).
Bar graphs use bars of varying length, extending either horizontally or vertically, 
to contrast two or more quantities. As with any graphic presentation, you must cre-
ate a comprehensive title. In the case of bar graphs, titles tell readers what is being 

162	
Part 3	
Analyzing Arguments
compared to what. Most bar graphs also have “legends,” which explain what the differ-
ent features on the graph represent. Bars are typically distinguished from each other by 
use of different colors, shades, or patterns of crosshatching. The special power of bar 
graphs is that they can help readers make quick comparisons.
Pie Charts  Another vivid kind of graph is a pie chart or circle graph, which depicts 
different percentages of a total (the pie) in the form of slices. Pie charts are a favorite 
way of depicting the way parts of a whole are divided up. Suppose, for example, that 
you wanted your readers to notice the high percentage of widows among women 
age 65 and older. To do so, you could create a pie chart (Figure 9.12) based on the 
data in the last row of Table 9.2. As you can see, a pie chart shows at a glance how the 
Married Females, 20–24
Married Females, 25–29
Percent
0
1970
2010
20
64.2
89.5
20.7
52.2
40
60
80
100
Figure 9.11  Percentage of married females, ages 20–29, 1970 and 2010
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Survey, March 2000.
Never Married
5%
Separated or
Divorced
12%
Widowed
40%
Married, Spouse
Absent
1%
Married, Spouse
Present
42%
Figure 9.12  Marital status of females, age 65 and older, 2010
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Survey, March 2010.

	
Chapter 9    Analyzing Visual Arguments	
163
whole of something is divided into segments. However, the effectiveness of pie charts 
­diminishes as you add more slices. In most cases, you’ll begin to confuse readers if 
you include more than five or six slices.
Line Graphs  Another powerful quantitative graphic is a line graph, which converts 
numerical data into a series of points on a grid and connects them to create flat, rising, 
or falling lines. The result gives us a picture of the relationship between the variables 
represented on the horizontal and vertical axes.
Suppose you wanted to tell the story of the rising number of separated/divorced 
women in the U.S. population. Using Table 9.2, you can calculate the percentage 
of separated/divorced females in 2010 by adding the number of separated females 
(3,187,000) and the number of divorced females (13,760,000) and dividing that sum 
by the total number of females (124,361,000). The result is 13.6 percent. You can make 
the same calculations for 2000, 1990, 1980, and 1970 by looking at U.S. census data 
from those years (available on the Web or in your library). The resulting line graph is 
shown in Figure 9.14.
To determine what this graph is telling you, you need to clarify what’s represented 
on the two axes. By convention, the horizontal axis of a graph contains the predictable, 
known variable, which has no surprises—what researchers call the “independent vari-
able.” In this case the horizontal axis represents the years 1970–2010 arranged predictably 
in chronological order. The vertical axis contains the unpredictable variable, which forms 
the graph’s story—what researchers call the “dependent variable”—in this case, the per-
centage of separated or divorced females. The ascending curve tells the story at a glance.
Note that with line graphs, the steepness of the slope (and hence the rhetorical 
effect) can be manipulated by the intervals chosen for the vertical axis. Figure 9.13 
shows vertical intervals of 2 percent. The slope could be made less dramatic by choos-
ing intervals of, say, 10 percent and more dramatic by choosing intervals of 1 percent.
Incorporating Graphics into Your Argument
Today, writers working with quantitative data usually use graphing software that auto-
matically creates tables, graphs, or charts from data entered into the cells of a spread-
sheet. For college papers, some instructors may allow you to make your graphs with 
pencil and ruler and paste them into your document.
Designing the Graphic  When you design your graphic, your goal is to have a 
specific rhetorical effect on your readers, not to demonstrate all the bells and whistles 
available on your software. Adding extraneous data to the graph or chart or using such 
features as a three-dimensional effect can often distract from the story you are trying 
to tell. Keep the graphic as uncluttered and simple as possible and design it so that it 
reinforces the point you are making.
Numbering, Labeling, and Titling the Graphic  In newspapers and popular 
magazines, writers often include graphics in boxes or sidebars without specifically 
referring to them in the text itself. However, in academic and professional workplace 
writing, graphics are always labeled, numbered, titled, and referred to directly in the 

164	
Part 3	
Analyzing Arguments
text. By convention, tables are listed as “Tables,” whereas line graphs, bar graphs, pie 
charts, or any other kinds of drawings or photographs are labeled as “Figures.” Suppose 
you create a document that includes four graphics—a table, a bar graph, a pie chart, 
and a photograph. The table would be labeled as Table 1. The rest would be labeled as 
Figure 1, Figure 2, and Figure 3.
In addition to numbering and labeling, every graphic needs a comprehensive title 
that explains fully what information is being displayed. Look back over the tables and 
figures in this chapter and compare their titles to the information in the graphics. In a 
line graph showing changes over time, for example, a typical title will identify the infor-
mation on both the horizontal and vertical axes and the years covered. Bar graphs also 
have a “legend” explaining how the bars are coded if necessary. When you import the 
graphic into your own text, be consistent in where you place the title—either above the 
graphic or below it.
Referencing the Graphic in Your Text  Academic and professional writers follow 
a referencing convention called independent redundancy. The general rule is this: The 
graphic should be understandable without the text; the text should be understandable 
without the graphic; the text should repeat the most important information in the 
graphic. An example is shown in Figure 9.14.
12
14
10
8
6
4
2
1970
1980
5.7%
9.4%
11.7%
12.6%
13.6%
1990
2000
2010
Percent
Figure 9.13  Percentage of females age 15 and older who are separated 
or divorced, 1970–2010
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Survey, March 2010.

	
Chapter 9    Analyzing Visual Arguments	
165
Writing Assignment  A Visual Argument Rhetorical Analysis, a Visual Argument,  
or a Microtheme Using Quantitative Data
Option 1: Writing a Rhetorical Analysis of a Visual Argument Write a thesis-driven 
rhetorical analysis essay in which you examine the rhetorical effectiveness of a visual 
argument, either one of the visual arguments in this text or one specified by your 
instructor. Unless otherwise stated, direct your analysis to an audience of your class-
mates. In your introduction, establish the argumentative conversation to which this ar-
gument is contributing. Briefly summarize the argument and describe the visual text. 
Present your thesis, highlighting two or more rhetorical features of the argument that 
you find central to the effectiveness or ineffectiveness of this argument. To develop 
and support your own points, you will need to include visual features and details (such 
as color, design, camera angle, framing, and special effects) as well as short quotations 
from any verbal parts of the argument.
Elderly women are likely to need more social services
than men because they are more likely to live alone.
As shown in Figure 1, only 42 percent of women over
sixty-ﬁve live with their spouses, and 40 percent of
women are widowed. In contrast, 72 percent of men over
sixty-ﬁve live with their spouses while only 13 per-
cent are widowed. These differences—caused largely by
the longer life expectancy of women and by men’s ten-
dency to marry women younger than themselves—mean that
women are more apt than men to face old age alone.
Fig. 1. Marital Status of Males and Females, Ages 65 
and Older, 2010
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2010
Writer’s point
References the ﬁgure
Repeats the key
information shown in
the ﬁgure
Connects the 
information to the
point
Title
Source
1HYHU0DUULHG

:LGRZHG

0DUULHG6SRXVH
$EVHQW

0DUULHG6SRXVH
3UHVHQW

0DOHV
6HSDUDWHGRU
'LYRUFHG

1HYHU0DUULHG

Legends
:LGRZHG

0DUULHG6SRXVH
$EVHQW

0DUULHG6SRXVH
3UHVHQW

)HPDOHV
6HSDUDWHGRU
'LYRUFHG

Figure 9.14  Example of a student text with a referenced graph

166	
Part 3	
Analyzing Arguments
Option 2: Multimodal Assignment: A Poster Argument Working with the idea 
of an advocacy ad or poster argument that you explored in the For Class Discussion 
feature on page 159, use the visual design concepts and principles presented on 
page 158, your understanding of visual argument and the genre of poster arguments, 
and your own creativity to produce a poster argument that can be displayed on your 
campus or in your town or city. Try out the draft of your poster argument on people 
who are part of your target audience. Based on these individuals’ suggestions for im-
proving the clarity and impact of this visual argument, prepare a final version of your 
poster argument.
Option 3: Multimodal Assignment: Cartoon Choose a controversial issue important 
to you and create a single-frame political cartoon that presents your perspective on 
the issue in a memorable way. Use the cartoon strategies of mini-narrative, caricature, 
exaggeration, distortion, and the interaction between image and text.
Option 4: A Microtheme Using a Quantitative Graphic Write a microtheme that 
tells a story based on data you select from Table 9.2 or from some other table provided 
by your instructor or located by you. Include in your microtheme at least one quan-
titative graphic (table, line graph, bar graph, pie chart), which should be labeled and 
referenced according to standard conventions. Use as a model the short piece shown in 
Figure 9.14 on page 165.  ■

167
Arguments in Depth
Types of Claims
Part Four
	10	 An Introduction to the Types of Claims
	11	 Definition and Resemblance Arguments
	12	 Causal Arguments
	13	 Evaluation and Ethical Arguments
	14	 Proposal Arguments
The advertisement for Nicolites is one voice 
in the public controversy over e-cigarettes. 
The ad claims that e-cigarettes are safer than 
regular cigarettes but chooses to use the word 
“smoking” rather than the more sanitized word 
“vaping.” The vapor from e-cigarettes usually 
includes nicotine (and may have added flavors) 
but not the tar from cigarettes. However, as the 
discussion in Chapter 10 on pages 170–173 
shows, the safety, healthfulness, and advisability  
of e-cigarettes are hotly debated issues. Using 
strategies from Chapter 9 on analyzing visual 
texts, how do the words and images in this ad 
work together to make positive claims about 
e-cigarettes?

168	
An Introduction to the 
Types of Claims
10
What you will learn in this chapter:
	10.1	 To identify different claim types and show how each type has characteristic 
patterns of development
	10.2	 To use strategies based on claim types to help focus an argument, generate 
ideas for it, and structure it persuasively
	10.3	 To be mindful of how different claim types work together in hybrid 
arguments
In Parts One, Two, and Three of this text, we showed how argument entails 
both inquiry and persuasion. We explained strategies for creating a compel-
ling structure of reasons and evidence for your arguments (logos), for linking 
your arguments to the beliefs and values of your audience (pathos), and for 
establishing your credibility and trustfulness (ethos). We also explained how 
to do a rhetorical analysis of both verbal and visual texts.
Now in Part Four, we examine arguments in depth by explaining five 
types of claims, each of which has its own characteristic patterns of develop-
ment and support. Because almost all arguments use one or more of these 
types of claims as basic argumentative “moves” or building blocks, knowing 
how to develop each claim type will advance your skills in argument. The 
claims we examine in Part Four are related to an ancient rhetorical concept 
called stasis, from a Greek term meaning “stand,” as in “to take a stand on 
something.” There are many competing theories of stasis, so no two rhetori-
cians discuss stasis in exactly the same way.
The Types of Claims and Their Typical Patterns 
of Development
To appreciate what a study of claim types can do, imagine 
one of those heated but frustrating arguments in which the 
question at issue keeps shifting. Everyone talks at cross-
purposes, each speaker’s point unconnected to the previous 
speaker’s. Suppose your heated discussion is about the use 
of steroids. You might get such a discussion back on track if one person says: 
“Hold it for a moment. What are we actually arguing about here? Are we arguing 
10.1  To identify different 
claim types and show how 
each type has characteristic 
patterns of development

	
Chapter 10    An Introduction to the Types of Claims	
169
about whether steroids are a health risk or whether steroids should be banned from sports? 
These are two different issues. We can’t debate both at once.” Whether she recognizes it or 
not, this person is applying the concept of claim types to get the argument focused.
To understand how claim types work, let’s return to the concept of stasis. A stasis 
is an issue or question that focuses a point of disagreement. You and your audience 
might agree on the answer to questions A and B, but on question C, you disagree. For 
example, you and your audience might agree that steroids, if used carefully under a 
physician’s supervision, pose few long-term health risks but still disagree on whether 
steroids should be banned from sports. This last issue constitutes a stasis, the point 
where you and your audience part company.
Rhetoricians have discovered that the kinds of questions that divide people have clas-
sifiable patterns. In this text, we identify several broad types of claims—each type origi-
nating in a different kind of question. The following chart gives you a quick overview of 
these types of claims, each of which is developed in more detail in subsequent chapters. 
It also shows you a typical structure for each type of argument. Note that the first three 
claim types concern questions of truth or reality, whereas the last two concern questions 
of value. You’ll appreciate the significance of this distinction as this chapter progresses.
Claims about Reality, Truth, or the Way Things Are
Claim Type and  
Generic Question
Examples of Issue  
Questions
Typical Methods for  
Structuring an Argument
Definition arguments:  
In which category 
does this thing belong? 
Chapter 11
■	 Is solitary confinement  
cruel and unusual 
punishment?
■	 Is a skilled video game 
player an athlete?
■	 Create a definition that 
­establishes criteria for the 
category.
■	 Use examples to show how 
the contested case meets the 
criteria.
Resemblance 
­arguments: To what 
is this thing ­similar? 
Chapter 11
■	 Is opposition to gay 
­marriage like opposition 
to interracial marriage?
■	 Is investing in the stock 
market like gambling?
■	 Let the analogy or precedent 
itself create the desired  
rhetorical effect.  
[or]
■	 Elaborate on the relevant simi-
larities between the given case 
and the analogy or precedent.
Causal arguments:  
What are the causes 
or consequences of this 
event or phenomenon? 
Chapter 12
■	 What are the causes 
of bee colony collapse 
disorder?
■	 What might be the 
­consequences of raising 
the minimum wage?
■	 Explain the links in a causal 
chain going from cause to 
­effect, or summarize experi-
mental studies showing cause 
or consequence 
[or]
■	 Speculate about causes  
(consequences) or propose a 
surprising cause (consequence)

170	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Identifying Types of Claims
Working as a whole class or in small groups, decide which claim type is represented 
by each of the following questions. Sometimes there might be several different ways to 
classify, so if you think the question fits two different categories, explain your reasoning.
	 1.	 Should the president be authorized to employ weaponized drones to kill terrorists?
	 2.	 Is taking Adderall to increase concentration for an exam a form of cheating?
	 3.	 What would be the economic consequences of a carbon tax aimed at reducing 
­carbon emissions?
	 4.	 Were the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, more like Pearl Harbor (an act of 
war) or more like an earthquake (a natural disaster)?
	 5.	 How effective is acupuncture in reducing morning sickness?
	 6.	 Is acupuncture quackery or real medicine?
Using Claim Types to Focus an Argument  
and Generate Ideas: An Example
Having provided an overview of the types of claims, we now 
show you some of the benefits of this knowledge. First of all, 
understanding claim types will help you focus an argument by 
asking you to determine what’s at stake between you and your 
audience. Where do you and your audience agree and disagree? 
■ ■ ■
10.2  To use strategies 
based on claim types to 
help focus an argument, 
generate ideas for it, and 
structure it persuasively
Claims about Values
Claim Type and Generic 
Question
Examples of Issue  
Questions
Typical Methods for  
Structuring an Argument
Evaluation arguments: 
What is the worth or value 
of this thing? Chapter 13
■	 Is talk therapy a good 
approach for treating 
anxiety?
■	 Is it ethical to use repro-
ductive technology to 
make “designer babies”?
■	 Establish the criteria for a 
“good” or “ethical” member 
of this class or category.
■	 Use examples to show how 
the contested case meets the 
criteria.
Proposal arguments: 
Should we take this 
­proposed action?  
Chapter 14
■	 Should colleges abolish 
the SAT and ACT for 
admissions?
■	 Should the federal 
­government enact a 
­carbon tax?
■	 Make the problem vivid for 
the audience.
■	 Explain your proposed 
­action to solve the problem.
■	 Justify your solution by 
showing how it is motivated 
by principle, by good  
consequences, or by resem-
blance to a previous action 
the audience approves.

	
Chapter 10    An Introduction to the Types of Claims	
171
Second, it will help you generate ideas for your argument by suggesting the kinds of 
reasons, examples, and evidence you’ll need.
To illustrate, let’s take the recent public controversy about e-cigarettes, which use 
a battery powered heating element to vaporize the liquid in a small cartridge. The 
user inhales the vapor (an act often called “vaping”). Cartridges can be purchased 
containing various amounts of nicotine or no nicotine at all; flavored liquids (such as 
apple cinnamon or peach cobbler) are also available. Although there is debate about 
whether the vapors from e-cigarettes are harmful, everyone agrees that the nicotine-
laced liquid itself is poisonous if ingested in its liquid form.
In the absence of federal regulations, many states and cities have enacted their 
own laws about e-cigarettes, often treating them exactly as if they were real cigarettes—­
banning them from bars, restaurants, and other public places, forbidding their sale to 
minors, and restricting the ways they can be advertised.
Let’s now take the hypothetical case of a city debating a policy on e-cigarettes. 
Imagine three different writers. Writer 1 wants to ban e-cigarettes, while Writer 2 
wants to promote them as a preferred alternative to real cigarettes. Writer 3, a libertar-
ian, advocates minimal restrictions. Let’s consider how familiarity with claim types can 
help each writer generate ideas for his or her argument.
Writer 1: Ban E-Cigarettes
Writer 1 believes that e-cigarettes are harmful. Her goal is to portray e-cigarettes nega-
tively in order to persuade her audience that e-cigarettes should be banned.
■	 Definition argument: Because regular cigarettes are already banned in public 
places, Writer 1 wants to place e-cigarettes in the same category as real ciga-
rettes. For part of her argument she can use a definitional strategy showing that 
e-cigarettes and regular cigarettes belong in the same category, in that they both 
deliver nicotine extracted from tobacco leaves. She can argue that the differ-
ences between e-cigarettes and regular cigarettes, such as one producing smoke 
and the other vapor, are superficial. What makes them the same is the delivery 
of nicotine.
■	 Resemblance argument: Using a resemblance strategy, Writer 1 can also show 
how e-cigarettes are designed to look like regular cigarettes and make smoking 
look cool again. You can blow “smoke” rings with the exhaled vapor, just as you 
can with real tobacco smoke.
■	 Causal argument: To increase her negative portrayal of e-cigarettes, Writer 1 can 
also use a causal strategy. She can argue that e-cigarettes will hook children and 
teenagers on real cigarettes. She can show how the creation of flavored vapors 
such as “bubble gum” or “pancake” seem marketed to children and how the avail-
ability of cartridges that combine flavored vapors with nicotine give Big Tobacco a 
new way to create the next generation of nicotine addicts.
■	 Evaluation argument: Here Writer 1 will have to summarize and rebut counter-
views that e-cigarettes are a good replacement for regular cigarettes. Supporters 

172	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
will say the e-cigarettes are better than regular cigarettes because they produce 
fewer carcinogens and are thus safer. Writer 1 will need to argue that the negative 
aspects of e-cigarettes—nicotine addiction and the enticement of children toward 
smoking—outweigh the increased safety. She can also argue that the propellant 
ingredients in the cartridges haven’t yet been proven safe and can refer to research 
showing the liquid itself is extremely poisonous if ingested directly.
■	 Proposal argument: The city council should ban e-cigarettes.
Writer 2: Promote E-Cigarettes as a Preferred Alternative  
to Real Cigarettes
Writer 2 shares with his audience a belief that cigarettes are harmful and that smok-
ing should be banned. However, he wants to emphasize the benefits of e-cigarettes to 
people who already smoke. Like Writer 1, he can use the five claim types to generate 
strategies for his argument.
■	 Definition argument: To portray e-cigarettes more positively, Writer 2 can make 
the definitional claim that e-cigarettes are not the same as real cigarettes and thus 
belong in a different category. He can argue that the essential trait of real ciga-
rettes is cancer-causing tar derived from the combustion of tobacco leaves. It is 
the danger of the tar, not the nicotine, that caused the anti-smoking movement 
in the first place, especially the danger of secondhand smoke to others. By argu-
ing that the delivery of nicotine is a superficial rather than essential criterion for 
defining cigarettes, he can show that the absence of tar and secondhand smoke 
makes e-cigarettes essentially different from real cigarettes.
■	 Resemblance argument: Using this strategy, Writer 2 can show that although 
e-cigarettes are essentially different from real cigarettes, the two have pleasing 
similarities. Vaping provides the same physical and social pleasures as does 
smoking, but without the harm to self and others.
■	 Causal argument: Writer 2 can also portray e-cigarettes positively through the 
causal argument that they can save the lives of current smokers by converting 
them from the dangerous to less dangerous way of getting nicotine. Without con-
doning nicotine addiction, Writer 2 can point to the positive health consequences 
of getting a nicotine hit without the carcinogens. Writer 2 can also argue that 
e-cigarettes can help people stop smoking because they can gradually reduce the 
nicotine content in the cartridges they purchase.
■	 Evaluation argument: Here Writer 2 can claim that e-cigarettes are better than 
real cigarettes by arguing that the health benefits of no smoke and tar outweigh 
the addiction to nicotine, which in itself causes little health risk.
■	 Proposal argument: E-cigarettes should be promoted as a safe alternative to real 
cigarettes.

	
Chapter 10    An Introduction to the Types of Claims	
173
Writer 3: Place No Restrictions on E-Cigarettes
Writer 3 is a libertarian who dislikes nanny-state restrictions on our individual free-
doms. She wants to argue that the only restrictions on e-cigarettes should be federally 
mandated childproofing of the cartridges, truth-in-labeling about what is contained 
in the cartridges, and prevention of sales of nicotine-containing cartridges to minors.
■	 Definition argument: Writer 3, like Writer 2, can argue that e-cigarettes are in a 
different category from regular cigarettes. They present no proven dangers either 
to self or to others through secondhand smoke.
■	 Resemblance argument: To celebrate the libertarian endorsement of individual 
freedom, Writer 3 can show the resemblance between taking a pleasurable hit on 
an e-cigarette with other pleasures frowned on by the nanny state—drinking sug-
ary sodas, buying a big Mac, or owning a muscle car.
■	 Causal argument: Whereas Writer 2 argues that e-cigarettes are safer than regu-
lar cigarettes, Writer 3 can argue that no one has demonstrated any firsthand or 
secondhand health hazards for e-cigarettes. She can make the additional causal 
argument that government wants to treat e-cigarettes like regular cigarettes so 
that they can tax them heavily to produce sin-tax revenue. She can also argue that 
nanny-state regulations lead to increased loss of personal freedoms and the shut-
ting down of markets for free enterprise.
■	 Evaluation argument: Writer 3 can argue that people should be free to make their 
own evaluations of e-cigarettes.
■	 Proposal argument: For consenting adults, the city should place no restrictions 
on e-cigarettes.
Hybrid Arguments: How Claim Types Work  
Together in Arguments
As the e-cigarette example shows, hybrid arguments can be built 
from different claim types. A writer might develop a proposal ar-
gument with a causal subargument in one section, a resemblance 
subargument in another section, and an evaluation subargument 
in still another section. Although the overarching proposal argu-
ment follows the typical structure of a proposal, each of the subsections follows a typical 
structure for its own claim type.
Some Examples of Hybrid Arguments
The following examples show how these combinations of claim types can play out in 
actual arguments.
10.3  To be mindful of 
how different claim types 
work together in hybrid 
arguments

174	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Exploring Different Claim Types and Audiences
Working in small groups or as a whole class, try to develop hybrid arguments for each 
of the authorial purposes below. How might supporting reasons for each argument be 
based on different claim types (definition, resemblance, cause, evaluation, proposal)? 
Use as your models our example arguments about e-cigarettes. Imagine an audience 
skeptical of your chosen position.
	 1.	 Carbon footprint: You want (do not want) the Environmental Protection Agency 
to regulate the amount of carbon dioxide that can be emitted from power plants.
	 2.	 Gun restrictions: You want (do not want) the federal government to ban assault 
rifles and high-volume ammunition cartridges.
	 3.	 Diet: You want your classmates to adopt (or not adopt) the paleo diet.
An Extended Example of a Hybrid Argument
As the previous examples illustrate, different claim types often serve as building 
blocks for larger arguments. We ask you now to consider the following argument 
from Outside Magazine aimed at enthusiasts of outdoor sports such as hiking, 
mountain climbing, skiing, biking, and distance running. The magazine’s readers 
are often health-conscious consumers of multivitamins and other diet supplements 
ranging from fish oil capsules to energy drinks. In this startling article the writer 
■ ■ ■
Evaluation claim
Evaluation Argument Addressed to Parents
Proposal Argument Addressed to Local Newspaper Readers
Values claim
Definition claim
Causal claim
Truth/reality claims
Resemblance claim
Proposal claim
Values claim
Causal claim
Resemblance claim
Truth/reality claims
Evaluation claim
Shooter video games are bad for kids
because they are socially toxic.
because they have been shown to promote
violence in some males.
because they desensitize users to violence in
the same way that army training games do.
Our region should build a light-rail transportation
system 
because light rail would get a substantial
number of commuters out of cars.
because light rail has been successful in
other regions.
because light rail is cost effective and
environmentally sound.

	
Chapter 10    An Introduction to the Types of Claims	
175
uses recent scientific studies to make the evaluation claim that these supplements 
are either “useless” or “worse than useless.” Notice how this overall evaluation claim 
is supported by claims from definition, resemblance, and cause.
Your Daily Multivitamin May  
Be Hurting You
Alex Hutchinson
In JUNE, at this year’s European College of Sport Science con-
ference in Barcelona, Mari Carmen Gomez-Cabrera, a physiologist 
at the University of Valencia and one of the world’s leading experts 
on antioxidants, was debating the merits of supplements with two 
top researchers. For more than 90 minutes they went back and forth, 
parsing the accumulated evidence in front of a packed auditorium. 
Finally, Gomez-Cabrera landed on a provocative question that 
­summarized her position.
The debate, she explained, isn’t whether supplements are good or 
bad for athletes. Rather, it’s “are they useless, or are they worse than 
useless?”
The question may come as a shock to the more than half of 
Americans who take some sort of dietary supplement—a vast catch-
all term that includes everything from vitamins and minerals to 
herbal remedies to exotic performance boosters like deer-antler spray 
and glutamine. It’s no surprise that the purported muscle-building 
supplements make unproven claims and may come with hazardous 
side effects. But in the past few years, Gomez-Cabrera and a grow-
ing number of researchers have come to believe that even respectable 
mainstream supplements like vitamins C and E suffer from the 
same basic flaw: few apparent benefits and increasing evidence of neg-
ative effects. For example, in July’s issue of the Journal of Physiology, 
researchers discovered that resveratrol, an antioxidant in red wine, 
actually limited the positive effects of cardiovascular exercise—like an 
increased VO2 max—when taken daily in high concentrations. In July, 
scientists at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center found that 
men with high levels of the omega-3 fatty acid DHA in their blood, 
often from fish-oil supplements, had a significantly greater risk of pros-
tate cancer.
According to Pieter Cohen, a professor at Harvard Medical School, 
there are really only two types of sports supplements: those that are 
safe but don’t work, and those that might work but have side effects, 
especially at higher than normal levels. “If any supplement, no matter 
Introduces the  
evaluation issue  
“Are supplements 
good/bad?”
Restates evaluation  
issue with implied 
claim: Supplements 
are either useless or 
worse than useless.
Further develops 
evaluation claim: 
Supplements are bad 
because they make 
unproven claims and 
because they may 
come with hazardous 
side effects.
Uses causal 
­arguments to 
­illustrate bad side 
effects.
Definition claim: 
Supplements belong 
to one of two catego-
ries: (1) safe but don’t 
work or (2) work but 
have bad side effects.

176	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
how beneficial, has a pharmaceutical effect, it’s also got a downside,” 
he says. “There’s no way to get around that basic principle.”
Most supplements stay firmly in the first category. Taking a daily 
multivitamin, Cohen emphasizes, won’t harm you, but it usually 
won’t help either, which is why major health organizations like the 
American Heart Association and the American College of Sports 
Medicine don’t recommend supplements to healthy people.
It’s not that vitamins and minerals aren’t important. If you don’t get 
enough vitamin C, you can get scurvy; without enough iron, you can 
become anemic; and if you live far enough north to see Russia from 
your backyard, you may need some extra vitamin D. But all three of 
these substances have also been linked to negative effects at high doses. 
Same goes for prolonged use of other common supplements like 
­vitamin E and calcium. In short, unless tests have shown that you’re 
low in a particular vitamin or mineral, there’s no evidence to suggest 
that you should take a daily supplement.
That rule also applies if you’re an athlete who takes supplements 
because, say, you assume your training requires an anti-oxidant 
boost to speed recovery. Gomez-Cabrera and her colleagues at the 
University of Valencia have shown that antioxidant supplements 
suppress the oxidative stress that signals your body to adapt and get 
stronger. The result: regular use of something seemingly innocuous 
like vitamin C can actually block gains in endurance-boosting 
mitochondria.
The balance between risk and return also works in subtler ways, as 
Wen-Bin Chiou, a psychologist at National Sun Yatsen University in 
Taiwan, has shown in a series of experiments on a phenomenon called 
the licensing effect. As part of a battery of tests, subjects were asked to 
take a pill; half were told the pill was a multivitamin, while the other 
half were told it was a placebo. In truth, they were all placebos.
In subsequent tests, the subjects who thought they’d taken a vita-
min consistently behaved in less healthy ways. When asked to try out a 
pedometer, they were more likely to choose a shorter walking route; at 
lunch, they chose less healthy food. In follow-up studies, Chiou has also 
discovered that smokers who think they’ve been given a vitamin smoke 
more, and people who are given a weight-loss supplement are less likely 
to stick to their diet. The same thing happens when you go to the gym 
or eat a plate of spinach. The difference is that exercise and vegetables 
have real benefits, so you’ve still got a chance to come out ahead. If you 
take a pill with no benefits, the best you can do is break even.
Develops definition 
argument by showing  
how supplements 
meet criteria of being 
safe but useless or  
having bad side 
effects.
Causal argument 
showing bad side 
effects
Causal argument 
showing still more 
bad side effects
Causal argument from 
psychology showing 
different bad effect: 
People who take 
supplements feel they 
are healthier and thus 
actually act in less 
healthy ways.
Brief resemblance 
argument: Taking a 
vitamin is NOT like  
eating spinach or 
­going to the gym.
5­

	
Chapter 10    An Introduction to the Types of Claims	
177
Which brings us back to Gomez-Cabrera in Barcelona. She, of all 
people, has enormous respect for the powers of micronutrients like an-
tioxidants—she has devoted her life to studying them. “But if you eat 
enough fruits and vegetables, five servings a day,” she says, “I don’t 
think you need anything else.” And if you’re not eating like that, then 
taking a pill isn’t a solution. In fact, it may be part of the problem.
Conclusion
As this editorial demonstrates, awareness of different kinds of claims can help you 
increase your flexibility and effectiveness as an arguer. In the following chapters in 
Part Four, we discuss each of the claim types in more detail, showing how they work 
and how you can develop skills and strategies for supporting each type of claim.

178	
Definition and 
Resemblance Arguments 11
What you will learn in this chapter:
	11.1	 To explain what is at stake in categorical arguments
	11.2	 To explain four types of categorical arguments
	11.3	 To explain the criteria match structure of categorical arguments based 
on definition
	11.4	 To use criteria-match reasoning to generate ideas for your own definition 
argument
	11.5	 To write your own definitional argument
Arguments about definition or resemblance concern disputes about what 
category something belongs to, either directly by definition or indirectly or 
metaphorically through comparison or resemblance. They are among the 
most common argument types you will encounter.
Case 1    Are Global Warming Skeptics Like The Outlier 
Frog In This Cartoon?
This cartoon by award-wining political cartoonist (as well as children’s book author) Pat Bagley 
makes two overlapping resemblance arguments. First, it argues that global warming happens 
slowly, like a heating pot of water. Second, it argues that the Republican Science Committee, 
comprised of global warming skeptics, selects its evidence from outlier sources, analogous to the 
outlier frog in this cartoon. This striking visual analogy makes a resemblance argument against the 
objectivity of the GOP Science Committee. 

	
Chapter 11    Definition and Resemblance Arguments	
179
Case 2    Is a Frozen Embryo a Person or Property?
An infertile couple conceived several embryos in a test tube and then froze the fertilized embryos for future 
use. During the couple’s divorce, they disagreed about the disposition of the embryos. The woman wanted to 
use the frozen embryos to try to get pregnant, and the man wanted to destroy them. When the courts were 
asked to decide what should be done with the embryos, several questions of definition arose: Should the 
frozen embryos be categorized as “persons,” thus becoming analogous to children in custody disputes? Or 
should they be divided up as “property,” with the man getting half and the woman getting the other half? Or 
should a new legal category be created for them that regards them as more than property but less than actual 
persons? The judge decided that frozen embryos “are not, strictly speaking, either ‘persons’ or ‘property,’ but 
occupy an interim category that entitles them to special respect because of their potential for human life.”*
What is at Stake in a Categorical Argument?
Definition and resemblance arguments occur whenever a community dis-
agrees about the category a particular person, thing, act, or phenomenon 
should be placed in or identified with. Here are some examples:
*See Vincent F. Stempel, “Procreative Rights in Assisted Reproductive Technology: Why the Angst?” 
Albany Law Review 62 (1999), 1187.
11.1  To explain 
what is at stake 
in categorical 
arguments
Issues Involving Categories
Question
Does this specific  
phenomenon . . . 
. . . belong to (or is it similar to) 
 this category?
Is atmospheric carbon dioxide 
a pollutant?
Atmospheric carbon 
dioxide
Pollutant
Is LASIK surgery for nearsightedness 
“medically necessary” surgery or  
“cosmetic” surgery?
LASIK surgery for 
nearsightedness
Medically necessary surgery 
(or cosmetic surgery)
Is women’s obsession with thinness 
today similar in effect to women’s 
foot binding in ancient China?
Women’s obsession 
with thinness
Foot binding in ancient China
Much is at stake when we place things into categories because the category that some-
thing belongs to can have real consequences. Naming the category that something 
belongs to makes an implicit mini-argument.

180	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
Consequences Resulting from Categorical Claims
To appreciate the consequences of categorical claims, consider the competing catego-
ries proposed for whales in the international controversy over commercial whaling. 
What category does a whale belong to? Some arguers might say that “whales are sacred 
animals,” implying that their intelligence, beauty, grace, and power mean they should 
never be killed. Others might argue that “whales are a renewable food resource” like 
tuna, crabs, cattle, and chickens. This category implies that we can harvest whales for 
food the same way we harvest tuna for tuna fish sandwiches or cows for beef. Still oth-
ers might argue that “whales are an endangered species”—a category that argues for 
the preservation of whale stocks but not necessarily for a ban on controlled hunting 
of individual whales. Each of these whaling arguments places whales in a separate, 
­different category that implicitly urges the reader to adopt that category’s perspective 
on whaling.
Significant consequences can also result from resemblance claims. Consider 
the way that media analysts tried to make sense of the September 11, 2001, terrorist 
­attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon by comparing them to different 
kinds of previous events. Some commentators said, “The September 11 attacks are like 
Timothy McVeigh’s bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma 
City in 1995”—an argument that framed the terrorists as criminals who must be 
brought to justice. Others said, “The September 11 attacks are like the 1941 Japanese 
attack on Pearl Harbor”—an argument suggesting that the United States should 
­declare war on some as-yet-to-be-defined enemy. Still others said, “The September 11 
attacks are like an occasionally disastrous earthquake or an epidemic,” arguing that 
terrorists will exist as long as the right conditions breed them and that it is useless to 
fight them using the strategies of conventional war. Under this analogy, the “war on 
terror” is a metaphorical war like the “war on poverty” or the “war against cancer.” 
Clearly, each of these resemblance claims had high-stakes consequences. In 2001, the 
Pearl Harbor claim prevailed, and the United States went to war, first in Afghanistan 
and then in Iraq. Many critics of these wars continue to say that war is an inappropri-
ate strategy for fighting the “disease of terrorism.”
The Rule of Justice: Things in the Same Category  
Should Be Treated the Same Way
As you can see, the category we place something into—either directly through definition 
or indirectly through comparison—can have significant implications for people’s actions 
or beliefs. To ensure fairness, philosophers refer to the rule of justice, which states that 
“beings in the same essential category should be treated in the same way.” For example, 
the problem of how the courts should treat the users or sellers of marijuana depends on 
the category marijuana belongs to. Marijuana might be placed in the same category as 
tobacco and alcohol, in which case the possession and sale of marijuana would be legal 
but subject to regulation and taxes. Or marijuana could be placed in the same category 
as meth, cocaine, and heroin; in this case, it would be an illegal drug subject to criminal 
prosecution. Some states have placed marijuana in the same category as penicillin and 
insulin, making it a legal drug so long as it is obtained from a licensed dispensary with a 

	
Chapter 11    Definition and Resemblance Arguments	
181
doctor’s prescription. Many states are not happy with any of these categories and are try-
ing to define marijuana in some fourth way. Or to take a more homely example, suppose 
your professor says that absence from an exam can be excused for emergencies only. How 
would you define “emergency”? Clearly if you broke your leg on the morning of an exam, 
you would be excused. But is attending your grandmother’s funeral or your best friend’s 
wedding an “emergency”? How about missing an exam because your car wouldn’t start? 
Although your interests might be best served by a broad definition of emergency, your 
professor might prefer a narrow definition, which would permit fewer exemptions.
The rule of justice becomes especially hard to apply when we consider contested 
cases marked by growth or slow change through time. At what point does a child 
become an adult? When does a binge drinker become an alcoholic, an Internet poker 
player a compulsive gambler, or a fetus a human person? In most category debates, an 
argument, not a quick trip to the dictionary, is required to settle the matter.
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Applying the Rule of Justice
Suppose your landlord decides to institute a “no pets” rule. The rule of justice requires 
that all pets have to go—not just your neighbor’s barking dog, but also Mrs. Brown’s 
cat, the kids’ hamster downstairs, and your own pet tarantula. That is, all these animals 
have to go, unless you can argue that some of them are not “pets” for purposes of the 
landlord’s “no pets” rule.
	 1.	 Working in small groups or as a whole class, define pets by establishing the criteria 
an animal would have to meet to be included in the category “pets.” Consider your 
landlord’s “no pets” rule as the cultural context for your definition.
	 2.	 Based on your criteria, which of the following animals is definitely a pet that 
would have to be removed from the apartment? Based on your criteria, which 
animals could you exclude from the “no pets” rule? How would you make your 
argument to your landlord?
	 ■	 a German shepherd
	 ■	 a small housecat
	 ■	 a tiny, well-trained lapdog
	 ■	 a gerbil in a cage
	 ■	 a canary
	 ■	 a tank of tropical fish
	 ■	 a tarantula
Types of categorical Arguments
Categorical arguments assert that a disputed phenomenon is (or is not) 
either a member of a certain category or is like a certain category. Such 
arguments can be divided into four kinds:
	 1.	 Simple categorical arguments, in which there is no dispute about the definition 
of the category.
	 2.	 Definition arguments, in which there is a dispute about the boundaries of the 
category and hence of its definition.
■ ■ ■
11.2  To explain 
four types of cate-
gorical arguments

182	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
	 3.	 Resemblance arguments by analogy, in which the writer uses metaphor or other 
figurative language to link the phenomenon to a certain category.
	 4.	 Resemblance arguments by precedent, in which the arguer claims that one 
­phenomenon or situation is similar to another phenomenon or situation.
Let’s look at each in turn.
Simple Categorical Arguments
A categorical argument can be said to be “simple” if there is no disagreement about the 
definition of the category into which a person, event, or phenomenon is placed. For 
example, if you make the claim that “Joe is bossy,” you are placing him in the category 
of “bossy people.” In this case, you assume that you and the audience agree on what 
“bossy” means. Your dispute is simply whether Joe meets the criteria for “bossy.” To 
support your claim, you would provide examples of his bossiness (his poor listening 
skills, his shouting at people, his making decisions without asking the committee). To 
support or rebut a simple categorical claim, you would provide evidence to show that 
the person, event, or phenomenon does or does not meet the criteria for the category.
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Supporting and Rebutting Simple  
Categorical Claims
Working individually or in small groups, consider how you would support the follow-
ing simple categorical claims. What examples or other data would convince readers 
that the specified case fits within the named category? Then discuss ways you might 
rebut each claim.
	 1.	 Bottled water is environmentally unfriendly. (That is, bottled water belongs in the 
category of “environmentally unfriendly substances.”)
	 2.	 Macklemore is a pure rapper.
	 3.	 Americans today are obsessed with their appearance. (That is, Americans belong 
in the category of “people obsessed with their appearance.”)
	 4.	 Competitive cheerleading is physically risky.
Definition Arguments
Simple categorical arguments morph into definition arguments whenever stakehold-
ers disagree about the boundaries of a category. Suppose in the previous exercise that 
you had said about Macklemore, “Well, that depends on how you define ‘pure rapper.’” 
The need to define the term “pure rapper” adds a new layer of complexity to your 
­arguments about Macklemore. You are disputing not only specifics about Macklemore 
but also the definition of “pure rapper” itself.
Full-blown definition arguments occur, then, when the disputants don’t agree on the 
definition of the category into which a person, event, or phenomenon is placed. Consider, 
for example, the environmental controversy over the definition of wetland. Section 404 
of the federal Clean Water Act provides for federal protection of wetlands, but it leaves 
the task of defining wetland to administrative agencies and the courts. Currently, about 
■ ■ ■

	
Chapter 11    Definition and Resemblance Arguments	
183
5 percent of the land surface of the contiguous forty-eight states is potentially affected by 
the wetlands provision, and 75 percent of this land is privately owned. Efforts to define 
wetland have created a battleground between pro-environment and pro-development 
or property rights groups. Farmers, homeowners, and developers often want a narrow 
definition of wetlands so that more property is available for commercial or private use. 
Environmentalists favor a broad definition in order to protect different habitat types and 
maintain the environmental safeguards that wetlands provide (control of water pollution, 
spawning grounds for aquatic species, floodwater containment, and so forth).
The problem is that defining wetland is tricky. For example, one federal regula-
tion defines a wetland as any area that has a saturated ground surface for twenty-one 
consecutive days during the year. But how would you apply this law to a pine flatwood 
ecosystem that was wet for ten days this year but thirty days last year? And how should 
the courts react to lawsuits claiming that the regulation itself is either too broad or too 
narrow? One can see why the wetlands controversy provides hefty incomes for lawyers 
and congressional lobbyists.
As we will explain later, definition arguments require a “criteria-match” structure 
in which the arguer must first define the category term by specifying the criteria that 
must be met for something to be placed in that category. The writer then shows that 
the disputed person, event, or phenomenon matches those criteria.
Resemblance Argument Using Analogy
Whereas definition arguments claim that a particular phenomenon belongs to a certain 
category, resemblance arguments simply compare one thing to another. A common 
kind of resemblance argument uses analogies—imaginative kinds of comparisons often 
with subtle persuasive effects. If you don’t like your new boss, you can say that she’s like 
a Marine drill sergeant or the cowardly captain of a sinking ship. Each of these analo-
gies suggests a different category in which to place your boss, clarifying the nature of 
your dislike while conveying an emotional charge. The arguer’s intention is to transfer 
the audience’s understanding of (or feelings about) the second thing back to the first. 
The risk of resemblance arguments is that the differences between the two things being 
compared are often so significant that the argument collapses under close examination.
Sometimes, as in the “My boss is like a Marine drill sergeant” example, arguers use 
short, undeveloped analogies for quick rhetorical effect. At other times, arguers develop 
extended analogies that carry a substantial portion of the argument. As an example 
of an extended analogy, consider the following excerpt from a professor’s argument 
­opposing a proposal to require a writing proficiency exam for graduation. In the follow-
ing portion of his argument, the professor compares development of writing skills to 
the development of physical fitness.
A writing proficiency exam gives the wrong symbolic messages about writing. It suggests that 
writing is simply a skill, rather than an active way of thinking and learning. It suggests that 
once a student demonstrates proficiency then he or she doesn’t need to do any more writing.
Imagine two universities concerned with the physical fitness of their students. One uni-
versity requires a junior-level physical fitness exam in which students must run a mile in less 
than 10 minutes, a fitness level it considers minimally competent. Students at this university 
see the physical fitness exam as a one-time hurdle. As many as 70 percent of them can pass the 

184	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
exam with no practice; another 10–20 percent need a few months’ training; and a few hopeless 
couch potatoes must go through exhaustive remediation. After passing the exam, any student 
can settle back into a routine of TV and potato chips having been certified as “physically fit.”
The second university, however, believing in true physical fitness for its students, is 
not interested in minimal competency. Consequently, it creates programs in which its 
students must take one credit physical fitness course each term for the entire four years of 
the undergraduate curriculum. There is little doubt which university will have the most 
physically fit students. At the second university, fitness becomes a way of life with everyone 
developing his or her full potential. Similarly, if we want to improve our students’ writing 
abilities, we should require writing in every course throughout the curriculum.
Thus analogies have the power to get an audience’s attention like virtually no 
other persuasive strategy. But seldom are they sufficient in themselves to provide full 
understanding. At some point, with every analogy, you need to ask yourself, “How 
far can I legitimately go with this? At what point are the similarities between the two 
things I am comparing going to be overwhelmed by their dissimilarities?” Analogies 
are useful attention-getting devices, but they can conceal and distort as well as clarify.
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Developing Analogies
The following exercise will help you clarify how analogies function in the context of 
arguments. Working individually or in small groups, think of two analogies for each 
of the following topics. One analogy should urge readers toward a positive view of the 
topic; the other should urge a negative view. Write each of your analogies in the follow-
ing one-sentence format:
_______ is like _______: A, B, C . . . (in which the first term is the contested topic being 
discussed; the second term is the analogy; and A, B, and C are the points of comparison).
Example
Topic: Cramming for an exam
Negative analogy: Cramming for an exam is like pumping iron for ten hours straight to 
prepare for a weight-lifting contest: exhausting and counterproductive.
Positive analogy: Cramming for an exam is like carbohydrate loading before a big race: 
it gives your brain a full supply of facts and concepts, all fresh in your mind.
	1.	 Checking social media constantly
	2.	 Using racial profiling for airport security
	3.	 Using steroids to increase athletic performance
	4.	 Paying college athletes
	5.	 Eating at fast-food restaurants
Resemblance Arguments Using Precedent
Another kind of resemblance argument uses precedent for its persuasive force. An argu-
ment by precedent tries to show that a current situation is like a past situation and that there-
fore a similar action or decision should be taken or reached. You can refute a precedence 
­argument by showing that the present situation differs substantially from the past situation.
■ ■ ■

	
Chapter 11    Definition and Resemblance Arguments	
185
Precedence arguments are very common. For example, during the debate about 
health care reform in the first year of Barack Obama’s presidency, supporters of a 
single-payer, “Medicare-for-all” system pointed to Canada as a successful precedent. 
Supporters said that since a single-payer system was successful in Canada, it would 
also be successful in the United States. But opponents also used the Canadian prece-
dent to attack a single-payer system. They pointed to problems in the Canadian system 
as a reason to reject a Medicare-for-all system in the United States.
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Using Claims of Precedent
Consider the following claims of precedent, and evaluate how effective you think each 
precedent might be in establishing the claim. How would you develop the argument? 
How would you cast doubt on it?
	 1.	 To increase alumni giving to our university, we should put more funding into our 
football program. When University X went to postseason bowls for three years 
in a row, alumni donations to building programs and academics increased by 
30 percent. We can expect the same increases here.
Claim about Category (Definition)
Examining Visual Arguments
This cartoon, by political cartoonist Randy Bish of the Pittsburgh Tribune Review, creates a visual pun that makes a categorical 
argument against heroin. How does Bish’s rendering of the letter “r” make a categorical claim? What is that claim? How effec-
tive do you find this cartoon in highlighting the seductive danger of heroin addiction?

186	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
	 2.	 Postwar democracy can be created successfully in Afghanistan because it was 
created successfully in Germany and Japan following World War II.
	 3.	 Euthanasia laws work successfully in the Netherlands. Therefore they will work 
successfully in the United States.
The Criteria-Match Structure of Definition Arguments
Of the four types of categorical arguments explained in the previous 
section, definition arguments require the fullest range of argumenta-
tive skills. For the rest of this chapter, we’ll explain more fully the argu­
mentative moves required to write your own definition argument.
Overview of Criteria-Match Structure
Definition arguments usually have a two-part structure: (1) a definition part that tries 
to establish the boundaries of the category, and (2) a match part that argues whether 
a given case meets that definition. To describe this structure, we use the term criteria-
match. Here are two examples:
Definition issue: In a divorce proceeding, is a frozen embryo a “person” rather 
than “property”?
Criteria part: What criteria must be met for something to be a “person”?
Match part: Does a frozen embryo meet these criteria?
Definition issue: Is this thirty-acre parcel of land near Swan Lake a “wetland”?
Criteria part: What criteria must be met for something to be a wetland?
Match part: Does this parcel of land meet these criteria?
To show how a definition issue can be developed into a claim with supporting reasons, 
let’s look more closely at a third example:
Definition issue: For purposes of my feeling good about buying my next pair of 
running shoes, is the Hercules Shoe Company a socially responsible company?
Criteria part: What criteria must be met for a company to be deemed “socially 
responsible”?
Match part: Does the Hercules Shoe Company meet these criteria?
Let’s suppose you work for a consumer information group that wishes to encour-
age patronage of socially responsible companies while boycotting irresponsible ones. 
Your group’s first task is to define socially responsible company. After much discussion 
and research, your group establishes three criteria that a company must meet to be 
considered socially responsible:
Your definition: A company is socially responsible if it (1) avoids polluting the environ-
ment, (2) sells goods or services that contribute to the well-being of the community, and 
(3) treats its workers justly.
The criteria section of your argument would explain and illustrate these criteria.
■ ■ ■
11.3  To explain the criteria-
match structure of categor-
ical arguments based on 
definition

	
Chapter 11    Definition and Resemblance Arguments	
187
The match part of the argument would then try to persuade readers that a specific 
company does or does not meet the criteria. A typical thesis statement might be as 
follows:
Your thesis statement: Although the Hercules Shoe Company is nonpolluting and provides 
a socially useful product, it is not a socially responsible company because it treats workers 
unjustly.
Toulmin Framework for a Definition Argument
Here is how the core of the preceding Hercules definition argument could be displayed 
in Toulmin terms. Note how the reason and grounds constitute the match argument 
while the warrant and backing constitute the criterion argument.
ENTHYMEME
CLAIM The Hercules Shoe Company is not
a socially responsible company
REASON because it treats workers unjustly.
GROUNDS
Evidence of unjust treatment:
• Evidence that the company manufactures
  its shoes in East Asian sweatshops
• Evidence of the inhumane conditions
  in these shops
• Evidence of hardships imposed on
  displaced American workers
WARRANT
Socially responsible companies treat workers
justly.
BACKING
• Arguments showing that just treatment of
  workers is right in principle and also
  benefits society
• Arguments that capitalism helps society
  as a whole only if workers achieve a
  reasonable standard of living, have time
  for leisure, and are not exploited
CONDITIONS OF REBUTTAL
Attacking warrant and backing
Justice needs to be considered from an
emerging nation’s standpoint:
• The wages paid workers are low by
  American standards but are above
  average by East Asian standards.
• Displacement of American workers
  is part of the necessary adjustment of
  adapting to a global economy and
  does not mean that a company is unjust.
Toulmin Analysis of the Hercules Shoe Company Argument 
CONDITIONS OF REBUTTAL
Attacking reasons and grounds
• Possible counter evidence that the shops
  maintain humane working conditions
• Possible questioning of statistical data
  about hardships on displaced workers

188	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
As this Toulmin schema illustrates, the warrant and backing constitute the criteria 
section of the argument by stating and defending “just treatment of workers” as a crite-
rion for a socially responsible company. The reason and grounds constitute the match 
section of the argument by arguing that the Hercules Shoe Company does not treat its 
workers justly. How much emphasis you need to place on justifying each criterion and 
supporting each match depends on your audience’s initial beliefs. The conditions of 
­rebuttal help you imagine alternative views and see places where opposing views need 
to be acknowledged and rebutted.
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Identifying Criteria and Match Issues
Consider the following definition claims. Working individually or in small groups, 
identify the criteria issue and the match issue for each of the following claims.
Definition issue: A Honda assembled in Ohio is (is not) an American-made car.
Criteria part: What criteria have to be met before a car can be called “American made”?
Match part: Does a Honda assembled in Ohio meet these criteria?
	 1.	 American Sign Language is (is not) a “foreign language” for purposes of a college 
graduation requirement.
	 2.	 The violence in Grand Theft Auto is (is not) constitutionally protected free speech.
	 3.	 Bungee jumping from a crane is (is not) a “carnival amusement ride” subject to 
state safety inspections.
	 4.	 For purposes of a state sales tax on “candy,” a Twinkie is (is not) candy.
	 5.	 A skilled video game player is (is not) a true athlete.
Creating Criteria Using Aristotelian Definition
When creating criteria for a category, you can often follow the pattern of Aristotelian 
definition. The Aristotelian definitional strategy, regularly used in dictionaries, defines 
a term by placing it within the next larger class or category and then showing the spe-
cific attributes that distinguish the term from other terms within the same category. For 
example, according to a legal dictionary, robbery is “the felonious taking of property” 
(next larger category) that differs from other acts of theft because it seizes property 
“through violence or intimidation.” Legal dictionaries often provide specific examples 
to show the boundaries of the term. Here is one example:
There is no robbery unless force or fear is used to overcome resistance. Thus, surrepti-
tiously picking a man’s pocket or snatching something from him without resistance on his 
part is larceny, but not robbery.
Many states specify degrees of robbery with increasingly heavy penalties. For example, 
armed robbery involves the use of a weapon to threaten the victim. In all cases, robbery 
is distinguished from the lesser crime of larceny, in which no force or intimidation is 
involved.
■ ■ ■

	
Chapter 11    Definition and Resemblance Arguments	
189
As you can see, an Aristotelian definition of a term identifies specific attributes 
or criteria that enable you to distinguish it from other members of the next larger 
class. We created an Aristotelian definition in our example about socially responsi-
ble companies. A socially responsible company, we said, is any company (next larger 
class) that meets three criteria: (1) it doesn’t pollute the environment; (2) it creates 
goods or services that promote the well-being of the community; and (3) it treats its 
workers justly.
Creating Criteria Using an Operational Definition
In some rhetorical situations, particularly those arising in the physical and social 
sciences, writers need precise, operational definitions that can be measured empir-
ically and are not subject to problems of context and conflicting values and beliefs. 
A social scientist studying the effects of television on aggression in children needs 
a precise, measurable definition of aggression. Typically, the scientist might measure 
“aggression” by counting the number of blows a child gives to an inflatable bobo doll 
over a fifteen-minute period when other play options are available. In our wetlands 
example, a federal authority created an operational definition of wetland: a wetland 
is a parcel of land that has a saturated ground surface for twenty-one consecutive 
days during the year.
Such operational definitions are useful because they are precisely measurable, 
but they are also limited because they omit criteria that may be unmeasurable but 
important. Thus, we might ask whether it is adequate to define an honors student as 
someone with a 3.8 GPA or higher or a successful sex-education program as one that 
results in a 25 percent reduction in teenage pregnancies. What important aspects of 
an honors student or a successful sex-education program are not considered in these 
operational definitions?
Conducting the Match Part of a Definition Argument
In conducting a match argument, you need to supply examples and other evidence 
showing that your contested case does (does not) meet the criteria you established in 
your definition. In essence, you support the match part of your argument in much the 
same way you would support a simple categorical claim.
For example, if you were developing the argument that the Hercules Shoe 
Company is not socially responsible because it treats its workers unjustly, your match 
section would provide evidence of this injustice. You might supply data about the per-
centage of shoes produced in East Asia, about the low wages paid these workers, and 
about the working conditions in these factories. You might also describe the suffer-
ing of displaced American workers when Hercules closed its American factories and 
moved operations to Asia, where the labor is nonunion and cheap. The match section 
should also summarize and respond to opposing views.

190	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
Idea-Generating Strategies for Creating Your Own  
Criteria-Match Argument
In constructing criteria to define your contested term, you can 
either research how others have defined your term or make 
your own definitions. If you use the first strategy, you turn to 
standard or specialized dictionaries, judicial opinions, or expert 
testimony to establish a definition based on the authority of 
others. The second strategy is to use your own critical thinking to make your own 
definition, thereby defining the contested term yourself. This section explains these 
approaches in more detail.
Strategy 1: Research How Others Have Defined the Term
When you take this approach, you search for authoritative definitions acceptable to 
your audience yet favorable to your case. When the state of Washington tried to ini-
tiate a new sales tax on candy, lawyers and legislators wrestled with a definition. They 
finally created the following statute available to the public on a government Web site:
What Is the Definition of Candy?
“Candy” is a preparation of sugar, honey, or other natural or artificial sweeteners combined 
with chocolate, fruits, nuts, or other ingredients or flavorings in the form of bars, drops, or 
pieces. Candy does not require refrigeration, and does not include flour as an ingredient.
“Natural or artificial sweeteners” include, but are not limited to, high fructose corn 
syrup, dextrose, invert sugar, sucrose, fructose, sucralose, saccharin, aspartame, stevia, 
fruit juice concentrates, molasses, evaporated cane juice, and rice syrup.
“Flour” includes any flour made from a grain, such as wheat flour, rice flour, and corn 
flour.
Items that require “refrigeration,” either before or after opening, are not candy. For 
example, popsicles, ice cream bars, and fruits in sweetened syrups are not candy.
This definition made it easy for state officials to exclude from the “candy tax” any 
snack food that contained flour. Thus Twinkies, Fruit Loops cereal, and chocolate-cov-
ered pretzels were exempt from the tax. But considerable debate occurred over cough 
drops. The state decided to exclude cough drops if the package contained a “drug 
facts” panel and a list of active ingredients. (Such cough drops were then classified as 
“over the counter drugs.”)
Turning to established definitions is thus a first step for many definition argu-
ments. Common sources of these definitions are specialized dictionaries such as 
Black’s Law Dictionary, which form a standard part of the reference holdings of any 
library. Other sources of specialized definitions are state and federal appellate court 
decisions, legislative and administrative statutes, and scholarly articles examining a 
given definition conflict. Lawyers use this research strategy exhaustively in preparing 
court briefs. They begin by looking at the actual text of laws as passed by legislatures 
11.4  To use criteria-match 
reasoning to generate ideas 
for your own definition 
argument

	
Chapter 11    Definition and Resemblance Arguments	
191
or written by administrative authorities. Then they look at all the court cases in which 
the laws have been tested and examine the ways courts have refined legal definitions 
and applied them to specific cases. Using these refined definitions, lawyers then apply 
them to their own case at hand.
If your research uncovers definitions that seem ambiguous or otherwise unfa-
vorable to your case, you can sometimes appeal to the “original intentions” of those 
who defined the term. For example, if a scientist is dissatisfied with definitions of 
wetlands based on consecutive days of saturated ground surface, she might proceed 
as follows: “The original intention of Congress in passing the Clean Water Act was 
to preserve the environment.” What Congress intended, she could then claim, was 
to prevent development of those wetland areas that provide crucial habitat for wild-
life or that inhibit water pollution. She could then propose an alternative definition 
based on criteria other than consecutive days of ground saturation.
Strategy 2: Create Your Own Extended Definition*
Often, however, you need to create your own definition of the contested term. An 
­effective strategy is to establish initial criteria for your contested term by thinking of 
hypothetical cases that obviously fit the category you are trying to define and then by 
altering one or more variables until the hypothetical case obviously doesn’t fit the cat-
egory. You can then test and refine your criteria by applying them to borderline cases. 
For example, suppose you work at a homeless agency where you overhear street people 
discuss an incident that strikes you as potential “police brutality.” You wonder whether 
you should write to your local paper to bring attention to the incident.
A Possible Case of Police Brutality
Two police officers confront an inebriated homeless man who is shouting obscenities on a 
street corner. The officers tell the man to quiet down and move on, but he keeps shouting 
obscenities. When the officers attempt to put the man into the police car, he resists and 
takes a wild swing at one of the officers. As eyewitnesses later testified, this officer shouted 
obscenities back at the drunk man, pinned his arms behind his back in order to handcuff 
him, and lifted him forcefully by the arms. The man screamed in pain and was later discov-
ered to have a dislocated shoulder. Is this officer guilty of police brutality?
To your way of thinking, this officer seems guilty: An inebriated man is too unco-
ordinated to be a threat in a fight, and two police officers ought to be able to arrest 
him without dislocating his shoulder. But a friend argues that because the man took 
a swing at the officer, the police were justified in using force. The dislocated shoulder 
was simply an accidental result of using justified force.
*The defining strategies and collaborative exercises in this section are based on the work of George 
Hillocks and his research associates at the University of Chicago. See George Hillocks Jr., Elizabeth 
A.  Kahn, and Larry R. Johannessen, “Teaching Defining Strategies as a Mode of Inquiry: Some 
Effects on Student Writing,” Research in the Teaching of English 17 (October 1983), 275–84. See also 
Larry R. Johannessen, Elizabeth A. Kahn, and Carolyn Calhoun Walter, Designing and Sequencing 
Prewriting Activities (Urbana, IL: NCTE, 1982).

192	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
To make your case, you need to develop a definition of “police brutality.” You can 
begin by creating a hypothetical case that is obviously an instance of “police brutality”:
A Clear Case of Police Brutality
A police officer confronts a drunk man shouting obscenities and begins hitting him in 
the face with his police baton. [This is an obvious incidence of police brutality because the 
officer intentionally tries to hurt the drunk man without justification; hitting him with the 
baton is not necessary for making an arrest or getting the man into the police car.]
You could then vary the hypothetical case until it is clearly not an instance of 
police brutality.
Cases That Are Clearly Not Police Brutality
Case 1: The police officer handcuffs the drunk man, who, in being helped into the police 
car, accidentally slips on the curb and dislocates his arm while falling. [Here the injury 
occurs accidentally; the police officer does not act intentionally and is not negligent.]
Case 2: The police officer confronts an armed robber fleeing from a scene and tackles 
him from behind, wrestling the gun away from him. In this struggle, the officer pins 
the robber’s arm behind his back with such force that the robber’s shoulder is dislo-
cated. [Here aggressive use of force is justified because the robber was armed, dangerous, 
and resisting arrest.]
Using these hypothetical cases, you decide that the defining criteria for police brutality 
are (1) intention and (2) use of excessive force—that is, force beyond what was required 
by the immediate situation. After more contemplation, you are convinced that the offi-
cer was guilty of police brutality and have a clearer idea of how to make your argument. 
Here is how you might write the “match” part of your argument:
Match Argument Using Your Definition
If we define police brutality as the intentional use of excessive force, then the police 
­officer is guilty. His action was intentional because he was purposefully responding 
to the homeless man’s drunken swing and was angry enough to be shouting obsceni-
ties back at the drunk (according to eyewitnesses). Second, he used excessive force in 
­applying the handcuffs. A drunk man taking a wild swing hardly poses a serious danger 
to two police officers. Putting handcuffs on the drunk may have been justified, but lift-
ing the man’s arm violently enough to dislocate a shoulder indicates excessive force. The 
­officer lifted the man’s arms violently not because he needed to but because he was angry, 
and acting out of anger is no justification for that violence. In fact, we can charge police 
­officers with “police brutality” precisely to protect us from being victims of police anger. 
It is the job of the court system to punish us, not the police’s job. Because this officer 
acted intentionally and applied excessive force out of anger, he should be charged with 
police brutality.
The strategy we have demonstrated—developing criteria by imagining hypothetical 
cases that clearly do and do not belong to the contested category—gives you a systematic 
procedure for developing your own definition for your argument.

	
Chapter 11    Definition and Resemblance Arguments	
193
■ ■ ■	 For Writing and Class Discussion  Developing a Definition
Individual task: 
	 1.	 Suppose you want to define the concept of courage. In each of the following cases, 
decide whether the person in question is acting courageously or not. In each 
­instance explain your reasoning.
	 a.	 A neighbor rushes into a burning house to rescue a child from certain death 
and emerges, coughing and choking, with the child in his arms. Is the neighbor 
courageous?
	 b.	A firefighter rushes into a burning house to rescue a child from certain death 
and emerges with the child in her arms. The firefighter is wearing protective 
clothing and a gas mask. When a newspaper reporter calls her courageous, she 
says, “Hey, this is my job.” Is the firefighter courageous?
	 c.	 A teenager rushes into a burning house to recover a memento given to him by 
his girlfriend, the first love of his life. Is the teenager courageous?
	 d.	A parent rushes into a burning house to save a trapped child. The fire marshal 
tells the parent to wait because there is no chance that the child can be reached 
from the first floor. The fire marshal wants to try cutting a hole in the roof 
to reach the child. The parent rushes into the house anyway and is burned to 
death. Was the parent courageous?
	 2.	 Now formulate your own definition of a “courageous act.” “An act would be 
­considered courageous if it meets the following criteria: [you specify].”
	 3.	 Finally, apply your definition to the following case: An extreme sport enthusiast 
sets a record for a hang gliding descent from a certain state’s highest cliff. Is this 
record-setting descent a courageous act? Write a paragraph in which you argue 
that the descent is or is not courageous.
Group task: Share the results from the individual task on courage. Then make up your 
own series of controversial cases, like those given previously for “courage,” for one or 
more of the following concepts:
	 a.	 cruelty to animals
	 b.	 child abuse
	 c.	 true athlete
	d.	 sexual harassment
	 e.	 free speech protected by the First Amendment
Finally, using the strategy of making up hypothetical cases that do and do not belong 
to each category, construct a definition of your chosen concept.
Writing Assignment  A Definition Argument
The assignment for this chapter focuses on definition disputes about cate-
gories. Write an essay in which you argue that a borderline or contested case 
fits (or does not fit) within a given category. In the opening of your essay, 
introduce the borderline case you will examine and pose your definition 
question. In the first part of your argument, define the boundaries of your category 
■ ■ ■
11.5  To write 
your own defini-
tional argument

194	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
(criteria) by reporting a definition used by others or by developing your own extended 
definition. In the second part of your argument (the match), show how your borderline 
case meets (or doesn’t meet) your definition criteria.
Exploring Ideas
Ideally, in writing this argument you will join an ongoing conversation about a 
definition issue that interests you. What cultural and social issues that concern you 
involve disputed definitions? In the public arena, you are likely to find numerous 
examples simply by looking through news stories—for example, the disputes about 
the definition of “torture” in interrogating terrorist suspects or about “freedom of 
religion” in debates about religious organizations having to pay for contraception in 
employees’ health insurance. Often you can frame your own definition issues even 
if they aren’t currently in the news. Is using TiVo to avoid TV commercials a form 
of theft? Is flag burning protected free speech? Is solitary confinement “cruel and 
unusual punishment”? Is Wal-Mart a socially responsible company? Are voter ID 
laws racist?
If you have trouble discovering a local or national issue that interests you, you can 
create fascinating definition controversies among your classmates by asking whether 
certain borderline cases are “true” or “real” examples of some category: Are highly 
skilled video game players (race car drivers, synchronized swimmers, marbles players) 
true athletes? Is a gourmet chef (skilled furniture maker, tagger) a true artist? Is a chi-
ropractor (acupuncturist, naturopathic physician) a “real doctor”? Working as a whole 
class or in small groups inside or outside class, create an argumentative discussion on 
one or more of these issues. Listen to the various voices in the controversy, and then 
write out your own argument.
You can also stimulate definition controversies by brainstorming borderline cases 
for such terms as courage (Is mountain climbing an act of courage?), cruelty to animals 
(Are rodeos [zoos, catch-and-release trout fishing, use of animals for medical re-
search] guilty of cruelty to animals?), or war crimes (Was the American firebombing of 
Tokyo in World War II a war crime?).
As you explore your definition issue, try to determine how others have defined your 
category. If no stable definition emerges from your search, create your own definition by 
deciding what criteria must be met for a contested case to fit within your category. Try 
using the strategy for creating criteria that we discussed on pages 191–192 with reference 
to police brutality. Once you have determined your criteria, freewrite for five or ten min-
utes, exploring whether your contested case meets each of the criteria.
Identifying Your Audience and Determining What’s at Stake
Before drafting your argument, identify your targeted audience and determine what’s 
at stake. Consider your responses to the following questions:
	
■	 What audience are you targeting? What background do they need to understand 
your issue? How much do they already care about it?

	
Chapter 11    Definition and Resemblance Arguments	
195
	
■	 Before they read your argument, what stance on your issue do you imagine them 
­holding? What change do you want to bring about in their views?
	
■	 What will they find new or surprising about your argument?
	
■	 What objections might they raise? What counterarguments or alternative points 
of view will you need to address?
	
■	 Why does your argument matter? Who might be threatened or made uncomfortable 
by your views? What is at stake?
• Engage reader’s interest in your definition issue
    and show why it is controversial or problematic. 
• Show what’s at stake.
• Provide background information needed by your
 
audience.
• State your claim.
• State and develop criterion 1.
• State and develop criterion 2.
• Continue with the rest of your criteria.
• Anticipate and respond to possible objections to
    the criteria.
• Consider restating your claim for clarity.
• Argue that your case meets (does not meet)
 
criterion 1.
• Argue that your case meets (does not meet)
 
criterion 2.
• Continue with the rest of your match argument.
• Anticipate and respond to possible objections
 
to the match argument.
Introduce the issue and state
your claim.
Present your criteria.
Present your match argument.
Conclude.
• Perhaps sum up your argument.
• Help reader return to the “big picture” of what’s at
    stake.
• End with something memorable.
Organization Plan 1: Definition Argument with Criteria and Match in
Separate Sections

196	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
Organizing a Definition Argument
As you compose a first draft of your essay, you may find it helpful to know typical 
structures for definition arguments. There are two basic approaches, as shown in 
Organization Plans 1 and 2. You can either discuss the criteria and the match separately 
or interweave the discussion.
Questioning and Critiquing a Definition Argument
A powerful way to stimulate global revision of a draft is to role-play a skeptical audience. 
The following questions will help you strengthen your own argument or rebut the defini-
tion arguments of others. In critiquing a definition argument, you need to appreciate its 
criteria-match structure because you can question your criteria argument, your match 
argument, or both.
Present series of criterion-match
arguments.
Conclude.
Introduce the issue and state
your claim.
Respond to possible objections to
your argument.
•   Engage reader’s interest in your definition issue
    and show why it is problematic or controversial. 
•   Show what’s at stake.
•   Provide background information needed by your
    audience.
•   State your claim.
•   State and develop criterion 1 and argue that your
    case meets (does not meet) the criterion.
•   State and develop criterion 2 and argue that your 
    case meets (does not meet) the criterion.
•   Continue with the rest of your criterion-match
    arguments.
•   Perhaps sum up your argument.
•   Help reader return to the “big picture” of what’s
    at stake.
•   End with something memorable.
•   Anticipate and summarize possible objections.
•   Respond to the objections through rebuttal or
    concession.
Organization Plan 2: Definition Argument with Criteria and Match Interwoven

	
Chapter 11    Definition and Resemblance Arguments	
197
Questioning Your Criteria
	
■	 Could a skeptic claim that your criteria are not the right ones? Could he or she 
­offer different criteria or point out missing criteria?
	
■	 Could a skeptic point out possible bad consequences of accepting your criteria?
	
■	 Could a skeptic cite unusual circumstances that weaken your criteria?
	
■	 Could a skeptic point out bias or slant in your definition?
Questioning Your Match
	
■	 Could a skeptic argue that your examples or data don’t meet the STAR criteria 
(see Chapter 5, pages 77–78) for evidence?
	
■	 Could a skeptic point out counterexamples or alternative data that cast doubt on 
your argument?
	
■	 Could a skeptic reframe the way you have viewed your borderline case?  ■

198	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
Reading
This reading, by student Alex Mullen, was written for the definition assignment on 
pages 193–194. Alex’s argument was stimulated by class discussions of property owner-
ship in digital environments.
A Pirate But Not a Thief: What Does “Stealing”  
Mean in a Digital Environment?
Alex Mullen (Student)
I am a pirate. In the eyes of the law, I could face serious punishment in fines, up to 
thousands of dollars, or jail time for my crime. Legally, it matters very little that my 
crime is one perpetrated by millions of people every year (you yourself may be guilty 
of it) or that there are far worse offenders out there. But before we get out the noose 
and head for the yardarm, I think I ought to describe my crime. In my History of 
Film class we were asked to watch Jean Renoir’s La Grande Illusion. Now, if you’ve 
spent any time searching for 1930s foreign films you will undoubtedly know what a 
pain it is to find them, and of the twenty or so films we watched for my class a grand 
total of three were available on streaming sites such as Netflix, Hulu, and YouTube. 
While there were several copies of this particular film at my University Library, all 
had been checked out. I planned to make a journey to the fabled Scarecrow Video 
(one of the largest rental libraries in the United States), but time was running low at 
this point. Finally, I broke down and used a person-to-person torrent site to down-
load the film illegally. In the end all the trouble was worthwhile, as La Grande Illusion 
remains one of the greatest films I have ever seen. After watching it several times and 
writing a brief paper, I deleted the film from my computer. Although I feel that my 
action was justifiable, many people think what I did was no better than shoplifting 
and that I am guilty of theft. As a film lover and aspiring filmmaker I am conflicted 
on the issue of online piracy. Nevertheless, I contend that what I did wasn’t stealing 
because I deprived no one of either property or profit.
Let’s take a step back from online piracy and focus simply on what stealing is in 
its most basic form. In my mind, stealing is the unlawful taking of another’s property 
or profits without permission. The underlying assumption that makes stealing wrong 
needs to be considered. In the case of property, stealing is wrong not because the thief 
has the property but because the original owner has been deprived of it. The owner’s 
loss causes the wrong, not the thief’s gain. To give an example in very simple terms, if 
you have a phone case and I make a copy of that case (as is quite possible with a 3D 
printer), you still possess the original case, so no harm has been done to you the owner. 
However, suppose that you made your living by selling these phone cases. If I made 
exact duplicates with my 3-D printer and then sold these cases to others, then you 

	
Chapter 11    Definition and Resemblance Arguments	
199
could be deprived of profits that might otherwise have been received. Again, the wrong 
comes from the creator’s loss and not the thief’s gain.
Now let’s focus on my particular example of online piracy. While I concede that 
piracy has the distinct potential to be stealing, I reject the accusation that all piracy 
is stealing. Based on the first part of my definition of stealing, my downloading La 
Grande Illusion deprived no consumer or creator of his or her copy of the film. This 
is why accusations that compare online piracy to shoplifting are false. In the case of 
shoplifting the owner/creator has one fewer piece of merchandise to make a profit on; 
with online piracy such loss does not occur because the original copy still exists.
However, the second part of my definition, which focuses on profits, still remains 
to be examined. Perhaps by downloading the film I have deprived the creators/owners 
of profits they would normally receive. Let me begin by saying that I never intended 
to purchase La Grande Illusion. While intention does not often register in legal mat-
ters, it does have a bearing on the type and degree of wrongdoing. Film industry 
lawyers often argue that every time a film is pirated the rightful owner is deprived 
of money because the pirate would have otherwise purchased the film. This claim, 
however, is fallacious because there is no way to show that these potential consum-
ers would have purchased the film (I certainly wouldn’t have). So while we may agree 
that some of these people would have purchased the film, it would be inaccurate to 
claim that in all cases piracy directly deprives creators of profit. I argue that what I 
did in the case of La Grande Illusion was more like borrowing than theft. Borrowing 
a film from a library (or renting it from a video store) has the same basic effect on the 
owner/creator as online piracy. That is, a library or video store purchases a copy and 
then loans it or rents to others. Thus, many persons may not purchase a copy from 
the owner/creator because they can use this single public or commercial copy. Yet 
we do not consider borrowing or renting stealing even though it can have the same 
economic ramification as piracy. To go a step further, any time I borrow a film from a 
friend I cause the same outcome found so reprehensible in online piracy. In my case, 
instead of borrowing La Grande Illusion from an institution or business, I borrowed it 
from another individual via the Internet.
There is, of course, the counterargument that I could have rented the film from 
Scarecrow and thus stole profit from this film rental store much loved by film buffs. 
While it is true that I did not benefit Scarecrow with my patronage (a fact that I par-
tially regret because I do try to support Scarecrow as often as possible), it would be 
inaccurate to say that I stole from Scarecrow. I am under no obligation to supply them 
with profits. When I pay money to a rental organization I am not paying for the film; 
I am paying for the service of being able to use their copy of the film for 24 hours. 
Had I purchased the film directly from the filmmaker, I would do the same harm to 
Scarecrow. Thus my not utilizing Scarecrow to obtain La Grande Illusion is not theft.
While I understand why the film industry (and also the music industry) views down-
loading from file-sharing torrent sites as piracy, their motives focus on preserving prof-
its and blur the distinctions among “buying,” “renting,” and “borrowing.” If I owned a 
DVD version of a movie and loaned it to a friend, no one would object. But if I make 
5­

200	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
the same movie available to a friend via a torrent or file-sharing site, I become a pirate 
subject to huge fines. The intention is the same, only the format changes. The problem 
stems from the hazy concept of “ownership” in a digital environment where physical 
copies are replaced by digital copies. Certainly, we pay to possess digital copies of films, 
music, and video games, but is this really the same as physical ownership? After all I can 
lend, rent, or even sell a physical DVD, but such actions are impossible with digital cop-
ies without committing piracy. Our consumption of media is evolving rapidly, and while 
undoubtedly there will always be those who exploit these changes for personal gain, I 
feel we need to realize that our understanding of ownership, stealing, and illegal use 
must evolve along with these changes.
Critiquing “A Pirate But Not a Thief: What Does ‘Stealing’  
Mean in a Digital Environment?”
	 1.	 Identify the following features of Alex’s essay: (1) his definition of “stealing”; (2) his 
examples to illustrate the definition; (3) his “match” argument showing whether 
his downloading of the film fits each of the criteria; and (4) his summary of and 
responses to objections and opposing views.
	 2.	 Do you agree with Alex’s contention that his downloading the film was an act of 
“borrowing” rather than “stealing”?
	 3.	 What do you see as the major strengths of Alex’s argument? How about 
weaknesses?
	 4.	 Do you think that the laws about online piracy should be changed? At what point 
does online piracy clearly become “stealing”?

	
	
201
12
Causal Arguments
What you will learn in this chapter:
	12.1	 To explain and illustrate kinds of causal arguments
	12.2	 To explain how different causal mechanisms function in cause/
consequence arguments
	12.3	 To understand key causal terms and the need to avoid inductive fallacies 
in causal arguments
	12.4	 To write your own cause or consequence argument
We encounter causal issues all the time. What has caused the declining birth 
rate among teens in the United States? Why has the dance exercise called 
Zumba become popular globally? Why are white teenage girls seven times 
more likely to smoke than African American teenage girls? In addition to ask-
ing questions about case, we pose consequence questions as well: What might 
be the consequences of installing stricter proof-of-citizenship requirements 
for voting? What might be the consequences—expected or unexpected—of 
expanding commercial use of drones? Often, arguments about causes and 
consequences have important stakes because they shape our view of reality 
and influence government policies and individual decisions. This chapter 
explains how to wrestle responsibly with cause/consequence issues to produce 
effective causal arguments.
Case 1    What Causes Global Warming?
One of the early clues linking global warming to atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) came from side-
by-side comparisons of graphs plotting atmospheric carbon dioxide and global temperatures over 
time. These graphs show that increases in global temperature parallel increases in the percentage 
of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. However, the graphs show only a correlation, or link, ­between 
increased carbon dioxide and higher average temperature. To argue that an increase in CO2 could 
cause global warming, scientists needed to explain the links in a causal chain. They could do so by 
comparing the earth to a greenhouse. Carbon dioxide, like glass in a greenhouse, lets some of the 
earth’s heat radiate into space but also reflects some of it back to the earth. The higher the concen-
tration of carbon dioxide, the more heat is reflected back to the earth.

202	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
Case 2    What Has Caused the Change in the Rate of Teen 
Pregnancies in the United States in the Last Five Years?
Although the United States still has the highest rate of teen pregnancies among developed countries, studies 
show a decline in teen pregnancies since the early 1990s. What has caused this decline? Some economists 
point to the recession, claiming that teens are afraid of not being able to get jobs if encumbered with babies. 
Other sources credit the role of parents in cautioning teens about irresponsible sexual choices. A quite dif-
ferent explanation comes from a recent study analyzing the impact of media images on viewers. This study 
has found a correlation between the decline in teen pregnancies and the popularity of the MTV docudrama 
16 and Pregnant (premiered in 2009) and its spinoff Teen Moms. While some critics argue that these shows 
sensationalize and glamorize the lives of the teen moms, researchers, using Nielsen ratings and geographic 
data on viewership and data from Google Trends and Twitter, found that watching these shows “led to more 
searches and tweets regarding birth control and abortion, and ultimately led to a 5.7 percent reduction in 
teen births in the eighteen months” after 16 and Pregnant first aired.*
An Overview of Causal Arguments
Typically, causal arguments try to show how one event brings about 
­another. When causal investigation focuses on material objects—for exam-
ple, one billiard ball striking another—the notion of causality appears fairly 
straightforward. But when humans become the focus of a causal argument, 
the nature of causality becomes more vexing. If we say that something hap-
pened that “caused” a person to act in a certain way, what do we mean? Do we mean 
that she was “forced” to act in a certain way, thereby negating her free will (as in, an 
*Melissa S. Kearney and Phillip B. Levine. “Media Influences on Social Outcomes: The Impact of 
MTV’s 16 and Pregnant on Teen Childbearing,” NBER Working Paper No. 19795, National Bureau of 
Economic Research, January 2014.
12.1  To explain 
and illustrate 
kinds of causal 
arguments
CO2 in Atmosphere
330
340
350
360
370
380
390
400
1980 1985
(A)
1990
Year
1995
Parts Per Million
2000 2005 2010
Source: Data from Dr. Pieter Tans, NOAA/ESRL
(B)
Year
Mean Global Temperature
Degrees Celsius
14.0
14.1
14.2
14.3
14.4
14.5
14.6
14.7
1980 1985 1990 1995 2000
2010
2005
Source: Data from NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies 
Surface Temperature Analysis

	
Chapter 12    Causal Arguments	
203
undiagnosed brain tumor caused her to act erratically), or do we mean more simply 
that she was “motivated” to act in a certain way (as in, her anger at her parents caused 
her to act erratically)? When we argue about causality in human beings, we must 
guard against confusing these two senses of “cause” or assuming that human behavior 
can be predicted or controlled in the same way that nonhuman behavior can. A rock 
dropped from a roof will always fall at thirty-two feet per second squared, and a rat 
zapped for turning left in a maze will always quit turning left. But if we raise interest 
rates, will consumers save more money? If so, how much? This is the sort of question 
we debate endlessly.
Kinds of Causal Arguments
Arguments about causality can take a variety of forms. Here are three typical kinds:
■	 Speculations about possible causes. Sometimes arguers speculate about possible 
causes of a phenomenon. For example, whenever a shooter opens fire on innocent 
bystanders (as in the 2012 Sandy Hook Elementary School massacre), investigators 
begin analyzing the causes. One of the most heavily debated shooting incidents 
occurred in 1999 at Columbine High School in Littleton, Colorado, when two 
male students opened fire on their classmates, killing thirteen people, wounding 
twenty-three others, and then shooting themselves. Figure 12.1 illustrates some of 
the proposed theories for the Columbine shootings. What was at stake was not only 
our desire to understand the sociocultural sources of school violence but also our 
desire to institute policies to prevent future school shootings. If a primary cause is 
the availability of guns, then we might push for more stringent gun control laws. 
But if the primary cause is the disintegration of the traditional family, the shooters’ 
Proposed Causes
Violent video 
games
American
fascination
with guns
Lack of
school
discipline
Internet
neo-Nazi
chat rooms
Irresponsible
prescribing of
antidepressants
(one of the
shooters was
on Prozac)
Violent movies
and violent TV
Music of
Marilyn Manson
Breakdown of
the traditional
family
Internet
bombmaking
instructions
Inadequate
school
counseling
Alienation from
popular school
cliques
Effect
Columbine High School Shootings
Figure 12.1  Speculation about possible causes: Columbine High School Massacre

204	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
alienation from high school cliques, or the dangerous side effects of Prozac, then 
we might seek different solutions.
■	 Arguments for an unexpected or surprising cause. Besides sorting out possible 
causes of a phenomenon, sometimes arguers try to persuade readers to see the plau-
sibility of an unexpected or surprising cause. This was the strategy used by syndi-
cated columnist John Leo, who wanted readers to consider the role of violent video 
games as a contributing cause to the Columbine massacre.* After suggesting that the 
Littleton killings were partly choreographed on video game models, Leo suggested 
the causal chain shown in Figure 12.2.
*John Leo, “Kill-for-Kicks Video Games Desensitizing Our Children,” Seattle Times 27 April 
1999, B4.
Many youngsters are left alone for long periods of
time (because both parents are working).
They play violent video games obsessively.
Their feelings of resentment and powerlessness “pour
into the killing games.”
Realistic touches in modern video games blur the
“boundary between fantasy and reality.”
The video games break down a natural aversion to
killing, analogous to psychological techniques
employed by the military.
Youngsters begin identifying not with conventional
heroes but with sociopaths who get their kicks from
blowing away ordinary people (”pedestrians, marching
bands, an elderly woman with a walker”).
Having enjoyed random violence in the video games,
vulnerable youngsters act out the same adrenaline
rush in real life.
Figure 12.2  Argument for a surprising cause: Role of violent video games in the 
Columbine massacre

	
Chapter 12    Causal Arguments	
205
■	 Predictions of consequences. Still another frequently encountered kind of causal 
argument predicts the consequences of current, planned, or proposed actions or 
events. Consequence arguments have high stakes because we often judge actions on 
whether their benefits outweigh their costs. As we will see in Chapter 14, proposal 
arguments usually require writers to predict the consequences of a proposed action, 
do a cost/benefit analysis, and persuade readers that no unforeseen negative conse-
quences will result. Just as a phenomenon can have multiple causes, it can also have 
multiple consequences. Figure 12.3 shows the consequence arguments considered 
by environmentalists who propose eliminating several dams on Idaho’s Snake River 
in order to save salmon runs.
Toulmin Framework for a Causal Argument
Because causal arguments can involve lengthy or complex causal chains, they are 
often harder to summarize in because clauses than are other kinds of arguments. 
Likewise, they are not as likely to yield quick analysis through the Toulmin schema. 
Nevertheless, a causal argument can usually be stated as a claim with because clauses. 
Typically, a because clause pinpoints one or two key elements in the causal chain 
rather than summarizes every link. John Leo’s argument linking the Columbine 
massacre to violent video games could be summarized in the following claim with a 
because clause:
Violent video games may have been a contributing cause to the Littleton massacre because 
playing these games can make random, sociopathic violence seem pleasurable.
Loss of hydropower
generated by dams
Restoration of
ecosystem—increased
sense of natural balance
Increased opportunities for 
recreational fishing; tourist 
dollars brought to area
Loss of several thousand jobs 
associated with operation of
the dams and with river
navigation system (made
possible by dams)
Transference of shipping from
barges (low environmental
impact) to overland trucks
and trains (high
environmental impact)
Increased salmon
runs
Breaching of several dams on  Snake River
above Lewiston, Idaho
Proposed
Action
Predicted
Consequences
Figure 12.3  Predictions about consequences: Breaching dams on the Snake River

206	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
Toulmin Analysis of the Violent Video Games Argument 
Qualifiers
GROUNDS
• Evidence that the killers, like many young
  people, played violent video games
• Evidence that the games are violent
• Evidence that the games involve random,
  sociopathic violence (not good guys versus bad
  guys) such as killing ordinary people—marching
  bands, little old ladies, etc.
• Evidence that young people derive pleasure
  from these games
WARRANT
If young people derive pleasure from random,
sociopathic killing in video games, they can
transfer this pleasure to real life, thus leading
to the Columbine shooting.
BACKING
• Testimony from psychologists
• Evidence that violent video games desensitize
  people to violence
• Analogy to military training in which video
  games are used to “make killing a reflex action”
• Evidence that the distinction between fantasy
  and reality becomes especially blurred for
  unstable young people
CONDITIONS OF REBUTTAL
Attacking the warrant and backing
• Perhaps kids are fully capable of
  distinguishing fantasy from reality.
• Perhaps the games are just fun with no
  transference to real life.
• Perhaps the games are substantially
  different from military training games.
CONDITIONS OF REBUTTAL
Attacking the reason and grounds
• Perhaps the killers didn’t play violent video
  games.
• Perhaps the video games are no more
  violent than traditional kids’ games such as
  cops and robbers.
• Perhaps the video games do not feature
  sociopathic killing.
ENTHYMEME
CLAIM  Violent video games may have been a
contributing cause to the Columbine school
shooting
REASON because playing these games can
make random, sociopathic violence seem
pleasurable.
Once stated as an enthymeme, the argument can be analyzed using Toulmin’s 
schema. It is easiest to apply Toulmin’s schema to causal arguments if you think of the 
grounds as the observable phenomena at any point in the causal chain and the war-
rants as the shareable assumptions about causality that join links together.

	
Chapter 12    Causal Arguments	
207
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Developing Causal Chains
	 1.	 Working individually or in small groups, create a causal chain to show how the 
item on the left could help lead to the item on the right.
a.  Invention of the automobile
Changes in sexual mores
b.  Popularity of cell phones
Reduction in size and importance of 
phone directories
c.  Millennials’ desire for an 
urban lifestyle
Redesign of cities
d.  Development of way to prevent 
­rejections in transplant operations
Liberalization of euthanasia laws
	 2.	 For each of your causal chains, compose a claim with an attached because clause 
summarizing one or two key links in the causal chain—for example, “Millennials’ 
desire for an urban lifestyle is spurring the redesign of cities because Millennials’ 
car-free habits are prompting developers to build new high-density urban 
­communities that are close to work and play.”
Two Methods for Arguing that One Event Causes Another
One of the first things you need to do when preparing a causal 
­argument is to note exactly what sort of causal relationship you 
are dealing with—a onetime phenomenon, a recurring phenom-
enon, or a puzzling trend. Here are some examples.
■ ■ ■
12.2  To explain how 
­different causal mechanisms 
function in cause/ 
consequence arguments
Kind of Phenomenon
Examples
Onetime phenomenon
■	 Mysterious disappearance of Malaysia Airlines  
Flight 370 in March 2014
■	 Firing of a popular teacher at your university
Recurring phenomenon
■	 Eating disorders
■	 Road rage
Puzzling trend
■	 Declining audience for TV news
■	 Declining populations of both bats and honeybees
With recurring phenomena or with trends, one has the luxury of being able to 
study multiple cases, often over time. You can interview people, make repeated obser-
vations, or study the conditions in which the puzzling phenomenon occurs. But with 
a onetime occurrence, one’s approach is more like that of a detective than a scientist. 
Because one can’t repeat the event with different variables, one must rely only on the 
immediate evidence at hand, which can quickly disappear.
Having briefly stated these words of caution, let’s turn now to two main ways that 
you can argue that one event causes another.

208	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
First Method: Explain the Causal Mechanism Directly
The most convincing kind of causal argument identifies every link in the causal chain, 
showing how an initiating cause leads step by step to an observed effect. A causes B, which 
causes C, which causes D. In some cases, all you have to do is fill in the missing links. In 
other cases—when your assumptions about how one step leads to the next may seem ques-
tionable to your audience—you have to argue for the causal connection with more vigor.
A careful spelling out of each step in the causal chain is the technique used by 
science writer Robert S. Devine in explaining a negative consequence of dams. In the 
following passage, he explains how dams reduce salmon flows by slowing the migra-
tion of smolts (newly hatched, young salmon) to the sea.
Causal Argument Describing a Causal Chain
Such transformations lie at the heart of the ongoing environmental harm done by dams. 
Rivers are rivers because they flow, and the nature of their flows defines much of their 
character. When dams alter flows, they alter the essence of rivers.
Consider the erstwhile river behind Lower Granite (a dam on Idaho’s Snake River). 
Although I was there in the springtime, when I looked at the water it was moving too 
slowly to merit the word “flow”—and Lower Granite Lake isn’t even one of the region’s 
enormous storage reservoirs, which bring currents to a virtual halt. In the past, spring 
snowmelt sent powerful currents down the Snake during April and May. Nowadays hy-
dropower operators of the Columbia and Snake systems store the runoff behind the dams 
and release it during the winter, when demand—and the price—for electricity rises. Over 
the ages, however, many populations of salmon have adapted to the spring surge. The 
smolts used the strong flows to migrate, drifting downstream with the current. During 
the journey smolts’ bodies undergo physiological changes that require them to reach salt 
water quickly. Before dams backed up the Snake, smolts coming down from Idaho got to 
the sea in six to twenty days; now it takes from sixty to ninety days, and few of the young 
salmon reach salt water in time. The emasculated current is the single largest reason that 
the number of wild adult salmon migrating up the Snake each year has crashed from 
predevelopment runs of 100,000–200,000 to what was projected to be 150–750 this year.*
This tightly constructed passage connects various causal chains to explain the 
decline of salmon runs:
Smolts use river flow to reach the sea → dams restrict flow of river → a trip that before 
­development took 6–20 days now takes 60–90 days → migrating smolts undergo physiologi-
cal changes that demand quick access to salt water → delayed migration time kills the smolts.
Second Method: Infer Causal Links Using Inductive Reasoning
If we can’t explain a causal link directly, we often employ a reasoning strategy called 
induction. Through induction we infer a general conclusion based on a limited num-
ber of specific cases. For example, if on several occasions you got a headache after 
drinking red wine but not after drinking white wine, you would be likely to conclude 
*Robert S. Devine, “The Trouble with Dams,” Atlantic (August 1995), 64–75. The example quotation 
is from page 70.

	
Chapter 12    Causal Arguments	
209
inductively that red wine causes you to get headaches, although you can’t explain 
­directly how it does so. However, because there are almost always numerous variables 
involved, inductive reasoning gives only probable truths, not certain ones.
Three Ways of Thinking Inductively  When your brain thinks inductively, it 
sorts through data looking for patterns of similarity and difference. In this section we 
­explain three ways of thinking inductively: looking for a common element, looking for 
a single difference, and looking for correlations.
	 1.	 Look for a common element. One kind of inductive thinking places you on a 
search for a common element that can explain recurrences of the same phenom-
enon. For example, psychologists attempting to understand the causes of anorexia 
have discovered that many anorexics (but not all) come from perfectionist, highly 
work-oriented homes that emphasize duty and responsibility. This common ele-
ment is thus a suspected causal factor leading to anorexia.
	 2.	 Look for a single difference. Another approach is to look for a single difference 
that may explain the appearance of a new phenomenon. When infant death rates 
in the state of Washington shot up in July and August 1986, one event making these 
two months different stood out: increased radioactive fallout over Washington from 
the April Chernobyl nuclear meltdown in Ukraine. This single difference led some 
­researchers to suspect radiation as a possible cause of the ­increase in infant deaths.
	 3.	 Look for correlations. Still another method of induction is correlation, which means 
that two events or phenomena tend to occur together but this doesn’t imply that one 
causes the other. For example, there is a correlation between nearsightedness and in-
telligence. (That is, in a given sample of nearsighted people and people with normal 
eyesight, the nearsighted group will have a somewhat higher mean IQ score.) But 
the direction of causality isn’t clear. It could be that high ­intelligence causes people 
to read more, thus ruining their eyes (high intelligence causes nearsightedness). Or 
it could be that nearsightedness causes people to read more, thus raising their intelli-
gence (nearsightedness causes high intelligence). Or it could be that some unknown 
phenomenon, perhaps a gene, is related to both nearsightedness and intelligence. So 
keep in mind that correlation is not causation—it simply suggests possible causation.
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Developing Plausible Causal Chains Based 
on Correlations
Working individually or in small groups, develop plausible causal chains that may 
­explain the relationship between the following pairs of phenomena:
a.  A person who registers a low stress  
level on an electrochemical stress meter
does daily meditation
b.  A binge drinker at college parties
has increased risk of becoming 
a perpetrator or victim of sexual 
violence
c.  A person who grew up in a house with 
two bathrooms
is likely to have higher SAT scores 
than a person who grew up in a 
one-bathroom home
■ ■ ■

210	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
Key Terms and Inductive Fallacies in Causal Arguments
Because causal arguments are often easier to conduct if writer and 
reader share a few specialized terms and concepts, this section 
explains key terms in causal reasoning and offers ways to avoid 
inductive fallacies.
A Glossary of Key Terms
■	 The problem of oversimplified cause. One of the great temptations is to look for 
the cause of something, as if a phenomenon had only one cause rather than multi-
ple causes. For example, in recent years the number of persons in the United States 
sending out Christmas cards has declined substantially. Many commentators 
­attribute the decline to the increasing use of Facebook, which keeps old friends in 
touch year-round, eliminating the need for holiday “family letters.” But there may 
be other causes also, such as a decline in the number of nuclear families, fewer 
networks of long-term friends, or generational shifts away from older traditions. 
When you make a causal argument, be especially careful how you use words such 
as all, most, some, the, or in part. For example, some (but not all) of the decline in 
Christmas cards may be caused by Facebook. Arguers sometimes deliberately mix 
up these quantifiers to misrepresent and dismiss opposing views.
■	 Immediate and remote causes. Every causal chain extends backward indefinitely 
into the past. An immediate cause is the closest in time to the event being examined. 
12.3  To understand key 
causal terms and the need 
to avoid inductive fallacies 
in causal arguments
Examining Visual Arguments
A Causal Claim
This billboard is part of a Texas campaign to fight sex trafficking. How do both the text and image in this billboard 
­suggest links in a causal chain? Although this ad oversimplifies the complex issue of human trafficking, and some would 
say it represents only one view of sex workers, how do both the words and the choice of images make powerful appeals 
to both logos and pathos?

	
Chapter 12    Causal Arguments	
211
Consider the causes for the release of nuclear contaminants around the Fukushima 
nuclear power plant following the 2011 earthquake off the coast of Japan. The 
­immediate cause was loss of power to the water pumps that cooled the reactor’s fuel 
rods, causing the rods to overheat and partially melt. A slightly less immediate cause 
(several days earlier) was the earthquake-produced tsunami that had swept away 
the diesel fuel tanks needed to run the backup generators. These immediate causes 
can be contrasted with a remote cause—in this case, a late-1960s design decision 
that used backup diesel generators to power the water pumps in case of an electrical 
power loss to the reactor facility. Still more remote causes were the economic and 
regulatory systems in the late 1960s that led to this particular design.
■	 Precipitating and contributing causes. These terms are similar to immediate and 
remote causes but don’t designate a temporal link going into the past. Rather, they 
refer to a main cause emerging out of a background of subsidiary causes. If, for 
example, a husband and wife decide to separate, the precipitating cause may be a 
stormy fight over money, after which one of the partners (or both) says, “I’ve had 
enough.” In contrast, contributing causes would be all the background factors that 
are dooming the marriage. Note that contributing causes and the precipitating 
cause all coexist at the same time.
■	 Constraints. Sometimes an effect occurs because some stabilizing factor—a 
­constraint—is removed. In other words, the presence of a constraint may keep a cer-
tain effect from occurring. For example, in the marriage we have been discussing, the 
presence of children in the home may be a constraint against divorce; as soon as the 
children graduate from high school and leave home, the marriage may well dissolve.
■	 Necessary and sufficient causes. A necessary cause is one that has to be present for a 
given effect to occur. For example, fertility drugs are necessary to cause the concep-
tion of septuplets. Every couple who has septuplets must have used fertility drugs. In 
contrast, a sufficient cause is one that always produces a given effect. Smoking more 
than a pack of cigarettes per day is sufficient to raise the cost of one’s life insurance 
policy. If you are a smoker, no matter how healthy you appear to be, life insurance 
companies will always place you in a higher, more expensive risk bracket. In some 
cases, a single cause can be both necessary and sufficient. For example, lack of ascor-
bic acid is both a necessary and a sufficient cause of scurvy. It is a necessary cause 
because you can’t get scurvy any other way except through absence of ascorbic acid; 
it is a sufficient cause because the absence of ascorbic acid always causes scurvy.
Avoiding Common Inductive Fallacies that Can Lead to Wrong Conclusions   
Largely because of its power, informal induction can often lead to wrong conclusions. 
You should be aware of two common fallacies of inductive reasoning that can tempt you 
into erroneous assumptions about causality. (Both fallacies are treated more fully in the 
Appendix.)
■	 Post hoc fallacy: The post hoc, ergo propter hoc fallacy (“after this, therefore ­because 
of this”) mistakes sequence for cause. Just because event A regularly precedes 
event B doesn’t mean that event A causes event B. The same reasoning that tells us 
that flipping a switch causes the light to go on can make us believe that low levels 
of radioactive fallout from the Chernobyl nuclear disaster caused a sudden rise in 

212	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
infant death rates in the state of Washington. The nuclear disaster clearly preceded 
the rise in death rates. But did it clearly cause it?
■	 Hasty generalization: The hasty generalization fallacy occurs when you make a gen-
eralization based on too few cases or too little consideration of alternative explana-
tions: You flip the switch, but the lightbulb doesn’t go on. You conclude—too hastily—
that the lightbulb has burned out. (Perhaps the power has gone off or the switch is 
broken.) How many trials does it take before you can make a justified generalization 
rather than a hasty generalization? It is difficult to say for sure.
Both the post hoc fallacy and the hasty generalization fallacy remind us that 
­induction requires a leap from individual cases to a general principle and that it is 
­always possible to leap too soon.
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Brainstorming Causes and Constraints
The terms in the preceding glossary can be effective brainstorming tools for thinking 
of possible causes of an event. For the following events, try to think of as many causes 
as possible by brainstorming possible immediate causes, remote causes, precipitating 
causes, contributing causes, and constraints:
	 1.	 Why did you decide to attend your present college?
	 2.	 Why are women’s fashion and beauty magazines the most frequently purchased 
magazines in college bookstores?
	 3.	 Why do American students consistently score below Asian and European students 
in academic achievement?
Writing Assignment  A Causal Argument
Choose an issue about the causes or consequences of a trend, event, or other 
phenomenon. Write an argument that persuades an audience to accept your 
explanation of the causes or consequences of your chosen phenomenon. 
Within your essay you should examine alternative hypotheses or opposing 
views and explain your reasons for rejecting them. You can imagine your 
­issue either as a puzzle or as a disagreement. If a puzzle, your task will be to create a 
convincing case for an audience that doesn’t have an answer to your causal question 
already in mind. If a disagreement, your task will be more overtly persuasive because 
your goal will be to change your audience’s views.
Exploring Ideas
Arguments about causes and consequences abound in public, professional, or personal 
life, so you shouldn’t have difficulty finding a causal issue worth investigating and 
­arguing. If you have trouble finding a causal issue to write about, you can often create 
provocative controversies among your classmates through the following strategies:
	
■	 Make a list of unusual likes and dislikes. Think about unusual things that 
people like or dislike. You could summarize the conventional explanations that 
■ ■ ■
12.4  To write 
your own cause 
or consequence 
argument

	
Chapter 12    Causal Arguments	
213
people give for an unusual pleasure or aversion and then argue for a surprising or 
unexpected cause. What attracts people to extreme sports? How do you explain 
the popularity of the paleo diet or of The Hunger Games?
	
■	 Make a list of puzzling events or trends. Another strategy is to make a list of 
puzzling phenomena and then try to explain their causes. Start with onetime 
events (a curriculum change at your school, the sudden popularity of a new app). 
Then list puzzling recurring events (failure of knowledgeable teenagers to prac-
tice safe sex). Finally, list some recent trends (growth of naturopathic medicine, 
increased interest in tattoos). Engage classmates in discussions of one or more of 
the items on your list. Look for places of disagreement as entry points into the 
conversation.
	
■	 Brainstorm consequences of a recent or proposed action. Arguments about con-
sequences are among the most interesting and important of causal disputes. If you 
can argue for an unanticipated consequence of a real or proposed action, whether 
good or bad, you can contribute importantly to the conversation. What might be 
the consequences, for example, of placing “green taxes” on coal-produced electric-
ity; of legalizing marijuana; of overturning Roe v. Wade; or of requiring national 
public service for all young adults?
Identifying Your Audience and Determining What’s at Stake
Before drafting your argument, identify your targeted audience and determine what’s 
at stake. Consider your responses to the following questions:
	
■	 What audience are you targeting? What background do they need to understand 
your issue? How much do they already care about it?
	
■	 Before they read your argument, what stance on your issue do you imagine them 
holding? What change do you want to bring about in their views?
	
■	 What will they find new or surprising about your argument?
	
■	 What objections might they raise? What counterarguments or alternative points 
of view will you need to address?
	
■	 Why does your argument matter? Who might be threatened or made uncomfort-
able by your views? What is at stake?
Organizing a Causal Argument
At the outset, it is useful to know some of the standard ways that a causal argument 
can be organized. Later, you may decide on a different organizational pattern, but the 
standard ways shown in Organization Plans 1, 2, and 3 on pages 215–216 will help you 
get started.
Plans 2 and 3 are similar in that they examine numerous possible causes or con-
sequences. Plan 2, however, tries to establish the relative importance of each cause or 
consequence, whereas Plan 3 aims at rejecting the causes or consequences normally 
assumed by the audience and argues for an unexpected, surprising cause or conse-
quence. Plan 3 can also be used when your purpose is to change your audience’s mind 
about a cause or consequence.

214	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
Questioning and Critiquing a Causal Argument
Knowing how to question and critique a causal argument will help you anticipate 
opposing views in order to strengthen your own. It will also help you rebut another 
person’s causal argument. Here are some useful questions to ask:
	
■	 When you explain the links in a causal chain, can a skeptic point out weaknesses 
in any of the links?
	
■	 If you speculate about the causes of a phenomenon, could a skeptic argue for 
different causes or arrange your causes in a different order of importance?
	
■	 If you argue for a surprising cause or a surprising consequence of a phenomenon, 
could a skeptic point out alternative explanations that would undercut your 
argument?
	
■	 If your argument depends on inferences from data, could a skeptic question the 
way the data were gathered or interpreted? Could a skeptic claim that the data 
weren’t relevant (for example, research done with lab animals might not apply to 
humans)?
	
■	 If your causal argument depends on a correlation between one phenomenon and 
another, could a skeptic argue that the direction of causality should be reversed or 
that an unidentified, third phenomenon is the real cause?  ■

	
Chapter 12    Causal Arguments	
215
Explain the links in the chain
going from cause to effect.
Introduce the issue and state
your claim.
•   Engage reader’s interest in your causal issue and
    show why it is controversial or problematic.
•   Show what’s at stake.
•   State your claim.
•   Explain the links and their connections in order.
•   Anticipate and respond to possible objections if
    needed.
Conclude.
•   Perhaps sum up your argument.
•   Return to the “big picture” of what’s at stake.
•   End with something memorable.
Organization Plan 1: Argument Explaining Links in a Causal Chain
Introduce the issue and state
your claim.
•   Engage reader’s interest in your causal issue and
    show why it is problematic or controversial. 
•   Show what’s at stake.
•   State your claim.
Propose relative contributions of
different causes of a phenomenon
or relative importance of different
consequences.
•   Describe the first possible cause or consequence
    and explain your reasoning.
•   Continue with the rest of your causes or
    consequences.
•   Arrange causes or consequences in increasing
    order of importance, significance, or surprise.
Respond to possible objections to
your argument (if needed).
•   Anticipate and summarize possible objections.
•   Respond through rebuttal or concession.
Conclude.
•   Perhaps sum up your argument.
•   Return to the “big picture” of what’s at stake.
•   End with something memorable.
Organization Plan 2: Argument Proposing Multiple Causes or
Consequences of a Phenomenon

216	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
Introduce the issue and state
your claim.
•   Engage reader’s interest in your causal issue and
    show why it is problematic or controversial. 
•   Show what’s at stake.
•   State your claim.
Reject commonly assumed
causes or consequences.
•   Describe the first commonly assumed cause or
    consequence and show why you don’t think the
    explanation is adequate.
•   Continue with the rest of your commonly assumed
    causes or consequences.
Argue for your surprising cause or
consequence.
•   Describe your surprising cause or consequence.
•   Explain your causal reasoning.
•   Anticipate and respond to possible objections if
    needed.
Conclude.
•   Perhaps sum up your argument.
•   Return to the “big picture” of what’s at stake.
•   End with something memorable.
Organization Plan 3: Argument Proposing a Surprising Cause or Consequence

	
Chapter 12    Causal Arguments	
217
Reading
Student Julee Christianson wrote this causal argument in response to the assignment in 
this chapter. Julee was entering an intense public debate about the underrepresentation 
of women in science, a controversy initiated by Lawrence Summers, then president of 
Harvard, who suggested there might be fewer women than men on prestigious science 
faculties because women have less innate talent for science and math. A furious reaction 
ensued. The Web site of the Women in Science and Engineering Leadership Institute 
has extensive coverage of the controversy, including Summers’s original speech.
Julee’s paper is documented and formatted in the style of the American 
Psychological Association. For more on APA style, see Appendix 2.

218	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
APA
Why Lawrence Summers Was Wrong: Culture Rather Than Biology
Explains the Underrepresentation of Women in Science and Mathematics
Julee Christianson
December 8, 2008
Running head: WHY LAWRENCE SUMMERS WAS WRONG	
1

	
Chapter 12    Causal Arguments	
219
APA
Why Lawrence Summers Was Wrong	
2
Why Lawrence Summers Was Wrong: Culture Rather  
Than Biology Explains the Underrepresentation of  
Women in Science and Mathematics
In 2005, Harvard University’s president, Lawrence H. Summers, gave a con-
troversial speech that suggested that the underrepresentation of women in tenured 
positions in math and science departments is partly caused by biological differences. 
In his address, Summers proposed three hypotheses explaining why women shy away 
from math and science careers. First, he gave a “high-powered job hypothesis” that 
stated that women naturally want to start a family and therefore will not have the 
time or desire to commit to the high-stress workload required for research in math 
and science. His second hypothesis was that genetic differences between the sexes 
cause more males than females to have high aptitude for math and science. Lastly, he 
mentioned the hypothesis that women are underrepresented because of discrimina-
tion, but he dismissed discrimination as an insignificant factor. It was Summers’s 
second hypothesis about biological differences that started a heated national debate. 
The academic world seems split over this nature/nurture issue. Although there is 
some evidence that biology plays a role in determining math ability, I argue that cul-
ture plays a much larger role, both in the way that women are socialized and in the 
continued existence of male discrimination against women in male-dominated fields.
Evidence supporting the role of biology in determining math ability is effec-
tively presented by Steven Pinker (2005), a Harvard psychologist who agrees with 
Summers. In his article “The Science of Difference: Sex Ed,” Pinker focuses exten-
sively on Summers’s argument. According to Pinker, “in many traits, men show 
greater variance than women, and are disproportionately found at both the low and 
high ends of the distribution” (p. 16). He explains that males and females have simi-
lar average scores on math tests but that there are more males than females in the top 
and the bottom percentiles. This greater variance means that there are disproportion-
ately more male than female math geniuses (and math dunces) and thus more male 
than female candidates for top math and science positions at major research universi-
ties. Pinker explains this greater variance through evolutionary biology: men can pass 
on their genes to dozens of offspring, whereas women can pass on their genes to only 
a few. Pinker also argues that men and women have different brain structures that 
result in different kinds of thinking. For example, Pinker cites research that shows 
that on average men are better at mental rotation of figures and mathematical word 

220	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
APA
Why Lawrence Summers Was Wrong	
3
problems, while women are better at remembering locations, doing mathematical cal-
culations, reading faces, spelling, and using language. Not only do males and females 
think differently, but they release different hormones. These hormones help shape 
gender because males release more testosterone and females more estrogen, meaning 
that men are more aggressive and apt to take risks, while women “are more solicitous 
to their children” (p. 16). One example Pinker uses to support his biological hypothe-
sis is the case of males born with abnormal genitals and raised as females. These chil-
dren have more testosterone than normal female children, and many times they show 
characteristically male interests and behavior. Pinker uses these cases as evidence that 
no matter how a child is raised, the child’s biology determines the child’s interests.
Although Pinker demonstrates that biology plays some role in determining 
math aptitude, he almost completely ignores the much larger role of discrimination 
and socialization in shaping the career paths of women. According to an editorial 
from Nature Neuroscience (2005), “[t]he evidence to support [Summers’s] hypothesis 
of ­‘innate difference’ turns out to be quite slim” (“Separating,” p. 253). The editorial 
reports that intercultural studies of the variance between boys’ and girls’ scores on math 
tests show significant differences between countries. For example, in Iceland girls out-
score boys on math tests. The editorial also says that aptitude tests are not very good at 
predicting the future success of students and that the “SATs tend to underpredict ­female 
and over-predict male academic performance” (p. 253). The editorial doesn’t deny that 
men and women’s brains work differently, but states that the differences are too small to 
be blamed for the underrepresentation of women in math and science careers.
If biology doesn’t explain the low number of women choosing math and sci-
ence careers, then what is the cause? Many believe the cause is culture, especially the 
gender roles children are taught at a very young age. One such believer is Deborah L. 
Rhode (1997), an attorney and social scientist who specializes in ethics and gender, 
law, and public policy. Rhode describes the different gender roles females and males 
are expected to follow from a very young age. Gender roles are portrayed in children’s 
books and television shows. These gender roles are represented by male characters 
as heroes and problem solvers, while the female characters are distressed damsels. 
Another example of gender roles is that only a very small number of these shows 
and books portray working mothers or stay-at-home fathers. Rhodes also discusses 
how movies and popular music, especially rap and heavy metal, encourage violence 
and objectify women. As girls grow up, they face more and more gender stereotypes, 

	
Chapter 12    Causal Arguments	
221
APA
Why Lawrence Summers Was Wrong	
4
from toys to magazines. Parents give their boys interactive, problem-solving toys 
such as chemistry sets and telescopes, while girls are left with dolls. Although more 
organizations such as the Girl Scouts of America, who sponsor the Web site Girls 
Go Tech.org, are trying to interest girls in science and math and advertise careers in 
those fields to girls, the societal forces working against this encouragement are also 
still pervasive. For example, magazines for teenage girls encourage attracting male at-
tention and the importance of looks, while being smart and successful is considered 
unattractive. Because adolescents face so many gender stereotypes, it is no wonder 
that these stereotypes shape the career paths they choose later in life. The gender 
roles engraved in our adolescents’ minds cause discrimination against women later 
in life. Once women are socialized to see themselves as dependent and not as smart 
as males, it becomes very difficult to break away from these gender stereotypes. With 
gender bias so apparent in our society, it is hard for females to have high enough self-
confidence to continue to compete with males in many fields.
The effect of socialization begins at a very early age. One study (Clearfield & 
Nelson, 2006) shows how parents unconsciously send gendered messages to their in-
fants and toddlers. This study examined differences in mothers’ speech patterns and 
play behaviors based on the gender of infants ranging from six months to fourteen 
months. Although there was no difference in the actual play behavior of male and 
female infants, the researchers discovered interesting differences in the way mothers 
interacted with daughters versus sons. Mothers of daughters tended to ask their 
daughters more questions, encouraging social interaction, whereas mothers of sons 
were less verbal, encouraging their sons to be more independent. The researchers 
concluded that “the mothers in our study may have been teaching their infants about 
gender roles through modeling and reinforcement.…Thus girls may acquire the 
knowledge that they are ‘supposed’ to engage in higher levels of interaction with 
other people and display more verbal behavior than boys.…In contrast, the boys 
were reinforced for exploring on their own” (p. 136).
One of the strongest arguments against the biological hypothesis comes from a 
transgendered Stanford neurobiologist, Ben A. Barres (2006), who has been a scientist 
first as a woman and then as a man. In his article “Does Gender Matter?” Barres states 
that “there is little evidence that gender differences in [mathematical] abilities exist, are 
innate or are even relevant to the lack of advancement of women in science” (p. 134). 
Barres provides much anecdotal evidence of the way women are discriminated against 

222	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
APA
in this male-dominated field. Barres notes that simply putting a male name rather than 
a female name on an article or résumé increases its perceived value. He also describes 
­research showing that men and women do equally well in gender-blind academic com-
petitions but that men win disproportionately in contests where gender is revealed.
As Barres says, “The bar is unconsciously raised so high for women and minority 
candidates that few emerge as winners” (p. 134). In one study reported by Barres, women 
applying for a research grant needed more than twice the productivity of men in order 
to be considered equally competent. As a female-to-male transgendered person, Barres 
has personally experienced discrimination when trying to succeed in the science and math 
fields. When in college, Barres was told that her boyfriend must have done her home-
work, and she later lost a prestigious fellowship competition to a male even though she 
was told her application was stronger and she had published “six high-impact papers,” 
while the man that won published only one. Barres even notices subtle differences, such 
as the fact that he can now finish a sentence without being interrupted by a male.
Barres urges women to stand up publicly against discrimination. One woman he 
particularly admires as a strong female role model is MIT biologist Nancy Hopkins, 
who sued the MIT administration for discrimination based on the lesser amount of 
lab space allocated to female scientists. The evidence from this study was so strong 
that even the president of MIT publicly admitted that discrimination was a problem 
(p. 134). Barres wants more women to follow Hopkins’s lead. He believes that women 
often don’t realize they are being discriminated against because they have faith that the 
world is equal. Barres explains this tendency as a “denial of personal disadvantage” 
(p. 134). Very few women will admit to seeing or experiencing discrimination. Until  
discrimination and sexism are addressed, women will continue to be oppressed.
As a society, we should not accept Lawrence Summers’s hypothesis that 
biological differences are the reason women are not found in high-prestige 
­tenured jobs in math and science. In fact, in another generation the gap between 
men and women in math and science might completely disappear. In 2003–2004, 
women received close to one-third of all doctorates in mathematics, up from 15 
percent of doctorates in the early 1980s (American Mathematical Society, 2005). 
Although more recent data are not yet available, the signs point to a steadily 
­increasing number of women entering the fields of math, science, and engineer-
ing. Blaming biology for the lack of women in these fields and refusing to fault 
our culture is taking the easy way out. Our culture can change.
Why Lawrence Summers Was Wrong	
5

	
Chapter 12    Causal Arguments	
223
APA
Why Lawrence Summers Was Wrong	
6
References
American Mathematical Society. (2005, July 6). Women in mathematics: Study shows 
gains. Retrieved from http://www/ams.org/news?news_id=489
Barres, B. A. (2006). Does gender matter? Nature, 44(7), 133–136. 
doi:10.1038/442133a
Clearfield, M. W., & Nelson, N. M. (2006). Sex differences in mothers’ speech and 
play behavior with 6-, 9-, and 14-month-old infants. Sex Role, 54(1–2), 127–137. 
doi:.10.1007/s11199-005-8874-1
Pinker, S. (2005, February 14). The science of difference: Sex ed. New Republic. 232, 
15–17.
Rhode, D. L. (1997). Speaking of sex: The denial of gender inequality. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.
Separating science from stereotype [Editorial]. (2005). Nature Neuroscience, 8(3) 253. 
doi:10.1038/nn0305-253
Summers, L. H. (2005, January 14). Remarks at NBER conference on diversifying 
the science and engineering workforce. Retrieved from http://designintelligences 
.wordpress.com/lawrence-h-summers-remarks-at-nber-conference/

224	
Evaluation and Ethical 
Arguments
13
What you will learn in this chapter:
	13.1	 To explain and illustrate the difference between categorical and ethical 
evaluation arguments
	13.2	 To conduct a categorical evaluation argument using a criteria-match 
strategy
	13.3	 To conduct an ethical evaluation argument using principles or 
consequences
	13.4	 To be mindful of common problems encountered in evaluation arguments
	13.5	 To write your own categorical or ethical evaluation argument
In our roles as citizens and professionals, we are continually expected to make 
evaluations and to persuade others to accept them. In this chapter, you will 
learn to conduct two kinds of evaluation arguments: categorical and ethical. 
Both have clarifying power to help us make difficult choices about good or 
bad, right or wrong.
Case 1    How Should We Evaluate The Film District 9?
In the film District 9 (2009), directed by South African Neill Blomkamp and produced by Peter 
Jackson, a spaceship has stalled out over Johannesburg, South Africa, where it has hovered 
for several decades. Its starving alien passengers, derogatorily called “The Prawns” for their 
­appearance, have been placed in what has become a crowded, militarized prison ghetto called 
District 9. As the film begins, South Africans have grown disgusted with and intolerantly fear-
ful of the growing alien population, while corporate powers seek these aliens’ technologically 
advanced bio-weapons. As this poster suggests—based on its “No Humans Allowed” sign, its 
ominous “You are not welcome here” slogan, and its barbed wire perimeter—the film includes 
graphic echoes of the racism of apartheid and disturbing depiction of xenophobia, abusive 
corporate powers, and mistreatment of refugees (the aliens). Nominated for numerous awards, 
District 9 has sparked heated evaluation arguments about whether it is a good or a flawed film. 
Part of the debate focuses on what evaluative criteria to use—a decision that depends on 
the category into which the film should be placed. Should it be evaluated as a science fiction 
film, as a corporate espionage thriller, or as a commentary on global social justice? Some critics, 
for example, have argued that District 9 is not a great science fiction film, but it is a deeply 
­provocative and moving commentary on social justice.

	
Chapter 13    Evaluation and Ethical Arguments	
225
Case 2    What Is a “Good Organ” for a Transplant? How Can an 
Ill Person Ethically Find an Organ Donor?
In the United States some 87,000 sick people have been waiting as long as six years for an organ transplant, with 
a portion of these dying before they can find a donor. The problem of organ shortages raises two kinds of evalu-
ation issues. First, doctors are reevaluating the criteria by which they judge a “good” organ—that is, a good lung, 
kidney, or liver suitable for transplanting. Formerly, people who were elderly or obese or who had engaged in 
risky behaviors or experienced heart failure or other medical conditions were not considered sources of good 
­organs. Now doctors are reconsidering these sources as well as exploring the use of organs from pigs. Second, the 

226	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
shortage of organs for donation has raised numerous ethical issues: Is it ethical for people to bypass the national 
waiting list for organs by advertising on billboards and Web sites in search of a volunteer donor? Is it morally right 
for people to sell their organs? Is it right for patients and families to buy ­organs or in any way remunerate living or-
gan donors? Some states are passing laws that allow some financial compensation to living organ donors.
An Overview of Categorical and Ethical Evaluation Arguments
In this chapter we explain strategies for conducting two differ-
ent kinds of evaluation arguments. First, we examine categor-
ical evaluations of the kind “Is this thing a good member of its 
class?”* (Is Ramon a good leader?) In such an evaluation, the 
writer determines the extent to which a given something pos-
sesses the qualities or standards of its category or class. What are the traits of good 
leaders? Does Ramon possess these traits? Second, we examine ethical arguments of 
the kind “Is this action right (wrong)?” (Was it right or wrong to drop atomic bombs 
on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in World War II?) In these arguments, the writer evalu-
ates a given act from the perspective of some system of morality or ethics.
To see the difference between the two kinds of evaluations, consider the case of 
terrorists. From a nonethical standpoint, you could make a categorical evaluation by 
saying that certain people are “good terrorists” in that they fully realize the purpose 
of the class “terrorist”: they cause great anguish and damage with a minimum of 
­resources, and they bring much attention to their cause. In other words, they are good 
at what they do—terrorism. However, if we want to condemn terrorism on ethical 
grounds, we have to construct an ethical argument that terrorism is wrong. The ethi-
cal question is not whether a person fulfills the purposes of the class “terrorist,” but 
whether it is wrong for such a class to exist. In the rest of this chapter we will explain 
categorical evaluations and ethical evaluations in more detail.
Constructing a Categorical Evaluation Argument
A categorical evaluation uses a criteria-match structure simi-
lar to the structure we examined in definition arguments (see 
Chapter 11).
Criteria-Match Structure of Categorical Evaluations
A typical claim-with-reasons frame for an evaluation argument has the following 
structure:
This thing/phenomenon is/is not a good member of its class because it meets (fails to 
meet) criteria A, B, and C.
13.1  To explain and illus-
trate the difference between 
categorical and ethical 
evaluation arguments
13.2  To conduct a categor-
ical evaluation argument us-
ing a criteria-match strategy
*In addition to the term good, a number of other evaluative terms involve the same kind of 
­thinking—effective, successful, workable, excellent, valuable, and so forth.

	
Chapter 13    Evaluation and Ethical Arguments	
227
The main conceptual difference between an evaluation argument and a definition ar-
gument is the nature of the contested category. In a definition argument, one argues 
whether a particular thing belongs within a certain category. (Is this swampy area a 
wetland?) In an evaluation argument, we know what category something belongs to. 
For example, we know that this 2008 Chevy Cobalt is a used car. For an evaluation 
­argument, the question is whether this Chevy Cobalt is a good used car. Or, to place 
the question within a rhetorical context, is this Chevy Cobalt a good used car for me to 
buy for college?
To illustrate the criteria-match structure of an evaluation argument, let’s ask 
whether hydraulic fracturing (commonly called fracking) is a good means for extract-
ing natural gas from shale formations. Supporters of fracking might say, “yes,” because 
it meets three major criteria:
■	 It is technologically efficient at extracting huge supplies of otherwise untappable 
natural gas.
■	 It is cost effective.
■	 It is environmentally safe.
Opponents might make two counterarguments: First, they might claim that frack-
ing is not environmentally safe. (Safety is still a crucial criterion. Opponents argue 
that fracking doesn’t meet this criterion.) Second, they might argue that fracking, 
by producing lots of relatively cheap natural gas, removes the urgency from efforts 
to convert to renewable energy such as solar and wind. Thus it might be cost effec-
tive (criterion 2) in the short run, but disastrous in the long run. Page 228 provides 
a Toulmin analysis of how proponents of fracking might develop their third reason: 
“Fracking is environmentally safe.”
Developing Your Criteria
To help you develop your criteria, we suggest a three-step thinking process:
	 1.	 Place the thing you are evaluating in the smallest relevant category so that you 
don’t compare apples to oranges.
	 2.	 Develop criteria for your evaluation based on the purpose or function of this 
category.
	 3.	 Determine the relative weight of your criteria.
Let’s look at each of these steps in turn.
Step 1: Place the Thing You Are Evaluating in the Smallest Relevant Category   
Placing your contested thing in the smallest category is a crucial first step. Suppose, for 
example, that you want a professor to write you a letter of recommendation for a sum-
mer job. The professor will need to know what kind of summer job. Are you ­applying 
to become a camp counselor, a law office intern, a retail sales clerk, or a tour guide at 
a wild animal park? Each of these jobs has different criteria for excellence. Or to take 
a different example, suppose that you want to evaluate e-mail as a medium of corre-
spondence. To create a stable context for your evaluation, you need to place e-mail in 

228	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
its smallest relevant category. You may choose to evaluate e-mail as a medium for busi-
ness communication (by contrasting e-mail with direct personal contact, phone con-
versations, or postal mail), as a medium for staying in touch with high school friends 
(in contrast, say, to text messaging or Facebook), or as a medium for carrying on a 
long-distance romance (in contrast, say, to old-fashioned “love letters”). Again, criteria 
will vary across these different categories.
By placing your contested thing in the smallest relevant class, you avoid the 
apples-and-oranges problem. That is, to give a fair evaluation of a perfectly good apple, 
you need to judge it under the class “apple” and not under the next larger class, “fruit,” 
CONDITIONS OF REBUTTAL
Attacking the reason and grounds
Arguments that fracking is not environmentally
safe
• Studies pointing to possible dangers such as
  contamination of aquifers, earthquakes,
  flaring of methane, and so forth
• Arguments that local, state, and federal
  regulations are too loose and unenforced
• Statistics about environmental costs in doing
  the fracking (huge amounts of required water,
  recovering contaminated water, use of carbon
  fuels to run the machinery, and so forth)
CONDITIONS OF REBUTTAL
Attacking the warrant and backing
• Environmentalists will endorse the warrant,
  but may say that even if fracking is safe, it
  undermines the urgency of finding alternative
  energy sources.
• Business interests might want to loosen an
  insistence on absolute safety by
  acknowledging that some accidents are
  inevitable.
WARRANT
Environmental safety is an important criterion
for evaluating a method of drilling for natural gas
BACKING
Arguments that safety must be a prime
consideration of any business plan. One major
accident could undermine public support of
fracking.  [Backing tries to counter the arguments
of environmentalists that business interests put
profit ahead of safety.]
TOULMIN ANALYSIS OF THE FRACKING ARGUMENT SUPPORTING ENVIRONMENTAL
SAFETY
GROUNDS
• Descriptions of safety measures employed
  by industry
• Descriptions of local, state, and federal
  regulations aimed at insuring safety
• Summaries of peer-reviewed studies and
  government studies showing the safety of
  fracking
• Refutation of anecdotal scare stories told by
  environmentalists
ENTHYMEME
CLAIM Fracking is a good method for
extracting natural gas from shale formations
REASON because it is environmentally safe.

	
Chapter 13    Evaluation and Ethical Arguments	
229
or a neighboring class such as “orange.” And to be even more precise, you may wish to 
evaluate your apple in the class “eating apple” as opposed to “pie apple” because the lat-
ter class is supposed to be tarter and the former class juicier and sweeter.
Step 2: Develop Criteria for Your Evaluation Based on the Purpose or Functions 
of This Category  Suppose that the summer job you are applying for is tour guide at a 
wild animal park. The functions of a tour guide are to drive the tour buses, make people 
feel welcome, give them interesting information about the wild animals in the park, 
make their visit pleasant, and so forth. Criteria for a good tour guide would thus include 
reliability and responsibility, a friendly demeanor, good speaking skills, and knowledge 
of the kinds of animals in the wild animal park. In our e-mail example, suppose that you 
want to evaluate e-mail as a medium for business communication. The purpose of this 
class is to provide a quick and reliable means of communication that increases efficiency, 
minimizes misunderstandings, protects the confidentiality of internal communications, 
and so forth. Based on these purposes, you might establish the following criteria:
A good medium for business communication:
■	 Is easy to use, quick, and reliable
■	 Increases employee efficiency
■	 Prevents misunderstandings
■	 Maintains confidentiality where needed
Step 3: Determine the relative weight of your criteria  In some evaluations all 
the criteria are equally important. However, sometimes a phenomenon to be evaluated 
is strong in one criterion but weak in another—a situation that forces the evaluator 
to decide which criterion takes precedence. For example, the supervisor interviewing 
candidates for tour guide at the wild animal park may find one candidate who is very 
knowledgeable about the wildlife but doesn’t have good speaking skills. The supervisor 
would need to decide which of these two criteria gets more weight.
Making Your Match Argument
Once you’ve established and weighed your criteria, you’ll need to use examples and 
other evidence to show that the thing being evaluated meets or does not meet the cri-
teria. For example, your professor could argue that you would be a good wildlife park 
tour guide because you have strong interpersonal skills (based on your work on a col-
lege orientation committee), that you have good speaking skills (based on a speech you 
gave in the professor’s class), and that you have quite a bit of knowledge about animals 
and ecology (based on your major in environmental science).
In our e-mail example, you might establish the following working thesis:
Despite its being easy to learn, quick, and reliable, e-mail is often not an effective medium 
for business communication because it reduces worker efficiency, leads to frequent misun-
derstandings, and often lacks confidentiality.

230	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
An Evaluation Claim
This photograph of Stephen Colbert and Jon Stewart of The Colbert Report and The Daily Show was taken at the October 30, 
2010 “Rally to Restore Sanity ‘or Fear,’” on the Washington, DC, National Mall, an event that drew thousands of people. The 
event followed by two months the “Restoring Honor Rally” led by conservative Fox News talk show celebrity Glenn Beck on 
August 28, 2010. Political commentators debated whether the Colbert and Stewart rally was simply satirical entertainment 
mocking the Beck rally or whether it was serious political activism supporting the liberal left. If your goal was to portray this 
event as serious political activism, would this photograph be a good image to ­accompany your argument? What criteria 
would you establish for selecting a photograph to support your argument that Colbert and Stewart are effective political 
activists and not simply entertainers?
Examining Visual Arguments

	
Chapter 13    Evaluation and Ethical Arguments	
231
You could develop your last three points as follows:
■	 E-mail reduces worker efficiency. You can use personal anecdotes and research 
data to show how checking e-mail is addictive and how it eats into worker time 
(one research article says that the average worker devotes ten minutes of every 
working hour to reading and responding to e-mail).
■	 E-mail leads to misunderstandings. Because an e-mail message is often com-
posed rapidly without revision, e-mail can cause people to state ideas imprecisely, 
to write something they would never say face-to-face, or to convey an unintended 
tone. You could give a personal example of a high-consequence misunderstanding 
caused by e-mail.
■	 E-mail often lacks confidentiality. You could provide anecdotal or research evi-
dence of cases in which a person clicked on the “reply to all” button rather than 
the “reply” button, sending a message intended for one person to a whole group of 
people. Also, people sometimes forward e-mails without the sender’s permission. 
Finally, e-mail messages are archived forever, so messages that you thought were 
deleted may show up years later in a lawsuit.
As these examples illustrate, the key to a successful match argument is to use sufficient 
examples and other evidence to show how your contested phenomenon meets or does 
not meet each of your criteria.
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Developing Criteria/Match Arguments
The following small-group exercise can be accomplished in one or two class hours. It 
gives you a good model of the process you can go through in order to write your own 
categorical evaluation.
	 1.	 Choose a specific controversial person, thing, or event to evaluate. To help you 
think of ideas, try brainstorming controversial members of various categories such 
as people (athletes, political leaders, musicians); technology (new car features, phone 
apps); media (a social network, a TV program); government and world affairs (an 
economic policy, a Supreme Court decision); your college or university (food service, 
an administrative policy); the world of work (a job, a company operation, a dress 
policy); or any other categories of your choice.
	 2.	 Place your controversial person or thing within the smallest relevant class, thus 
providing a rhetorical context for your argument and showing what is at stake. 
Do you want to evaluate Harvey’s Hamburger Haven in the broad category of 
restaurants, in the narrow category of hamburger joints, or in a different narrow 
category such as late-night study places?
	 3.	 Make a list of the purpose or function of that class, and then list the criteria that 
a good member of that class would need to have in order to accomplish the pur-
pose or function. (What is the purpose or function of a hamburger joint versus 
a late-night study place? What criteria for excellence can you derive from these 
purposes or functions?)

232	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
	 4.	 If necessary, rank your criteria from most to least important. (For a late-night study 
place, what is more important: good ambience, Wi-Fi availability, good coffee, or 
convenient location?)
	 5.	 Provide examples and other evidence to show how your contested something 
matches or does not match each of your criteria. (As a late-night study place, 
Carol’s Coffee Closet beats out Harvey’s Hamburger Haven. Although Harvey’s 
Hamburger Haven has the most convenient location, Carol’s Coffee Closet has 
Wi-Fi, an ambience conducive to studying, and excellent coffee.)
Constructing an Ethical Evaluation Argument
A second kind of evaluation argument focuses on moral or ethical issues, 
which can often merge or overlap with categorical evaluations. For ­example, 
many apparently straightforward categorical evaluations can turn out to 
have an ethical dimension. Consider again the criteria for buying a car. 
Most people would base their evaluations on cost, safety, comfort, and so 
forth. But some people may feel morally obligated to buy the most fuel-
efficient car, to buy an American car, or not to buy a car from a manufacturer whose 
labor policies they find morally repugnant. Depending on how large a role ethical con-
siderations play in the evaluation, we may choose to call this an ethical argument based 
on moral considerations rather than a categorical evaluation based on the purposes of 
a class or category.
When we are faced with an ethical issue, we must move from arguments of good or 
bad to arguments of right or wrong. The terms right and wrong are clearly different from 
the terms good and bad when the latter terms mean, simply, “effective” (meets purposes 
of class, as in “This is a good laptop”) or “ineffective” (fails to meet purposes of class, as 
in “This is a bad cookbook”). But right and wrong often also differ from what seems to be 
a moral use of the terms good and bad. We may say, for example, that sunshine is good 
because it brings pleasure and that cancer is bad because it brings pain and death, but 
that is not quite the same thing as saying that sunshine is “right” and cancer is “wrong.” It 
is the problem of “right” and “wrong” that ethical arguments confront.
There are many schools of ethical thought—too many to cover in this brief 
overview—so we’ll limit ourselves to two major systems: arguments from conse-
quences and arguments from principles.
Consequences as the Base of Ethics
Perhaps the best-known example of evaluating acts according to their ethical conse-
quences is utilitarianism, a down-to-earth philosophy that grew out of nineteenth-
century British philosophers’ concern to demystify ethics and make it work in the 
practical world. Jeremy Bentham, the originator of utilitarianism, developed the 
goal of the greatest good for the greatest number, or “greatest happiness,” by which 
he meant the most pleasure for the least pain. John Stuart Mill, another British 
philosopher, built on Bentham’s utilitarianism by using predicted consequences to 
determine the morality of a proposed action.
■ ■ ■
13.3  To conduct 
an ethical evalu-
ation argument 
using principles or 
consequences

	
Chapter 13    Evaluation and Ethical Arguments	
233
Mill’s consequentialist approach allows you readily to assess a wide range of acts. 
You can apply the principle of utility—which says that an action is morally right if 
it produces a greater net value (benefits minus costs) than any available alternative 
action—in virtually any situation, and it will help you reach a decision. Obviously, 
however, it’s not always easy to make the calculations called for by this approach be-
cause, like any prediction of the future, an estimate of consequences is conjectural. In 
particular, it’s often very hard to assess the long-term consequences of any action. Too 
often, utilitarianism seduces us into a short-term analysis of a moral problem simply 
because long-term consequences are difficult to predict.
Principles as the Base of Ethics
Any ethical system based on principles will ultimately rest on moral tenets that we are 
duty bound to uphold, no matter what the consequences. Sometimes the moral tenets 
come from religious faith—for example, the Ten Commandments. At other times, 
however, the principles are derived from philosophical reasoning, as in the case of 
German philosopher Immanuel Kant. Kant held that no one should ever use another 
person as a means to his own ends and that everyone should always act as if his acts 
are the basis of universal law. In other words, Kant held that we are duty bound to 
­respect other people’s sanctity and to act in the same way that we would want all other 
people to act. The great advantage of such a system is its clarity and precision. We are 
never overwhelmed by a multiplicity of contradictory and difficult-to-quantify conse-
quences; we simply make sure we are following (or not violating) the principles of our 
ethical system and proceed accordingly.
Example Ethical Arguments Examining Capital Punishment
To show you how to conduct an ethical argument, let’s now apply these two strategies to 
the example of capital punishment. In general, you can conduct an ethical evaluation by 
using the frame for either a principles-based argument or a consequences-based argu-
ment, or a combination of both.
Principles-Based Frame: An act is right (wrong) because it follows (violates) 
principles A, B, and C.
Consequences-Based Frame: An act is right (wrong) because it will lead to con-
sequences A, B, and C, which are good (bad).
A principles-based argument looks at capital punishment through the lens of one 
or more guiding principles. Kant’s principle that we are duty bound not to violate the 
sanctity of other human lives could lead to arguments opposing capital punishment. 
One might argue as follows:
Principles-based argument opposing capital punishment: The death penalty is wrong 
­because it violates the principle of the sanctity of human life.
You could support this principle either by summarizing Kant’s argument that one 
should not violate the selfhood of another person or by pointing to certain religious 

234	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
systems such as Judeo-Christian ethics, where one is told, “Vengeance is mine, saith 
the Lord” or “Thou shalt not kill.” To develop this argument further, you might exam-
ine two exceptions in which principles-based ethicists may allow killing—self-defense 
and war—and show how capital punishment does not fall into either category.
Principles-based arguments can also be developed to support capital punishment. 
You may be surprised to learn that Kant himself—despite his arguments for the sanc-
tity of life—supported capital punishment. To make such an argument, Kant evoked a 
different principle about the suitability of the punishment to the crime:
There is no sameness of kind between death and remaining alive even under the most 
miserable conditions, and consequently there is no equality between the crime and the 
retribution unless the criminal is judicially condemned and put to death.
Stated as an enthymeme, Kant’s argument is as follows:
Principles-based argument supporting capital punishment: Capital punishment is right 
­because it follows the principle that punishments should be proportionate to the crime.
In developing this argument, Kant’s burden would be to show why the principle of 
proportionate retribution outweighs the principle of the supreme worth of the individ-
ual. Our point is that a principles-based argument can be made both for and against 
capital punishment. The arguer’s duty is to make clear what principle is being evoked 
and then to show why this principle is more important than opposing principles.
Unlike a principles-based argument, which appeals to certain guiding maxims 
or rules, a consequences-based argument looks at the consequences of a decision and 
measures the positive benefits against the negative costs. Here is the frame that an 
­arguer might use to oppose capital punishment on the basis of negative consequences:
Consequences-based argument opposing capital punishment: Capital punishment is wrong 
because it leads to the following negative consequences:
■	 The possibility of executing an innocent person
■	 The possibility that a murderer who may repent and be redeemed is denied that chance
■	 The excessive legal and political costs of trials and appeals
■	 The unfair distribution of executions so that one’s chances of being put to death are much 
greater if one is a minority or is poor
To develop this argument, the reader would need to provide facts, statistics, and other 
evidence to support each of the stated reasons.
A different arguer might use a consequences-based approach to support capital 
punishment:
Consequences-based argument supporting capital punishment: Capital punishment is right 
because it leads to the following positive consequences:
■	 It may deter violent crime and slow down the rate of murder.
■	 It saves the cost of lifelong imprisonment.

	
Chapter 13    Evaluation and Ethical Arguments	
235
■	 It stops criminals who are menaces to society from committing more murders.
■	 It helps grieving families reach closure and sends a message to victims’ families that society 
recognizes their pain.
It should be evident, then, that adopting an ethical system doesn’t lead to automatic 
answers to one’s ethical dilemmas. A system offers a way of proceeding—a way of 
conducting an argument—but it doesn’t relieve you of personal responsibility for 
thinking through your values and taking a stand. When you face an ethical dilemma, 
we encourage you to consider both the relevant principles and the possible conse-
quences the dilemma entails. In many arguments, you can use both principles-based 
and consequences-based reasoning as long as irreconcilable contradictions don’t 
present themselves.
■ ■ ■	 For Writing and Discussion  Developing an Ethical Argument
Individual task:  Develop a frame for an ethical argument (based on principles, con-
sequences, or both) for or against any two of the following actions. Use the previous 
examples on capital punishment as a model.
	 1.	 Eating meat
	 2.	 Using public transportation instead of owning a car
	 3.	 Legalizing assisted suicide for the terminally ill
	 4.	 Selling organs
	 5.	 Allowing concealed weapons on college campuses
Group task:  Share your arguments with classmates
Common Problems in Making Evaluation Arguments
When conducting evaluation arguments (whether categorical or 
ethical), writers can bump up against recurring problems that are 
unique to evaluation. In some cases these problems complicate the 
establishment of criteria; in other cases they complicate the match 
argument. Let’s look briefly at some of these common problems.
■	 The problem of standards—what is commonplace versus what is ideal: In vari-
ous forms, we experience the dilemma of the commonplace versus the ideal all the 
time. Is it fair to get a ticket for going seventy miles per hour on a sixty-five-mile-
per-hour freeway when most of the drivers go seventy miles per hour or faster? 
(Does what is commonplace—going seventy—override what is ideal—obeying 
the law?) Is it better for high schools to pass out free contraceptives to students 
because students are having sex anyway (what’s commonplace), or is it better not 
to pass them out in order to support abstinence (what’s ideal)?
■	 The problem of mitigating circumstances: This problem occurs when an arguer 
claims that unusual circumstances should alter our usual standards of judgment. 
Ordinarily, it is fair for a teacher to reduce a grade if you turn in a paper late. But 
what if you were up all night taking care of a crying baby? Does that count as 
■ ■ ■
13.4  To be mindful of  
common problems 
­encountered in evaluation 
arguments

236	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
a mitigating circumstance to waive the ordinary criterion? When you argue for 
mitigating circumstances, you will likely assume an especially heavy burden of 
proof. People assume the rightness of usual standards of judgment unless there are 
compelling arguments for abnormal circumstances.
■	 The problem of choosing between two goods or two bads: Often an evaluation 
issue forces us between a rock and a hard place. Should we cut pay or cut people? 
Should we put our parents in a nursing home or let them stay at home, where 
they have become a danger to themselves? In such cases one has to weigh con-
flicting criteria, knowing that the choices are too much alike—either both bad or 
both good.
■	 The problem of seductive empirical measures: The need to make high-stakes 
evaluations has led many people to seek quantifiable criteria that can be weighed 
mathematically. Thus we use grade point averages to select scholarship winners, 
student evaluation scores to decide merit pay for teachers, and combined scores of 
judges to evaluate figure skaters. In some cases, empirical measures can be quite 
acceptable, but they are often dangerous because they discount important non-
quantifiable traits. The problem with empirical measures is that they seduce us 
into believing that complex judgments can be made mathematically, thus rescuing 
us from the messiness of alternative points of view and conflicting criteria.
■	 The problem of cost: A final problem in evaluation arguments is cost. Something 
may be the best possible member of its class, but if it costs too much, we have to 
go for second or third best. We can avoid this problem somewhat by placing 
items into different classes on the basis of cost. For example, a Mercedes will 
exceed a Kia on almost any criterion, but if we can’t afford more than a Kia, the 
comparison is pointless. It is better to compare a Mercedes to a Lexus and a Kia 
to an equivalent Ford. Whether costs are expressed in dollars, personal discom-
fort, moral repugnance, or some other terms, our final evaluation of an item 
must take cost into account. 
Writing Assignment  An Evaluation or Ethical Argument
Write an argument in which you try to change your read-
ers’ minds about the value, worth, or ethics of something. 
Choose a phenomenon to be evaluated that is controver-
sial so that your readers are likely at first to disagree with 
your evaluation or at least to be surprised by it. Somewhere in your essay you should 
summarize alternative views and either refute them or concede to them (see Chapter 7).
Exploring Ideas
Evaluation issues are all around us. Think of disagreements about the value of a person, 
thing, action, or phenomenon within the various communities to which you belong—
your dorm, home, or apartment community; your school community, including clubs 
13.5  To write your own 
­categorical or ethical  
evaluation argument

	
Chapter 13    Evaluation and Ethical Arguments	
237
or organizations; your academic community, including classes you are currently taking; 
your work community; and your city, state, national, and world communities. Once 
you have settled on a controversial thing to be evaluated, place it in its smallest relevant 
category, determine the purposes of that category, and develop your criteria. If you are 
making an ethical evaluation, consider your argument from the perspective of both 
principles and consequences.
Identifying Your Audience and Determining What’s at Stake
Before drafting your argument, identify your targeted audience and determine what’s 
at stake. Consider your responses to the following questions:
	
■	 What audience are you targeting? What background do they need to understand 
your issue? How much do they already care about it?
	
■	 Before they read your evaluation argument, what stance on your issue do you 
imagine them holding? What change do you want to bring about in their view?
	
■	 What will they find new or surprising about your argument?
	
■	 What objections might they raise? What counterarguments or alternative points 
of view will you need to address?
	
■	 Why does your evaluation matter? Who might be threatened or made uncom-
fortable by your views? What is at stake?
Organizing an Evaluation Argument
As you write a draft, you may find useful the following prototypical structures for 
evaluation arguments shown in Organization Plans 1 and 2 on pages 238 and 239. 
Of  course, you can always alter these plans if another structure better fits your 
material.
Critiquing a Categorical Evaluation Argument
Here is a list of questions you can use to critique a categorical evaluation argument:
Will a skeptic accept my criteria? Many evaluative arguments are weak because the 
writers have simply assumed that readers will accept their criteria. Whenever your 
audience’s acceptance of your criteria is in doubt, you will need to argue for your 
criteria explicitly.
Will a skeptic accept my general weighting of criteria? Another vulnerable spot 
in an evaluation argument is the relative weight of the criteria. How much anyone 
weights a given criterion is usually a function of his or her own interests relative to 
your contested something. You should always ask whether some particular group 
might have good reasons for weighting the criteria differently.

238	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
Will a skeptic accept my criteria but reject my match argument? The other 
­major way of testing an evaluation argument is to anticipate how readers may 
object to your stated reasons and grounds. Will readers challenge you by showing 
that you have cherry-picked your examples and evidence? Will they provide coun-
terexamples and counterevidence?
Conclude.
•   Perhaps sum up your argument.
•   Help reader return to the “big picture” of what’s
    at stake.
•   End with something memorable.
Introduce the issue and
state your claim.
•   Engage reader’s interest in your evaluation issue
    and show why it is controversial or problematic. 
•   Show what’s at stake.
•   Provide background information needed by your
    audience.
•   State your claim.
Present your criteria.
•   State and develop criterion 1.
•   State and develop criterion 2.
•   Continue with the rest of your criteria.
•   Anticipate and respond to possible objections to
    the criteria.
Present your match argument.
•   Consider restating your claim for clarity.
•   Argue that your case meets (does not meet)
    criterion 1.
•   Argue that your case meets (does not meet)
    criterion 2.
•   Continue with the rest of your match argument.
•   Anticipate and respond to possible objections to
    the match argument.
Organization Plan 1: Criteria and Match in Separate Sections

	
Chapter 13    Evaluation and Ethical Arguments	
239
Conclude.
•   Perhaps sum up your argument.
•   Help reader return to the “big picture” of what’s
    at stake.
•   End with something memorable.
Introduce the issue and state
your claim.
•   Engage reader’s interest in your evaluation issue
    and show why it is controversial or problematic. 
•   Show what’s at stake.
•   Provide background information needed by your
    audience.
•   State your claim.
Present series of criterion-match
arguments.
•   State and develop criterion 1 and argue that your
    case meets (does not meet) the criterion.
•   State and develop criterion 2 and argue that your
    case meets (does not meet) the criterion.
•   Continue with the rest of your criterion-match
    arguments.
 
Respond to possible objections
to your argument.
•   Anticipate and summarize possible objections.
•   Respond to the objections through rebuttal or
    concession.
Organization Plan 2: Criteria and Match Interwoven
Critiquing an Ethical Argument
Ethical arguments can be critiqued through appeals to consequences or principles. 
If an argument appeals primarily to principles, it can be vulnerable to a simple cost 
analysis. What are the costs of adhering to this principle? There will undoubtedly 
be some, or else there would be no real argument. If the argument is based strictly 
on consequences, we should ask whether it violates any rules or principles, particu-
larly such commandments as the Golden Rule—“Do unto others as you would have 
others do unto you”—which most members of our audience adhere to. By failing 
to mention these alternative ways of thinking about ethical issues, we undercut not 
only our argument but our credibility as well.  ■

240	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
Silenced and Invisible: Problems of Hispanic Students 
at Valley High School
Lorena Mendoza-Flores (Student)
Every year, thousands of Mexican families come to the United States in order to 
escape economic hardships in Mexico and hope for better schools for their children. 
While many American schools try to accommodate immigrant non-native speak-
ers, many immigrant families, according to case study interviews, have increasingly 
negative perceptions of these attempts (Roessingh). There are action plans to bridge 
the gap between disadvantaged and advantaged students, yet Hispanic ESL (English 
as a Second Language) youth continue to perform considerably below that of other 
students (Good, Masewicz, and Vogel). These problems pose the question: what is 
wrong with the way our schools treat Hispanic immigrants? Perhaps we could gain 
some understanding if we looked at a specific school—my own Valley High School in 
an agricultural region of [name of state]. Valley High School is a perfect example of a 
school with a growing Hispanic population, well-intentioned teachers, and hopes for 
their success that simply fall through. The failures at my school include inadequate 
ESL training for teachers, inadequate counseling for immigrant students, poor mul-
ticultural training for all teachers, and failure to value Hispanic identity and provide 
support for transitioning families.
Despite the fact that the Valley School District has 52 percent Hispanic students, a 
large percentage of whom have Spanish as their first language and parents who only 
speak Spanish, the staff at Valley High School is overwhelmingly white with only one 
Hispanic teacher and only three or four teachers who speak Spanish. Even with a 
large number of ESL students, Valley High School has not hired teachers who are ad-
equately trained in ESL. There is only one ESL teacher, who is responsible for all the 
ESL students. They are assigned to regular classes and then go to the ESL classrooms 
for what is supposed to be extra support. When I’ve gone into the ESL classroom, I’ve 
found students surfing random sites online and the teacher, also the yearbook advi-
sor, working on pages for the annual. Because I was senior editor of the yearbook, 
he was very open to talking to me about his students, always complaining that they 
didn’t work hard enough even though I could see they weren’t being given meaningful 
work. I was frustrated because it was obvious that the ESL classroom did not engage 
Readings
Our first reading, by student writer Lorena Mendoza-Flores, critiques her former high 
school for the way it marginalizes Hispanic students. Lorena, a physics major in col-
lege, has changed the name of her high school and chosen not to reveal her home state.

	
Chapter 13    Evaluation and Ethical Arguments	
241
either the students or the teacher. The students’ language progress remained stagnant, 
while the expectations of standardized testing became increasingly more demanding, 
dooming ESL students to failure.
Another problem is inadequate counseling for Hispanic students and inadequate 
methods of assessing their progress so they can be placed in the right classes. When 
immigrant students need help, teachers often recruit other students to address their 
needs. As a student mentor, I was called upon a few times to speak with students about 
their performance in class. In one particular situation, the math teacher called me in 
to talk to a student who had decided to drop out. The teacher was visibly concerned 
for the student’s welfare but didn’t have any means for understanding or addressing 
the student’s issues. The student told me that he did not feel like he belonged at school. 
The lack of adequate counseling sent the message that immigrant students were not 
worth fighting for to stay in our school.
Additionally, when students enter the school, their skills in other coursework are 
not taken into consideration. All ESL students are placed in the basic Math and 
English courses and while they might move down, sometimes as far as being placed 
in special education classes, they’re never moved up. A student’s aptitude in math or 
science may never get recognized in the four years that he or she is in high school 
because the ESL students move as a single group and take just about all coursework 
together. Their status as ESL students becomes the sole determinant of their identity 
as a student within the school system, and they are not given the same considerations 
and levels of attention required to grow and develop academically. Personally, I have 
fallen victim to our school’s overlooking of student progress. When I entered the 
Valley School District in 8th grade, I had already taken several years of algebra and 
tested far above other students in my grade. At my previous school in another district, 
I had surpassed the school’s highest level of math. In fact, my 5th–7th grade math in-
structor had to find advanced online material for me so that I could keep progressing. 
Entering the Valley School District, however, I regressed two years. Even though I 
communicated to both my math teacher and the counselor that I was being placed 
too low and that the nearby high school had several higher-level courses, I was kept in 
the same class. The next year, I was shocked to see that two 8th grade white students 
were in my 9th grade geometry class; the system had catered to them while it had 
denied to me an acknowledgement of the same earned achievement. I felt dismissed 
because I was Hispanic.
A third problem is that outside of the ESL classroom, in the regular classroom 
settings, teachers are often untrained in how to create safe multicultural dialogue. 
One time in sociology my teacher asked the class why the Hispanic students were 
performing so much worse than white students. I tried to explain that our support 
was inadequate. I stated that since most Hispanic students came from immigrant 
backgrounds, our parents weren’t able to help us maneuver through the school 
system. In doing our homework, we had no one to turn to, and if the instructions 
were unclear, we did not have access to a resource such as an English speaking 
parent, something that many white students and faculty never even thought about 
5

242	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
when considering this gap in performance. When I started talking about these 
things, white students around the room started becoming upset. They argued that 
they were hard workers and didn’t have their parents do their homework for them. 
Obviously, my point was not to dismiss their efforts but to emphasize that these 
are two different worlds we’re living in. Coming from an immigrant background, 
I and my fellow Hispanic students undoubtedly had more obstacles to overcome 
every step of the way. What was most troubling about this situation was that at no 
point did my sociology teacher step up and defend the validity of my arguments. 
Teachers need to know how to facilitate these multicultural clashes by helping 
make injustices more visible rather than marginalizing someone for bringing up 
uncomfortable issues.
Finally, Valley High School does little to honor cultural identity or reach out to 
­immigrant families. My senior year I was president of the International Club (the only 
club at our school that had lots of immigrant student participation). Without my con-
sent, or that of the members, my advisor began a transition to convert the International 
Club into the InterAct club affiliated with the community’s Rotaract Club (part of 
Rotary). While this new connection with the Rotary would provide more funding, the 
only club that was primarily made up of Hispanic members was now being taken over 
by one sponsored by an all-white organization. In this transition, our advisor had pre-
elected leaders to move it forward (also all white). By the time I graduated, the transition 
was well under way. In fact, on Cinco de Mayo, International Club’s major event every 
year, our club members realized that our advisor didn’t think this event was worth our 
time. As the only Mexican teacher, this advisor did not even advocate for the desires of 
our community. Ultimately, she turned her back on the members, and the following year 
InterAct became a primarily white club just like every other club at school.
The loss of a club supporting Hispanic students is matched by failure to create 
a welcoming environment for Hispanic parents and families. When immigrant par-
ents come to the school, they have to wait around until they can find a translator if 
they want to speak to a teacher or administrator. Usually this interpreter is another 
student, creating awkward moments for parents who don’t want to discuss their 
children’s problems in front of another student. The school occasionally does try 
to reach out to Hispanic parents by holding Hispanic Nights where all the events 
are held in Spanish. However, all the other school events are held only in English. 
Considering that the school population is more than half Hispanic, the absence of 
any interpreters makes it clear the school thinks of itself as white. In addition, there 
are no translators at larger school events such as academic award nights or sporting 
banquets. As a result, immigrant parents and families feel isolated from the school 
and unwelcomed.
Debate remains over the exact or best procedures for helping immigrant ESL 
students successfully integrate into schools, but what is not debated is that these stu-
dents deserve equal opportunities to learn and grow. Just as any other student, im-
migrant students should meet the demanding academic standards needed for higher 
education, but first they must have adequate support. It is essential that schools 

	
Chapter 13    Evaluation and Ethical Arguments	
243
support educational reforms that address the problem areas apparent at Valley High 
School. Particularly, schools need to hire qualified ESL instructors, provide ad-
equate counseling for immigrant students, enable teachers to develop multicultural 
sensitivity and skills at handling ethnic conflict, and provide outreach to immigrant 
families while valuing their culture.
Works Cited
Good, Mary Ellen; Masewicz, Sophia; and Vogel, Linda. “Latino English Language Learners: 
Bridging Achievement and Cultural Gaps between Schools and Families.” Journal of Latinos & 
Education 9.4 (2010): 321-339. Education Research Complete. Web. 15 Feb. 2014.
Roessingh, Hetty. “The Teacher Is the Key: Building Trust in ESL High School Programs.” Canadian 
Modern Language Review 62.4 (2006): 563-590. Education Research Complete. Web. 17 Feb. 2014.
Three Genetic Parents—For One Healthy Baby
Judith Daar and Erez Aloni
Since January, a new California 
law allows for a child to have more 
than two legal parents. But chil-
dren are still limited to two genetic 
parents. That could change soon, if 
the Food and Drug Administration 
approves human clinical trials for a 
technique known as mitochondrial 
replacement, which would enable 
a child to inherit DNA from three 
parents.
News of the pending applica-
tion has caused a kind of panic 
not seen since Dolly the sheep was 
cloned, raising the possibility of a 
single genetic parent. But far from 
being the end of the human race as 
we know it, the technique might be 
a way to prevent hundreds of mi-
tochondrial-linked diseases, which 
affect about one in 5,000 people.
The idea of multi-person repro-
ductive collaborations is not new. 
Over the last several decades we 
have acclimated to various forms 
of assisted reproductive technolo-
gies. Indeed, in the U.S. about 
75,000 infants are born each year 
to parents who enlist the aid of egg 
donors, sperm donors or gestational 
carriers. These methods, however, 
still involve the “traditional” merger 
of DNA from one male and one 
female.
Mitochondrial replacement would 
alter this two-genetic-parent model 
by introducing a third set of DNA 
into the procreative process. The 
technique would enable women who 
carry harmful mutations in their mi-
tochondria to have a child without 
those harmful mutations. As with all 
Our final reading, by Judith Daar and Erez Aloni, addresses ethical issues emerg-
ing from recent research on therapeutic cloning at the Oregon Health and Sciences 
University. It appeared as an op-ed piece in the Los Angeles Times on March 21, 
2014. Judith Daar, a professor of both law and medicine, is a member of the Ethics 
Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Her coauthor, Erez 
Aloni, is a professor at Whittier Law School.

244	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
human reproduction, the child would 
carry a combination of genes from 
one male and one female. However, 
in this technique, the nucleus of the 
mother’s egg would be injected into a 
“third parent’s” nucleus-free egg con-
taining healthy mitochondrial DNA. 
As a  result, the child would inherit 
the characteristics of the original male 
and female but have healthy mito-
chondria from a third person.
Experiments 
employing 
the 
technique conducted on monkeys 
resulted in healthy offspring that 
did not carry the harmful mu-
tation. Now, a team at Oregon 
Health and Sciences University is 
seeking approval from the FDA to 
begin human clinical trials.
It seems likely that, if it is proved 
safe and effective, mitochondrial 
replacement will eventually join 
the panoply of techniques facilitat-
ing the birth of healthy children 
through assisted conception. But it 
should be no surprise that the new 
technology is causing a furor.
The introduction of assisted 
reproductive technologies has fol-
lowed a predictable pattern: initial 
panic followed by widespread con-
demnation, followed by gradual 
acceptance as a technique becomes 
more widespread. In the 1950s, 
when reports of pregnancies using 
donor sperm first appeared in med-
ical journals, lawmakers declared 
the  process “mechanical adultery” 
and sought its criminalization. Early 
reports of success with in ­vitro fer-
tilization in the 1970s provoked 
editorials that decried the process 
as totally immoral. In the 1990s, 
the introduction of pre-implanta-
tion diagnosis of genetic diseases 
provoked allegations of a war on 
disabled individuals.
Today, detractors remain, but 
the methods have been embraced as 
the standard of care in reproductive 
­medicine. Once a technique proves 
safe and effective, its ability to as-
sist in the birth of healthy children 
generally paves the way for public 
approval.
For some, the introduction of 
a third genetic parent is alarming 
because the novel genetic config-
uration could be embedded in the 
child’s DNA in perpetuity, with 
unknown implications for future 
generations. But the panic also rests 
in part on simple discomfort with 
upending the notion of genetic 
parenthood involving just two 
people.
A similar anxiety seized the 
­public this year after California au-
thorized judges to recognize more 
than two people as a child’s law-
ful parents. The law grew out of 
a horrendous situation in which 
the court’s inability to recognize a 
third parent diverted a young child 
into foster care. Though it’s hardly 
on par with the scientific break-
through represented by mitochon-
drial ­replacement, the so-called 
three-parent law stirred deep fears 
about the  durability of traditional 
family life in the modern era.
But the fears about three-­parent 
possibilities—both 
genetic 
and 
­legal—are likely to subside as peo-
ple realize that they are aimed at 
one goal: the well-being of children. 
The California law orders judges 
to recognize three parents when 
not doing so “would otherwise 
be ­detrimental to the child.” And 
mitochondrial 
replacement 
will 
be employed to avoid transmission 
of a heritable disease. If the “power 
of three” has the ability to improve 
a child’s well-being, isn’t that some-
thing worth embracing?
5
10

	
	
245
What you will learn in this chapter:
	14.1	 To explain the special features and concerns of proposal arguments
	14.2	 To use a problem-solution-justification structure to develop proposal 
arguments
	14.3	 To use heuristic strategies to develop supporting reasons for your proposal 
argument
	14.4	 To use words and images to create an advocacy poster or advertisement
	14.5	 To write your own proposal argument
Proposal arguments—which identify problems and propose solutions—are 
essential for the workings of a free and open society. Whether you are writing 
a grant proposal to seek funding for a research project, a practical proposal 
for remedying a problem at your workplace, or a policy proposal to address 
a national issue, proposal arguments are among the most important kinds of 
writing you will ever be called upon to produce.
Case 1    Should the Supreme Court Overturn Roe v. 
Wade?
Among the most heated debates in the United States is whether the due process and privacy 
protections of the Fourteenth Amendment can be extended to a woman’s right to an abortion. 
The right-to-life movement has intensified its efforts to restrict access to abortions at the state 
level and to overturn Roe v. Wade in the U.S. Supreme Court. Meanwhile, pro-choice advocates 
such as Planned Parenthood have vigorously defended a woman’s right to an abortion. Both 
sides make effective use of visual arguments. Right-to-life groups frequently use posters show-
ing ultrasound images of unborn babies (often not using the word “fetus”). The poster on the 
next page, sponsored by Planned Parenthood, features a starkly black question mark that on 
second look is made from a coat hanger. It makes an implied proposal claim (“Abortion should 
remain legal”) and supports it with a consequence argument: If abortions are outlawed, women 
will have abortions anyway—using coat hangers instead of medically safe procedures. The 
­image of the coat hanger (reminiscent of horror stories about abortions prior to Roe v. Wade) 
appeals simultaneously to logos and pathos.
Proposal Arguments
14

246	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
Case 2    How Should the United States Reduce the Carbon 
Footprint of Automobiles?
The concern for climate change—combined with the high price of gasoline—has increased the popularity 
of small, energy-efficient cars. Much debated among policy makers is the role that federal or state govern-
ments should play in further promoting a green transportation system. Some argue that the government 
should stay out of free markets, letting buyers decide for themselves what kinds of cars they want to buy. 
Others argue that free markets do not currently make gasoline consumers pay for the “externalities” of gaso-
line consumption—particularly the cost to the environment of loading more carbon into the atmosphere. 
Concerned citizens have proposed dozens of ideas for reducing the carbon footprint of cars and trucks. 
Among the proposals are the following: placing a “green tax” on gasoline; requiring auto manufacturers to in-
crease the fuel efficiency of their fleets; giving tax credits for buying a fuel-efficient car; increasing incentives 
for carpooling or taking public transportation; increasing the cost of parking; charging different gas prices at 
the pump (with higher prices for less fuel-efficient cars); retrofitting cars to burn natural gas; and rebuilding 
cities so that housing is closer to work sites.
When
your right
to an abortion
is taken away,
what are you
going to
do
Reproductive rights are under attack. The Pro-Choice Public Education Project. It's pro-choice or no choice.
1(688)253-CHOICE or www.protect.choice.org

	
Chapter 14    Proposal Arguments	
247
The Special Features and Concerns of Proposal Arguments
Although proposal arguments are the last type of argument we 
­examine, they are among the most common arguments that you will 
encounter or be called upon to write. The essence of proposal argu-
ments is that they call for action. In reading a proposal, the audience 
is enjoined to make a decision and then to act on it—to do something. They typically have 
a three-part structure: (1) description of a problem, (2) proposed solution, and (3) justi-
fication for the proposed solution. In the justification section of your proposal argument, 
you ­develop because clauses of the kinds you have practiced throughout this text.
Practical Proposals versus Policy Proposals
For instructional purposes, we distinguish between two kinds of proposal arguments—
practical proposals, which propose an action to solve some kind of local or immediate 
problem, and policy proposals, which propose a broad plan of action to solve major ­social, 
economic, or political problems affecting the common good. A student’s proposal to build 
bike paths on campus would be an example of a practical proposal. In contrast, an argu-
ment that the United States should abolish the income tax would be a policy proposal.
Toulmin Framework for a Proposal Argument
The Toulmin schema is particularly useful for proposal arguments because it helps 
you find good reasons and link them to your audience’s beliefs, assumptions, and 
values. Suppose that your university is debating whether to banish fraternities and 
sororities. Suppose further that you are in favor of banishing the Greek system. One 
of your ­arguments is that eliminating the Greek system will improve your university’s 
academic reputation. The chart on page 248 shows how you might use the Toulmin 
schema to make this line of reasoning as persuasive as possible.
Special Concerns for Proposal Arguments
In their call for action, proposal arguments entail certain emphases and audience con-
cerns that you don’t generally face with other kinds of arguments. Let’s look briefly at 
some of these special concerns.
■	 The need for presence. To persuade people to act on your proposal, particularly 
if the personal or financial cost of acting is high, you must give your argument 
presence as well as intellectual force. By presence, we mean an argument’s ability to 
grip your readers’ hearts and imaginations as well as their intellects. You can give 
presence to an argument through appeals to pathos, such as effective use of details, 
provocative statistics, dialogue, illustrative narratives, and compelling examples 
that show the reader the seriousness of the problem you are addressing or the con-
sequences of not acting on your proposal.
■	 The need to overcome people’s natural conservatism. Another difficulty with 
proposals is the innate conservatism of all human beings, whatever their political 
persuasion, as suggested by the popular adage “If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it.” The 
14.1  To explain the special 
features and concerns of 
proposal arguments

248	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
difficulty of proving that something needs fixing is compounded by the fact that 
frequently the status quo appears to be working. So sometimes when writing a pro-
posal, you can’t argue that what we have is bad, but only that what we could have 
would be better. Often, then, a proposal argument will be based not on present evils 
but on the evils of lost potential. And getting an audience to ­accept lost potential 
may be difficult indeed, given the inherently abstract nature of potentiality.
■	 The difficulty of predicting future consequences. Further, most proposal mak-
ers will be forced to predict consequences of their proposed action. As the “law of 
Toulmin Analysis of the Greek System Argument
WARRANT
It is good for our university to achieve a better
academic reputation.
BACKING
• The school would attract more serious
  students, leading to increased prestige.
• Campus would be more academically focused
  and attract better faculty.
• Losing the “party-school” reputation would put
  us in better light for taxpayers and legislators.
• Students would graduate with more skills and
  knowledge.
CONDITIONS OF REBUTTAL
Attacking the reason and grounds
• Many of the best students are Greeks. Last
  year’s highest-GPA award went to a sorority
  woman, and several other Greeks won
  prestigious graduate school scholarships.
• Statistics on grades are misleading. Many
  houses had a much higher average GPA than
  the university average.  Total GPA was
  brought down by a few rowdy houses.
• Many other high-prestige universities have
  Greek systems.
• There are ways to tone down the party
  atmosphere on campus without abolishing
  the Greek system.
• Greeks contribute significantly to the
  community through service projects.
CONDITIONS OF REBUTTAL
Attacking the warrant and backing
• No one will argue that it is not good to
  have a strong academic reputation.
• However, skeptics may say that
  eliminating sororities and fraternities won’t
  improve the university’s academic reputation
  but will hurt its social life and its wide range
  of living options.
ENTHYMEME
CLAIM Our university should eliminate the
Greek system
REASON  because doing so will improve our
university’s academic reputation.
GROUNDS
Evidence that eliminating the Greek system will
improve our academic reputation:
• Excessive party atmosphere of some Greek
  houses emphasizes social life rather than
  studying—we are known as a party school.
• Last year the average GPA of students in
  fraternities and sororities was lower than the
  GPA of non-Greek students.
• New pledges have so many house duties and
  initiation rites that their studies suffer.
• Many new students think about rush more
  than about the academic life.

	
Chapter 14    Proposal Arguments	
249
unintended consequences” suggests, few major decisions lead neatly to their antic-
ipated results without surprises along the way. So when we claim that our proposal 
will lead to good consequences, we can expect our audience to be skeptical.
■	 The problem of evaluating consequences. A final problem for proposal writers 
is the difficulty of evaluating consequences. In government and industry, manag-
ers often use a cost-benefit analysis to reduce all consequences to a single-scale 
comparison, usually money. Although this scale may work well in some circum-
stances, it can lead to grotesquely inappropriate conclusions in other situations. 
Just how does one balance the environmental benefits of high gasoline prices 
against the suffering of drivers who can’t afford to get to work? Also, a benefit of 
one group often entails a cost for others. For example, a higher minimum wage 
will benefit low-wage workers, but at a cost to consumers who must pay higher 
prices or to other low-wage workers who get laid off.
A Proposal Claim
This advocacy poster, sponsored by the Endangered Wildlife Trust, presents a photograph of a dead baby albatross on a 
beach on Midway Island, a main nesting ground for albatrosses. The photo is part of environmental photographer Chris 
Jordan’s exhibit “Midway: Message from the Gyre.” In this exhibit, Jordan exposes the effects of increasing volumes of ocean 
garbage on albatrosses, who mistake the garbage for food. What policy proposal is the Endangered Wildlife Trust making in 
this poster? What action is it asking people to take? The colorful, plastic-filled carcass of the baby albatross creates a complex 
appeal to pathos in its effort to give presence to the problem. How does the verbal text help to ­interpret this appeal while 
driving home the logos of the argument?
Examining Visual Arguments

250	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
These, then, are some of the general difficulties facing someone who sets out to 
write a proposal argument. Although these difficulties may seem daunting, the rest 
of this chapter offers strategies to help you overcome them and produce a successful 
proposal.
Developing a Proposal Argument
Writers of proposal arguments must focus in turn on three main 
phases or stages of the argument: showing that a problem exists, 
explaining the proposed solution, and offering a justification.
Convincing Your Readers that a Problem Exists
There is one argumentative strategy generic to all proposal arguments: calling your 
reader’s attention to a problem. In some situations, your intended audience may already 
be aware of the problem and may have even asked for solutions. In such cases, you do 
not need to develop the problem extensively or motivate your audience to solve it. But 
in most situations, awakening your readers to the existence of a problem—a problem 
they may well not have recognized before—is your first important challenge. You must 
give your problem presence through anecdotes, telling statistics, or other means that 
show readers how the problem affects people or otherwise has important stakes. Your 
goal is to gain your readers’ intellectual assent to the depth, range, and potential seri-
ousness of the problem and thereby motivate them to want to solve it.
Typically, the arguer develops the problem in one of two places in a proposal 
­argument—either in the introduction prior to the presentation of the arguer’s proposal 
claim or in the body of the paper as the first main reason justifying the proposal claim. 
In the second instance the writer’s first because clause has the following structure: “We 
should do this action because it addresses a serious problem.”
Here is how one student writer gave presence to a proposal, addressed to the chair 
of the mathematics department at her school, calling for redesign of the first-year cal-
culus curriculum in order to slow its pace. She wants the chair to see the problem from 
her perspective.
Example Passage Giving Presence to a Problem
For me, who wants to become a high school math teacher, the problem with introductory 
calculus is not its difficulty but its pace. My own experience in the Calculus 134 and 135 
sequence last year showed me that it was not the learning of calculus that was difficult 
for me. I was able to catch on to the new concepts. My problem was that it went too fast. 
Just as I was assimilating new concepts and feeling the need to reinforce them, the class 
was on to a new topic before I had full mastery of the old concept. . . . Part of the reason 
for the fast pace is that calculus is a feeder course for computer science and engineering. 
If prospective engineering students can’t learn the calculus rapidly, they drop out of the 
program. The high dropout rate benefits the Engineering School because they use the 
math course to weed out an overabundance of engineering applicants. Thus the pace of 
14.2  To use a problem-
solution-justification 
­structure to develop 
­proposal arguments

	
Chapter 14    Proposal Arguments	
251
the calculus course is geared to the needs of the engineering curriculum, not to the needs 
of someone like me, who wants to be a high school mathematics teacher and who believes 
that my own difficulties with math—combined with my love for it—might make me an 
excellent math teacher.
By describing the fast pace of the math curriculum from the perspective of a future 
math teacher rather than an engineering student, this writer brings visibility to a prob-
lem. What before didn’t look like a problem (it is good to weed out weak engineering 
majors) suddenly became a problem (it is bad to weed out future math teachers). 
Establishing herself as a serious student genuinely interested in learning calculus, she 
gave presence to the problem by calling attention to it in a new way.
Showing the Specifics of Your Proposal
Having decided that there is a problem to be solved, you should lay out your thesis, 
which is a proposal for solving the problem. Your goal now is to stress the feasibility of 
your solution, including costs. The art of proposal making is the art of the possible. To 
be sure, not all proposals require elaborate descriptions of the implementation process. 
If you are proposing, for example, that a local PTA chapter buy new tumbling mats 
for the junior high gym classes, the procedures for buying the mats will probably be 
irrelevant. But in many arguments the specifics of your proposal—the actual step-by-
step methods of implementing it—may be instrumental in winning your audience’s 
support.
You will also need to show how your proposal will solve the problem either par-
tially or wholly. Sometimes you may first need to convince your reader that the prob-
lem is solvable, not something intractably rooted in “the way things are,” such as earth-
quakes or jealousy. In other words, expect that some members of your audience will be 
skeptical about the ability of any proposal to solve the problem you are addressing. You 
may well need, therefore, to “listen” to this point of view in your refutation section and 
to argue that your problem is at least partially solvable.
In order to persuade your audience that your proposal can work, you can 
follow any one of several approaches. A typical approach is to lay out a causal ar-
gument showing how one consequence will lead to another until your solution is 
effected. Another approach is to turn to resemblance arguments, either analogy or 
precedent. You try to show how similar proposals have been successful elsewhere. 
Or, if similar things have failed in the past, you try to show how the present situa-
tion is different.
Convincing Your Readers that the Benefits of Your Proposal 
Outweigh the Costs
The justification phase of a proposal argument will need extensive development in 
some arguments and minimal development in others, again depending on your par-
ticular problem and the rhetorical context of your proposal. If your audience already 

252	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
acknowledges the seriousness of the problem you are addressing and has simply been 
waiting for the right solution to come along, then your argument will be successful so 
long as you can convince your audience that your solution will work and that it won’t 
cost too much. Such arguments depend on the clarity of your proposal and the feasi-
bility of its being implemented.
But what if the costs are high? What if your readers don’t think the problem is 
serious? What if they don’t appreciate the benefits of solving the problem or the bad 
consequences of not solving it? In such cases you have to develop persuasive reasons 
for enacting your proposal. You may also have to determine who has the power to act 
on your proposal and apply arguments directly to that person’s or agency’s immediate 
interests. You need to know to whom or to what your power source is beholden or 
responsive and what values your power source holds that can be appealed to. You’re 
looking, in short, for the best pressure points.
Using Heuristic Strategies to Develop Supporting  
Reasons for Your Proposal
To help you find supporting reasons for your proposal—the 
pressure points that will move your audience—we offer two heu-
ristic strategies. (A heuristic is an exploratory problem-solving 
technique or invention aid that helps you generate ideas.) We call 
these heuristics the “claim types” strategy and the “stock issue” 
strategy.
The “Claim Types” Strategy
In Chapter 10 we explained how evaluation and proposal claims often depend for their 
supporting reasons on claims about category, cause, or resemblance. This fact leads to 
a powerful idea-generating strategy based on arguments from category (particularly 
from a category of actions that adhere to a certain principle), on arguments from 
consequences, or on arguments from resemblance. This “claim types” strategy is illus-
trated in the following chart:
Claim Type
Generic Template
Example from Biotechnology Issue
Argument from 
principle or 
category
We should do this action
■	 because doing so adheres 
to this good principle [or]
■	 because this action belongs 
to this good category
We should support genetically modified 
foods
■	 because doing so values scientific 
reason over emotion [or]
■	 because genetically modified foods 
are safe [belong to the category of 
safe things]
14.3  To use heuristic strate-
gies to develop supporting 
reasons for your proposal 
argument
(contiuned)

	
Chapter 14    Proposal Arguments	
253
Claim Type
Generic Template
Example from Biotechnology Issue
Argument from 
consequences
■	 because this action  
will lead to these good 
consequences
■	 because biotech crops can reduce 
world hunger
■	 because biotech crops can improve 
the environment by reducing use 
of pesticides
Argument from 
resemblance
■	 because this action has 
been done successfully 
­elsewhere [or]
■	 because this action is like 
this other good action
■	 because genetic modification is like 
natural crossbreeding that has been 
accelerated [or]
■	 because genetic modification of 
food is like scientific advancements 
in medicine
Before we give you some simple strategies for using this approach, let’s illustrate it 
with another example.
The United States should levy a “carbon tax” on carbon-based fuels.
■	 Because such a tax accords with the free-market principle that the price of a 
good should reflect the full cost of production (category/principle)
■	 Because such a tax will accelerate the transition to cleaner fuels and thus help 
reduce global warming (cause/consequence)
■	 Because this approach is similar to the market-based tax on sulfur emissions 
that helped solve the problem of acid rain (resemblance)
Note how each of these supporting reasons appeals to the value system of different kinds 
of voters. The writer argues that a carbon tax belongs to the category of things that use 
free market principles (particularly valued by conservative, pro-business voters); that it 
will lead to the good consequence of reducing global warming (valued particularly by 
environmentalists and others worried about climate change); and is similar to something 
that has already proved successful (the market-based approach to fighting acid rain, 
which has been hailed by both liberals and conservatives). The claim types strategy for 
generating ideas is easy to apply in practice. The following chart shows you how.
Suggestions for Applying the Claim Types Strategy to Your Proposal
Claim Type
Your Goal
Thinking Strategy
Argument from 
principle or 
category
Show how your proposed 
­action follows a principle 
valued by your audience or 
belongs to a category valued 
by your audience.
Think of how your proposed action 
adheres to an audience-valued rule or 
principle or belongs to an audience-
valued category (for example, “doing 
this action is kind, just, constitu-
tional, appropriately restrained, safe, 
efficient,” and so forth.
(contiuned)

254	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
Claim Type
Your Goal
Thinking Strategy
Argument from 
consequences
Show how your proposed  
action will lead to conse-
quences valued by your 
audience.
Brainstorm consequences of your 
proposal and identify those that the 
audience will agree are good.
Argument from 
resemblance
Show how your proposed 
action has been done success­
fully elsewhere or is like  
another action valued by 
your audience.
Find analogies that compare your 
proposed action to something the 
audience already values or find 
­previous places or times that your 
proposed action (or something  
similar to it) has been done 
successfully.
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Generating Ideas Using the  
Claim Types Strategy
Working in small groups or as a whole class, use the strategies of principle/category, 
consequence, and resemblance to create because clauses that support each of the fol-
lowing claims. Try to have at least one because clause from each of the claim types, but 
generate as many reasons as possible. Don’t worry about whether any individual rea-
son exactly fits the category. The purpose is to stimulate thinking, not fill in the slots. 
When you have shared ideas, then repeat the exercise taking the opposite position on 
each issue.
Example
Congress should not pass gun control laws (proposal claim)
■	 because the Second Amendment guarantees the right to own guns (principle or category)
■	 because owning a gun allows citizens to protect themselves, their homes, and their loved 
ones from intruders (consequence)
■	 because laws to ban guns will be as ineffective as laws to ban alcohol during Prohibition 
(resemblance)
	 1.	 Colleges should require a service learning course for graduation.
	 2.	 Restaurants should be required to post calorie counts and other ingredient informa-
tion for all menu items.
	 3.	 Division I college athletes should receive salaries.
The “Stock Issues” Strategy
Another effective heuristic for a proposal argument is to ask yourself a series of 
questions based on the “stock issues” strategy. Suppose, for example, you wanted to 
develop the following argument: “In order to solve the problem of students who won’t 
■ ■ ■

	
Chapter 14    Proposal Arguments	
255
take risks with their writing, the faculty should adopt a pass/fail method of grading 
in all writing courses.” The stock issues strategy invites the writer to consider “stock” 
ways (that is, common, usual, frequently repeated ways) that such arguments can be 
conducted.
Stock issue 1: Is there really a problem here that needs to be solved? Is it really 
true that a large number of student writers won’t take risks in their writing? Is this 
problem more serious than other writing problems such as undeveloped ideas, 
lack of organization, and poor sentence structure? This stock issue invites the 
writer to convince her audience that a true problem exists. Conversely, an oppo-
nent to the proposal may argue that a true problem does not exist.
Stock issue 2: Will the proposed solution really solve this problem? Is it true that 
a pass/fail grading system will cause students to take more risks with their writ-
ing? Will more interesting, surprising, and creative essays result from pass/fail 
grading? Or will students simply put less effort into their writing? This stock issue 
prompts a supporter to demonstrate that the proposal will solve the problem; in 
contrast, it prompts the opponent to show that the proposal won’t work.
Stock issue 3: Can the problem be solved more simply without disturbing the 
­status quo? An opponent of the proposal may agree that a problem exists and 
that the proposed solution might solve it. However, the opponent may say, “Are 
there not less radical ways to solve this problem? If we want more creative and 
risk-­taking student essays, can’t we just change our grading criteria so that we 
reward risky papers and penalize conventional ones?” This stock issue prompts 
supporters to show that only the proposed solution will solve the problem 
and that no minor tinkering with the status quo will be adequate. Conversely, 
opponents will argue that the problem can be solved without acting on the 
proposal.
Stock issue 4: Is the proposed solution really practical? Does it stand a chance 
of actually being enacted? Here an opponent to the proposal may agree that 
the proposal would work but contends that it involves pie-in-the-sky idealism. 
Nobody will vote to change the existing system so radically; therefore, it is a 
waste of our time to debate it. Following this prompt, supporters would have to 
argue that pass/fail grading is workable and that enough faculty members are 
disposed to it that the proposal is worth debating. Opponents may argue that 
the faculty is so traditional that pass/fail has utterly no chance of being ­accepted, 
despite its merits.
Stock issue 5: What will be the unforeseen positive and negative consequences 
of the proposal? Suppose we do adopt a pass/fail system. What positive or nega-
tive consequences may occur that are different from what we at first predicted? 
Using this prompt, an opponent may argue that pass/fail grading will reduce 
the effort put forth by students and that the long-range effect will be writing 
of even lower quality than we have now. Supporters would try to find positive 
­consequences—perhaps a new love of writing for its own sake rather than for 
the sake of a grade.

256	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
■ ■ ■	 For Class Discussion  Brainstorming Ideas for a Proposal
The following collaborative task takes approximately two class days to complete. The 
exercise takes you through the process of creating a proposal argument.
	 1.	 In small groups, identify and list several major problems facing students in your 
college or university.
	 2.	 Decide among yourselves which are the most important of these problems and 
rank them in order of importance.
	 3.	 Take your group’s number one problem and explore answers to the following 
questions. Group recorders should be prepared to present their group’s answers to 
the class as a whole:
	a.	Why is the problem a problem?
	b.	For whom is the problem a problem?
	c.	How will these people suffer if the problem is not solved? (Give specific 
examples.)
	d.	Who has the power to solve the problem?
	e.	Why hasn’t the problem been solved up to this point?
	f.	How can the problem be solved? (That is, create a proposal.)
	g.	What are the probable benefits of acting on your proposal?
	h.	What costs are associated with your proposal?
	i.	Who will bear those costs?
	j.	Why should this proposal be enacted?
	k.	Why is it better than alternative proposals?
	 4.	 As a group, draft an outline for a proposal argument in which you
	a.	 describe the problem and its significance.
	b.	 propose your solution to the problem.
	c.	 justify your proposal by showing how the benefits of adopting that proposal 
­outweigh the costs.
	 5.	 Recorders for each group should write their group’s outline on the board and be 
prepared to explain it to the class.
Proposal Arguments as Advocacy Posters or Advertisements
A frequently encountered kind of proposal argument is the one-page news-
paper or magazine advertisement often purchased by advocacy groups to 
promote a cause. Such arguments also appear as Web pages or as posters 
or fliers. These condensed advocacy arguments are marked by their bold, 
abbreviated, tightly planned format. The creators of these arguments know 
they must work fast to capture our attention, give presence to a problem, 
advocate a solution, and enlist our support. Advocacy advertisements frequently use 
photographs, images, or icons that appeal to a reader’s emotions and imagination. In 
addition to images, they often use different type sizes and styles. Large-type text in 
these documents frequently takes the form of slogans or condensed thesis statements 
written in an arresting style. To outline and justify their solutions, creators of advocacy 
■ ■ ■
14.4  To use 
words and images 
to create an ad-
vocacy poster or 
advertisement

	
Chapter 14    Proposal Arguments	
257
ads often put main supporting reasons in bulleted lists and sometimes enclose care-
fully selected facts and quotations in boxed sidebars. To add an authoritative ethos, the 
arguments often include fine-print footnotes and bibliographies. (For more detailed 
discussion of how advocacy posters and advertisements use images and arrange text 
for rhetorical effect, see Chapter 9 on visual argument.)
Another prominent feature of these condensed, highly visual arguments is their 
appeal to the audience through a direct call for a course of action: go to an advocacy 
Web site to find more information on how to support the cause; cut out a postcardlike 
form to send to a decision maker; vote for or against the proposition or the candidate; 
write a letter to a political representative; or donate money to a cause.
An example of a student-produced advocacy advertisement is shown in Figure 14.1. 
Here, environmental studies student Janie Bube urges residents of her city to build rain 
Is Stormwater Turning Your Street Into a Lake?
Installing green stormwater infrastructure technologies like rain
gardens will address this problem.
Install a rain garden to:
•   Slow, retain, and absorb runoff
•   Replicate the functioning of a forest in cleaning pollutants from the water
•   Add natural beauty
For further information contact RainWise through Seattle Public Utilities at
rainwise@seattle.gov
Figure 14.1  Student advocacy poster

258	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
gardens to help solve the problem of excess storm water. At the top of this poster, Janie 
uses a photo of a flood she took during her internship fieldwork to give the problem 
presence. She then offers her proposed solution, made visually appealing by another 
of her own photos—a neighborhood rain garden. She offers three reasons to justify the 
choice of rain gardens, asserting why and how rain gardens work. The final lines of the 
poster give readers a Web site for more information. The rhetorical effect of the text, 
image, and layout is to attract readers’ attention, remind them of the problem, and push 
them toward adopting her proposed solution.
Writing Assignment  A Proposal Argument
Option 1: A Practical Proposal Addressing a Local Problem  Write a prac-
tical proposal offering a solution to a local problem. Your proposal should 
have three main sections: (1) description of the problem, (2) proposed solu-
tion, and (3) justification. Proposals are usually accompanied by a letter of 
transmittal—a one-page business letter that introduces the proposal to its intended audi-
ence and provides some needed background about the writer.
Option 2: A Policy Proposal as a Guest Editorial  Write a two- to three-page policy 
proposal suitable for publication as a feature editorial in a college or city newspaper, on an 
appropriate Web site, or in a publication associated with a particular group, such as a church 
newsletter or employee bulletin. The voice and style of your argument should be aimed at 
readers of your chosen publication or Web site. Your editorial should have the following 
features:
	 1.	The identification of a problem (Persuade your audience that this is a genuine 
problem that needs solving; give it presence.)
	 2.	A proposal for action that will help alleviate the problem
	 3.	A justification of your solution (the reasons why your audience should accept 
your proposal and act on it)
Option 3: A Researched Argument Proposing Public Policy  Write an eight- to twelve-
page proposal argument as a formal research paper, using researched data for development 
and support. In business and professional life, this kind of research proposal is often called 
a white paper, which recommends a course of action internally within an organization or 
externally to a client or stakeholder. An example of a researched policy proposal is student 
writer Ivan Snook’s “Flirting with Disaster: An Argument against Integrating Women into 
the Combat Arms” on pages 264–268.
Option 4: Multimedia Project: A One-Page Advocacy Poster or Advertisement  Using 
the strategies of visual argument discussed in Chapter 9 and on pages 256–258 of this 
chapter, create a one-page advocacy advertisement urging action on a public issue. Your 
advertisement should be designed for publication in a newspaper or on a Web site, or for 
distribution as a poster or flier. An example of a student-produced advocacy advertisement 
is shown in Figure 14.1 on page 257.
14.5  To write 
your own proposal 
argument

	
Chapter 14    Proposal Arguments	
259
Option 5: Multimedia Project: A Proposal Speech with Visual Aids  Deliver a ­proposal 
argument as a prepared but extemporaneous speech of approximately five to eight minutes, 
supported with visual aids created on presentation software such as PowerPoint or Prezi. 
Your speech should present a problem, propose a solution, and justify the solution with rea-
sons and evidence. Use visual aids to give “presence” to the problem and to enhance appeals 
to logos, ethos, and pathos. Good aids use visual strategies to create encapsulated visual argu-
ments; they are not simply bullet point outlines of your speech. Sandy Wainscott’s speech 
outline and selected PowerPoint slides (­pages 269–270) illustrate this genre.
Exploring Ideas 
Because should or ought issues are among the most common sources of arguments, 
you may already have ideas for proposal issues. To think of ideas for practical propos-
als, try making an idea map of local problems you would like to see solved. For initial 
spokes, try trigger words such as the following:
	
■	 Problems at my university (dorms, parking, registration system, financial aid, 
campus appearance, clubs, curriculum, intramural program, athletic teams)
	
■	 Problems in my city or town (dangerous intersections, ugly areas, inadequate 
lighting, parks, police policy, public transportation, schools)
	
■	 Problems at my place of work (office design, flow of customer traffic, merchandise 
display, company policies)
	
■	 Problems related to my future career, hobbies, recreational time, life as a consumer, 
life as a homeowner
If you can offer a solution to the problem you identify, you may make a valuable con-
tribution to some phase of public life.
To find a topic for policy proposals, stay in touch with the news, which will keep 
you aware of current debates on regional and national issues. Also, visit the Web sites 
of your congressional representatives to see what issues they are currently investigating 
and debating. You might think of your policy proposal as a white paper for one of your 
legislators.
Once you have decided on a proposal issue, we recommend you explore it by 
trying one or more of the following activities:
	
■	 Explore ideas by using the claim types strategy (see pages 252–254).
	
■	 Explore ideas by using the “stock issues” strategy (see pages 254–255).
	
■	 Explore ideas using the eleven questions (3a–3k) on pages 256.
Identifying Your Audience and Determining What’s at Stake 
Before drafting your argument, identify your targeted audience and determine what’s 
at stake. Consider your responses to the following questions:
	
■	 What audience are you targeting? What background do they need to understand 
your problem? How much do they already care about it? How could you motivate 
them to care?

260	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
	
■	 After they read your argument, what stance do you imagine them holding? What 
change do you want to bring about in their view or their behavior?
	
■	 What will they find uncomfortable or threatening about your proposal? Particularly, 
what costs will they incur by acting on your proposal?
	
■	 What objections might they raise? What counterarguments or alternative solutions 
will you need to address?
	
■	 Why does your proposal matter? What is at stake?
Organizing a Proposal Argument 
When you write your draft, you may find it helpful to have at hand an organization 
plan for a proposal argument. The plan on page 261 shows a typical structure for a 
proposal argument. In some cases, you may want to summarize and rebut opposing 
views before you present the justification for your own proposal.
Designing a One-Page Advocacy Advertisement 
As an alternative to a traditional written argument, your instructor may ask you to 
create a one-page advocacy advertisement. The first stage of your invention process 
should be the same as that for a longer proposal argument. Choose a controversial 
public issue that needs immediate attention or a neglected issue about which you 
want to arouse public passion. As with a longer proposal argument, consider your 
audience in order to identify the values and beliefs on which you will base your 
appeal.
When you construct your argument, the limited space available demands efficiency 
in your choice of words and in your use of document design. Your goal is to have a 
memorable impact on your reader in order to promote the action you advocate. The 
following questions may help you design and revise your advocacy ad.
	 1.	 How could photos or other graphic elements establish and give presence to the 
problem?
	 2.	 How can type size, type style, and layout be used to present the core of your pro-
posal, including the justifying reasons, in the most powerful way for the intended 
audience?
	 3.	 Can any part of this argument be presented as a memorable slogan or catch-
phrase? What key phrases could highlight the parts or the main points of this 
argument?
	 4.	 How can document design clarify the course of action and the direct demand on 
the audience this argument is proposing?
	 5.	 How can use of color enhance the overall impact of your advocacy argument? 
(Note: One-page advertisements are expensive to reproduce in color, but you 
might make effective use of color if your advocacy ad were to appear as a poster 
or Web page.)

	
Chapter 14    Proposal Arguments	
261
Introduce and develop the
problem.
Justify your proposed solution
through a series of supporting
reasons.
•   Restate your claim and forecast your supporting
    reasons.
•   Present and develop reason 1.
•   Present and develop reason 2.
•   Present and develop additional reasons.
Respond to objections or to
alternative proposals.
•   Anticipate and summarize possible objections or
    alternative ways to solve the problem.
•   Respond appropriately through rebuttal or
    concession.
Conclude.
•   Sum up your argument and help readers return to
    the “big picture” of what’s at stake.
•   Call readers to action.
•   End with something memorable.
Present your proposed solution
to the problem.
•   First, state your proposal concisely to serve as
    your thesis statement or claim.
•   Then, explain the specifics of your proposal.
•   Engage readers’ interest in your problem.
•   Provide background, including previous attempts
    to solve the problem.
•   Give the problem “presence” by showing who is
    affected and what is at stake.
•   Argue that the problem is solvable (optional).
Organization Plan for a Proposal Argument
Designing PowerPoint Slides or Other Visual Aids for a Speech 
In designing visual aids, your goal is to increase the persuasive effect of your speech 
rather than to demonstrate your technical wizardry. If you find yourself thinking about 
special effects (animations, fade-outs, flashing letters) rather than about “at a glance” 
visual appeals to logos or pathos, you may be on the wrong track. Another common 
mistake is to use slides simply to project a bullet point outline of your speech. Our best 
advice in designing slides is to “think visual argument.”

262	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
In terms of visual argument, effective presentation slides can usually be placed 
into three design categories:
	
■	 Slides using images (photographs, drawings) to enhance pathos or to create 
snapshot visual clarity of a concept (logos)
	
■	 Slides using graphs or other visual displays of numbers to make numeric arguments
	
■	 Slides using bulleted (all text) subpoints for evidence
All the strategies for visual arguments discussed in Chapter 9 and in this chapter under 
“Proposal Arguments as Advocacy Posters or Advertisements” (pages 256–258) apply 
equally to presentation slides.
In most cases, the “title” of the slide should put into words the “take-away point” of 
the slide—a verbal summary of the slide’s visual argument. Most rhetoricians suggest that 
the title of a slide be a short sentence that makes a point rather than just a topic phrase.
Topic as Title (Weak)
Point as Title (Strong)
Coal and the Environment
Burning Coal Produces Dangerous Greenhouse Gases
The Effect of Money on Happiness
More Money Doesn’t Mean More Happiness
Student writer Sandy Wainscott tried to follow these principles in her speech and ac-
companying PowerPoint slides shown on pages 269–270.  ■
Questioning and Critiquing a Proposal Argument 
As we’ve suggested, proposal arguments need to overcome the innate conservatism of 
people, the difficulty of anticipating all the consequences of a proposal, and so forth. 
What questions, then, can we ask about proposal arguments to help us anticipate these 
problems?
Will a skeptic deny that my problem is really a problem? Be prepared for skeptics 
who aren’t bothered by your problem, who see your problem as limited to a small 
group of people, or who think you are exaggerating.
Will a skeptic doubt the effectiveness of my solution? A skeptic might agree that 
your problem is indeed important, but will not be convinced that your solution will 
work. For these skeptics, you’ll need to provide evidence that your solution is work-
able. Also be prepared for skeptics who focus on the potential negative or unintended 
consequences of your proposed solution.
Will a skeptic think my proposal costs too much? The most commonly asked ques-
tion of any proposal is simply, “Do the benefits of enacting the proposal outweigh the 
costs?” Be wary of the understandable tendency to underestimate costs and exaggerate 
the benefits of a proposal. Honesty will enhance your ethos.
Will a skeptic suggest counterproposals? Once you’ve convinced readers that a 
problem exists, they are likely to suggest solutions different from yours. It only makes 
sense to anticipate alternative solutions and to work out ways to argue why your solu-
tion is better. And who knows, you may end up liking the counterproposal better and 
changing your mind about what to propose!

	
Chapter 14    Proposal Arguments	
263
Reading
Our first reading, by student writer Ivan Snook, is a researched public policy proposal 
written in response to the option 3 assignment on page 258. Snook’s argument is based 
both on library and Internet research, and on personal experience (he is a returning 
veteran who served as a Marine infantry soldier in Iraq). It is formatted as a formal 
research paper using the documentation style of the Modern Language Association 
(MLA). An explanation of this format is given in Appendix 2.

264	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
MLA
Snook 1
Ivan Snook
Dr. Johnson
Argumentative Writing
March 31, 2014
Flirting with Disaster: An Argument Against Integrating  
Women into the Combat Arms
In 2005 I was a rifleman for the elite 1st Reconnaissance Battalion in Iraq. 
My deployment was not all bad. When we returned to Camp Fallujah to repair our 
humvee we ate great chow, enjoyed good entertainment, and drank contraband vodka.  
I never had a girlfriend, though. I was too busy working in my all-male ­infantry unit. 
At the time I wished we had a few girls in the unit. What can I say? I wanted female 
companionship like the guys in non-combat jobs had. But I realized that women could 
never serve in the infantry because of the negative impact of boyfriend/girlfriend 
­dramatics on unit morale, cohesiveness, and ultimately combat effectiveness.
However, America’s civilian leadership recently moved towards integrating 
women into frontline combat arms units such as infantry, tanks, and artillery. In 
January, 2014, Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta lifted the Pentagon’s policy on 
all-male combat arms occupations. “The department’s goal . . . is to ensure that the 
mission is met with the best qualified and most capable people, regardless of gender,” 
he said. “I’m not talking about reducing the qualifications for the job—if they can 
meet the qualifications for the job, then they should have a right to serve” (qtd. in 
Michaels and Vanden Brook). President Obama expanded upon Panetta’s sentiment 
by saying, “Every American can be proud that our military will grow even stronger, 
with our mothers, wives, sisters, and daughters playing a greater role in protecting 
this country we love” (qtd. in Michaels and Vanden Brook, emphasis mine).
If this policy change will indeed strengthen our military, every American should 
support it. However, no one has specified how integrating women into the combat 
arms will strengthen our military. I wholeheartedly agree with integrationists who 
claim that women can meet the rigorous physical and mental requirements for frontline 
combat. Any CrossFit has at least half a dozen women more physically and mentally 
fit than some of my Marine brothers in arms. If those were the sole criteria by which 
we evaluate infantrymen, I would endorse integration. But, how an individual soldier 
affects the combat unit as a whole must be considered. The great military theorist Carl 

	
Chapter 14    Proposal Arguments	
265
MLA
Snook 2
von Clausewitz coined the term “friction” to represent the “[c]ountless minor incidents  
. . . [that] combine to lower the general level of performance [of the military machine].” 
He continues, “We should bear in mind that none of its components is of one piece: 
each part is composed of individuals, every one of whom retains his potential of fric-
tion” (119). Therefore, we must not judge individual soldiers only by their individual 
physical capabilities, but also by their impact on the unit as a whole.
Introducing women to previously all-male combat units means introducing 
the friction of romantic relationships. Petty jealousies and other dramatic relational 
issues combine to lower the general level of performance. In 1997, the non-profit 
global policy think tank RAND Corporation studied how romantic relationships 
affect coed military units. The study reported that such relationships “sexualize” the 
work environment, making it “difficult for colleagues to regard one another as just 
coworkers. Thus, the cohesion of the unit is negatively affected” (Harrell and Miller 
81). One respondent complained, “The [cafeteria]. . .at night looks more like a 
singles club or promenade deck than a cafeteria [for a military unit].” Another said, 
“I get tired of seeing a junior enlisted female and her boyfriend [at the cafeteria]. . . . 
This place is like high school all over again. Everyone is dating others. To me this 
is not the military. We are here to do a job not meet our spouse. Guys seem more 
­worried about getting a girl than doing their job” (Harrell and Miller 81-82).
Integrationists claim the military’s high level of discipline coupled with strict 
rules against fraternization will prevent romantic relationships. However, those strict 
rules have always been in place and have never worked. During the Gulf War, 5 percent 
of deployed women were sent home early due to pregnancy. The Navy sends home on 
average 10 percent of deployed female sailors for the same reason. The USS Theodore 
Roosevelt, one of America’s largest aircraft carriers, lost 45 of its 300 female sailors to 
pregnancy leave and became one of the many U.S. Navy ships to earn the nickname 
“The Love Boat” (Browne 246). My point is not about morality. These statistics dem-
onstrate that despite strict rules against fraternization, 18-25 year olds succumb to their 
natural urges. What else should one expect when young adults are locked away on ship 
or deployed to Afghanistan for months at a time? It is analogous to locking the doors 
on a coed college dormitory for a year and making rules against sex. It is preposterous 
to expect 18-25 year olds to work, live, and relax together in such close proximity and 
expect no romantic relationships to sprout.

266	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
MLA
Snook 3
These problems are more than just trifling lovers’ quarrels. They affect a serious 
decline in performance and can lead to a total breakdown of command structure. In 
2005, Brian Kates of the New York Daily News visited Camp Bucca, a military prison 
in Southern Iraq, which he described as a drunken “out-of-control frat party.” “In front 
of a cheering male audience, two young women wearing only bras and panties threw 
themselves into a mud-filled plastic kiddie pool and rolled around in a wild wrestling 
match.” Sergeant Emil Ganim, who refereed the match, said other non-commissioned 
officers “had been lending out their rooms for soldiers to have sex.” These were not 
just young privates, either. A witness told investigators that a drunken first sergeant 
and master sergeant, two high-ranking non-commissioned officers, were in attendance 
(Kates). Although Camp Bucca was far away from any actual fighting, it is safe to 
assume similar sexual antics and command structure breakdowns will occur in coed 
frontline combat units whose members confront their own mortality on a daily basis.
Still, Camp Bucca is not the worst case scenario. The military is currently bat-
tling an epidemic of rape and sexual assault. A study conducted by the Department of 
Veterans’ Affairs reported that one-third of female veterans say they were victims of 
rape or attempted rape. A third of those claim they were raped multiple times, and 14 
percent claim they were gang raped (Browne). Introducing females to frontline combat  
units will only exacerbate the problem. Dr. David Grossman, one of the world’s fore-
most experts on human aggression and the psychology of combat, has explained how 
combat stress affects human sex drive. He analogizes the human body’s ability to cope 
with stress to a bathtub: it can hold only so much water before overflowing. When our 
body overflows with stress the midbrain releases hormones causing a fight or flight 
response, often followed by a dramatic change in hunger and sex drive. Grossman 
writes, “Some people lose their appetite for food in response to stress, but many have 
an enhanced craving to eat. In the same way, some individuals can lose their sex drive 
in response to great stress, but other people experience a tremendous sex drive, espe-
cially after a combat situation in which they were triumphant” (275). Frontline combat 
is fueled by stress hormones, and the potential for a woman to be sexually assaulted 
is very high. An inter-unit sexual assault costs the unit two soldiers: the victim is typi-
cally transferred to a new unit, the assaulter is sent to prison. Replacing two comrades 
integrated in a tight-knit unit with two new recruits is a difficult blow to a unit’s esprit 
de corps and trust members have in one another. Thus, to put at risk a female soldier’s 
sexual well-being is to also put at risk her unit’s combat ability.

	
Chapter 14    Proposal Arguments	
267
MLA
Snook 4
Rather than respond to the physiological realities of preparing for and 
­engaging in combat, integrationists such as CNN’s Maren Leed deflect to a false 
analogy connecting integration of women to past arguments against integrating 
­minorities and homosexuals. Regarding minorities, race is a social construct not a 
biological difference. Whereas the military somewhat successfully trained its men to 
not act on racial prejudices, it is improbable that 18-25 year old men can be trained 
to be not sexually attracted to women. Regarding homosexuals, one homosexual has 
little effect on a group of heterosexuals, but one female can have a significant impact 
on a large group of stress hormone driven heterosexual men.
Another integrationist argument is that changes in modern warfare already put 
women in combat. They say modern warfare is “asymmetric” and attacks can come 
from anywhere. It is true that women have served in combat in Afghanistan and Iraq, 
but integrationists erroneously believe the nature of warfare has evolved beyond 
traditional frontlines. Every American military engagement since World War II has 
been a limited war, but that does not mean all future wars will be. The wars our mil-
itary must prepare to fight are global conflicts where combat troops face well-armed 
and well-trained enemies on traditional frontlines.
Perhaps the most important argument made by integrationists, and one 
to which I am sympathetic, concerns fairness and equity. It is extremely dif-
ficult to be promoted to General without infantry training. Some may say the 
Army should change its promotion policy, but this would harm overall morale. 
Frontline troops more enthusiastically follow leaders who are sharing, or have at 
one time shared, the toils and dangers of war. Thus, high-ranking female officers 
hit a glass ceiling because no such experience is available to them. However, there 
is an alternative to break through this glass ceiling without making all combat 
units coed. The U.S. Army National Guard consists of every imaginable combat 
arms occupation. If they were opened to aspirant female soldiers, they would 
have access to the necessary experience for advancement to the military’s upper 
echelon and have the option of transferring from the National Guard to active 
duty. General John Vessey began his illustrious career in the National Guard 
­infantry and was later selected as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. This 
compromise would give women the opportunity to get infantry training while still 
protecting our active duty frontline infantry units from the unnecessary friction 
caused by romantic relationships.

268	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
MLA
A PROP
Subm
Snook 5
Although some outsiders call terms like friction, morale, and unit cohesion 
mere buzzwords, to the Marines they mean life or death. Coed infantry is a parlous 
experiment with too much at stake. The restriction against women joining the infan-
try must be reinstated before the policy becomes entrenched and the negative side 
effects of romantic relationships deteriorate our fighting ability. I fully support gen-
der equality, and I am proud of the brave women in the Marines, Army, Navy, and 
Air Force who have sacrificed so much defending this country I love. But when one 
considers the ultimate mission of the military, which is to win wars, we must not risk 
losing the cohesion of combat units when there is no exigent reason to do so except 
for the sake of expanding military career opportunities for women.
Works Cited
Browne, Kingsley. Co-Ed Combat: The New Evidence That Women Shouldn’t Fight 
the Nation’s Wars. New York: Sentinel, 2007. Print.
Clausewitz, Carl von. On War. 1832. Trans. Michael Howard and Peter Paret. 
Princeton: Princeton, 1984. Print.
Grossman, David. On Combat: The Psychology and Physiology of Deadly Conflict in 
War and in Peace. 3rd ed. Millstadt: Warrior Science, 2008. Print.
Harrell, Margaret C., and Laura L. Miller. “New Opportunities for Women: Effects 
of Gender Integration on Morale.” RAND Corporation, 1 Jan. 1997. Web. 15 
Mar. 2014.
Kates, Brian. “Out of Control at Camp Crazy! Female Soldiers Dress Down & Get 
Dirty for Mud Romps.” New York Daily News, 6 Feb. 2005. Web. 15 Mar. 2014.
Leed, Maren. “Will Infantry Men Accept Women as Peers?” CNN, 25 Jan. 2013. 
Web. 15 Mar. 2014.
Michaels, Jim, and Tom Vanden Brook. “Women, Men Must Meet Same Combat 
Standards in Military.” USA Today, 13 Jan. 2014. Web. 15 Mar. 2014.
Snook 6

	
Chapter 14    Proposal Arguments	
269
Our second reading, by student Sandy Wainscott, illustrates option 5, a proposal 
speech supported by visual aids. We have reproduced Sandy’s outline for her speech, 
along with her scripts for the introduction and conclusion. (Although she delivered 
the body of the speech extemporaneously from her outline, she scripted the introduc-
tion and conclusion to reduce nervousness.) We have also reproduced four of her ten 
PowerPoint slides. She used these four slides to introduce each of the four main points 
shown on the outline. Note how she has constructed her slides as visual arguments 
supporting a main point (stated in the slide title).
Why McDonald’s Should Sell Meat  
and Veggie Pies: A Proposal to End Subsidies  
for Cheap Meat
Sandy Wainscott (student)
Script for Introduction: McDonald’s hamburgers are popular because they’re satisfy-
ing and pretty darn cheap. But I will argue that the hamburger is cheap because the 
American taxpayer subsidizes the cost of meat. Uncle Sam pays agribusiness to grow 
feed corn while not requiring agribusiness to pay the full cost for water or for cleaning 
up the environmental damage caused by cattle production. If meat producers had to 
recover the true cost of their product, the cost of meat would be substantially higher, 
but there would be offsetting benefits: a healthier environment, happier lives for cows 
and chickens, and healthier diets for all of us.
1.	 Meat is relatively cheap partly because taxpayers help feed the cows.
a.	 U.S. taxpayers give farmers money to grow feed corn, which is fed to cows.
b.	 U.S. taxpayers provide farmers with cheap water.
2.	 Cheap meat threatens health.
a.	 Factory-style farms significantly reduce the effectiveness of antibiotics.
b.	 Antibiotic-resistant pathogens are potentially huge killers.
c.	 Factory farms are likely sources of new swine and bird flus.
d.	Meat-related food poisoning harms millions of people per year with thousands 
of deaths.
3.	 Cheap meat hurts the environment.
a.	 Factory farms create 130 times more sewage than humans.
b.	 Animal farming contributes more to global warming than all forms of human 
transportation combined.
c	 Farming uses much of the world’s land and water.
4.	 Cheap meat requires cruelty to animals.
a.	 Ninety-eight percent of egg-laying hens in the United States spend their entire 
lives in stacked cubicle cages with 9-inch sides.
b.	 Cruel conditions also exist for pigs and cows.

270	
Part 4	
Arguments in Depth
Script for Conclusion: If we quit giving farmers taxpayer subsidies and required them 
to pay for the pollution they cause, the cost of meat would be much higher—but with 
great benefits to our health and to our environment. A restaurant like McDonald’s 
would likely adjust its menus. McDonald’s would move the burger off its 99 cent 
menu and replace it with something like a meat pie, a similarly warm, quick, and sat-
isfying choice, but with a lower proportion of meat than a burger. In a fair market, 
we should have to pay more for a hamburger than for a meat pie or a stir fry. But we 
would have the benefit of a healthier Earth.
Meat is relatively cheap because taxpayers help
feed the cows
Corn again ?
Figure 14.2  Sandy’s PowerPoint slides used to introduce main points
Cheap meat threatens health
Most antibiotics are used on farm animals
• Animal farming is a leading contributor to antibiotic-
 resistant germs
70% used
on farm
animals
30% used
on humans
Cheap meat reqiures cruelty to animals
Cheap meat hurts the environment
US animal farms produce 
as the entire US human population
130 times as much sewage waste

	
	
271
1
Informal Fallacies
Appendix
In this appendix, we look at ways of assessing the legitimacy of an argument 
within a real-world context of probabilities rather than within a mathemati-
cal world of certainty. Whereas formal logic is a kind of mathematics, the 
informal fallacies addressed in this appendix get embedded in everyday argu-
ments, sometimes making fallacious reasoning seem deceptively persuasive, 
especially to unwary audiences. Fallacies of pathos rest on flaws in the way an 
argument appeals to the audience’s emotions and values. Fallacies of ethos rest 
on flaws in the way the argument appeals to the character of opponents or of 
sources and witnesses within an argument. Fallacies of logos rest on flaws in 
the relationship among statements in an argument.
Fallacies of Pathos
Argument to the People (Appealing to Stirring Symbols)  Arguments 
to the people appeal to the fundamental beliefs, biases, and prejudices of the 
audience in order to sway opinion through a feeling of solidarity among those 
of the group. Thus a “Support Our Troops” bumper sticker, often includ-
ing the American flag, creates an initial feeling of solidarity among almost 
all citizens of good will. But the car owner may have the deeper ­intention of 
actually meaning “support our president” or “support the war in _________.” 
The stirring symbol of the flag and the desire shared by most people to sup-
port our troops is used fallaciously to urge support of a particular political 
act. Arguments to the people often use visual rhetoric, as in the soaring eagle 
used in Wal-Mart corporate ads or images of happy families in marketing 
advertisements.
Appeal to Ignorance  This fallacy persuades an audience to accept as true 
a claim that hasn’t been proved false or vice versa. “Jones must have used 
steroids to get those bulging biceps because he can’t prove that he hasn’t used 
steroids.” Appeals to ignorance are particularly common in the murky field of 
pseudo-science. “UFOs (or ghosts, or abominable snowmen) do exist because 
science hasn’t proven that they don’t exist.” Sometimes, however, it is hard to 
draw a line between a fallacious appeal to ignorance and a legitimate appeal to 
precaution: “Genetically modified organisms must be dangerous to our health 
because science hasn’t proven that they are safe.”

272	
Appendix 1    Informal Fallacies
Appeal to Popularity—Bandwagon  To board the bandwagon means (to use a 
more contemporary metaphor) to board the bus or train of what’s popular. Appeals 
to popularity are fallacious because the popularity of something is irrelevant to its 
actual merits. “Living together before marriage is the right thing to do because most 
couples are now doing it.” Bandwagon appeals are common in advertising where the 
claim that a product is popular substitutes for evidence of the product’s excellence. 
There are times, however, where popularity may indeed be relevant: “Global warming 
is probably caused by human activity because a preponderance of scientists now hold 
this position.” (Here we assume scientists haven’t simply climbed on a bandwagon 
themselves, but have formed their opinions based on research data and well vetted, 
peer-reviewed papers.)
Appeal to Pity  Here the arguer appeals to the audience’s sympathetic feelings 
in order to support a claim that should be decided on more relevant or objective 
grounds. “Honorable judge, I should not be fined $200 for speeding because I was 
distraught from hearing news of my brother’s illness and was rushing to see him in 
the hospital.” Here the argument is fallacious because the arguer’s reason, while evok-
ing sympathy, is not a relevant justification for speeding (as it might have been, for 
instance, if the arguer had been rushing an injured person to the emergency room).
Red Herring  This fallacy’s funny name derives from the practice of using a red 
herring (a highly odiferous fish) to throw dogs off a scent that they are supposed to 
be tracking. It refers to the practice of throwing an audience off track by raising an 
­unrelated or irrelevant point. “Debating a gas tax increase is valuable, but I really think 
there should be an extra tax on SUVs.” Here the arguer, apparently uncomfortable with 
the gas tax issue, diverts the conversation to the emotional issue of SUVs.
Fallacies of Ethos
Appeal to False Authority  Arguers appeal to false authority when they use famous 
persons (often movie stars or celebrities) to testify on issues about which these persons 
have no special competence. “Joe Quarterback says Gooey Oil keeps his old tractor 
running sharp; therefore, Gooey Oil is a good oil.” Real evidence about the quality of 
Gooey Oil would include technical data about the product rather than testimony from 
a hired celebrity.
Ad Hominem  Literally, ad hominem means “to the person.” An ad hominem argu-
ment is directed at the character of an opponent rather than at the quality of the reason-
ing. Ideally, arguments are supposed to be ad rem (“to the thing”), that is, addressed to 
the specifics of the case itself. Thus an ad rem critique of a politician would focus on her 
voting record, the consistency and cogency of her public statements, her responsiveness 
to constituents, and so forth. An ad hominem argument would shift attention from her 
record to irrelevant features of her personality, life circumstances, or the company she 
keeps. “Senator Sweetwater’s views on the gas tax should be ­discounted because her 
campaign was supported by the huge oil companies” or “Senator Sweetwater supports 
tax cuts for the wealthy because she is very wealthy herself and stands to gain.” But not 

	
Appendix 1    Informal Fallacies	
273
all ad hominem arguments are ad hominem fallacies. Lawyers, for example, when ques-
tioning expert witnesses who give damaging testimony, will often make an issue of their 
honesty, credibility, or personal investment in an outcome.
Poisoning the Well  This fallacy is closely related to ad hominem. Arguers poison 
the well when they discredit an opponent or an opposing view in advance. “Before I 
yield the floor to the next speaker, I must remind you that persons who oppose my 
plan do not have the best interests of working people in their hearts.”
Straw Man  The straw man fallacy occurs when you oversimplify an opponent’s 
argument to make it easier to refute or ridicule. Rather than summarizing an oppos-
ing view fairly and completely, you basically make up the argument you wish your 
opponent had made because it is so much easier to knock over, like knocking over a 
straw man or scarecrow in a corn field.
Fallacies of Logos
Hasty Generalization  This fallacy occurs when someone makes a broad general-
ization on the basis of too little evidence. Generally, the evidence needed to support a 
generalization persuasively must meet the STAR criteria (sufficiency, typicality, accuracy, 
and relevance) discussed in Chapter 5 (pages 77–78). But what constitutes a sufficient 
amount of evidence? The generally accepted standards of sufficiency in any given field 
are difficult to determine. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA), for example, 
generally proceeds cautiously before certifying a drug as “safe.” However, if people are 
harmed by the side effects of an FDA-approved drug, critics often accuse the FDA of 
having made a hasty generalization. At the same time, patients eager to have access to 
a new drug and manufacturers eager to sell a new product may lobby the FDA to quit 
“dragging its feet” and get the drug to market. Hence, the point at which a hasty general-
ization passes over into the realm of a prudent generalization is nearly always uncertain 
and contested.
Part for the Whole  Sometimes called by its Latin name pars pro toto, this fallacy 
is closely related to hasty generalization. In this fallacy, arguers pick out a part of the 
whole or a sample of the whole (often not a typical or representative part or sample) 
and then claim what is true of the part is true for the whole. If, say, individuals wanted 
to get rid of the National Endowment for the Arts (NEA), they might focus on several 
controversial programs funded by the NEA and use them as justification for wiping out 
all NEA programs. The flip side of this fallacy occurs when an arguer picks only the 
best examples to make a case and omits other examples that might weaken the case.
Post Hoc, Ergo Propter Hoc  The Latin name of this fallacy means “after this, 
therefore because of this.” The fallacy occurs when a sequential relationship is mis-
taken for a causal relationship. (See Chapter 12, pages 211–212, where we discuss 
this fallacy in more depth.) For example, you may be guilty of this fallacy if you say 
“Cramming for a test really helps because last week I crammed for my psychology test 
and I got an A.” When two events occur frequently in conjunction with each other, 

274	
Appendix 1    Informal Fallacies
we’ve got a good case for a causal relationship. But until we can show how one causes 
the other and until we have ruled out other causes, we cannot be certain that a causal 
relationship is occurring. For example, the A on your psych test may have been the 
result of an easy exam. It is often difficult to tell when a post hoc fallacy occurs. When 
the New York police department changed its policing tactics in the early 1990s, the 
crime rate plummeted. But did the new policing tactics cause the drop in the crime 
rate? Many experts suggested other causes, including economist Steven Levitt, who 
attributes the declining crime rate to the legalization of abortion in the 1970s (and 
hence to a decline in unwanted children who might grow up to be criminals).
Begging the Question—Circular Reasoning  Arguers beg the question when they 
provide a reason that simply restates the claim in different words. Here is an ­example: 
“Abortion is murder because it is the intentional taking of the life of a human being.” 
Because “murder” is defined as “the intentional taking of the life of a human being,” 
the argument is circular. It is tantamount to saying “Abortion is murder because it is 
murder.”
False Dilemma—Either/Or  This fallacy occurs when an arguer oversimplifies 
a complex issue so that only two choices appear possible. Often one of the choices is 
made to seem unacceptable, so the only remaining option is the other choice. “It’s my 
way or the highway” is a typical example of a false dilemma. Here is a more subtle one: 
“Either we allow embryonic stem cell research, or we condemn persons with diabetes, 
Parkinson’s disease, or spinal injuries to a life without a cure.” Clearly there may be 
other options here including other approaches to curing these diseases.
Slippery Slope  The slippery slope fallacy is based on the fear that once we put 
a foot on a slippery slope heading in the wrong direction we’re doomed to slide right 
out of sight. The controlling metaphor is of a slick mountainside without places to 
hold on rather than of a staircase with numerous stopping places. Here is an example 
of a slippery slope: “Once we allow medical use of marijuana, we’ll eventually legal-
ize it for everyone, after which we’re on a slippery slope toward social acceptance of 
cocaine and heroin.”
False Analogy  In Chapter 11 on resemblance arguments, we explained that no 
analogy is perfect. Any two things being compared are similar in some ways and 
different in other ways. Whether an analogy is persuasive or false often depends 
on the audience’s initial degree of skepticism. For example, persons opposed to 
gun control may find the following argument persuasive: “Banning guns on the 
basis that guns accidentally kill people is like banning cars on the basis that cars 
accidentally kill people.” In contrast, supporters of gun control are likely to call this 
argument a false analogy on the basis of dissimilarities between cars and guns. (For 
example, they might say that banning cars would be far more disruptive on our 
society than would be banning guns.) Just when a persuasive analogy turns into 
a false analogy is difficult to say.
Non Sequitur  The name of this fallacy means “it does not follow.” Non sequitur is a 
catchall term for any claim that doesn’t follow from its premises or that is supported 

	
Appendix 1    Informal Fallacies	
275
by irrelevant premises. Sometimes the arguer seems to make an inexplicably illogical 
leap: “Genetically modified foods should be outlawed because they are not natural.” 
(Should anything that is not natural be outlawed? In what way are they not natural?) 
At other times, there may be a gap in the chain of reasons: “Violent video games 
have some social value because the Army uses them for recruiting.” (There may be 
an important idea emerging here, but too many logical steps are missing.) At still 
other times an arguer might support a claim with irrelevant reasons. “I should not 
receive a C in this course because I currently have a 3.8 GPA.”
Loaded Label or Definition  Sometimes arguers will try to influence their audi-
ence’s view of something by creating a loaded label or definition. For example, people 
who oppose the “estate tax” (which calls to mind rich people with estates) have rela-
beled it the “death tax” in order to give it a negative connotation without any markers 
of class or wealth. Or to take another example, proponents of organic foods could 
create definitions like the following: “Organic foods are safe and healthy foods grown 
without any pesticides, herbicides, or other unhealthy additives.” “Safe” and “healthy” 
are evaluative terms used fallaciously in what purports to be a definition. The intended 
implication is that non-organic foods are not safe and healthy.

276	
2
A Concise Guide to 
Evaluating, Using, and 
Documenting Sources
When you research material for your arguments, you will probably use sources 
from licensed databases and the World Wide Web as well as from a library’s 
print collection. You must be able to evaluate these sources, use them effec-
tively in your own arguments (avoiding plagiarism), and cite and document 
them accurately so that readers can retrace your steps. This appendix provides 
brief instruction for evaluating and using sources and for citing and docu-
menting them using both the MLA (Modern Language Association) and APA 
(American Psychological Association) systems.
Evaluating Your Sources by Reading Rhetorically
To be an effective researcher, you need to read your sources rhetorically. In 
this section we show you how to read your sources with your own goals in 
mind, take purposeful notes, and evaluate sources for reliability, credibility, 
angle of vision, and degree of advocacy. We also provide some additional 
advice for evaluating Web sources.
Reading with Your Own Goals in Mind
How you read a source depends to a certain extent on where you are in the 
­research process. Early in the process, when you are in the thesis-seeking, ex-
ploratory stage, your goal is to achieve a basic understanding about your research 
problem. You need to become aware of different points of view, learn what is 
unknown or controversial about your research question, see what values or 
­assumptions are in conflict, and build up your store of background knowledge.
Given these goals, at the early stages of research you should select over-
view kinds of sources to get you into the conversation. In some cases, even 
an encyclopedia or specialized reference work can be a good start for getting 
general background.
As you get deeper into your research, your questions become more 
focused, and the sources you read become more specialized. Once you for-
mulate a thesis and plan a structure for your paper, you can determine more 
clearly the sources you need and read them with purpose and direction.
Appendix

	
APPENDIX 2    A Concise Guide to Evaluating, Using, and Documenting Sources	
277
Reading with Rhetorical Awareness
To read your sources rhetorically, you should keep two basic questions in mind:
	 1.	 What was the source author’s purpose in writing this piece?
	 2.	 What might be my purpose in using this piece?
Table A2.1 sums up the kinds of questions a rhetorical reader typically considers.
Table A2.1 reinforces a point we’ve made throughout this text: all writing is 
produced from an angle of vision that privileges some ways of seeing and filters out 
other ways. You should guard against reading your sources as if they present hard, 
undisputed facts or universal truths. For example, if one of your sources says that 
“Saint-John’s-wort [an herb] has been shown to be an effective treatment for depres-
sion,” some of your readers might accept that statement as fact—but many wouldn’t. 
Skeptical readers would want to know who the author is, where his views have been 
published, and what he uses for evidence. Let’s say the author is someone named 
Samuel Jones. Skeptical readers would ask whether Jones is relying on published 
research, and if so, whether the studies have been peer reviewed in reputable, schol-
arly journals and whether the research has been replicated by other scientists. They 
would also want to know whether a trade association for herbal supplements spon-
sored the research and whether Jones has financial connections to companies that 
Table A2.1  Questions Asked by Rhetorical Readers
What was the source author’s purpose in  
writing this piece?
What might be my purpose in using this piece  
in my own argument?
•	
Who is this author? What are his or her ­credentials 
and affiliations?
•	
What audience is this person addressing?
•	
What is the genre of this piece? (if you downloaded 
the piece from the World Wide Web, did it originally 
appear in print?)
•	
If this piece appeared in print, what is the 
­reputation and bias of the journal, magazine, 
or press? Was the piece peer reviewed?
•	
If this piece appeared only on the Web, who 
or what organization sponsors the Web site 
(check the home page)? What is the reputation 
and bias of the sponsor?
•	
What is the author’s thesis or purpose?
•	
How does this author try to change his or her 
­audience’s view?
•	
What is this writer’s angle of vision or bias?
•	
What is omitted or censored from this text?
•	
How reliable and credible is this author?
•	
What facts, data, and other evidence does this 
­author use and what are the sources of these data?
•	
What are this author’s underlying values, 
­assumptions, and beliefs?
•	
How has this piece influenced or compticated 
my own thinking?
•	
How does this piece relate to my research 
question?
•	
How will my own intended audience react to 
this author?
•	
How might I use this piece in my own 
argument?
•	
Is it an opposing view that I might summarize?
•	
Is it an alternative point of view that I might 
­compare to other points of view?
•	
Does it have facts and data that I might use?
•	
Would a summary of all or part of this argument 
support or oppose one or more of my own 
points?
•	
Could I use this author for testimony? (If so, how 
should I indicate this author’s credentials?)
•	
If I use this source, will I need to acknowledge 
the author’s bias and angle of vision?

278	
APPENDIX 2    A Concise Guide to Evaluating, Using, and Documenting Sources
produce herbal remedies and supplements. Rather than settling the question about 
Saint-John’s-wort as a treatment for depression, a quotation from Jones may open up 
a heated controversy about medical research.
Reading rhetorically is thus a way of thinking critically about your sources. It influ-
ences the way you take notes, evaluate sources, and shape your argument.
Taking Purposeful Notes
Many beginning researchers opt not to take notes—a serious mistake, in our view. 
Instead, they simply photocopy or print articles, perhaps using a highlighter to mark pas-
sages. This practice, which experienced researchers almost never use, reduces your ability 
to engage the ideas in a source and to find your own voice in a conversation. When you 
begin drafting your paper, you’ll have no notes to refer to, no record of your thinking-in-
progress. Your only recourse is to revisit all your sources, thumbing through them one 
at a time—a practice that leads to passive cutting and pasting (and possible plagiarism).
Good note taking includes recording bibliographic information for each source, 
recording information and ideas from each source, and responding to each source 
with your own ideas and exploratory writing.
Recording Bibliographic Information  To take good research notes, begin by 
making a bibliographic entry for each source, following the documentation format 
assigned by your instructor. Although you will be tempted to put off doing this 
­mechanical task, there are two reasons to do it immediately:
■	 Doing it now, while the source is in front of you, will save you time in the long 
run. Otherwise you’ll have to try to retrieve the source, in a late-night panic, just 
before the paper is due.
■	 Doing it now will make you look at the source rhetorically. Is this a peer-reviewed 
journal article? A magazine article? An op-ed piece? A blog? Making the biblio-
graphic entry forces you to identify the source’s genre.
Recording Ideas and Information and Responding to Each Source  To take 
good research notes, follow the reading habits of summary and exploration discussed 
in Chapter 2, weaving back and forth between walking in the shoes of the source 
­author and then standing back to believe and doubt what the source says.
■	 Your informational notes on each source: Using the skills of summary writing 
explained in Chapter 2, summarize each source’s argument and record useful in-
formation. To avoid the risk of plagiarism later, make sure that you put quotation 
marks around any passages that you copy word for word (be sure to copy exactly). 
When you summarize or paraphrase passages, be sure to put the ideas entirely into 
your own words. (For more on quoting, summarizing, and paraphrasing sources, 
see pages 284–287.)
■	 Your own exploratory notes as you think of ideas: Write down your own ideas as 
they occur to you. Record your thinking-in-progress as you mull over and speak 
back to your sources.

	
APPENDIX 2    A Concise Guide to Evaluating, Using, and Documenting Sources	
279
An approach that encourages both modes of writing is to keep a dialectic or 
double-entry journal. Divide a page in half; enter your informational notes on one 
side and your exploratory writing on the other. If you use a computer, you can put 
your ­informational notes in one font and your own exploratory writing in another.
Taking effective notes is different from the mechanical process of copying out pas-
sages or simply listing facts and information. Rather, make your notes purposeful by 
imagining how you might use a given source in your research paper. Table A2.2 shows 
the different functions that research sources might play in your argument and high-
lights appropriate note-taking strategies for each function.
Table A2.2  Strategies for Taking Notes According to Purpose
Function that Source Might Play 
in Your Argument
Strategies for Informational Notes
Strategies for Exploratory Notes
Provides background about your 
problem or issue
•	
Summarize the information.
•	
Record specific facts and figures 
useful for background.
•	
Speculate on how much 
­background your readers 
will need.
Gives an alternative view that you 
will mention briefly
•	
Summarize the source’s argu-
ment in a couple of sentences; 
note its bias and perspective.
•	
Identify brief quotations 
that sum up the source’s 
perspective.
•	
Jot down ideas on how and 
why different sources disagree.
•	
Begin making an idea map of 
alternative views.
Provides an alternative or 
­opposing view that you might 
summarize fully and respond to
•	
Summarize the article fully 
and fairly (see Chapter 2 on 
summary writing).
•	
Note the kinds of 
evidence used.
•	
Speculate about why you 
disagree with the source and 
whether you can refute the 
­argument, concede to it, or 
compromise with it.
•	
Explore what research you’ll 
need to support your own 
argument.
Provides information or testimony 
that you might use as evidence
•	
Record the data or information.
•	
If using authorities for testimony, 
quote short passages.
•	
Note the credentials of the 
writer or person quoted.
•	
Record new ideas as they occur 
to you.
•	
Continue to think purpose-
fully about additional research 
you’ll need.
Mentions information or 
­testimony that counters your 
­position or raises doubts about 
your argument
•	
Note counterevidence.
•	
Note authorities who disagree 
with you.
•	
Speculate how you might 
­respond to counterevidence.
Provides a theory or method 
that influences your approach 
to the issue
•	
Note credentials of the author.
•	
Note passages that sparked 
ideas.
•	
Freewrite about how the 
source influences your method 
or ­approach.

280	
APPENDIX 2    A Concise Guide to Evaluating, Using, and Documenting Sources
Evaluating Sources
When you read sources for your research project, you need to evaluate them as you go 
along. As you read each potential source, ask yourself questions about the author’s reli-
ability, credibility, angle of vision, and degree of advocacy.
Reliability  “Reliability” refers to the accuracy of factual data in a source. If you check 
a writer’s “facts” against other sources, do you find that the facts are correct? Does the 
writer distort facts, take them out of context, or otherwise use them unreasonably? In 
some controversies, key data are highly disputed—for example, the frequency of date 
rape or the risk factors for many diseases. A reliable writer acknowledges these contro-
versies and doesn’t treat disputed data as fact. Furthermore, if you check out the sources 
used by a reliable writer, they’ll reveal accurate and careful research—respected primary 
sources rather than hearsay or secondhand reports. Journalists of reputable newspapers 
(not tabloids) pride themselves on meticulously checking out their facts, as do editors 
of serious popular magazines. Editing is often minimal for Web sources, however, and 
they can be notoriously unreliable. As you gain knowledge of your research question, 
you’ll develop a good ear for writers who play fast and loose with data.
Credibility  “Credibility” is similar to “reliability” but is based on internal rather 
than external factors. It refers to the reader’s trust in the writer’s honesty, goodwill, 
and trustworthiness and is apparent in the writer’s tone, reasonableness, fairness in 
summarizing opposing views, and respect for different perspectives. Audiences differ 
in how much credibility they will grant to certain authors. Nevertheless, a writer can 
achieve a reputation for credibility, even among bitter political opponents, by applying 
to issues a sense of moral courage, integrity, and consistency of principle.
Angle of Vision and Political Stance  By “angle of vision,” we mean the way that a 
piece of writing is shaped by the underlying values, assumptions, and beliefs of its au-
thor, resulting in a text that reflects a certain perspective, worldview, or belief system. 
Of paramount importance are the underlying values or beliefs that the writer assumes 
his or her readers will share. You can get useful clues about a writer’s angle of vision 
and intended audience by doing some quick research into the politics and reputation 
of the author on the Internet or by analyzing the genre, market niche, and political 
reputation of the publication in which the material appears.
Degree of Advocacy  By “degree of advocacy” we mean the extent to which an 
author unabashedly takes a persuasive stance on a contested position as opposed to 
adopting a more neutral, objective, or exploratory stance. For example, publications 
affiliated with advocacy organizations (the Sierra Club, the National Rifle Association) 
will have a clear editorial bias. When a writer has an ax to grind, you need to weigh 
carefully the writer’s selection of evidence, interpretation of data, and fairness to 
­opposing views. Although no one can be completely neutral, it is always useful to seek 
out authors who offer a balanced assessment of the evidence. Evidence from a more 
detached and neutral writer may be more trusted by your readers than the arguments 
of a committed advocate. For example, if you want to persuade corporate executives 
of the dangers of global warming, evidence from scholarly journals may be more 

	
APPENDIX 2    A Concise Guide to Evaluating, Using, and Documenting Sources	
281
persuasive than evidence from an environmentalist Web site or from a freelance writer 
for a leftist popular magazine such as Mother Jones.
Criteria for Evaluating a Web Source  When you evaluate a Web source, we sug-
gest that you ask five different kinds of questions about the site in which the source 
appeared, as shown in Table A2.3. These questions, developed by scholars and librar-
ians as points to consider when you are evaluating Web sites, will help you determine 
the usefulness of a site or source for your own purposes.
As a researcher, the first question you should ask about a potentially useful Web 
source should be, “Who placed this piece on the Web and why?” You can begin an-
swering this question by analyzing the site’s home page, where you will often find 
navigational buttons linking to “Mission,” “About Us,” or other identifying informa-
tion about the site’s sponsors. You can also get hints about the site’s purpose by asking, 
“What kind of Web site is it?” Different kinds of Web sites have different purposes, 
Table A2.3  Criteria for Evaluating Web Sites
Criteria
Questions to Ask
1.  Authority
•	
Is the document author or site sponsor clearly identified?
•	
Does the site identify the occupation, position, education, experience, 
or other credentials of the author?
•	
Does the home page or a clear link from the home page reveal the 
author’s or sponsor’s motivation for establishing the site?
•	
Does the site provide contact information for the author or sponsor 
such as an e-mail or organization address?
2.  Objectivity or Clear Disclosure 
of Advocacy
•	
Is the site’s purpose clear (for example, to inform, entertain, or 
persuade)?
•	
Is the site explicit about declaring its point of view?
•	
Does the site indicate whether the author is affiliated with a specific 
organization, institution, or association?
•	
Does the site indicate whether it is directed toward a specific 
audience?
3.  Coverage
•	
Are the topics covered by the site clear?
•	
Does the site exhibit a suitable depth and comprehensiveness for its 
purpose?
•	
Is sufficient evidence provided to support the ideas and opinions 
presented?
4.  Accuracy
•	
Are the sources of information stated?
•	
Do the facts appear to be accurate?
•	
Can you verify this information by comparing this source with other 
sources in the field?
5.  Currency
•	
Are dates included in the Web site?
•	
Do the dates apply to the material itself, to its placement on the Web, 
or to the time the site was last revised and updated?
•	
Is the information current, or at least still relevant, for the site’s 
­purpose? For your purpose?

282	
APPENDIX 2    A Concise Guide to Evaluating, Using, and Documenting Sources
often revealed by the domain identifier following the site name: .com (commercial); 
.org (nonprofits and advocacy groups); .edu (college or university); .gov (government 
agency); and .mil (military site).
Using Sources for Your Own Purposes
To illustrate the purposeful use of sources, we will use the following short argument from 
the Web site of the American Council on Science and Health (ACSH)—an organization 
of doctors and scientists devoted to providing scientific information on health issues and 
to exposing health fads and myths. Please read the argument carefully in preparation for 
the discussions that follow.
Is Vegetarianism Healthier Than Nonvegetarianism?
Many people become vegetarians because they believe, in error, that vegetarianism is 
uniquely conducive to good health. The findings of several large epidemiologic studies 
indeed suggest that the death and chronic-disease rates of vegetarians—primarily vegetar-
ians who consume dairy products or both dairy products and eggs—are lower than those 
of meat eaters . . . .
The health of vegetarians may be better than that of nonvegetarians partly because of 
nondietary factors: Many vegetarians are health-conscious. They exercise regularly, main-
tain a desirable body weight, and abstain from smoking. Although most epidemiologists 
have attempted to take such factors into account in their analyses, it is possible that they 
did not adequately control their studies for nondietary effects.
People who are vegetarians by choice may differ from the general population in other 
ways relevant to health. For example, in Western countries most vegetarians are more 
affluent than nonvegetarians and thus have better living conditions and more access to 
medical care.
An authoritative review of vegetarianism and chronic diseases classified the evidence 
for various alleged health benefits of vegetarianism:
■	 The evidence is “strong” that vegetarians have (a) a lower risk of becoming alcoholic, 
constipated, or obese and (b) a lower risk of developing lung cancer.
■	 The evidence is “good” that vegetarians have a lower risk of developing adult-onset dia-
betes mellitus, coronary artery disease, hypertension, and gallstones.
■	 The evidence is “fair to poor” that vegetarianism decreases risk of breast cancer, colon 
cancer, diverticular disease, kidney-stone formation, osteoporosis, and tooth decay.
For some of the diseases mentioned above, the practice of vegetarianism itself prob-
ably is the main protective factor. For example, the low incidence of constipation among 
­vegetarians is almost certainly due to their high intakes of fiber-rich foods. For other 
conditions, nondietary factors may be more important than diet. For example, the low in-
cidence of lung cancer among vegetarians is attributable primarily to their extremely low 
rate of cigarette smoking. Diet is but one of many risk factors for most chronic diseases.
How you might use this article in your own writing would depend on your re-
search question and purpose. To illustrate, we’ll show you three different hypothetical 
examples of writers who have reason to cite this article.

	
APPENDIX 2    A Concise Guide to Evaluating, Using, and Documenting Sources	
283
■	 Writer 1: A Causal Argument Showing Alternative Approaches to Reducing 
Risk of Alcoholism. Writer 1 argues that vegetarianism may be an effective way to 
resist alcoholism. She uses just one statement from the ACSH article for her own 
purpose and then moves on to other sources.
Another approach to fighting alcoholism is through naturopathy, holistic medicine, 
and vegetarianism . Vegetarians generally have better health than the rest of the popu-
lation and particularly have,  according to the American Council on Science and 
Health ,  “a lower risk of becoming alcoholic.”  This lower risk has been borne out by 
other studies showing that the benefits of the holistic health movement are particularly 
strong for persons with addictive tendencies . . . . [goes on to other arguments and sources]
■	 Writer 2: A Proposal Argument Advocating Vegetarianism. Writer 2 proposes 
that people become vegetarians. Parts of his argument focus on the environmental 
costs and ethics of eating meat, but he also devotes one paragraph to the health 
benefits of vegetarianism. As support for this point he summarizes the ACSH ar-
ticle’s material on health benefits.
 Not only will a vegetarian diet help stop cruelty to animals, but it is also good for your 
health.   According to the American Council on Science and Health ,  vegetarians have 
longer life expectancy than nonvegetarians and suffer from fewer chronic diseases. 
The Council cites “strong” evidence from the scientific literature showing that vegetar­
ians have reduced risk of lung cancer, obesity, constipation, and alcoholism. The  
Council also cites “good” evidence that they have a reduced risk of adult-onset dia­
betes, high blood pressure, gallstones, and hardening of the arteries. Although the evi-
dence isn’t nearly as strong, vegetarianism may also lower the risk of certain cancers, 
kidney stones, loss of bone density, and tooth decay. 
■	 Writer 3: An Evaluation Argument Looking Skeptically at Vegetarianism. Here, 
Writer 3 uses portions of the same article to make an opposite case from that of 
Writer 2. She focuses on those parts of the article that Writer 2 consciously excluded.
 The link between vegetarianism and death rates is a classic instance of correlation 
rather than causation . While it is true that vegetarians have a longer life expectancy 
than nonvegetarians and suffer from fewer chronic diseases,  the American Council on 
Science and Health has shown   that the causes can mostly be explained by factors 
other than diet.   As the Council suggests ,  vegetarians are apt to be more health con-
scious than nonvegetarians and thus get more exercise, stay slender, and avoid 
­smoking.   The Council points out   that vegetarians also tend to be wealthier than non­
vegetarians and see their doctors more regularly . In short, they live longer because 
they take better care of themselves, not because they avoid meat.
Writer’s claim
Identification of 
source
Quotation from 
ACSH
Writer’s claim
Identification of 
source
Summary of  
ACSH material
Writer’s claim
Identification of 
source
Paraphrased 
points from 
ACSH

284	
APPENDIX 2    A Concise Guide to Evaluating, Using, and Documenting Sources
Using Summary, Paraphrase, and Quotation
As a research writer, you need to incorporate sources gracefully into your own prose. 
Depending on your purpose, you might (1) summarize all or part of a source author’s 
argument, (2) paraphrase a relevant portion of a source, or (3) quote small passages from 
the source directly. To avoid plagiarism, you’ll need to reference the source with an in-
text citation, put quotation marks around quoted passages, and convert paraphrases and 
summaries entirely into your own words. Table A2.4 gives you an overview of summary, 
paraphrase, and quotation as ways of incorporating sources into your own prose.
Summarizing
Detailed instructions on how to write a summary of an article and incorporate it 
into your own prose are provided in Chapter 2 (pages 27–29). Summaries can be as 
short as a single sentence or as long as a paragraph. Make the summary as concise as 
Table A2.4  Incorporating Sources into Your Own Prose
Strategy
What to Do
When to Use This Strategy
Summarize the 
source.
Condense a source ­writer’s 
argument by keeping main 
ideas and omitting details 
(see Chapter 2,  
pages 27–29).
•	
When the source writer’s whole argument is relevant 
to your purpose
•	
When the source writer presents an alternative or 
­opposing view that you want to push against
•	
When the source writer’s argument can be used in 
support of your own
Paraphrase the 
source.
Reproduce an idea from a 
source writer but translate 
the idea entirely into your 
own words; a paraphrase 
should be approximately 
the same length as the 
original.
•	
When you want to incorporate factual information 
from a source or to use one specific idea from a 
source
•	
When the source passage is overly complex or 
­technical for your targeted audience
•	
When you want to incorporate a source’s point in 
your own voice without interrupting the flow of your 
argument
Quote short 
passages from 
the source using 
quotation marks.
Work brief quotations 
from the source smoothly 
into the grammar of 
your own sentences  
(see pages 286–287).
•	
When you need testimony from an authority (state 
the authority’s credentials in an attributive tag—
see pages 287–288)
•	
In summaries, when you want to reproduce a 
source’s voice, particularly if the language is striking 
or memorable
•	
In lieu of paraphrase when the source language is 
memorable
Quote long 
­passages from 
the source using  
the block 
method.
Results in a page with 
noticeably lengthy block 
quotations
•	
When you intend to analyze or critique the 
­quotation—the quotation is followed by your 
­detailed analysis of its ideas or rhetorical features
•	
When the flavor and language of testimonial 
­evidence is important

	
APPENDIX 2    A Concise Guide to Evaluating, Using, and Documenting Sources	
285
possible so that you don’t distract the reader from your own argument. In many cases, 
writers summarize only parts of a source, depending on what is relevant to their own 
argument. Writer 3’s summary of the article by the American Council on Science and 
Health is a good example of a partial summary.
Paraphrasing
Unlike a summary, which is a condensation of a source’s whole argument, a para-
phrase translates a short passage from a source’s words into the writer’s own words. 
Writers often choose to paraphrase when the details of a source passage are particu-
larly important or when the source is overly technical and needs to be simplified for 
the intended audience. When you paraphrase, be careful to avoid reproducing the 
original writer’s grammatical structure and syntax. If you mirror the original sentence 
structure while replacing occasional words with synonyms or small structural changes, 
you will be doing what composition specialists call “patchwriting”—that is, patch-
ing some of your language onto someone else’s writing.* Patchwriting is a form of 
academic dishonesty because you aren’t fully composing your own sentences and are 
thus misrepresenting both your own work and that of the source writer. An acceptable 
paraphrase needs to be entirely in your own words. To understand patchwriting more 
fully, track the differences between unacceptable patchwriting and acceptable para-
phrase in the following examples.
Original
■	 The evidence is “strong” that vegetarians have (a) a lower risk of becoming alcoholic, 
constipated, or obese and (b) a lower risk of developing lung cancer.
■	 The evidence is “good” that vegetarians have a lower risk of developing adult-onset dia-
betes mellitus, coronary artery disease, hypertension, and gallstones.
Unacceptable Patchwriting
 According to the American Council on Science and Health , there 
is strong evidence  that vegetarians have a lower risk of becoming 
alcoholic, constipated, or obese . The evidence is also strong that 
they have a lower risk of lung cancer.  The evidence is good that 
vegetarians  are less apt to  develop adult-onset diabetes, coronary 
artery disease, hypertension, or gallstones. 
*We are indebted to the work of Rebecca Moore Howard and others who have led composition 
researchers to reexamine the use of sources and plagiarism from a cultural and rhetorical perspec-
tive. See especially Rebecca Moore Howard, Standing in the Shadow of Giants: Plagiarists, Authors, 
Collaborators (Stamford, CT: Ablex Pub., 1999).
Identification of source
Note phrases taken word for word 
from original.

286	
APPENDIX 2    A Concise Guide to Evaluating, Using, and Documenting Sources
Acceptable Paraphrase
 The Council summarizes   “strong”  evidence from the scientific liter­
ature showing that vegetarians have reduced risk of lung cancer, 
­obesity, constipation, and alcoholism. The council also cites  “good”  
evidence that they have a reduced risk of adult-onset diabetes, high 
blood pressure, gallstones, or hardening of the arteries.
Both the patchwriting example and the acceptable paraphrase reproduce the same 
ideas as the original in approximately the same number of words. But the writer of the 
acceptable paraphrase has been more careful to change the sentence structure sub­
stantially and not copy exact phrases. In contrast, the patchwritten version contains 
longer strings of borrowed language without quotation marks.
We’ll return to the problem of patchwriting in our discussion of plagiarism 
(pages 289–291).
Quoting
Besides summary and paraphrase, writers often choose to quote directly in order to 
give the reader the flavor and style of the source author’s prose or to make a memo-
rable point in the source author’s own voice. Always quote the source author’s words 
exactly (unless you indicate changes with ellipses or brackets) and don’t misrepresent 
the author’s meaning by taking quotations out of context.
In the following sections, we show you the two main ways to use quotations: 
quoting a complete sentence from your source versus inserting brief words and 
phrases from your source into your own sentence. For special cases using quotations 
(brackets, ellipses, quotations within a quotation, or block quotations), consult a 
good handbook.
Quoting a Complete Sentence  In some cases, you will want to quote a complete 
sentence from your source.
Original Passage
Many people become vegetarians because they believe, in error, that vegetarianism is 
uniquely conducive to good health. [found on page 282 of source]*
Identification of source
Quotes “strong” and “good” to indi-
cate distinction made in original
Doesn’t follow original sentence 
structure
*The cited page is from this text. When quoting from print sources or other sources with stable page 
numbers, you indicate the page number as part of your citation. To illustrate how to punctuate page 
citations, we’ll assume throughout this section that you found the American Council on Science and 
Health article in this textbook rather than on the Web, in which case it would not be possible to cite 
page numbers.

	
APPENDIX 2    A Concise Guide to Evaluating, Using, and Documenting Sources	
287
Writer’s Quotation of This Passage
 According to the American Council on Science and Health,   “Many 
people become vegetarians because they believe, in error, that vege-
tarianism is uniquely conducive to good health”  (282)  .
Quoting Words and Phrases  Instead of quoting a complete sentence, you often 
want to quote only a few words or phrases from your source and insert them into your 
own sentence. In these cases, make sure that the grammatical structure of the quota-
tion fits smoothly into the grammar of your own sentence.
Original Passage
The health of vegetarians may be better than that of nonvegetarians partly because of non-
dietary factors: Many vegetarians are health-conscious. They exercise regularly, maintain a 
desirable body weight, and abstain from smoking. [found on page 282]
Quoted Phrase Inserted into Writer’s Own Sentence
 The American Council on Science and Health argues that  the 
cause of vegetarians’ longer life may be  “nondietary factors.”  The 
Council claims that vegetarians are more  “health-conscious”  than 
meat eaters and that they  “exercise regularly, maintain a desirable 
body weight, and abstain from smoking”   (282) .
Creating Attributive Tags to Indicate Use of a Source
Our previous examples use attributive tags to indicate words or ideas taken from a 
source. Attributive tags are phrases such as “according to Hahn  . . . ” or “Smith and 
Perosi claim that . . . .” Such phrases indicate that the material immediately following 
the tag is from the cited source. You can also add to the tag a phrase indicating the 
source author’s credentials, biases, or angle of vision: “Climate scientist James Hansen 
Attributive tag
Quotation introduced with comma.
Quotation is a complete sentence, so 
it starts with a capital letter.
Page number from source;  
period comes after parentheses.
Final quotation mark goes before 
parentheses.
Attributive tag
Quotation marks show where quo­
tation starts and ends.
No comma or capital letter: Punctua­
tion and capitalization determined by 
grammar of your own sentence.
Period comes after parentheses 
­containing page number.

288	
APPENDIX 2    A Concise Guide to Evaluating, Using, and Documenting Sources
states that  . . . ” Although some disciplines (particularly the social sciences) indicate 
a source only by citing it in parentheses at the end of the borrowed material, the pre-
ferred practice for non-specialized audiences is to use attributive tags.
Less Preferred: Indicating Source through Parenthetical Citation
Vegetarians are apt to be more health-conscious than nonvegetarians  (American Council on 
Science and Health). 
More Preferred: Indicating Source through Attributive Tag
 According to the American Council on Science and Health,  vegetarians are apt to be more 
health-conscious than nonvegetarians.
Avoiding Plagiarism
Unethical use of sources—called plagiarism—is a major concern not only for writ-
ing teachers but for teachers in all disciplines. To combat plagiarism, many instruc-
tors across the curriculum use plagiarism-detection software like turnitin.com. 
Their purpose, of course, is to discourage students from cheating. But sometimes 
students who have no intention of cheating can fall into producing papers that look 
like cheating. That is, they produce papers that might be accused of plagiarism even 
though the students had no intention of deceiving their readers. Our goal in this 
section is to explain the concept of plagiarism more fully and to sum up the strate-
gies needed to avoid it.
Why Some Plagiarism May Occur Unwittingly
To understand how unwitting plagiarism might occur, consider Table A2.5, where the 
middle column—“Misuse of Sources”—shows common mistakes of novice writers. 
Everyone agrees that the behaviors in the “Fraud” column constitute deliberate cheat-
ing and deserve appropriate punishment. Everyone also agrees that good scholarly 
work meets the criteria in the “Ethical Use of Sources” column. Novice researchers, 
however, may find themselves unwittingly in the middle column until they learn the 
academic community’s conventions for using research sources.
You might appreciate these conventions more fully if you recognize how they 
have evolved from Western notions of intellectual property and patent law associ-
ated with the rise of modern science in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. 
A person not only could own a house or a horse, but also could own an idea and 
the words used to express that idea. Laws and professional codes of ethics protect 
an author’s words in the same way they protect song lyrics, drawings, or patents. In 
the academic world, the conventions protecting a source author’s words and ideas 
are essential if research findings are to win the community’s confidence. Effective 

	
APPENDIX 2    A Concise Guide to Evaluating, Using, and Documenting Sources	
289
research can occur only within ethical and responsible research communities, where 
people respect the words and ideas of those who have gone before them.
Strategies for Avoiding Plagiarism
Table A2.6 will help you review the strategies presented throughout this appendix for 
using source material ethically and avoiding plagiarism.
Table A2.5  Plagiarism and the Ethical Use of Sources
Plagiarism
Ethical Use of Sources
Fraud
Misuse of Sources (Common Mistakes 
Made by New Researchers)
The writer
•	
buys a paper online
•	
submits someone else’s 
work as his own
•	
copies chunks of text 
from sources with obvious 
intention of not being 
detected
•	
fabricates data or makes 
up evidence
•	
intends to deceive
The writer
•	
copies passages directly from 
a source, references the source 
with an in-text citation, but fails 
to use quotation marks or block 
indentation
•	
in attempting to paraphrase a 
source, makes some changes, but 
follows too closely the wording of 
the original (“patchwriting”)
•	
fails to indicate the sources of 
some ideas or data (often is 
­unsure what needs to be cited 
or has lost track of sources 
through poor note taking)
•	
in general, misunderstands the 
conventions for using sources in 
academic writing
The writer
•	
writes paper entirely in her 
own words or uses exact 
­quotations from sources
•	
indicates all quotations with 
quotation marks or block 
indentation
•	
indicates her use of all 
sources through attribution, 
in-text citation, and an  
end-of-paper list of 
works cited
Table A2.6  Avoiding Plagiarism or the Appearance of Plagiarism
What to Do
Why to Do It
At the beginning
Read your college’s policy on plagiarism as well 
as statements from your teachers in class or on 
course syllabi.
Understanding policies on plagiarism and ­academic 
integrity will help you research and write ethically.
Pose a research question rather than a topic area.
Arguing your own thesis gives you a voice, ­establishes 
your ethos, and urges you to write ethically.
(continued)

290	
APPENDIX 2    A Concise Guide to Evaluating, Using, and Documenting Sources
What to Do
Why to Do It
At the note-taking stage
Create a bibliographic entry for each source.
This action makes it easy to create an end-of-paper 
bibliography and encourages rhetorical reading.
When you copy a passage into your notes, copy 
word for word and enclose it within quotation 
marks.
It is important to distinguish a source’s words from 
your own words.
When you enter summaries or paraphrases into your 
notes, avoid patchwriting.
If your notes contain any strings of a source’s ­original 
wording, you might later assume that these words are 
your own.
Distinguish your informational notes from your per-
sonal exploratory notes.
Keeping these kinds of notes separate will help you 
identify borrowed ideas when it’s time to ­incorporate 
the source material into your paper.
When writing your draft
Except for exact quotations, write the paper entirely 
in your own words.
This strategy keeps you from patchwriting when you 
summarize or paraphrase.
Indicate all quotations with quotation marks or block 
­indentation. Use ellipses or brackets to make changes 
to fit your own grammar.
Be careful to represent the author fairly; don’t change 
meaning by taking quotations out of context.
When you summarize or paraphrase, avoid 
patchwriting.
Word-for-word strings from a source must ­either be 
avoided or placed in quotation marks. Also avoid 
­mirroring the source’s grammatical structure.
Never cut and paste a Web passage directly into 
your draft. Paste it into a separate note file and put 
quotation marks around it.
Pasted passages are direct invitations to patchwrite.
Inside your text, use attributive tags or parentheti-
cal citations to identify all sources. List all sources 
­alphabetically in a concluding Works Cited or 
References list.
This strategy makes it easy for readers to know when 
you are using a source and where to find it.
Cite with attributive tags or parenthetical citations all 
quotations, paraphrases, summaries, and any other 
references to specific sources.
These are the most common in-text citations in a 
­research paper.
Use in-text citations to indicate sources for all visuals 
and media such as graphs, maps, photographs, films, 
videos, broadcasts, and recordings.
The rules for citing words and ideas apply equally to 
visuals and media cited in your paper.
Use in-text citations for all ideas and facts that are not 
common knowledge.
Although you don’t need to cite widely accepted and 
noncontroversial facts and information, it is better to 
cite them if you are unsure.
Table A2.6  continued

	
APPENDIX 2    A Concise Guide to Evaluating, Using, and Documenting Sources	
291
■ ■ ■ 	 For Class and Discussion  Avoiding Plagiarism
Reread the original article from the American Council on Science and Health (page 282) 
and Writer 3’s use of this source in her paragraph about how nondietary habits may ex-
plain why vegetarians are healthier than nonvegetarians (page 283). Then read the para-
graph below by Writer 4, who makes the same argument as Writer 3 but crosses the line 
from ethical to nonethical use of sources. Why might Writer 4 be accused of plagiarism?
Writer 4’s Argument (Example of Plagiarism)
According to the American Council on Science and Health, the health of vegetarians may be 
better than that of nonvegetarians partly because of nondietary factors. People who eat only 
vegetables tend to be very conscious of their health. They exercise regularly, avoid getting fat, 
and don’t smoke. Scientists who examined the data may not have adequately controlled for 
these nondietary effects. Also in Western countries most vegetarians are more affluent than 
nonvegetarians and thus have better living conditions and more access to medical care.
Working in small groups or as a whole class, respond to the following questions.
	 1.	 How does this passage cross the line into plagiarism?
	 2.	 The writer of this passage might say, “How can this be plagiarism? I cited my 
source.” How would you explain the problem to this writer?
	 3.	 Psychologically or cognitively, what may have caused Writer 4 to misuse the 
source? How might this writer’s note-taking process or composing process have 
differed from that of Writer 3 on page 283? In other words, what happened to 
get this writer into trouble?
Citing Sources in Your Text in MLA Style
When academic writers cite sources, they use the conventions appropriate to their disci-
pline. In this section, we will explain briefly the MLA style used in the humanities. (We 
explain the APA system used in the social sciences later in this appendix.) Our discussion 
of MLA style and our citation examples are based on the new seventh edition of the MLA 
Handbook for Writers of Research Papers, published in 2009, and used by undergraduates.
In the MLA system of in-text citation, you place the author’s last name and the page 
number of the cited source in parentheses, usually at the end of the material you wish to 
cite. (If the author’s name is mentioned in a preceding attributive tag, such as “according 
to Karnow” or “Karnow says,” only the page number is placed in parentheses.) In the fol-
lowing examples, note that the citation precedes the period. If you are citing a quotation, 
the parenthetical citation follows the quotation mark but precedes the final period.
The Spanish tried to reduce the status of Filipina women who had been able to do business, 
get divorced, and sometimes become village chiefs ( Karnow   41 ).
According to  Karnow , the Spanish tried to reduce the status of Filipina women who had 
been able to do business, get divorced, and sometimes become village chiefs ( 41 ).
“And, to this day,”  Karnow  continues, “women play a decisive role in Filipino families” ( 41 ).
■ ■ ■

292	
APPENDIX 2    A Concise Guide to Evaluating, Using, and Documenting Sources
A reader who wishes to look up the source will find the bibliographic information 
in the Works Cited section by looking for the entry under “Karnow.” If more than one 
work by Karnow was used in the paper, the writer would also include an abbreviated 
title of the book or article following Karnow’s name in the in-text citation.
( Karnow , In Our Image  41 )
When citing sources and page numbers, you should know about two special cases:
Citing from an Indirect Source  Occasionally you may wish to use a quotation that 
you have seen cited in one of your sources. You read Jones, who has a nice quotation 
from Smith, and you want to use Smith’s quotation. To do so, quote Smith, but then cite 
Jones in your text preceded by the terms “qtd in.” List only Jones in your “Works Cited.”
According to the ex-mayor of Gotham City, Rupert Smith, “the rate of crime was at an all-time 
low” during his term of office (qtd. in Jones 25).
Citing a Work without Page Numbers  If the work you are citing in your paper 
has no page numbers but does have numbered paragraphs, use par. or pars. and give 
the number of the paragraph(s): (Helvarg, par. 10). If the source has neither page 
nor paragraph numbers, as is typical of many Web sources in HTML format, do not 
give any numbers in the in-text citation but cite the source in its entirety. (Do not use 
the page numbers from an HTML printout because they will not be consistent from 
printer to printer.)
Documenting Sources in a “Works Cited” List (MLA)
In the MLA system, you place a complete bibliography, titled “Works Cited,” at the end 
of the paper. The list includes all the sources that you mention in your paper. However, 
it does not include works you read but did not use. Entries in the Works Cited follow 
these general guidelines:
■	 Entries are arranged alphabetically by author, or by title if there is no author.
■	 Entries must include the publication medium of the source you consulted, for 
­example: Print, Web, DVD, Performance, Oil on canvas, and so on.
■	 If there is more than one entry by the same author, the second and subsequent 
entries begin with three hyphens followed by a period and the title.
Smith, Roberta. Body Image in Non-Western Cultures. London: Bonanza, 1999. Print.
—. Body Image in Western Cultures, 1750-Present. London: Bonanza, 1995. Print.
—. “Eating Disorders Reconsidered.” Journal of Appetite Studies 45.3 (1999): 295–300. Print.
For an example of how to format a “Works Cited” page in MLA style, see the last 
page of Ivan Snook’s researched argument (p. 268).
Table A2.7 provides MLA models for the most common kinds of citations. This 
table will help you distinguish the forest from the trees when you try to cite sources. 
All the major categories of sources are displayed in this table.

	
APPENDIX 2    A Concise Guide to Evaluating, Using, and Documenting Sources	
293
Table A2.7  Quick Reference Guide for MLA Citations
Kind of Source
Basic Citation Model
Print Sources
Article in scholarly journal
Pollay, Richard W., Jung S. Lee, and David Carter-Whitney. “Separate, but Not Equal: Racial 
Segmentation in Cigarette Advertising.” Journal of Advertising 21.1 (1992): 45-57. Print.
Article in magazine or  
newspaper
Beam, Alex. “The Mad Poets Society.” Atlantic Monthly July–Aug. 2001: 96–103. Print.
Lemonick, Michael D. “Teens Before Their Time.” Time 30 Oct. 2000: 66–74. Print.
Liptak, Adam. “In Abortion Rulings, Idea of Marriage Is Pivotal.” New York Times 2 Nov. 2005: A1. Print.
Book
Tannen, Deborah. The Argument Culture: Moving From Debate to Dialogue. New York: Random, 1998. 
Print.
Article in anthology with 
an editor
Shamoon, Linda. “International E-mail Debate.” Electronic Communication Across the Curriculum. 
Ed. Donna Reiss, Dickie Self, and Art Young. Urbana: NCTE, 1998. 151-61. Print.
Sources That You Have Downloaded from a Database
Article downloaded from 
database
Beckham II, Jack M. “Placing Touch of Evil, The Border, and Traffic in the American Imagination.” Journal 
of Popular Film & Television 33.3 (2005): 130-41. Academic Search Premier. Web. 16 July 2008.*
Other Internet and Web Sources
Home page (use for citing an 
entire Web site)
MyNRA. National Rifle Association, 2005. Web. 3 Aug. 2007.
Document within a Web site
Marks, John. “Overview: Letter from the President.” Search for Common Ground. Search for Common 
Ground, 25 June 2004. Web. 18 July 2008.˚
Article from scholarly Web 
journal
Welch, John R., and Ramon Riley. “Reclaiming Land and Spirit in the Western Apache Homeland.” 
American Indian Quarterly 25.4 (2001): n. pag. Web. 19 Dec. 2005.†
News article downloaded 
from Web
Bounds, Amy. “Thinking Like Scientists.” Daily Camera [Boulder]. Scripps Interactive Newspapers 
Group, 26 June 2007. Web. 27 June 2007.‡
Blog posting
Wright, Jeremy. “MySpace Is the New Blogosphere.” Ensight.org. N. p., 21 Feb. 2006. Web. 6 June 2007. 
<http://www.ensight.org/archives/2006/02/21/ myspaceis-the-new-blogosphere/>.§
Miscellaneous Sources
Interview
Van der Peet, Rob. Personal interview. 24 June 2009.
Lecture, address, or speech
Sharples, Mike. “Authors of the Future.” Conference of European Teachers of Academic Writing. 
U of Groningen. Groningen, Neth. 20 June 2001. Lecture.
*Give print publication information first, then the name of the database, italicized. Web is the medium of publication; 16 July 2008 is the 
date the source was accessed.
˚The Web site name is italicized; the sponsor is in regular type.
†When there are no page numbers for a scholarly article, use n. pag.
‡If the location of the newspaper is not clear from its name, give the city in brackets.
§If readers may have difficulty finding an Internet source, give the URL in angle brackets at the end of the citation.
Student Example of an MLA-Style Research Paper
For an illustration of a student research paper written and formatted in MLA style, see 
Ivan Snook’s researched policy proposal on pages 264–268.

294	
APPENDIX 2    A Concise Guide to Evaluating, Using, and Documenting Sources
Citing Sources in Your Text in APA Style
Our discussion of APA style is based on the Publication Manual of the American 
Psychological Association, 6th ed. (2010).
To cite sources in the body of your paper in the APA system, you include the year 
of the source and you place a “p.” or “pp.” before the page number. The author’s last 
name, date, and page numbers are separated by commas. When the author is men-
tioned in an attributive tag, place only the date and page number in parentheses, usu-
ally directly after the author’s name.
The Spanish tried to reduce the status of Filipina women who had been able to do business, 
get divorced, and sometimes become village chiefs (Karnow, 1989, p. 41).
According to Karnow (1989, p. 41), the Spanish tried to reduce the status of Filipina 
women who had been able to do business, get divorced, and sometimes become village 
chiefs.
If your readers wish to follow up on this source, they will look for “Karnow” in 
the References section at the end of the essay. If Karnow had more than one entry in 
the References section, they would look for the 1989 source. If Karnow had published 
more than one work in 1989, you would add a lowercase “a” to the date of the first one 
and a lowercase “b” to the date of the second one. Your in-text parenthetical citation 
would then be either (Karnow, 1989a) or (Karnow, 1989b).
When you quote or use data from an indirect source, in your parenthetical cita-
tion use “as cited in” rather than the MLA’s “qtd in.”
According to the ex-mayor of Gotham City, Rupert Smith, “the rate of crime was at an all-
time low” during his term of office (as cited in Jones, 1995, p. 25).
Documenting Sources in a “References” List (APA)
The APA system includes a complete bibliography, called “References,” at the end of 
the paper. Entries are listed alphabetically, with a hanging indentation. If you list more 
than one item for an author, repeat the author’s name each time and arrange the items 
in chronological order beginning with the earliest. If two works appeared in the same 
year, arrange them alphabetically, adding an “a” and a “b” after the year for purposes of 
in-text citation. Here is a hypothetical illustration:
Smith, R. (1995). Body image in Western cultures, 1750–present. London, England: 
Bonanza Press.
Smith, R. (1999a). Body image in non-Western cultures. London, England: Bonanza Press.
Smith, R. (1999b). Eating disorders reconsidered. Journal of Appetite Studies, 45, 295–300.
Table A2.8 provides examples in APA style for the most common kinds of cita-
tions to be placed in a “References” list at the end of the paper.

	
APPENDIX 2    A Concise Guide to Evaluating, Using, and Documenting Sources	
295
Table A2.8  Quick Reference Guide for APA Citations
Kind of Source
Basic Citation Model
Print Sources
Article in scholarly journal
Pollay, R. W., Lee, J.S., & Carter-Whitney, D. (1992). Separate, but not equal: Racial segmentation in ­cigarette 
advertising. Journal of Advertising, 21(1), 45-57.
Article in magazine or 
newspaper
Beam, A. (2001, July–August). The mad poets society. Atlantic Monthly, 288, 96-103.
Lemonick, M. D. (2000, October 30). Teens before their time. Time, 156, 66-74.
Cauvin, H. E. (2001, July 18). Political climate complicates food shortage in Zimbabwe. The New York Times, 
p. A13.
Book
Tannen, D. (1998). The argument culture: Moving from debate to dialogue. New York, NY: Random House.
Article in anthology with 
an editor
Shamoon, L. (1998). International e-mail debate. In D. Reiss, D. Self, & A. Young (Eds.), Electronic communi-
cation across the curriculum (pp. 151-161). Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English.
Sources That You Have Downloaded from a Database
Article with DOI
Adelt, U. (2008). Trying to find an identity: Eric Clapton’s changing conception of “blackness.” Popular 
Music & Society, 31, 433–452. doi: 10.1080/03007760802052809
Article without DOI—use 
periodical’s home page
Beckham II, J. M. (2008). Placing Touch of evil, The border, and Traffic in the American imagination. Journal 
of Popular Film & Television 33(3), 130-141. Retrieved from http://www.heldref.org/pubs/jpft/about.html
Other Internet and Web Sources
Document within a Web 
site
Marks, J. Overview: Letter from the president. Retrieved 2004, June 25 from the Search for Common 
Ground Web site: http://www.sfcg.org/sfcg/sfcg_overview.html
Article from scholarly Web 
journal
Welch, J. R., & Riley, R. (2001). Reclaiming land and spirit in the western Apache homeland. American 
Indian Quarterly, 25, 5–14. Retrieved from http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/american_indian_quarterly
News article downloaded 
from Web
Thevenot, B. (2004, July 31). Once in a blue moon. Times Picayune [New Orleans]. Retrieved from  
http://www.nola.com/t-p
Blog posting
Wright, J. (2006, Feb. 21). MySpace is the new blogosphere. [Web log post]. Retrieved from  
http://www.ensight.org/archives
Miscellaneous Sources
Interview, personal 
communication
R. Van der Peet (personal communication, June 24, 2009) stated that . . . [In-text citation only; not ­included 
in References]
Lecture, address, or speech
According to Mike Sharples (lecture given at the Conference of European Teachers of Academic Writing, 
Groningen, June 20, 2001), authors  . . . [in-text citation only; not included in references]
Student Example of an APA-Style Research Paper
An example of a paper in APA style is Julee Christianson’s researched argument on 
pages 218–223.

296	
Credits
Text
Pages 15, 17, 28, 29, 30, 36. Trudie Makens
Page 25. James Surowiecki, “The Pay Is Too Damn Low,” The New Yorker. Reprinted with permission of the Chris 
Calhoun Agency.
Page 32. Michael Saltsman, “To Help the Poor, Move Beyond ‘Minimum Gestures’,” Huffington Post. Reprinted 
by permission of the author.
Page 46. Pearson Education
Pages 54, 68. Carmen Tieu
Page 106. Trudie Makens, “Bringing Dignity to Workers: Make the Minimum Wage a Living Wage”
Page 116. Colleen Fontana, “An Open Letter to Robert Levy in Response to His Article ‘They Never Learn’.” Used 
by permission.
Page 119. Lauren Shinozuka, “The Dangers of Digital Distractedness”
Page 128. Kathryn Jean Lopez, “Egg Heads,” National Review. (c) 1998 National Review, Inc. Reprinted by 
permission.
Page 138. Zachary Stumps, “A Rhetorical Analysis of Ellen Goodman’s ‘Womb for Rent’.” Reprinted with 
­permission of the author.
Page 175. Alex Hutchinson, “Your Daily Multivitamin May Be Hurting You—The Debate Is On: Just Useless, or 
Truly Dangerous?” Outside Magazine, Oct. 8, 2013. Used with permission.
Page 198. Alex Mullens, “A Pirate but Not a Thief: What Does ‘Stealing’ Mean in a Digital Environment?” 
Reprinted by permission of the author.
Page 210. “Buying Sex Causes Sex Trafficking” from Free the Captives. Used by permission.
Page 218. Julee Christianson, “Why Lawrence Summers Was Wrong.” Used by permission.
Page 240. Lorena Mendoza-Flores, “Silenced and Invisible: Problems of Hispanic Students at Valley High School”
Page 243. Judith Daar, “Three Genetic Parents for One Healthy Baby,” Los Angeles Times, March 21, 2014. 
Reprinted with permission of the author.
Page 264. Ivan Snook, “Flirting with Disaster: An Argument Against Integrating Women into the Combat Arms.” 
Reprinted by permission of the author.
Page 269. Sandy Wainscott, “Why McDonald’s Should Sell Meat and Veggie Pies: A Proposal to End Subsidies for Cheap 
Meat.” Used by permission.
Images
Page 1. AP Photo/StephanSavoia
Page 4. United Steelworkers Union
Page 15. www.cartoonstock.com
Page 16. Shmitt, John and Janelle Jones. 2012. “Low-Wage Workers are Older and Better Educated Than Ever.” 
Washington, DC: Center for Economic and Policy Research. Used with permission.
Page 43. Andreas Rentz/Getty Images
Page 83. Top, AP Photo/Toby Talbot. Bottom, AP Photo/Branimir Kvartuc.
Page 95. AP Photo/Bullit Marquez
Page 96. Men Can Stop Rape. Reprinted with permission.
Page 123. Peter Byrne/PA Wire URN:187 98732 (Press Association via AP Images)
Page 142. John Bean

	
Credits	
297
Page 145. Ad Council
Page 149. Save the Children
Page 151. Figure 9.12, Blend Images/Alamy. Figure 9.13, Radius Images/Alamy. Figure 9.14, Eric Basir/Alamy. 
Figure 9.15, DCPhoto/Alamy.
Page 153. Photos 12/Alamy
Page 155. TXTResponsibly.org
Page 157. Milt Prigee/Cagle Cartoons
Page 165. John Ramage
Page 167. © Kathy deWitt/Alamy
Page 178. Bagley/Cagle Cartoons
Page 185. Bish/Cagle Cartoons
Page 225. AF archive/Alamy
Page 230. AP Photo/Carolyn Kaster
Page 246. DeVito Verdi Advertising Agency
Page 249. © FLPA/Alamy
Page 257. Reprinted with permission of Jane E. Bube.
Page 270. Lower left, Aurora Photos/Alamy. Lower right, Simon Belcher/Alamy.

298	
Audience-based reasons
to enhance logos, ethos, and pathos, 58, 
95, 97–98
power of, 58
Authority, questioning credibility of, 105
Authors. See Writers
Backing, 60–63. See also Toulmin 
framework
Bandwagon appeal, 272
Bankers, 23
Bar graphs, 161–162
Base point, for statistical  
comparisons, 86
Baumlin, James, 113
because clauses, 52–53, 205
Begging the question, 274
Believe, reading to, 25–29
Believing and doubting game, 
17–18, 113
Bibliographic information, 278
Blogs, 20
Brainstorming
consequences of actions, 213
to identify issues to explore, 13–14
sources of evidence, 86
“Bringing Dignity to Workers: Make the 
Minimum Wage a Living Wage” 
(Makens), 106–108
Brochures, 152
Business professionals, 23
Cartoons
examples of, 157, 178, 185
as visual arguments, 156
Cases, as evidence, 76
Categorical arguments
criteria development for, 227–229
criteria-match structure of, 226–227
definition arguments as, 182–183
explanation of, 226
function of, 179
making match argument for, 
229, 231
resemblance argument using 
­analogy as, 183–184
genres of, 19–22
hybrid, 173–177
implicit, 3–4
as inquiry, 12–13
issue questions for, 47–49
justification of claims in, 4–6
logical structure of, 55–71
match, 229, 231
multisided, 100, 101
one-sided, 100, 101
as persuasion, 7–9
principles-based, 233–234
as process and product, 6–7
proposal, 172, 245–262
pseudo-, 49–51
reading to believe, 25–29
reading to doubt, 29–30
resemblance, 171–173, 178, 183–185
role-playing, 11
Toulmin framework to plan and 
test, 63–71 (See also Toulmin 
framework)
truth issues and, 9–10
as truth seeking combined with 
­persuasion, 7–9
Argument to the people, 271
Aristotelian definition, 188–189
Aristotle, 57–59
Assignments. See Writing assignments
Assumptions
enthymeme and, 56–57
role of, 56
shared, 50–51
Attributive tags, 287–288
Audience
analysis of, 97–98, 133
appeal to, 257
authorial purpose and, 23–24
for causal arguments, 213
for definition arguments, 194–195
neutral, 102–103
for proposal arguments, 259–260
resistant, 101–102, 108–111
supportive, 102
undecided, 102–103
for visual arguments, 158
Academics, 23
Ad hominem, 272–273
Advertisements. See Advocacy 
advertisements/posters
Advocacy, degree of, 24, 280–281
Advocacy advertisements/posters. See 
also Visual arguments
design elements of, 148–150, 260
examples of, 155, 210, 246
function of, 21
as proposal arguments, 256–260
public affairs, 21, 154, 155
Advocacy groups, 22–23
Aloni, Erez and Judith Daar, “Three 
Genetic Parents—For One Healthy 
Baby,” 243–244
Analogy
to appeal to pathos, 93
resemblance argument by, 183–184
Angle of vision
of evidence, 80–82
explanation of, 80
in photographs, 83
of source material, 280
Antithesis, 30
Appealing to stirring symbols, 271
Appeal to false authority, 272
Appeal to ignorance, 271
Appeal to pity, 272
Appeal to popularity, 272
Arguments. See also Visual arguments; 
specific types of arguments
categorical, 179, 181–185
causal, 171–173, 202–221
classical structure of, 44–47
consequences-based, 233–235
creating your own criteria-match, 
190–196
defining features of, 4–9
definition, 171–173, 178, 181–183, 
186–197
dialogic, 100, 101, 108–111
evaluation, 171–173
explicit, 3–4
frame of, 51–53
function of, 2–4
Index

	
Index	
299
operational definitions and, 189
organization of, 195, 196
questioning and critiquing, 196–197
Toulmin framework for, 187–188
Definitions
Aristotelian, 188–189
creating your own extended,  
191–192
Delayed-thesis arguments
example of, 109–110
explanation of, 109, 111
organization of, 111
Design elements. See also Graphics; 
Images; Photographs; Visual 
arguments
analysis of visual argument using, 
148–150
color as, 144
images and graphics as, 144–145, 159, 
163–165
space and layout as, 145–146
type and text as, 143–146
Dialectic, 30
Dialectic thinking
explanation of, 30–31
methods to foster, 33–34
questions to promote, 31
Dialogic arguments
delayed-thesis argument as, 109–111
explanation of, 100
function of, 101, 108
Rogerian argument as, 112
Discussion, to foster dialectic 
thinking, 33
Documentary films, 22
Does/says statements, 27, 28
Doubt
reading to, 29–30
strategy to cast, 105
Douthat, Ross, “Islam in Two Americas,” 
109–110
Drawings, 146–148. See also Visual 
arguments
Editorials, newspaper, 20
“Egg Heads” (Lopez), 128–131
Either/or fallacy, 274
Elbow, Peter, 17, 30, 113
Electronic bulletin boards, 20
organization of, 45–46
thesis-governed “self-announcing” 
structure of, 70–71
Closed-form structure, 70–71
Collaborative negotiation, 115
Commercial filmmakers, 23–24
Conclusions, of classical argument, 45
Concrete language, 91
Consequences
as base of ethics, 232–233
from categorical claims, 180
evaluation of, 249
predictions of, 205, 248–249
Consequences-based argument, 
233–235
Conservatism, 247–248
Constraints, 211
Contributing cause, 211
Correlations, 209
Counterexamples, 105
Countertestimony, 10
Court decisions, 21
Credibility
appeal to, 90
method to question, 105
of sources, 280
Criteria-match structure
of categorical evaluations, 226–227
of definition arguments, 186–189
idea-generating strategies for, 
190–196
Critiques, of causal arguments, 214
Daar, Judith and Erez Aloni, “Three 
Genetic Parents—For One Healthy 
Baby,” 243–244
“The Dangers of Digital Distractedness” 
(Shinozuka), 119–122
Debate, 3
Definition arguments
Aristotelian definition and, 188–189
audience for, 194–195
conducting match part of, 189
criteria-match structure of, 186–189
explanation of, 181
function of, 171–173, 182–183
idea-generating strategies for, 
190–196
ideas for, 194
resemblance argument using 
­precedent as, 184–185
simple, 182
types of, 181–182
Categorical claims
consequences resulting from, 180
issues in, 179
treatment of, 180–181
Causal arguments
audience for, 213
examples of, 201, 202
exploring ideas for, 212–213
function of, 171–173
inductive fallacies in, 211–212
key terms in, 210–211
methods used in, 207–209
organization of, 213
overview of, 201–202
questioning and critiquing method 
for, 214
Toulmin framework for, 205–206
types of, 203–205
Causal chains, 208–210
Chat rooms, 20
Christianson, Julee, “Why Lawrence 
Summers Was Wrong: Culture 
Rather Than Biology Explains the 
Underrepresentation of Women 
in Science and Mathematics,” 
218–221
Circular reasoning, 274
Claims
categorical, 179–181
to focus argument and generate ideas, 
170–173
for hybrid arguments, 173–177
justification of, 4–6
reasons to support, 51–53
Toulmin framework and, 61–63
types of, 168–170
Claim types strategy, 252–254
Classical appeals
example of, 119–122
explanation of, 46–47
types of, 47
Classical arguments
appeals in, 46–47
elements of, 44–45
explanation of, 44

300	
Index
Government officials, 23
Graphics
as design elements, 144–145, 159, 
163–165
incorporated into argument, 163–165
tables as, 159–161
telling stories with, 161–163
Graphs
bar, 161–162
line, 163
pie chart, 162–163
Grounds, 60, 62, 63, 89. See also Toulmin 
framework
Handbook for Writers of Research 
Papers (Modern Language 
Association), 291
Hasty generalization, 212, 273
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 30
Heuristics, 252–255
Hutchinson, Alex, “Your Daily 
Multivitamin May Be Hurting You,” 
175–177
Hybrid arguments
examples of, 173–177
function of, 173
Hypothetical examples, 76
Idea maps, 16, 17
Ideas
believing and doubting game to 
­explore, 17–18
brainstorming for, 13–14
for causal arguments, 212–213
claims to generate, 170–173
for criteria-match argument,  
190–196
for definition arguments, 194
freewriting to explore, 14–15
idea mapping to explore, 16
note taking to record, 278–279
for proposal arguments, 259
reasoned sequence of, 76–77
for rhetorical analysis, 135–136
Ideology, shared assumptions and, 50
Illustrations. See also Images
to appeal to logos, pathos, and  
kairos, 94
to create pathos, 91–92
in rhetorical analysis, 133–134
rhetorical understanding of, 80
source distance from, 79–80
statistical, 76
strategies to frame, 82–86
strategies to rebut, 104–105
sufficiency of, 77–78
types of, 73–77
typicality of, 78
Examples
casting doubt on, 105
to create pathos, 91–92
Explicit arguments, 3–4
Exploratory essays, 33, 35
Facts, 83–84
Fallacies. See also specific fallacies
of ethos, 272–273
inductive, 211–212
of logos, 273–275
of pathos, 271–272
False analogy, 274
False dilemma fallacy, 274
Field research, 74
Fliers, 152
“Flirting with Disaster: An Argument 
Against Integrating Women into 
the Combat Arms” (Snook), 
264–268
Fontana, Colleen, “An Open Letter 
to Robert Levy in Response to 
His Article ‘They Never Learn’,” 
116–118
Framing of evidence
function of, 80–82
rhetorical strategies for, 82–85
statistical, 85–86
Freelance writers, 23
Freewriting
example of, 15–16
to explore ideas, 14
Genre
analysis of, 131–132
of arguments, 19–22
explanation of, 19
of visual arguments, 157
Goodman, Ellen, “Womb for Rent,” 
137–138
Enthymeme
audience-based reasons and, 58
explanation of, 56–57
function of, 57, 89, 206, 234
in Toulmin framework, 59, 60, 62, 63 
(See also Toulmin framework)
Essays, exploratory, 33–34
Ethical evaluation arguments. See also 
Evaluation arguments
common problems related to, 
235–237
construction of, 232–233
example of, 233–235
explanation of, 226
method to critique, 239
organization of, 237–239
Ethics, 232–233
Ethos
audience-based reasons to enhance, 
95, 97–98
explanation of, 46, 47
images to appeal to, 94
method to create, 78–79, 90
as persuasive appeal, 88–90
Evaluation arguments. See also 
Categorical arguments; Ethical 
evaluation arguments
audience for, 237
common problems in, 235–236
criteria-match structure of, 226–227
development of criteria for, 227–229
ethical, 226, 232–235
exploring ideas for, 236–237
function of, 171–173
match argument for, 229, 231
method to critique, 237–239
organization of, 237–239
Evidence
accuracy of, 78
analysis of use of, 133–134
angle of vision and framing of, 80–86
applying STAR criteria to, 77–78
brainstorming sources of, 86
creating plan to gather, 86
establishing trustworthy ethos to, 78
explanation of, 73
persuasive use of, 77–80
presentation of contrary, 84
relevance of, 78

	
Index	
301
Neutral audience
appealing to, 102–103
conceding to opposing views for, 
105–106
essay example using refutation strategy 
for, 106–108
rebutting evidence for, 104–105
refuting opposing views for, 103–104
summarizing opposing views for, 103
Newspapers, 20
Non sequitur, 274–275
Note taking, 278–279
Observation, as evidence, 74
One-sided arguments
audience appeals and, 102
explanation of, 100, 101
Onetime phenomenon, 207
Op-ed columns, 20
Open-form structure, 70–71
“An Open Letter to Robert Levy in 
Response to His Article ‘They 
Never Learn’” (Fontana), 116–118
Opinions, shared assumptions and, 
50–51
Opposing views
concession to, 105–106
method to refute, 103–104
summaries of, 103
Organization
for causal arguments, 213, 215–216
for classical arguments, 45–46
for definition arguments, 195, 196
for delayed-thesis arguments, 111
for evaluation arguments, 237–239
for exploratory essays, 35
for proposal arguments, 260, 261
for rhetorical analysis, 136
for Rogerian arguments, 114
Organizational white papers, 21
Oversimplified cause, 210
Paraphrasing, 285–286
Part for the whole fallacy, 273
Pathos
analysis of, 132
audience-based reasons to enhance, 
95, 97–98
explanation of, 46, 47
Listening, Rogerian, 112
Loaded label, 275
Lobbyists, 22–23
Logic, formal vs. real-world, 55–56
Logical structure
assumptions and, 56
audience-based reasons and, 58
enthymeme and, 56–57
explanation of, 55
formal vs. real world, 55–56
thesis-governed “self-announcing” 
structure of, 70–71
Toulmin framework and, 59–70 
(See also Toulmin framework)
Logos. See also Logical structure
analysis of, 132
in argument, 55–59
audience-based reasons to enhance, 
95, 97–98
explanation of, 46, 47, 55
images to appeal to, 94
in rhetorical analysis, 132
Lopez, Kathryn, “Egg Heads,” 128–131
Magazines, argumentative articles in, 20
Makens, Trudie
“Bringing Dignity to Workers: Make 
the Minimum Wage a Living 
Wage,” 106–108
“Should Fast-Food Workers Be Paid 
$15 per Hour?”, 36–42
Match arguments, 229, 231
Mean, 85–86
Media commentators, 23
Median, 85–86
Mendoza-Flores, Lorena, “Silenced and 
Invisible: Problems of Hispanic 
Students at Valley High School,” 
240–243
Metaphors, to create pathos, 93
MLA style, 291–292
Mullen, Alex, “A Pirate But Not a Thief: 
What Does ‘Stealing’ Mean in a 
Digital Environment?”, 198–200
Multisided arguments, 100, 101
Narratives, to create pathos, 92–93
Necessary cause, 211
Negotiation, collaborative, 115
Images. See also Photographs; Visual 
arguments
to appeal to logos, pathos, and  
kairos, 94
as design elements, 144–145, 158, 
159, 163–165
to guide reader’s response to data, 
84–86
Immediate cause, 210–211
Independent filmmakers, 23–24
Inductive fallacies, 211–212
Inductive reasoning, 208–209
Informal fallacies. See also Fallacies
of ethos, 272–273
explanation of, 271
of logos, 273
of pathos, 271–272
Information questions, issue questions 
vs., 48
Inquiry, argument as, 12–13
Internet, 75, Web sites. See also Web 
pages
Interviews, 74
Introductions, to classical argument, 44
“Islam in Two Americas” (Douthat), 
109–110
Issue questions
identification of, 48–49
information questions vs., 48
as origin of argument, 47–48
Judges, 23
Kairos
explanation of, 47, 93–94
images to appeal to, 94
Kant, Immanuel, 233
Labels
for graphics, 163–164
to guide reader’s response to data, 84
Labor union leaders, 23
Language, concrete, 91
Lawyers, 23
Layout, 145–146
Legal briefs, 21
Legislators, 23
Letters to editor, 19
Libraries, evidence from resources in, 75

302	
Index
Reasons
audience-based, 58, 95, 97–98
in because clauses, 52–53
explanation of, 51–52
Rebuttal. See also Toulmin framework
conditions of, 61–63, 65
strategies for, 104–105
Recurring phenomenon, 207
Red herring, 272
Refutation strategy
example of, 106–108
explanation of, 103–104
Reliability, of sources, 280
Remote cause, 210–211
Resemblance arguments
by analogy, 182
function of, 171–173
by precedent, 182
Resistant audience
appeals to, 108–111
delayed-thesis argument for, 109–111
determining level of, 101–102
Rhetoric, 124
Rhetorical analysis
elements to consider in, 131–134
examples of, 128–131, 137–141
function of, 124, 125
generating ideas for, 135–136
organization of, 136
questions for, 125–127
“A Rhetorical Analysis of Ellen 
Goodman’s ‘Womb for Rent’” 
(Stumps), 138–141
Rhetorical context, 80, 131
Rogerian communication
as collaborative negotiation, 115
example of, 116–118
explanation of, 112
as growth for writer, 113, 115
method to write, 115
organization of, 114
views of, 113
Role-playing arguments, 11
Rule of justice, 180–181
Saltzman, Michael, “To Help the 
Poor, Move Beyond ‘Minimum’ 
Gestures,” 32
Scenarios, as evidence, 76
Proposal arguments
advocacy posters or advertisements 
as, 256–260
audience for, 259–260
claim types strategy for, 252–254
development of, 250–252
examples of, 263–270
exploring ideas for, 259
function of, 172, 173, 245
method to question and 
critique, 262
organization of, 260, 261
practical vs. policy, 247
special features and concerns of, 
247–250
stock issues strategy for, 254–255
Toulmin framework for, 247, 248
visual aids for, 261–262
Pseudo-arguments, 49–51
Public affairs advocacy advertisements, 
21, 154, 155
Public affairs magazines, 20. See also 
Magazines
Puzzling trends, 207
Qualifier, 62–63
Questionnaires, as evidence, 74
Questions/questioning
for causal argument, 214
information, 48
issue, 47–49
to promote dialectic thinking, 31
for proposal arguments, 262
for rhetorical analysis, 125–127
of rhetorical readers, 277
Quotations, 105, 286–287
Raw data, 85
Reading
to believe, 25–29
to doubt, 29–30
with goals in mind, 276
note taking while, 278–279
with rhetorical awareness, 19–24, 
277–278
Reading logs, 33
Reasoning
circular, 274
inductive, 208–209
Pathos (continued)
fallacies of, 271–272
images to appeal to, 94
method to create, 91–93
as persuasive appeal, 88–90
in rhetorical analysis, 132
“The Pay Is Too Damn Low” 
(Surowiecki), 25–27
Peer-reviewed scholarly sources, 20
Percentages, 85
Periodicals. See Magazines; Newspapers
Personal correspondence, 19
Personal experience, as evidence, 74
Persuasion
argument as, 7–9
evidence as, 77–80
Phenomena, 207
Photographs. See also Images; Visual 
arguments
angle of vision in, 83
to appeal to logos, pathos, and kairos, 
94
compositional features of, 146–148
“A Pirate But Not a Thief: What Does 
‘Stealing’ Mean in a Digital 
Environment?” (Mullen), 198–200
Plagiarism
explanation of, 288
methods to avoid, 289–290
unwitting, 288–289
Plato, 9
Poisoning the well fallacy, 273
Political candidates, 23
Political stance, 280
Posters, 152, 153. See also Advocacy 
advertisements/posters
Post hoc, ergo propter hoc fallacy,  
211–212, 273–274
PowerPoint presentations, 261–262
Precedent arguments, 184–185
Precipitating cause, 211
Predictions of consequences, 205, 
248–249
Premise. See Reasons
Presence, 247
Principles, as base of ethics, 233
Principles-based argument, 233–234
Problem, convincing reader of existing, 
250–251

	
Index	
303
Type
analysis of visual arguments using, 
145–146
as design element, 143
Undecided audience
conceding to opposing views for, 
105–106
essay example using refutation strategy 
for, 106–108
rebutting evidence for, 104–105
refuting opposing views for, 103–104
summarizing opposing views for, 103
Unfolding structure, 70–71
Value systems, 85
Visual arguments. See also Advocacy 
advertisements/posters; Images; 
Photographs
analysis of, 96, 148–150
angle of vision in, 83
cartoons as, 156, 157, 178
components of visual design in, 143–145
evaluation of, 249
explanation of, 22
features of, 22
function of, 142–143
genres of, 151–158
guidelines to create, 158
information graphics in, 159–165
photographs and drawings as, 146–148
posters and fliers as, 152, 153
public affairs advocacy advertisements 
as, 154–156
slides for, 261–262
space and layout in, 145–146
type in, 145–146
Web pages as, 157–158
Wainscott, Sandy, “Why McDonald’s 
Should Sell Meat and Veggie Pies: 
A Proposal to End Subsidies for 
Cheap Meat,” 269–270
Warrant, 59, 60, 62, 63, 89. See also 
Toulmin framework
Web pages, 157–158
Web sites
advocacy, 21
evaluation of, 281–282
as evidence, 76
strategies to frame, 85–86
Stock issues strategy, 254–255
Straw man fallacy, 273
Stumps, Zachary, “A Rhetorical Analysis 
of Ellen Goodman’s ‘Womb for 
Rent’,” 138–141
Sufficient cause, 211
Summaries
for classical argument, 45
explanation of, 27
of opposing views, 103
of source material, 284–285
steps to write, 27
as way of reading to believe, 27
Supportive audience, 102
Surowiecki, James, “The Pay Is Too 
Damn Low,” 25–27
Surveys, as evidence, 74
Tables, 159–161
Teich, Nathaniel, 113
Testimony
casting doubt on, 105
as evidence, 75
Thesis, opposing, 30
Thinking, dialectical, 30–33
Think tanks, 23
“Three Genetic Parents—For One 
Healthy Baby” (Daar & Aloni), 
243–244
Tieu, Carmen, “Why Violent Video 
Games Are Good for Girls,” 68–70
“To Help the Poor, Move Beyond 
‘Minimum’ Gestures” (Saltsman), 32
Toulmin framework
background of, 59
for causal argument, 205–206
for definition argument, 187–188
enthymeme in, 59, 60, 62, 63
for evaluation argument, 228
explanation of, 59–60
function of, 61–63
to plan and test arguments, 63–71
for proposal arguments, 247, 248
Truth
claims about, 169
issues related to, 9–10
Truth seeking, 7–9
Scholarly journals, argumentative 
­articles in, 20
Scholars, 23
Self-announcing structure, 70–71
Shared assumptions, 50–51
Shinozuka, Lauren, “The Dangers of 
Digital Distractedness,” 119–122
“Should Fast-Food Workers Be Paid 
$15 per Hour?” (Makens), 36–42
“Silenced and Invisible: Problems 
of Hispanic Students at Valley 
High School” (Mendoza-Flores), 
240–243
Simple categorical arguments, 181
Slides, 261–262
Slippery slope fallacy, 274
Snook, Ivan, “Flirting with Disaster: 
An Argument Against Integrating 
Women into the Combat Arms,” 
264–268
Socrates, 9, 10
Sophists, 9–10
Sources
angle of vision and political stance 
of, 280
attributive tags for material from, 
287–288
avoiding plagiarism in use of, 288–290
credibility of, 280
degree of advocacy of, 280–281
distance from original data, 79–80
evaluation of, 280–282
indirect, 292
MLA system to cite, 291–292
paraphrasing from, 285–286
purposeful use of, 282–283
quoting from, 286–287
reliability of, 280
summarizing from, 284–285
Web, 281–282
Space, 145–146. See also Design 
elements
Spatial elements, 144–146
Speculation, 203–205
Staff writers, 23
STAR criteria, 77–78, 133, 134
Statistics
casting doubt on, 105
emphasis on, 83–84

304	
Index
microtheme using quantitative 
graphic, 166
plan of argument’s details, 72
poster argument, 166
proposal argument, 258–259
revising draft for logos, pathos,  
and audience-based  
reasons, 99
rhetorical analysis, 134, 165
Rogerian letter, 119
supporting-reasons argument, 87
“Your Daily Multivitamin May Be 
Hurting You” (Hutchinson), 
175–177
Working thesis, because clauses in, 53
Works Cited (MLA style), 292
Writers
purpose of, 23–24
Rogerian argument and, 113, 115
Writing assignments
argument summary, 34
cartoon, 166
causal argument, 212
classical argument, 119
definition argument, 193–194
evaluation or ethical argument, 236
formal exploratory essay, 34
issue question and working thesis 
statement, 53
White papers, 21
“Why Lawrence Summers Was Wrong: 
Culture Rather Than Biology 
Explains the Underrepresentation 
of Women in Science and 
Mathematics” (Christianson), 
218–221
“Why McDonald’s Should Sell Meat 
and Veggie Pies: A Proposal to 
End Subsidies for Cheap Meat” 
(Wainscott), 269–270
“Why Violent Video Games Are Good 
for Girls” (Tieu), 68–70
“Womb for Rent” (Goodman), 137–138
Words, to create pathos, 93

Product Advertisements
Nicolites Electronic Cigarettes (Part 4)
Posters
The Hunger Games: Catching Fire  
(Ch. 9)
District 9 (Ch. 13)
Cartoons
Paul Fell, “Job Killer!” (Ch. 2)
Milt Priggee, “New Theory as to 
How the Dinosaurs Died”  
(Ch. 9)
Pat Bagley, “Climate Change Frogs” 
(Ch. 11)
Randy Bish, “Heroin” (Ch. 11)
Photos
Stand with Fast Food Workers  
(Part 1)
Protect Our Kids (Ch. 1)
Mosh Pit Photos (Ch. 5)
Boy after Typhoon Haiyan (Ch. 6)
Frack Will Seriously Damage Your 
Health (Part 3)
Polar Bear Parade (Ch. 9)
Self-Defense Photos (Ch. 9)
Stephen Colbert and Jon Stewart  
(Ch. 13)
Dead Baby Albatross (Ch. 14)
Video Games
“Tomb Raider” (Part 2)
Quantitative Tables and Graphs
Employment Statistics (Ch. 2)
Marital Status (Ch. 9)
Student Readings
Researched Arguments Formatted in 
Academic Style
Julie Christianson, “Why Lawrence 
Summers Was Wrong” (cause; APA 
format; Ch. 12)
Ivan Snook, “Flirting with Disaster” 
(proposal; MLA format; Ch. 14)
Classical Arguments
Carmen Tieu, “Why Violent Video 
Games Are Good for Girls” (Ch. 4)
Trudie Makens, “Bringing Dignity to 
Workers: Make the Minimum Wage a 
Living Wage” (Ch. 7)
Lauren Shinozuka, “The Dangers of 
Digital Distractedness” (Ch. 7)
Alex Mullen, “A Pirate But Not a Thief” 
(definition; Ch. 11)
Lorena Mendoza-Flores, “Silenced and 
Invisible” (evaluation; Ch. 13)
Exploratory Essay
Trudie Makens, “Should Fast-Food 
Workers Be Paid $15 per Hour?” 
(MLA format; Ch. 2)
Letters (Rogerian Communication)
Colleen Fontana, “An Open Letter 
to Robert Levy in Response to His 
Article ‘They Never Learn’” (Ch. 7)
Rhetorical Analysis
Zachary Stumps, “A Rhetorical Analysis 
of Ellen Goodman’s ‘Womb for Rent’” 
(Ch. 8)
Professional Visual  
Arguments
Advocacy Advertisements or Posters
Men Can Stop Rape, “Where Do You 
Stand?” (Ch. 6)
StopBullying.gov, “You’re a Dumb Piece 
of Trash” (Ch. 9)
Save the Children, “Help One, Save 
Many” (Ch. 9)
Txtresponsibly.org, “Be a Part of the 
Solution” (Ch. 9)
FreeTheCaptivesHouston.com,  
“Buying Sex Causes Sex Trafficking” 
(Ch. 12)
Planned Parenthood, “Reproductive 
Rights Under Attack” (Ch. 14)
Student Visual Arguments
Posters
Janie Bube, “Is Stormwater Turning Your 
Street into a Lake?” (Ch. 14)
Speech with PowerPoint
Sandy Wainscott, “Why McDonald’s 
Should Sell Meat and Veggie Pies” 
(Ch. 14)
Readings and Visual Arguments
Professional Readings
Articles by Journalists or Freelancers
Alex Hutchinson, “Your Daily 
Multivitamin May Be Hurting You” 
(Ch. 10)
Op-Ed Commentary from Journalists
James Surowiecki, “The Pay is Too 
Damn Low” (Ch. 2)
Ellen Goodman, “Womb for Rent” 
(Ch. 8)
Op-Ed Commentary from Concerned Citizens
Michael Saltsman, “To Help the Poor, 
Move Beyond ‘Minimum’ Gestures” 
(Ch. 2)
Judith Daar and Erez Aloni, “Three 
Genetic Parents—For One Healthy 
Baby” (Ch. 13)

