Author of
• How to Write a Thesis
• How to Survive Your Viva
Writing for Academic Journals
"Whether writing the first draft or the final draft, this book enables
and inspires academics to develop their own writing strategies and
goals."
Lorna Gillies, University of Leicester
"Our experience is that Rowena's practical approach works for busy
academic staff. Not only does it enable them to increase their
publication output and meet deadlines, but it boosts enthusiasm for
writing and stimulates creative thinking."
Kate Morss, Queen Margaret University College, Edinburgh
"This approach provides scientists with a systematic step-by-step
method of producing a paper for publication. The approach 
streamlines the process and provides strategies for overcoming 
barriers. Feedback from the professionals using the approach was
excellent."
Dr Mary Newton, Greater Glasgow Primary Care NHS Trust
This book unpacks the process of writing academic papers. It tells
readers what good papers look like, and explains how they come to 
be written.
Busy academics must develop productive writing practices quickly. 
No one has time for trial and error. To pass external tests of research 
output we must write to a high standard while juggling other 
professional tasks. This may mean changing writing behaviours.
Writing for Academic Journals draws on current research and theory 
to provide new knowledge on writing across the disciplines.  Drawing
on her extensive experience of running writing workshops and working
closely with academics on developing writing, Rowena Murray offers a
host of practical tried and tested strategies for good academic writing. 
This jargon-free, user-friendly, practical and motivational book is
essential for the desk of every academic, postgraduate student and
researcher for whom publication is an indicator of the quality of their
work and their ability.
Rowena Murray is Reader in the Centre for Academic Practice at the
University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, United Kingdom, and Visiting
Professor at Swinburne University, Melbourne, Australia. She teaches
on the Advanced Academic Studies course and the Postgraduate
Programme and her courses on academic writing are sought after
across the UK and overseas. Her other books include bestsellers How
to Write a Thesis and How to Survive Your Viva, both from Open
University Press. 
cover illustration: John McFarlane
cover design: Kate Prentice
  	


Writing for Academic Journals
M u r r a y
R o w e n a  M u r r a y
Writing
for Academic
Journals

WRITING FOR
ACADEMIC JOURNALS


WRITING FOR
ACADEMIC JOURNALS
Rowena Murray
OPEN UNIVERSITY PRESS

Open University Press
McGraw-Hill Education
McGraw-Hill House
Shoppenhangers Road
Maidenhead
Berkshire
England
SL6 2QL
email: enquiries@openup.co.uk
world wide web: www.openup.co.uk
and Two Penn Plaza, New York, NY 10121-2289, USA
First published 2005
Copyright © Rowena Murray 2005
All rights reserved. Except for the quotation of short passages for the purposes of
criticism and review, no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form, or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the
publisher or a licence from the Copyright Licensing Agency Limited. Details of such
licences (for reprographic reproduction) may be obtained from the Copyright
Licensing Agency Ltd of 90 Tottenham Court Road, London, W1T 4LP.
A catalogue record of this book is available from the British Library.
ISBN 0 335 21392 8 (pb)
0 335 21393 6 (hb)
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
CIP data applied for
Typeset by ReﬁneCatch Ltd, Bungay, Suffolk
Printed in the UK by Bell & Bain Ltd, Glasgow

For Phyllis


Contents
Preface
xi
Acknowledgements
xiv
Introduction: Beyond reason and vanity
1
1
Why write for academic journals?
9
What is academic writing?
10
Can it be learned?
11
Is it innate?
12
Reasons for writing
13
Reasons for publishing
14
Internal and external drivers
14
Career implications
16
Research proﬁle
18
What is ‘research’?
18
Reasons for not writing
22
‘I haven’t done any research’
23
Intellectual capacity
24
Turgid writing
25
Narrow range
26
Pre-peer review
27
Guilt, fear and anxiety
28
Procrastination
30
The writing self
31
Team and collaborative writing
32

Barriers to writing
33
An integrative strategy
34
Checklist
35
2
Targeting a journal
36
‘That’s interesting!’
37
Getting to know the journals
38
Peer reviewed or professional?
41
Instructions for authors
42
Journals that ‘count’
43
Analysing a journal
44
Working out what is acceptable
50
Becoming a scholar of the journal
50
Analysing abstracts
52
Deﬁning genre
57
Joining the conversation
59
Cloning or creativity?
60
Mediating
62
Personal negotiations
62
Contacting the editor
63
Editors’ responses
65
Wait time
65
Checklist
66
3
Finding a topic and developing an argument
67
Finding a topic
69
Conference presentations
71
Thesis
73
Freewriting
74
Generative writing
81
Writing to prompts
82
The writing ‘sandwich’
85
Finding readers: critic, mentor, buddy and others
91
Finding a voice
93
Finding an argument
93
Formulating a hypothesis
94
Constructing an argument
95
The quality question
96
Calibrating your topic
96
Writing a working title
97
Checklist
98
4
Outlining
99
Level 3 outlining
104
CONTENTS
viii

Allocating word lengths
108
Writing an abstract – Brown’s 8 questions
108
Outlining a paper – Murray’s 10 prompts
114
Calibrating your outline
115
Checklist
116
5
Drafting
117
What constitutes good writing in journals?
119
Shaping sections
125
Streamlining
126
Turning headings into prompts
127
Internal critique
134
Checklist
136
6
Revising the draft
137
Foregrounding generic aspects of academic style
139
Revising the outline
142
Revising drafts
143
Generative writing
146
Using the writers’ group
146
The critical friend and the ‘tame’ subject expert
147
Revision processes
147
Iterative processes
148
Developing a concise style
149
Polishing
150
The ﬁnal revision
151
Checklist
151
7
Finding time to write
152
Incremental writing
154
‘Binge’ or ‘snack’?
155
A writing plan
156
Goal setting
159
30-minute slots
163
Monitoring progress
163
Creating a place for writing in your life
164
Becoming a regular writer
165
A six-month writing programme
165
Checklist
168
8
Dialogue and feedback
169
A writers’ group
170
Writers’ retreat
176
CONTENTS
ix

Dialogue
184
More freewriting and generative writing
185
Checklist
186
9
Responding to reviewers’ feedback
187
The ‘grim reader’
188
Examples of reviewers’ comments
189
Destructive feedback
194
What to do with hostile reviews
196
Contradictory comments
196
Rejection
197
Resubmission
200
Responding to feedback from editors and reviewers
201
What now?
202
Acceptance
203
Proofs
205
Offprints
206
Marketing your writing
207
What next?
208
Recycling and ‘salami-slicing’
210
Writing a book
211
Developing a programme for writing
211
Checklist
213
Bibliography
214
Index
221
CONTENTS
x

Preface
This book is based on the assumption that the writing skills you learned in
school – which is when most people last learned about writing – do not equip
you for your entire career. This is to say that we can all develop our writing
skills throughout our careers, and that writing development – or whatever you
want to call it – is not remedial; far from it.
When we come to the subject of writing for academic journals, there are
other problematic misconceptions:
You cannot write for academic journals until you have immersed yourself in the
literature and you cannot write for academic journals if you have not done any
research.
These and other widely accepted conceptions about writing for academic
journals have, of course, an element of truth in them; you do have to know the
literature and you do have to contextualize your contribution in terms of the
other work that has been done.
However, ‘immersing yourself’ in the literature is itself a long-term process.
If you wait until you feel you have achieved that, you may never write. If you
wait until you have found your place in the literature, you may lose the cre-
ative spark, the germ of your own idea and your commitment to write. In
reality, it is the process of publishing a paper that helps you to establish your
place in the literature.
If this is true, then you need strategies to write and develop your ideas while
you are still learning about academic writing in your ﬁeld. You also have to
overcome the misconception that you cannot publish anything because you

have not done any ‘real’ research. There are, in fact, many varieties of paper
published in many ﬁelds.
Many see writing as a discipline-speciﬁc activity and will wonder how this
book can possibly address new writers in every ﬁeld. The answer lies in a
generic approach, showing how, while each discipline is indeed in many ways
quite different, there are similarities in writing published in journals across
disciplines.
Yet each ﬁeld does have its own rhetoric; in fact, each journal has, in a sense,
its own genre, its own prevailing conventions and values. Detailed analysis of
journal articles from different ﬁelds demonstrates the process of working out
precisely what journal editors and reviewers are looking for.
On another level, if we look at practice – what people actually do when they
write and how they manage to get it done – writing again presents challenges
to new writers in all disciplines:
• Writers – particularly new writers – in all disciplines face the constant chal-
lenges of getting started and making time for writing.
• Academics in all disciplines have to raise the standard of their writing and
publishing, as they move from postgraduate years to an academic career and
as they progress through their careers.
• It is difﬁcult to write regularly if you do not have productive practices, or if
you do not even know what that might involve.
These are often seen as ‘practical’ problems, sometimes relegated to a lower
order of thinking. In a sense, of course, these are practical problems, in that
they concern practice. But, as we all know, it is difﬁcult to separate out all the
levels of activity that writing involves, to distinguish the purely practical from
the cognitive, for example. They are closely connected.
This book therefore addresses the key challenges in writing academic papers
in terms of actual writing practices:
• What are the activities that lead to a paper being submitted and, ultimately,
accepted?
• How does it actually happen?
• What do you actually do?
• How do you really ﬁnd time for writing?
• How do you improve the standard of your writing?
As for any research task, a range of strategies is available, and it is probably
good to have more than one.
Throughout this book I include participants’ diverse reactions – both posi-
tive and negative – to the strategies I suggest, because this helps to reveal not
only the complexity of the writing process, but also what I see as learning
stages.
What is new about this book is my argument that the way to regular, mean-
PREFACE
xii

ingful and enjoyable writing for journals is through an integrated approach:
you can combine the conventional structuring strategies and the less con-
ventional – though no less tried and tested – ‘freewheeling’ and generative
strategies.
PREFACE
xiii

Acknowledgements
Once again, I want to thank Shona Mullen at Open University Press/McGraw-
Hill – not only for her support but this time also for her patience.
Dr Morag Thow at Glasgow Caledonian University provided unstoppable
support.
Many others, in many writing groups and programmes, have helped me
understand what goes on when we write. Without all these rehearsals and
airings, my ideas would not have developed beyond my reading, observations
and my own writing. Most recently, writers in a ‘mini-retreat’ at Swinburne
University (Melbourne, Australia) were astute, challenging and sympathetic
sounding boards for my ideas, and they helped me to reﬁne further the
activities I propose in this book.

Introduction: Beyond
reason and vanity
The title of this introduction, ‘Beyond reason and vanity’, echoes Skinner’s
Beyond Freedom and Dignity, the intention being not only to introduce,
from the start, the important behavioural dimension of writing but also to
reposition writing for academic journals: it cannot be reduced to a set of
professional imperatives. Given the lack of immediate, or even long-term,
reward for publishing, there must also be personal motives. The satisfaction
that writing a paper brings only comes later, sometimes much later, long after
the writing. Nor will publication necessarily bring any tangible reward.
Academics who publish regularly must therefore have somehow moved
beyond ‘reason’, not in the sense that they have lost their minds, but in the
sense that they do not, they say, ﬁnd their deepest motivation to publish in
organizational or political directives; ironically, the scoring systems used to
value – and devalue – publications is, for some, the last thing they would think
of if you asked them what motivates them to write.
Given that few academics who aim to be published in the top journals will
ever achieve this, most must have other reasons to write. They must also have
moved beyond ‘vanity’, in the sense that they aspire to more than making
themselves look good by collecting a pile of publications. Nor is regular publi-
cation a guarantee – for everyone – of career progression; for most academics
publication does not automatically bring status and promotion.
In fact, the dominant characteristic of academic writers is their persistence,
as much as anything else, which keeps them going when others have given up:
A writer needs obstinate perseverance to succeed. Writing is a fairly
thankless undertaking. I think people get tired of it pretty quickly, so
sticking with it is the greatest part of the battle.
(Messud, quoted in Roberts et al. 2002: 50)

This makes developing effective motivational, behavioural strategies more
complex.
Theoretically, what might be seen as the primary purpose of writing
for publication – achieving ‘hits’ in some kind of audit – must, therefore, be
broadened to encompass less rational motives: self-expression, creativity and
enjoyment. In reality, however, the two types of motivation may work in
opposition. There are those who would argue that academics are eternally
plagued by a tension between ‘idealism and practicality’ (Rossen 1993: 5).
Perhaps the competitiveness endemic in academic writing can be read as an
externalization of this internal conﬂict.
This book is aimed at all academic writers, published or otherwise, since
continuing to write and publish, and ﬁnding a purpose in doing so, is an on-
going challenge. There is a persistent tension between ‘scholarship as a means
to an end or as an end in itself’ (Rossen 1993: 3). In the present climate, the
same could be said of writing for academic journals.
Do academics really need to learn about writing?
It has been argued that academics learn about writing in the course of their
careers:
Successful university lecturers are likely to have spent many years devel-
oping acceptable ways of constructing their own knowledge through their
own writing practices in a variety of disciplinary contexts.
(Lea and Street 1998: 163)
Yet many academics, even those with PhDs, report that this is not how
it works; it simply does not prove possible to learn everything they need to
know about research and writing as they go along: ‘it was unspoken but it just
seemed obvious: that’s what one does. And then it turned out that I was
terribly bad at it’ (Ellmann, quoted in Hanks 2003). While it would be interest-
ing – and worthwhile – to research why this might be, it is the purpose of this
book to address the stated need for guidance and development in the demand-
ing task of writing for academic journals, particularly for new writers: there is
no need to pretend that you know all you need to know about writing.
Given the opportunity to experience writing development, many academics
are surprised at how little they know about writing and some are relieved
ﬁnally to be able to admit it:
The writing process was something I hadn’t given much thought to before
starting the [writing] course. . . . One of the ﬁrst topics explored was how is
academic writing learned? The answer . . . seems to be by trial and error.
INTRODUCTION
2

On reﬂection I cannot recall being given formal instruction on the
speciﬁcs of academic writing during my undergraduate career. This trial
and error process is not just conﬁned to academic writing; it extends to all
forms of writing.
(participant in Academic Writing module, Advanced Academic Studies
course, University of Strathclyde)
What we learned about writing at school – without wanting to criticize that
in any way – was not sufﬁcient preparation for all the writing we have to do
throughout our professional lives. How could it be? Yet there was an assump-
tion that writing development or instruction was only for those who struggled
with writing, perhaps non-native speakers, or those whose writing skills were
poor. Although this assumption persists, there is growing acknowledgement
that we ought to learn more about writing if we want to be published in
academic journals. In some disciplines, some support is provided during the
PhD, but in others there is nothing at all for new writers. What exactly we need
to learn is, of course, still a matter of some debate.
Pressure on academics to publish increases year by year. In addition, as
more institutions are granted university status and new disciplines join higher
education, there is an urgent need for support in this area. Lecturers in these
universities, some of whom are highly experienced, face even more intense
pressure to participate in audit exercises that make publication targets very
speciﬁc. Many of these lecturers will not have published in the past, but will
be expected to do so immediately. They have to run to catch up with the
other, more established disciplines with whom they will be compared.
This pressure to publish is international, as, it appears, is the demand for
development and support.
The stigma previously attached to what I call ‘writing development’ is
thankfully being eroded, as academics and postgraduate students recognize
that it is in their interest – and not just their universities’ – to raise the standard
of their writing by, simply, learning more about it.
Writing for publication requires a difﬁcult transformation for those
who have recently completed – or are still working on – a PhD thesis (UK) or
dissertation (USA). It can be a complex transformation, involving several
dimensions of change. Many new writers do not have rhetorical knowledge –
knowledge of the techniques of persuasive writing that are the building blocks
of scholarly writing. Consequently, they may make errors in their ﬁrst papers,
some of which, in my development work across the UK and elsewhere, I ﬁnd
recur across disciplines:
INTRODUCTION
3

Deﬁning the problem is clearly a crucial step in an argument. Yet many new
writers spend too long on this, in their early drafts, and produce an over-long
ﬁrst draft that then has to be radically cut. Alternatively, perhaps they have a
paper whose prime argument is that there is ‘a problem’, but new writers do
not always perceive the gradations of argument that are available and end up
overstating the critique, demolishing the opposition and drawing ﬁre from
reviewers. They are often able to say, immediately, when challenged, what
it is they are trying to write: this is where it helps to have a colleague say ‘write
that down’. Balanced, usable sentences often appear in discussions about the
paper.
Of course, any writer can make these errors at any time, but they do seem to
feature regularly in new writers’ texts. What these early errors have in common
is the writers’ lack of rhetorical development of their argument, too much
stating of the point, without the necessary justiﬁcations. Once these ﬂaws are
pointed out to writers – as ﬂaws – they can quickly modulate their tone, trim
their critique and prune their paper.
Academics can, therefore, learn about writing; in fact, they do so very
quickly, once the principles have been pointed out to them. This book will
deﬁne and illustrate many of the key principles.
What difference will it make?
The popularity of the Writing for Publication programme that I designed
demonstrates demand for writing development at universities and in other
organizations, such as hospital Trusts. The programme helps those aiming to
increase and/or improve written output. The structured approach to writing
for publication helps academics, and others, develop this key professional skill
over the longer term, rather than just ‘playing the publication game’. It has
changed some writers’ conceptions of the writing process and of themselves as
writers. Instead of sitting in the margin, occupying personal time, writing
is more clearly positioned within the writer’s working life. Evaluations,
New writers’ errors
• Writing too much about ‘the problem’
• Overstating the problem and claiming too much for their solution
• Overstating the critique of others’ work
• Not saying what they mean, losing focus through indirect writing
• Putting too many ideas in one paper
INTRODUCTION
4

in questionnaires, focus groups and long-term follow-up interviews show
evidence of impact in terms of participants’ published output.
Writers develop both a knowledge base and the behaviours they need to
become regular writers. While this book covers a wide range of approaches,
the main theme is developing an integrated writing strategy. This involves
working on all of the dimensions of the writing act. If you can create situations
where you are able to work on all the dimensions of writing at the same time, it
is possible to change your academic writing practices quite quickly. For
example, in writers’ group meetings, you can discuss the writing project itself,
your progress with it and your goals for the next phase; more importantly,
you would also discuss your feelings about the project, your sense of what
constitutes progress and your levels of conﬁdence in your writing. In this way,
you include the rhetorical, psycho-social and cognitive aspects of writing. You
will not just be talking about text.
The distinctiveness of this book is that it brings all these types of approaches
together: rhetorical, behavioural (which academics learning about writing
tend to call ‘practical’) and psycho-social. It is not just about one or the other.
These are tried and tested approaches, reﬁned in many different programmes
and in discussions with writers about their papers.
What can research tell us about academic writing?
There is a body of knowledge on writing – about how it is learned and how it is
done, about what constitutes good writing and how it is achieved. There is a
substantial amount of scholarship on how undergraduate writing skills can be
developed, but less on academic writers. Blaxter et al. (1998b) argued that
research on academic writing is ‘patchy’.
There is research on strategies used by one group of productive academic
writers. Hartley and Branthwaite (1989) studied British psychologists and
found that their results matched closely those of Boice (1987). Although the
research is not recent, it does offer pointers that later researchers would
endorse:
1 Make a rough plan (which you needn’t necessarily stick to).
2 Complete sections one at a time. It may help to do them in order.
3 Use a word processor if possible.
4 Revise and redraft at least twice.
5 Plan to spend about 2 to 5 hours writing per week in term time.
6 Find quiet conditions in which to write and, if possible, always write in the
same place (or places).
7 Set goals and targets for yourself.
INTRODUCTION
5

8 Invite colleagues and friends to comment on early drafts.
9 Collaborate with longstanding colleagues and trusted friends.
(Hartley and Branthwaite 1989: 449)
What is interesting, and still useful, about this list is that it shows the way
to a productive writing process. There is advice on how many hours you
should try to spend on writing per week, which does not sound like
much, but it is probably more manageable than the higher ﬁgure many
new writers would set themselves. Point 6 recalls all that study skills advice
that we give students. In this context it sounds a bit rigid, but this is what
worked for the productive writers in this study. Perhaps, as psychologists,
they were better at identifying productive behaviours. They would, for
example, know all about the powers of goals and targets both in theory and
in practice.
Boice (1987, 1990) developed writing strategies for academics, backed up
by empirical evidence. His approach is still relevant, though contentious to
academics who have developed a different mode: he advocates regular writing
in short bursts, ‘regular’ meaning daily and ‘short’ meaning as little as 30
minutes, and for many academics this ‘snack’ approach contradicts their
favoured ‘binge’ mode.
Elbow’s freewriting – both public and private – is an invaluable technique
for all writers, though some require more persuasion than others that this is so.
The value of what he calls ‘low stakes writing’ cannot be overstated; although
all writing is targeted at a speciﬁc audience, it is important to have a space to
write that is removed from their potentially endless judgements.
The impact of writers’ groups and development of an integrative strategy
have been the focus of my own work for the past few years. Again and again, I
have come back to the question, is it possible or sensible to talk about any one
of the dimensions of writing separately from the others? Can we talk about
rhetorical skills without, for example, talking about the need to – and skills of,
having the conﬁdence to – negotiate on a daily basis time to write? People tell
me all the time that there is no time to write. The need constantly to be
switching things around, stretching deadlines for other things in order to write
– surely that too is a skill? Although, are we not already doing this kind of
thing with other aspects of our professional roles? There are negotiating pro-
cesses involved in writing and in time management and my work has opened
up some of these individual and group negotiations. The main point about
writers’ groups is that we need to be able to link up, in discussion, the various
dimensions of writing: rhetorical, psycho-social and behavioural. Can we
make any progress if we only work to improve in one area?
One wonders why, if writing is so important in academic life, there has not
been more research. There could, for example, be much more on what pro-
ductive writers actually do; but perhaps they would be unwilling to share their
‘secrets’ in any case. The real reason may lie in the complexity of writing,
involving potentially several different disciplines:
INTRODUCTION
6

1 There is the psychology of writing, including motivation and meaning-
making.
2 There is a social dimension to writing, usually a solitary act, but aimed at
real people, and therefore beneﬁting from discussion and feedback.
3 There is the rhetorical dimension, including not only mechanics of writing,
but also persuasive strategies.
4 There is a cognitive dimension, deﬁning ways of thinking about writing.
Another block to research may, of course, be the residual stigma attached to
writing development. Although it can be positively positioned as writing at a
higher level, that old myth that ‘those who can, do’, along with the unspoken
– and often spoken – belief that there must be something wrong with you if
you need to be ‘developed’, has not quite gone. It only takes one inﬂuential
and/or senior member of staff or senior ofﬁcer to say that academics would be
better spending their time writing than attending writers’ groups, for example,
to kill off the initiative of academics, staff developers and any others within
earshot. They will function quite well without the explicit support of senior
staff, but their active resistance or explicit criticism will make it very difﬁcult
to continue.
The argument about how academics’ need for writing development occurs
rages on. There are those who blame the schools; others blame new technolo-
gies for what they see as the degradation of students’ grammar. In practice,
staff are just as likely to be unsure of how to use the semi-colon as students.
While we let that debate rage on, perhaps we can progress by admitting that
what we learned at school about writing – whether that included grammar or
not – was never likely to be sufﬁcient for writing an academic paper.
There is also a misconception that writing can be separated from learning
and research: I have heard it said, by a very senior keynote speaker, opening a
conference that I had been invited to address on academic writing, that ‘We all
know that it is the quality of the research that matters, not the writing’. He
singled out my session for this censure, not only putting me in my place,
before I even had a chance to say a word about writing skills, but quite likely
also discouraging anyone at his institution from seeking, or perhaps from
providing, writing development.
This book
What distinguishes this book from others on the subject is that it deals
not only with increasing or improving output, but also with the process of
changing writing practices. Productive strategies are provided to help writers
change their practices.
Change takes time. Stages in the process of becoming a regular, productive
INTRODUCTION
7

writer are outlined. By adopting and/or adapting these strategies writers will
become more productive, will write more readily and will ﬁnd more enjoy-
ment in the process. There is also evidence that they will be successful. By
working through this book writers can discover their own reasons for writing.
Each chapter includes writing activities that progress the writing project in
stages, from start to ﬁnish, from ﬁnding topics to responding to reviewers. All
the activities have been tried and tested in writers’ groups at many universities,
old and new, and in other organizations. Chapters are linked by questions or
comments repeatedly raised by writers. Unless these issues are addressed the
writing project falters.
In practice, some writers immediately take to some of the writing strategies
described here; others ﬁnd them counter-intuitive or not immediately
productive. The trick is to adopt or adapt them, as appropriate, and, more
importantly, to stick with them for long enough to see the beneﬁt. Clearly,
reading about a writing strategy, or even trying it once or twice, will have little
or no impact on your practice or output.
This book argues that you may have to change your writing habits; in
order to become a regular writer you may have to use both ‘snack’ and ‘binge’
strategies. Writing is not treated as a skill that you learn once and for all, but as
a professional task that continues to present an on-going challenge to new and
experienced writers alike.
Writing for academic journals is widely perceived as one of the most discip-
line-speciﬁc activities. Many academics assume that it is not possible to discuss
writing in a generic way and that only someone in their area can provide
useful feedback or instruction. Yet, this is to ignore the deep structures of
published arguments across a wide range of subjects, illustrated in this book.
This material is, therefore, relevant to all disciplines.
This book combines research- and practice-based approaches in order to
help writers change their approach to writing and adjust their academic writ-
ing practices. There is some evidence that, once adopted, these new strategies
can help writers with other, non-scholarly writing tasks.
The emphasis is on what writers do – or can do – rather than on what editors
or reviewers do. Although the role of the reviewers is dealt with in this book,
the focus is on how writers can respond to feedback in order to move their
writing towards publication.
That nature of the academy (and of academic work) is to foster rivalry
through discrimination between various theories and ideas, which are
largely – as critics of the academy delight in pointing out – subjective,
which heightens the tension between scholars all the more.
(Rossen 1993: 3)
Instead of ﬁxating on this ‘rivalry’, like many of those who say they want to
write but never do, or being distracted by your critics’ covert ‘subjectivity’, you
can focus on simply getting on with your writing.
INTRODUCTION
8

1
Why write for
academic journals?
What is academic writing? • Can it be learned? • Is it
innate? • Reasons for writing • Reasons for publishing
• Internal and external drivers • Career implications
• Research proﬁle • What is ‘research’? • Reasons for not
writing • ‘I haven’t done any research’ • Intellectual
capacity • Turgid writing • Narrow range • Pre-peer
review • Guilt, fear and anxiety • Procrastination • The
writing self • Team and collaborative writing • Barriers
to writing • An integrative strategy • Checklist
This chapter explores the potential purposes of scholarly writing – why do we
do it? What’s in it for us? The aim is to prompt readers, particularly if you have
not published much or at all in academic journals, to address your motiv-
ations. These can be quite mixed. New writers are often ambivalent about
academic journals, even, sometimes particularly, journals in their ﬁeld, and
this can be a barrier to writing. It is crucial to address the issues that come up
most frequently in discussions at this stage; if the issues are not addressed, it is
unlikely that there will be any writing.

If you are not a regular writer, you may have counter-motivations; there may
be factors, people or strategies holding you back from writing. Alternatively,
there may be achievements that occur because you do not write, and you may
be worried about losing these if you have to devote time and energy to writing.
You may not like the kinds of writing you see in journals in your ﬁeld. Many
new writers express a strong antipathy to what they see there:
‘I don’t want to write that turgid stuff.’
‘I want to write something that I would want to read.’
‘No one will read it if it’s published in that journal.’
On the positive side, most new writers have something ‘in the locker’, some-
thing that they have been meaning to write about for some time. They may
feel guilty, and may have to start by putting the sense of failure – at not having
made more progress – behind them. In order to do this, some type of re-tuning
of motivation might be necessary.
External drivers also impact on your motivation to write. Ironically, these
sometimes interfere with internal, or intrinsic, motivations. Each writer has to
work out his or her own answer to the question of why to write for scholarly
publication. Important answers include developing your proﬁle, progressing
in your career and developing your understanding of your ﬁeld. Once the
ambivalence has been resolved, it is possible to reposition writing as valuable,
feasible and enjoyable.
What is academic writing?
The craft or art of writing is the clumsy attempt to ﬁnd symbols for the
wordlessness. In utter loneliness a writer tries to explain the inexplicable.
(Steinbeck 1970: 14)
Academic writing is that set of conventions we see in a thesis or a published
paper in our disciplines, a deﬁnition that becomes more precise once you
scrutinize examples of published writing in your target journals.
Some argue that academic writing is a narrowly deﬁned set of specialisms
and knowledges, so narrow that it leaves ‘huge gaps in our understanding’:
It is the desire to think and write more, to ﬁll some of these gaps that
informs my desire to leave the academy – to think and write on subjects of
my choice, in the manner that I wish to write, in whatever voice I choose.
WHY WRITE FOR ACADEMIC JOURNALS?
10

There is so much emphasis on asserting a one-dimensional ‘voice’ in
academic life. I enjoy writing about many subjects in different ways.
(hooks 1999: 141)
hooks argues that our subjectivity is ‘colonised’ in academic writing, and it is
certainly true that across the disciplines subjectivity has traditionally had little
or no value. This has begun to change recently, in some disciplines, but in
others such changes are still seen as inappropriate to the enterprise of research.
If hooks’ argument applies, then there are gaps not simply in the literature,
but created by the literature. The academic approach to research – and the
academic style available for writing about it – is inherently limited. Those who
ﬁnd it limiting are not necessarily limited themselves; it is important to
acknowledge that much of what we think, say and do in the course of our work
can become invisible when we publish.
That accounts for academic writing, the product, but what about the pro-
cess? A published paper creates an illusion of linear progression, when, as we
all know, writing is a dynamic, cyclical process. While the merits of published
papers are often discussed, there is relatively little discussion of how writing
actually gets done: what are the stages and how do we ﬁt them into our other
tasks? How do productive writers manage to get so much done? – a question to
be asked not so much in awe or envy as in anticipation of a practical answer.
Can it be learned?
Whenever I introduce the subject of paragraph structure – and its role in
argument – to a group of academics I inevitably use such terms as ‘topic sen-
tence’. I ask them if they know what it means and, almost always, a silence
falls. ‘Is that the silence of “We know this already, move on . . . or the silence of
we don’t know, tell us now” ’, I ask. Usually, a few immediately respond that
they do not know. The point here is not that academics should learn jargon,
Words associated with writing about research
• objective
• hierarchical
• focused
• conservative
• neutral
CAN IT BE LEARNED?
11

but that they do have gaps in their knowledge about how sentences and para-
graphs work. This can affect not only how they talk about writing with their
students, but also how they manage their own writing.
Writing can, of course, be learned. The problem is there are very few formal,
or informal, opportunities to learn. One editor, speaking at a recent world
conference, said that it was the universities’ job to provide training in aca-
demic writing, so that students coming through would be able to write well.
Feedback from journal editors and reviewers teaches us some lessons, but it
is not advisable to set out to use them in that way. They will not appreciate it.
Not all of them want to help writers learn; some would prefer all their submis-
sions to be from ‘learned’ writers. Some of the more cutting reviews that we see
may result from reviewers’ frustration at having to provide what they see as
basic guidance. Some report that, in any case, they ﬁnd it difﬁcult to give
feedback on writing. They do not always have an explanation for why a piece
of text does not work; they simply know that it doesn’t.
If it can be learned, then can it be un-learned? People who do not write
regularly, or who have stopped writing for a while, feel that they have lost the
ability to write: ‘I’ve forgotten how to write’. The cure is, as always, to start
writing again – ‘It’s not till I write that I realize that I can’ – but perhaps in new
ways. It is possible to have a sense of your incompetence at the thought of
writing, and this, if it goes on for long enough, can be aversive: it will stop you
writing. This is something you have to ﬁnd ways to avoid, if you are to write
for academic journals.
Is it innate?
As for many other aspects of our professional roles for which we received no
training or education, there is a tenacious myth that there are those who can
write and those who cannot: ‘Those who can, do. Those who can’t, teach. And
those who can’t teach, teach gym/history/maths/law/education/writing/golf,
other bias against a discipline.’
On the few occasions when writing ability is discussed in universities, there
are popular assumptions about what makes some people productive writers,
and it is not all about technical skill:
• These people are just good writers.
• Some are better at making time for writing.
• Those who publish are more selﬁsh; they don’t care about their students.
For new writers there is a potential double bind here: you should be able to
write already on the basis on your education and experience, yet if you were
really good enough you would already have written more than you have.
WHY WRITE FOR ACADEMIC JOURNALS?
12

When academics talk about writing development, including training initia-
tives whose impact is evidenced in publications, senior colleagues, some ini-
tially and others serially, react with indifference at least and open scepticism at
worst. This suggests that, across many different institutions, and in several
countries, it is difﬁcult to get past the remedial model: participation in writing
development can be seen as a weakness.
The ability to write successfully for academic journals is not, of course,
innate, although, interestingly, many people still think that it is. Yet, in the
absence of formal training, perhaps it is true, ironically, that ‘those who can,
do’, or can we rewrite that as, ‘In the past, those who could, already did’.
This is not an excuse for avoiding writing development or, importantly,
writing discussions. There are strategies for productive writing and ways of
making time for writing in the average over-loaded academic life. Perhaps you
do need to think about being more ‘selﬁsh’, if that means putting your priority
– writing – ﬁrst. Perhaps you do need to overcome the sense that writers are a
breed apart. Perhaps you need to learn new tricks.
Reasons for writing
Since it can have so many effects, there is potentially a wide range of personal
and/or professional reasons for writing:
• working out what you think, clarifying your thinking or starting to think;
• having a ‘rant’, letting off steam, ‘uncluttering’ your brain;
• telling others what you think;
• persuading others to take it on board.
This list is no more than a starting point for thinking about where you are in
what could be seen as a continuum between writing for yourself and writing
for others: which is more important to you now?; which do you feel more
ready to do?; which do you want to do in the short term? Starting today? If you
have always had a feeling – as many have – that you would like to write, if only
you knew how to go about it, then now is the time to start.
The general purpose of this book is to make a case for two kinds of writing:
writing for yourself and writing for others. Writing for others, particularly for
academic journals, can sometimes seem too constraining; writing for yourself,
if you can silence your internal editor, is a crucial way to make sure that you
develop your idea, your voice and your conﬁdence.
Some writers argue that they like writing and do not lack conﬁdence, but see
no reason to get into print. They have other ways, they argue, of gaining
professional recognition and other outlets for their communications than
academic journals. Of course, this is always an option, as long as you are clear
REASONS FOR WRITING
13

about and comfortable with any consequences there may be for your career.
And what about consequences for your learning? Where will you ﬁnd the kind
of hard critique provided by journal reviewers?
Reasons for publishing
Your reasons for publishing may be much more closely linked to external
drivers – and to other people’s criteria – or, perhaps, to your awareness that you
are expected to establish such a link.
Some of these reasons are more altruistic than others. Co-authoring with
students, for example, can help them in their search for a good job after gradu-
ation, in some professions. They will certainly have learned from publishing,
provided you allow them to participate in the process, and you will have mod-
elled a form of continuing professional development. In addition, if you have
not published before, this is an excellent way of developing a small-scale piece
of work for a journal.
Internal and external drivers
For writing, as for other professional tasks, there is a complex mixture of
internal and external motivations. What is interesting is that when it comes to
writing for academic journals, these motivations sit in opposition and can
Reasons for publishing in academic journals
• career progression – moving up to the next rung on the ladder
• gaining recognition for work you have done
• stopping someone else taking credit for your work or using your materials
• personal satisfaction of completing a new goal
• setting yourself a new challenge
• helping your students to gain recognition for their work
• learning how to write to a higher standard
• contributing to knowledge
• building your institution’s status
• developing a proﬁle
WHY WRITE FOR ACADEMIC JOURNALS?
14

work against each other. Even in discussion among those who want to write
for journals, there can be resistance to actually doing it.
Both external and internal drivers may combine if your aim is to get on in
your career, yet this might be complicated by your ambivalence towards the
writing you see published in the journal articles in your ﬁeld. You may be
ambivalent about joining what you see as a big ‘game’. You may even develop
feelings of antipathy towards those who regularly publish, particularly if they
are in promoted positions. This may be compounded by your or others’ scepti-
cism at the whole promotion process, and this, too, can undermine your
writing.
When I say, in an attempt at humour rather than cynicism, in writers’ work-
shops that the quickest, surest way to get published is to change your ﬁrst
name to ‘Professor’, there is often rueful laughter, followed by an important
discussion of the differences between papers published by those who already
have a body of work and an established proﬁle in the discipline and those
published by ‘unknowns’. Of course, reviewing should be blind, but some-
times it isn’t, and even when it is, it is often easy to identify the authors from
their references. The important lesson is that once you yourself have a body of
work and experience, you too may write quite different types of papers; they
may be very different from your ﬁrst published paper.
Internal drivers include your intention genuinely to develop your writing
skills, yet you may feel ambivalent about feedback you receive from peers and
reviewers. You may invest time in researching a journal, yet feel that they have
‘missed the point’ of your paper, or been too harsh in their critique, or that
they seem to be confusing it with another paper entirely. You may ﬂat out
disagree with the feedback. The criticisms may indeed be unfair and unhelpful,
but your reaction may be as much about the emotional side of receiving criti-
cism of your writing. You have, after all, invested so much of yourself in it.
Until you have been through the process several times, you may ﬁnd yourself
taking criticism personally.
It will come as no comfort to know that as your knowledge of journal
writing deepens, you may uncover new layers of ambivalence: you know what
you are doing now and resent reviewers who still write as if they assume that
you don’t. This might be the best indication yet that it is an on-going struggle
to bridge the gap between your internal and external drivers. You may con-
tinue to feel that what started out as your distinctive voice has morphed into
journal-speak. It will be important, particularly when you are getting started,
to have a way to refocus on what’s in it for you to publish in academic
journals.
There are those who will ﬁnd all of this a bit pathetic; of course we all have to
publish as part of our jobs – why all the ambiguity? Surely it is your responsibil-
ity to add to the store of knowledge and to keep yourself up to date for the sake
of your students? If this is your view, you will, in theory, ﬁnd it easier to make
time and space for your writing, although when you start to, for the ﬁrst time,
there will be consequences for other people:
INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL DRIVERS
15

You have to be very clear, if you want to write, what place it occupies
in your life. I’m afraid that if you’re ambitious, it often has to have ﬁrst
place – it sometimes has to take precedence over human relationships and
anything else.
(Mantel, quoted in Roberts et al. 2002: 75)
Even if you just want to ‘get on’ in your career, that is, you do not necessarily
want to get to the very top – far from it, perhaps – there are those who will be
ready to label you as ‘ambitious’. Even if you simply want to be acknowledged
for your work by promotion, there will be those who see you as selﬁsh. No
matter how much time and energy you plough into other roles, supporting
students when no one else will, representing your department on more than
your share of committees, and being course leader on more courses than two
or more of your colleagues, there will be people in your peer group who refuse
to see all your efforts. ‘How did you ﬁnd time to write’, they wonder, ‘if you
really are so busy?’ Come the day you actually do defer a task to ﬁnish a paper,
there may be a cataclysmic reaction. You may be branded as someone who is
prone to ‘dropping the ball’ for the rest of your career.
The point of this one-sided narrative is to characterize another type of
external driver: the increasingly negative reactions – real or imagined, both
can have real impact – that your writing may provoke in other people. These
can drive against your writing, convincing you to make less time for it,
not more. You do have to make writing more important than anything
else at some point, in order to get it done at all. If you never make it the
priority you will never do it. You have to ask yourself, what exactly are you
waiting for?:
Write as if you are dying. It works. Imagine if you’ve only got a year to live
or something. I think that’s the best motivator to get you to do it.
(Gemmell, in Roberts et al. 2002: 57)
While this view will seem extreme to some, it does raise the question of how
long you have, if you wait another year or two, to get started and to become a
regular writer for academic journals.
Career implications
You may not enjoy the career appraisal or review process – that more or less
statutory discussion with your head of department or director about your pro-
gress and goals, and you may not even ﬁnd it useful, but it does give you
an opportunity to make connections between what you want to do in your
writing and what your department or unit values.
WHY WRITE FOR ACADEMIC JOURNALS?
16

These connections are not always apparent to heads and managers, who, for
various reasons, may never actually read what you write. The same goes for
promotion time: do not expect senior ofﬁcers to read your work, or even to
have a grasp of its signiﬁcance in your ﬁeld, or in any sense. They are just as
likely to read your publications as you are to read theirs – not at all likely. As
long as they don’t stop you doing what you want to do – in your writing – you
can consider yourself to be in a fairly privileged position.
You may think that your work is so directly linked to your department’s
priorities that it hardly needs to be said. Think again. Take every opportunity
to make that link explicit. As you develop your publication plans and inten-
tions, think about how you can, if not ‘align’, then simply explain them in
terms that are relevant to the department. In some disciplines, this will be
superﬂuous; in fact, you may think the whole process of formal career review is
superﬂuous. But in some areas, and perhaps at some times, it is much more
important to make these links explicit. No one will do this for you; it may be
that no one else could.
As you are contemplating the publishing dimension of a ‘career’, therefore,
you may have to update your answers to three questions:
1 What are the precise or general targets for publishing in your area/
department?
2 Have you discussed with your head of department – as part of your appraisal
or review – how you will meet those targets, including resources you will
need?
3 Did you get general or speciﬁc, formal or informal, agreement to your
publishing plans from your head of department?
Find out, if you can, how others would answer these questions, noting the
interesting array of answers and areas of convergence. Note any dislocations,
however minor, between the stated agenda and what is going on in practice,
without, if you can avoid it, becoming too involved in what others are doing
or not doing. You have no control over that, and is it really any of your busi-
ness? If there is a problem with someone else’s written work being published,
surely it is your boss’s problem?
If you feel that your work would be more valued in another area of the
university, there may be possibilities for your publications to be entered into
the local research ‘accounting’ system in another unit. In some disciplines,
this would be ridiculous and possibly damaging to your career, but you might
be surprised at the ﬂexibility of the discipline bases when there are ﬁnancial
consequences. There are many ways in which being published in academic
journals brings you external ‘credit’; the question is how can you ensure that
any credit also counts internally, whenever possible?
This is not to say that your output should be ﬁxed for your entire career. You
may want to do different types of writing for publication at different stages in
your career, from ‘initial career’, when you might be developing publications
CAREER IMPLICATIONS
17

from your thesis; to ‘middle career’, perhaps a time to write a single-authored
book; to ‘later career’, when you might be asked to write a guest contribution
to an edited volume (Blaxter et al. 1998a: 140). Again, it depends on your
discipline and, above all, on your understanding of how people construct a
programme of publications at different stages in their careers. Take a look at
a few web sites: what and where are junior and senior researchers publishing in
your discipline or sub-discipline?
Research proﬁle
Are you thinking ahead? Do you want to be published in certain journals, not
in others, and think you have no chance of getting into the ‘big ones’? It may
seem premature to be thinking of developing a research proﬁle, but your ﬁrst
publication may present you to the research community in a particular way. It
is important that you can live with that. Even better if you are making a
conscious choice, even if it is a compromise determined as much by where
you think you can get published as by where you would really like to be
published.
If you want to develop a proﬁle, will you have to focus your publications in a
certain area, not publishing too widely? Or will you be able to use diversity, in
your writing, to make a broader impact?
What is ‘research’?
I discovered long ago in collecting and classifying marine animals that
what I found was closely intermeshed with how I felt at the moment.
(Steinbeck 1962: 181)
This suggests that what constitutes ‘research’ will be closely related to your
own interests. All sorts of studies count as research, in some disciplines, and
the growing rigour and credibility of a range of qualitative methods has
opened the door for those who do not want to learn statistics, for example.
Research is as much about the work you are currently doing, including
teaching, as anything else. If you have expertise, experience and a proﬁle in an
area, then it makes sense to ﬁnd your research in that area, unless you hate it
with a passion. If you can ﬁnd the right journal, and can construct a sufﬁcient
contribution, then you have a potential publication.
For example, a brief survey of the sub-ﬁeld of social work dealing with
residential childcare produced the following in published papers:
WHY WRITE FOR ACADEMIC JOURNALS?
18

1 This is both a review of . . . as well as an attempt to place the issue in a
practical and reasonable context (Anglin 1999)
2 A theoretical model is offered . . . (Pazaratz 2001)
3 The author draws upon 30 years of experience in . . . (Gavin and Lister 2001)
4 This article looks at how . . . There is a discussion of practical skills and
training directions (Ziegler 2001).
The ﬁrst example shows how what the author considers an ‘issue’ can be
the subject of review and academic examination, while still being relevant to
practice, a feature important to many new writers. The second example dem-
onstrates that a new model, developed by the author, can make an important
contribution. The third explicitly draws on extensive experience, making the
case that this is itself an important body of knowledge. In the fourth, rela-
tively non-academic terms such as ‘looks at’ and ‘discussion’ have clearly
been judged sufﬁcient for publication. Such options will not be available
in all ﬁelds, but they are available in more ﬁelds than many new writers are
aware.
In other ﬁelds, personal experience, the personal voice and the ﬁrst-person,
‘I’, are off-limits, both stylistically and philosophically. In some disciplines,
they simply cannot constitute the ingredients of new knowledge. This will be
obvious to writers in those disciplines, but it is important that writers in other
disciplines are not put off by these criteria. You will know what does and
does not count as new knowledge from your reading. This is no time to be
distracted by writing – and what other people say about writing – in other
disciplines than your own.
Brew (2001) has argued that academic research – not just the writing that is
published about it – is itself narrow, requiring closer links to living with
uncertainty, ambiguity and the actual processes of researching. Calling for
more ‘reﬂexivity’ and ‘critical questioning’, Brew opens up new possibilities, in
some disciplines, for a rigorous critique of research itself and the development
of new ways of thinking: ‘we cannot escape seeing an outdated epistemology
infusing practice’ (p. 177). There is also a prompt here for analysis of practice.
In other words, while experienced colleagues may attribute your views on the
narrowness of academic writing in your discipline to your inexperience and
naïvity, you have grounds for critiquing existing work and established prin-
ciples. There is bound to be some such critique in your own discipline; you will
not be the ﬁrst to have these feelings or ideas about academic writing in your
discipline.
Even failure – with, of course, a careful deﬁnition of what constitutes
‘failure’ – can be a fruitful topic for academic writing:
Research must acknowledge its disasters as well as its achievements;
its rigidities as well as its creativity; its power and its powerlessness; its
openness and its dogmatic blinkers.
(Brew 2001: 186)
WHAT IS ‘RESEARCH’?
19

Research can be quite narrowly deﬁned, but acknowledging that narrowness,
carefully identifying its nature and form, can strengthen your arguments.
(Identifying the ‘causes’ of such narrowness would be a much more complex
argument – cause-and-effect arguments are much more complex than the
simple argument about the ‘way things are’.) A key problem for researchers in
many different ﬁelds is about how such critiques can be made credible and
robust.
Brew (2004) has analysed the conceptions of research held by established
senior researchers and has identiﬁed four categories of research experience:
The domino (series of tasks), trading (a social phenomenon emphasizing
products), layer (excavating reality) and journey (research transforms the
researcher).
(Brew 2004: 214)
Whether or not you feel you already have, or aspire to, one of these, it is as well
to consider your own orientation as something real, part of your identity and,
therefore, worth naming. Otherwise your concept of ‘research’ might remain
amorphous and even internally contested. Work out where you are coming
from, what deﬁnition of ‘research’ is meaningful to you and then you can start
to give the tasks, trades, layers or stops on your journey some deﬁnition in real
time and space and among real people. Brew’s perspective, it should be noted,
is underpinned by her research – phenomenography – uncovering the actual
lived experience of researchers.
Of the orientations Brew describes, the ‘trading’ variation is interesting for
its social nature:
Whether the research outcomes are conceived in terms of publications,
research grants, the achievement of objectives or social beneﬁts,
more often than not in this variation, research is described in terms of
relationships, activities or ideas of other people (e.g. research assistants,
collaborators or other researchers in the ﬁeld).
(Brew 2004: 221)
This implies that networks, collaborations and beneﬁciaries, in a variety of
senses, are positioned in the research process at a more than conceptual level.
A related aspect of this variation, one that might link directly to writing –
interesting that Brew uses the word ‘variation’, perhaps to emphasize plurality
– is the idea that research is for an audience. Clearly, this suggests that it is
important to develop not just an internal sense of audience, but also real
external audiences, for our research and writing.
The strongest link to writing is, in fact, with this trading orientation, as Brew
illustrates with a quotation from one of the participants in her study:
I’m with the school that believes you should always be writing while you
are researching and I always tell my . . . students too, that it’s fatal just to
WHY WRITE FOR ACADEMIC JOURNALS?
20

go away and read for a year. You should always be writing, . . . even if what
you have written is discarded you should always be writing . . . Half the
time is reading, half the time is writing.
(Brew 2004: 222)
This suggests that if you want to publish research regularly you should get
yourself into the habit of writing during the research process, but that you
should not try to do all this on your own; your social situation, including the
social context of your life in academe, can enable or inhibit your writing. This
last point may come as no surprise; many academics who want to write iden-
tify lack of support as a barrier. But you need to take steps to change this: take
time to build peer relationships that will provide a forum, both critical and
supportive, for your research. Develop some of this ‘trading’ mentality and
ﬁnd others who have it too. Brew (2004) argues that the trading variation is
more likely to lead to publication.
You will, of course, come across others with whom you want to work, but
whose orientation towards research clashes with yours. This may mean that
they can, for a while, perhaps not forever, serve as research colleagues for you
and you for them. Getting your different deﬁnitions of ‘research’ out into the
open at an early stage will help you bridge the gap. This discussion may also
sharpen your understanding of research.
To complicate matters further, you may change your orientation to
research as you do more of it, or as you write more about it or as you learn
more from feedback from reviewers. This too could be the topic of discus-
sion, as long as the driver is the focus on external products (the trading
variation).
Much of this, including what some will see as the potential narrowness of
Brew’s or others’ conceptions of research, can itself be a topic for your writing.
In fact, in some disciplines, the question of what does and does not constitute
research is a recurring subject of debate, and not just in the academics-versus-
practitioners direction. Looking across a range of disciplines, you can see that
making the case for your research as sufﬁcient to be given the name is often
among the ﬁrst steps in academic argument. This is another reason to write
about it.
Alternatively, you can use this as an ‘excuse’ to get started: writing about
potential orientations towards research, writing your response to Brew’s ‘vari-
ations’, writing about your work in relation to what others have called research
and constructing links between the two could be an important part of your
re-orientation as a researcher.
You can take this a step further and consider writing in different forms – as a
conscious development process, but with the possibility of publication in
mind – such as narrative: outline your history as a researcher; describe your
journey towards research; describe your attitudes, feelings and approaches at
different stages in the process. What might start out as exploratory writing
might become redeﬁning, recovering and developing an identity as a
WHAT IS ‘RESEARCH’?
21

researcher: how are you positioned as a researcher or writer in your scholarly
community?; is there integration or alienation?
This is not just a matter of writing a ‘how I see myself now’ snapshot diary
entry or essay, but more a matter of writing yourself back into research. Many
people who are new to research, and to academic writing, have at some stage
in their career written themselves out of research and, as their careers take
shape, have found it difﬁcult to write themselves back in.
Although academic writing in your discipline may not allow such subjectiv-
ity, there are potential beneﬁts in developing a subjective response to research;
it may be important for your long-term motivation. If academic writing – and
a great deal of research – has its origins in a set of positivistic assumptions, then
it may be productive to explore the limits of those assumptions. In some dis-
ciplines, their dominance is being eroded in any case. In others they are ripe
for challenge: ‘Historically, subjectivity has been the privilege of those with
the power to control institutional discourses’ (Bensimon 1995: 599).
Academic discourses have been constructed over time, they have been tried
and tested and are now widely trusted; but this does not mean that the ‘rules’
will never change. It is not only cynics, the excluded and the disenchanted
who take issue with what constitutes research. Some creative thinkers never
tire of challenging the status quo.
In some disciplines, this will seem like wasting time; there is no need to
develop an orientation, since researching – and writing about it – is obviously
what researchers do. Yet Brew’s research did include a wide range of discip-
lines, and so we can learn from that work what established senior researchers
see as research, and there are even hints about how they do it. Surely this is a
better way of learning about research than ‘simply getting on with it’?
Reasons for not writing
Reasons given for actively taking up a position of not writing give insights into
the nature of professional workplaces and the terms and conditions of those
who are expected to write for publication at this time:
• I don’t have any time for writing.
• I can’t write in my ofﬁce.
• I’m not ambitious.
• My teaching comes ﬁrst.
• I review papers regularly, but I don’t write myself.
• I don’t want to play the publications game.
• I’m too tired when I get home to do any writing.
• I resent giving up so much of my personal time.
• I do a lot of writing, just not for publication.
WHY WRITE FOR ACADEMIC JOURNALS?
22

• No one will read it anyway.
• I’m probably just afraid of rejection.
• I don’t write well.
Many reasons for not writing have their origin in lack of conﬁdence. This
in turn is sustained by lack of education about the characteristics of high-
quality academic writing – the product and the process – and lack of clear goal
setting. Those who decide that the problem lies not with academic writing
but with their deﬁciencies can congratulate themselves on being right: they are
right in the sense that there is a gap in their knowledge about how academic
writing is produced. Even those who do have some knowledge may have a
‘knowing-doing’ gap, whereby they have accumulated the knowledge without
developing the practice.
In some cultures, identifying your ‘deﬁciencies’ or ‘needs’ helps to deter-
mine the content of courses or other activities you need to take in order to
develop; in other cultures the very idea of ‘deﬁciencies’ amounts to an
admission of failure and the line stops there. Yet, we can all theoretically,
comfortably admit that no one can know everything about academic writing;
everyone learns something about it from doing it. The paradox is that people
still fault themselves for not having learned more when no teaching was avail-
able in the ﬁrst place. The problem is that there is little or no discussion about
how advanced writing – that is, beyond the level of high school – is learned,
about who needs to learn or about which modes of learning might work best
for them.
You may feel that you already know that your work ‘makes a difference’ and
feel no need to ‘publish for publishing’s sake’; you may feel that there is really
no point. Secure in your knowledge of your work’s signiﬁcance, you decide not
to write.
There are, therefore, reasons behind the reasons: like many, many others,
you may ﬁnd that you lack the education, support and environment for writ-
ing. The sooner you admit that you can learn about writing, the better. Then
you can set about looking for a course, group, mentor, programme or web site.
The activities in this book will help you to start, progress and complete a paper,
if, that is, you actually do them.
‘I haven’t done any research’
This barrier to writing is popular among academics in new universities or dis-
ciplines in which writing for publication is new. Many think they simply have
nothing to write about.
Consequently, it seems to be an important part of the process of becoming
an academic writer to take the time thoroughly to thrash out what does and
‘I HAVEN’T DONE ANY RESEARCH’
23

does not constitute research in your discipline and, possibly, to broaden your
deﬁnition of research for your area, a point covered in an earlier section.
The point to make here is that until you have reconﬁgured your work and
your ideas – in writing – they will continue to seem far too modest for a paper
in an academic journal. Yet, most papers do make modest contributions.
Deﬁne what yours is, as this is an essential element of most papers anyway.
Until you do, the voice telling you that you did not do that work as ‘research’,
and therefore should not be representing it as such, will keep droning on and
may stop you writing.
Intellectual capacity
Some years ago, in the midst of my discussion of ways to become an effective
and efﬁcient writer, one academic responded, ‘Well, yes, that’s all very well.
But you’re assuming that everyone has the intellectual capacity to write for
publication. Not everyone does, you know.’ Well, yes, I had been assuming
that everyone in the group of academics in front of me was capable of ﬁnding
something to publish somewhere. It was not my remit to judge writers’ cap-
acity; nor was I qualiﬁed to do so across the range of disciplines represented in
the group.
It is a legitimate question, but what was he really asking? The intellectual
capacity to do what? To analyse the literature, to work out what still needs to
be done and to plan a piece of writing about that? And how would that intel-
lectual capacity have been measured? Do we all need to have ﬁrst-class under-
graduate degrees? PhDs with distinction? Royal Society Fellowships? What
would be sufﬁcient demonstration of ‘intellectual capacity’?
And how would that intellectual capacity have been developed in the ﬁrst
place; could it be that writing for academic journals is one way of developing
it, teaching us how to raise the standard of our work and our writing? You have
to handle the question of your intellectual ability very carefully; it can be
transformed into a reason not to write. Much of what experienced writers
know about writing for publication was learned through writing for
publication.
Many people will challenge your ability to write for academic journals. This
challenge may also be legitimate, though its relentless repetition can be wear-
ing. Academics deemed ‘non-research-active’ may have to justify time devoted
to writing. Most academics and professionals will have no dedicated writing
time anyway.
Whatever your starting point, it is possible to develop your knowledge,
understanding and skills – without wanting to get into the debate about
whether or not that means developing your intellectual capacity – through
writing for publication. Writing provides one of the few opportunities to
WHY WRITE FOR ACADEMIC JOURNALS?
24

develop. The purpose of your academic writing is to persuade readers to think
about your ideas, at least, but it is also to develop those ideas. This requires you
to accept that no matter how many hours you put into making your paper
‘perfect’ you will still make mistakes, produce weak arguments and overstate
your claims. You will also ﬁnd ways to strengthen your research.
In the end, I do still assume that everyone has something to write about. The
question is, can you ﬁnd the right place to publish it?
Turgid writing
They make it so tedious – footnotes and bibliographies! They’re just
ridiculous. Who cares what you read? Just get on with it.
(Ellmann, quoted in Hanks 2003)
New writers are often dismayed at what they ﬁnd in academic journals.
They reject the inherent value of papers published in a style they do not
like. They resist the implicit injunction to ‘write that way’. They reject the
opportunity to transform their ideas into a new genre. They use the domin-
ant styles and structures to construct an argument for not writing for
academic journals.
This argument then provides a rationale for not writing at all; after all, the
argument goes, who would want to join such degraded, self-serving, navel-
gazing debates? They come to see the whole business of writing for academic
journals as just ‘playing the publications game’. In many discussions I have
heard this literally transformed into a reason not to write for academic jour-
nals at all. Again, that is, of course, an option, but not one explored in this
book.
Critiquing the dominant norms and forms of academic journals is an
important activity. Negotiating the extent to which we choose to reproduce
what we ﬁnd there is an essential part of the writing process. Seeing publica-
tion as some kind of ‘game’ can stimulate new writers to ﬁnd out what the
‘rules’ are and how the ‘referees’ apply them, so that they can then go off to
‘train’ and ‘play’. Discussing the pros and cons of targeting journals that we do
not enjoy reading – though they might ‘count’ heavily in external scoring
systems – is an important stage in developing motivation to write at all.
The key point is that colleagues will not read our writing, no matter how
fresh we think our style is, if we do not make some allowance for their perspec-
tive. Writing for academic journals is not about performance; it is about per-
suasion. This means that we always have to adjust our writing style to suit our
audience. You have to at least consider adopting some features of the so-called
‘turgid’ style. This might require a change of your perspective: for example, if
you think some points in the articles are too laboured, sentences too long and
TURGID WRITING
25

ideas too obvious, this might indicate areas that have to be very carefully
argued in that journal, ideas that are more contested than you thought they
were and/or the extent to which you have to embed your ideas in existing
work for that speciﬁc journal.
The decision not to write for a journal because you do not like its style – or
any other aspect of its content or presentation – is superﬁcial. It may even
indicate a lack of understanding of why the journal is written in a certain way.
Accepting that you may have something to learn from analysing – and pro-
ducing – a different style is more likely to develop your writing skills and your
understanding of what it is that gets published in your ﬁeld.
This is a contentious point; feelings run high in discussions of what consti-
tutes ‘acceptable’ writing. Personal preferences are very powerful; people have
very strong views on and feelings about what constitutes good writing. Once
we have our preferences in perspective, we can begin to see that a range – not
inﬁnite – of options is open to us, one of them being to redeﬁne what you
think is ‘turgid’.
Narrow range
For some, the range of writing options available in academic journals is just
too narrow; others see this as a plus as it helps them decide what to write
and how.
Those who have not published are often uncomfortable with this approach,
seeing it as exactly the kind of game-playing they despise. But it is about being
rhetorical. It involves looking for a way to join a conversation that has been
going on, in the literature, for some time.
Finding options in the narrow range
Only certain topics are accepted
<>
I can relate my work to those topics
They do not publish my method
<>
I can focus on other aspects of my
work
We’re never allowed to write ‘I’
<>
I can discuss subjectivity in the
methods
WHY WRITE FOR ACADEMIC JOURNALS?
26

Pre-peer review
Most people who have spent any time in a university will know how import-
ant peer review is for many aspects of academic work. Fewer will be aware of
how important it is to get feedback – ‘pre-peer review’ – on your writing before
you submit it to a journal. You may think your writing is not ready to show to
anyone else. It is probably a good idea not to expect that feeling to go away.
What makes people keep their writing from others? Lack of conﬁdence?
Unsure of how it might help them? Unsure of what sort of feedback they are
looking for? A bad experience: they gave writing to someone once and were
severely critiqued? Not leaving enough time; just wanting to submit it?
If you have had bad feedback on your academic writing before, why was
that?: did you ask for the type of feedback you needed?; did you say you
wanted constructive feedback?; or did you take it for granted that that was
what you would get?; did you just react too emotionally or too analytically
to the feedback?; did you ask the wrong person? All of these must happen
sometimes, but the trick is to keep going.
In a ‘pre-peer review’ you might be looking for feedback on the continuity of
your argument. Does it seem convincing? Does it make a contribution? Does it
seem appropriate for the journal you are targeting? That might be plenty.
Write these questions on a separate page, staple it to your paper, highlight
them in colour, put it all in a plastic envelop so that the front sheet cannot
become detached, give them or discuss with them a deadline by which your
reader will return it to you.
I once asked a senior colleague for feedback on a paper that had been
returned with major revisions required. Eight months later he put it in my
mail tray with one comment written at the top of the ﬁrst page: ‘I presume this
has already been submitted’. Why did that happen? In hindsight, I can see that
he was not the right person, but I could only have found that out by asking
him in the ﬁrst place.
Another way of getting feedback in the early stages of the development of a
paper is to email the editor to check that both your proposed subject and what
you intend to say about it are of sufﬁcient interest – as they see it – to readers of
their journal at all. Without this early checking, it would be possible to write a
paper that they are generally interested in, but that takes a direction that they
consider moves away from their area of interest.
27
PRE-PEER REVIEW

This is not to say that every writer has to have every type of feedback; it can
be difﬁcult enough to ﬁnd one person who is prepared to supply feedback of
any kind. The purpose of this list of pre-peer reviewers and their possible roles
is to prompt new writers particularly to think laterally about ﬁnding feedback.
Don’t forget to tell your reader what type of feedback you are looking for; it
can save everyone time and effort. This is easier said than done: people are very
busy; they do not have time to read each other’s work.
Guilt, fear and anxiety
Many people report that they can be quite creative in ﬁnding ways to avoid
writing: several cups of coffee, checking references or emails, putting on the
washing. There have even, apparently, been one or two very clean bathrooms.
There is potential distraction in an almost endless list of domestic and profes-
sional tasks. These avoidance tactics are probably related to uncertainties about
the writing project, but they may also be related to writing itself. How many of
us were ever taught a range of writing strategies for getting started quickly?
Some consider their displacement activity as an essential step in the writing
process, even if they are not entirely happy with it. This is often cited as a
reason for not trying the generative strategies that are proposed later in this
book: ‘What can I possibly write in half an hour? It takes me half an hour to get
started.’ They believe that they cannot simply ‘start writing’.
Whatever the purpose or value attributed to such beliefs and behaviours, if
they work to stimulate your writing, then all is well. If they do not, guilt follows.
Guilt at not having done ‘enough’ is a recurring theme in writers’ discussions.
Fear and anxiety recur so often that it seems important to spend some time
Pre-peer review
Reviewer
Type of feedback
Mentor
Advice about journals and editors
Senior colleague
Guidance on writing about your
subject
Someone who has published in your
target journal recently
Speciﬁc information about editorial
preferences
Colleague in any discipline
Feedback on your proposed
‘contribution’
Colleague in department/discipline
Constructive critique of your idea
Constant ally
Encouragement to write at all
WHY WRITE FOR ACADEMIC JOURNALS?
28

building conﬁdence (Moore 2003). If you want to become a successful aca-
demic writer, it might not be enough simply to learn more about the technical
skills; it might be equally important to invest time in developing your
conﬁdence through new types of writing activity, dealt with later in this book.
The institution in which you work is not likely to change, in order to give
you more time to write and more recognition for your writing, but you can
develop an identity as a writer within that context. Over time, as you publish
more, guilt, fear and anxiety diminish.
Before you start to see yourself as a neurotic or timid loser, you should con-
sider the very real risks that you run by submitting your work to an academic
journal. While ‘risks’ is perhaps the wrong word – some might say ‘challenges’
– it nevertheless feels risky:
• Your work is subjected to the hardest critique you have known.
• Experts scrutinize your research and your writing.
• You make mistakes.
• You ‘put your head above the parapet’.
• You attract criticism.
• You unintentionally criticize an authority, causing conﬂict.
• You develop your argument beyond what you can logically claim and
beyond the evidence.
These are not imaginary risks; writing for academic journals means writing
at the edge of your – and perhaps others’, though they may not admit it –
certainty. Until your paper has been peer reviewed, you may not be sure that
you have made a contribution. If you are submitting your ﬁrst paper, there are
more potential risks:
• What you have decided not to say is seen as a serious omission.
• Your critique of others’ work is seen as too strong.
• Your statement of the problem is seen as too general, under-referenced.
• Linking your work with that of established ﬁgures is seen as presumptuous.
Once you are a successful, published author, there are new risks:
• Unsuccessful colleagues passively or actively loathe you.
• Your growing conﬁdence is seen as arrogance.
• The area you publish in becomes devalued in your institution.
The trick is to get to grips with these potential risks, work out which ones are
holding you back and discuss them with trusted colleagues who want you to
succeed.
We have all had these thoughts. We all have our particular trigger, the one
that makes us lose conﬁdence from time to time. The bad news is that it may
stay with you – simply publishing papers will not make all these rational and
GUILT, FEAR AND ANXIETY
29

irrational fears and anxieties go away. The good news is that it will make you
strengthen your arguments.
In practice, over time, these thoughts can become quite destructive prompts
for writing, that is, prompts that tell you not to write (see Chapter 3 for more
on writing to prompts). They can also make you lose focus in your writing, as
you try too hard to strengthen your arguments. This may be why so many new
writers put so much into their ﬁrst drafts of their ﬁrst papers. They often have
two or three papers’ worth of material, but feel that they need to bolster their
paper, when, in fact, making the case for the work you did or making the
proposal that it needs to be done may be publishable papers in their own right,
in some disciplines.
This section has gone into fears and anxieties in some depth because new
writers do seem able to ﬁnd many reasons not to get started, or, once started, to
give up when they are asked to revise papers. This is partly due to a lack of
understanding of the process and partly to a lack of conﬁdence in your ability
to meet this new challenge, often without any training or support, and also
partly to fears that may go back to your early education:
Throughout my twenty years of teaching at a number of universities I
have witnessed the terror and anguish many students feel about writ-
ing. Many acknowledge that their hatred and fear of writing surfaced in
grade school and gathered momentum through high school, reaching a
paralyzing peak in the college years.
(hooks 1999: 169)
Submitting a paper to an academic journal can leave you feeling precarious,
but that is not just because you are weak and inexperienced; it is the very
nature of the writing act, some would argue, and it is embedded in your
experience of writing at various stages in your life up to this point.
Procrastination
Putting off writing until you have ‘more time’? Until you feel ‘ready to write’?
Convinced that if you had more time you would write more?
Tasks that have deadlines get done before those that do not. You already
know that a deadline forces you to prioritize. Anything with a deadline is
automatically more important than something that has not.
For some academics, teaching is always a priority. Marking examinations
unavoidably consumes large periods of time at certain points in the academic
year. For other professionals, caring for patients will be a priority. Writing is
last in a long list of tasks and, as long as it has no ﬁxed deadline, the ﬁrst to be
WHY WRITE FOR ACADEMIC JOURNALS?
30

dropped. Even when you do give writing a time slot in your diary, it is very
difﬁcult to protect it. For some, it proves impossible.
There are, therefore, very good reasons for putting writing off, as other prior-
ities arise. It may even feel quite subversive to be thinking about ways to lever
writing into your timetable. Do you need to ask anyone’s permission to do so?
Who else will you tell? Who will support you as you do this? Who will under-
mine you? Is it simply easier to procrastinate, rather than risking the hostility
of colleagues?
Some people will respect your efforts to stop procrastinating. How can you
recruit their support and make sure you can access it to keep you going?
Those who write for a living can point to antidotes to guilt, fear and anxiety.
They know what to do to keep writing. However, it is only by using such
strategies that we can ﬁnd ease, enjoyment and creativity in writing. You have
to ﬁnd your own antidotes and persevere when even those fail you:
You need perseverance, courage, bloody-mindedness, a capacity for hard
work, endurance . . .
(Weldon, quoted in Roberts et al. 2002: 7)
The writing self
Academic writing is not neutral. It is gendered, raced, classed and, therefore,
potentially discriminatory in many ways. These factors affect the role and
status of the writer in academia and will impact on the new writer’s learning
needs in relation to academic writing. The community of academic writers is
diverse, though the community of editors and reviewers may be less so. Some
will see these issues as irrelevant to the development of the writing self; others
will see the writing self as positioned by the organization of other writers and
the position of publishing in their disciplines. For them, the whole enterprise
may seem so ﬁxed as to give the illusion of transparency, particularly to those
who are already publishing in journals. Where does the new writer ﬁt into
all this?
Do you really need to let yourself be pinned down? There are ways of ﬁnding
room for yourself in academic journals. For example, an interesting strategy is
noted by Blaxter et al. (1998a: 146): ‘You can, of course, use a number of differ-
ent styles and voices. You might also use different names, as some academics
do, for different kinds of writing.’ While some will ﬁnd this a bit extreme – and
limiting to their developing proﬁle – others will see that perhaps they have
more options than the exclusivity of certain journals suggests.
However you choose to deal with the selectivity that operates in journals
across the ﬁelds, it might help to think of yourself as a writer and to think
through what that might mean in terms of your sense of yourself:
THE WRITING SELF
31

1 Have a reason to write that is not just about meeting other people’s
standards.
2 Make writing meaningful for yourself.
3 Reward yourself for making sacriﬁces for writing.
4 Take care of yourself, as a writer: physically, mentally, spiritually.
5 Find someone with whom you can have an ‘open narrative’ discussion
about your writing, not just analysing barriers, but ranging over possibilities
and experiences.
Many writers’ experiences and perceptions of academic writing are of ﬁerce
competition. The sheer numbers of us trying to get published means that there
is, in fact, literal competition to get into journals. But this need not be your
motivation to write. Some people are simply not motivated by competition;
they ﬁnd it demotivating. If you expected collegiality in higher education, you
may be disappointed. But there is no need to endure competition until you
retire. This is not to say that opting out of the ‘struggle’ to publish is your best
option – though it is certainly one option – but that you have to ﬁnd some way
of either ignoring other people’s sense of the on-going competition or ﬁnd
other reasons to write, some of which you might just keep to yourself, if you
feel they would put you at risk in your context.
Team and collaborative writing
This is a good way of not ‘going it alone’, or, as one new writer put it, ‘We can
begin to run in packs’, and you may also be bringing some collaboration into
this world of competition, with all the advantages – if you manage it well – of
pooling strengths, skills and contacts. It might help, if you are just starting to
write, to have someone who can help you make writing decisions, help you
with writing dilemmas or who will simply listen.
You may be able to work and write with, and learn from, more experienced
colleagues. You may be able to step outside your territory or tribe. There may
be issues of voice, ownership, career implications, politics and time that you
should discuss at the earliest opportunity.
However, there may also be disadvantages for new writers, and over the
longer term this should not be your sole strategy: ‘Those without sole
publications are not rewarded for their team-playing skills’ (Blaxter et al.
1998a: 144).
WHY WRITE FOR ACADEMIC JOURNALS?
32

Barriers to writing
The greatest problem I can see for academics in post is not ﬁnding
the motivation to write but the time amidst all the pressure and heavy
workloads of teaching and administration.
(Anonymous reviewer)
This reviewer is right: time is deﬁnitely, absolutely and across all the discip-
lines the inhibiting factor for academic writers. This is evidenced in evalu-
ations, focus groups, questionnaires and informal discussions where academic
writers cited lack of time as the barrier they had not been able to overcome.
As the reviewer points out, even those who say that they have the ‘motiv-
ation’ to write cannot do so if the time does not exist in which to do it, or if
they are so exhausted from other work that they have no energy left for writ-
ing. This suggests that even if you succeed in motivating yourself and are ready
to write, you still have this problem to solve: ﬁnding time for writing and, even
when you do ﬁnd time, protecting it from other demands on your diary.
But are ‘motivation’ and our use of ‘time’ as separate as the reviewer makes
out? Is your use of time not driven by your motivation? Do you not allocate
your time to tasks that you decide to perform, knowing how much is needed for
each task? Or is this too simplistic? Are you really free to decide how to spend
your time, when there are so many external demands that simply must be met?
In theory, you know that you are the one who decides how much – or how
little – time to spend on each of your professional tasks. In practice, however,
there are so many interruptions that academics report that they rarely even get
through their ‘to do’ lists. Moreover, there are priorities that cannot be
deferred: when there is marking to be done, or when the department is visited
by the auditors, inspectors, examiners or some other important body, we simply
have to drop everything else and catch up with it in the evening or over the
weekend or both.
This is the reality of many academics’ lives. Can any amount of talk about
your ‘motivation’ really make a difference in this context? In order to answer
that question you have to go back to your motivation: obvious as it is, it has to
be said that if you are genuinely – positively – motivated to write, then you will
ﬁnd a way to do so. If you are not, then you won’t.
A key barrier, therefore, may be holding on to the idea that you have tried,
really tried, to make time for writing and it simply does not work. I am not
trying to make light of this predicament; there are many, many people who are
at this point, but there are also those who have managed somehow to get
beyond it. I do not in any way want to make light of what is a difﬁcult journey
– from not writing to regular publication. In fact, I would argue that there are
some situations where the barriers are, in fact, insurmountable: anyone with a
family and/or others to care for, anyone going through a break-up or a
BARRIERS TO WRITING
33

bereavement, or anyone who is ill should, in my view, let themselves off the
hook for a while. Having said that, some people would ﬁnd such a new chal-
lenge gave them just what they needed to take them out of themselves, to look
beyond their situations and to move forward in their lives. It is a very personal
matter. They may also judge – rightly or wrongly for their own wellbeing – that
it is too risky for their careers to take time out.
Whatever your situation, the purpose of this chapter is not to analyse
reasons for not writing – though that can be very instructive – but to progress
the discussion of ways of solving the problem of ﬁnding time to write, even
when it seems almost impossible.
If you are in the position of not being able to ﬁnd time to write, it is time to
face up to the need for change. You may need to cast off some of the writing
strategies you currently use – they aren’t working. There are other ways to
write that take up less time, use up less energy and reduce the need for endless,
demotivating revisions.
An integrative strategy
Writing can be integrative in the sense that it is related to other academic roles,
and you can ﬁnd many types of outlet for the types of writing that you could
develop from your different roles: ‘biographical, confessional or develop-
mental’ (Blaxter et al. 1998a: 139).
Writing can be integrative in another sense: it is one of the themes of this
book that new writers can – and should – work on more than one dimension of
writing. Rather than using just one of the strategies proposed in this book, or
sticking with the one that you have, this book encourages you to move
towards an integrative strategy, combining several different strategies.
For example, you can get words down on paper and then work on them
later, ﬁlling in the blanks, making improvements. Or you can structure your
paper in detail before you start writing. Either way, you can start a project –
without procrastinating – and make progress.
The strategy you use may depend on the time you have available, the type of
writing you have to do or your familiarity with the subject. You can choose the
strategy that suits the stage of writing you are at, at any one time. You can adapt
as you go along. In other words, having a range of strategies – rather than just
one – can help you to write through the various challenges that writing presents.
Having said all that, it would not do to give the impression that writing is
forever integrated and ‘ﬂows’ once you have mastered these strategies; there is
no way round the ‘interruptedness’ of writing, nor is this a state unique to
writing, of course. Continuous ﬂow of writing may not be an achievable goal;
what you can do is adapt and adopt strategies that will help you connect the
various stages of writing among the diverse activities of your life.
WHY WRITE FOR ACADEMIC JOURNALS?
34

Checklist
• Consider writing about your current work; don’t wait until you have new
‘research’.
• Find personal reasons to write, reasons that matter to you.
• Don’t let your views on published papers stop you writing.
• Combine different writing strategies.
• Consider changing your current writing habits.
CHECKLIST
35

2
Targeting a journal
‘That’s interesting!’ • Getting to know the journals
• Peer reviewed or professional? • Instructions for
authors • Journals that ‘count’ • Analysing a journal
• Working out what is acceptable • Becoming a scholar
of the journal • Analysing abstracts • Deﬁning genre
• Joining the conversation • Cloning or creativity?
• Mediating • Personal negotiations • Contacting the
editor • Wait time • Editors’ responses • Checklist
The key point in this chapter is that, as with any other form of communica-
tion, you have to address the needs of your audience. Of course, you will have
some – or considerable – knowledge of the journals in your ﬁeld from reading
them over the years. But now that your intention is to write for them, you have
to pay closer attention to both your target journal’s instructions for authors
and its published papers in order to work out what type of paper editors and
reviewers are looking for.
What is acceptable can be deﬁned in terms of what editors and reviewers
have already accepted, that is, what they publish in the journal. When you
write for a journal you have to ﬁnd a way to bridge the gap between what
you want to say and what editors and reviewers, at any point in time, want
to hear.

You have to research the journals, becoming a scholar of the journals, identi-
fying the dominant issues and conventions operating in the journal you
choose to target ﬁrst. It also means, as with any other aspect of research,
keeping your knowledge of journals up to date.
There is, of course, information that this book cannot supply: it would be
impossible to provide advice for targeting every journal in every ﬁeld. What
this chapter does provide is advice on how to go about becoming an expert in
your target journal and, equally important, how to start writing your paper at
the same time.
This is what ‘instructions for authors’ do not tell you: when you start to
scrutinize journals for the ﬁrst time, you might well ﬁnd them off-putting, for
many different reasons. All the more reason to develop your writing, in writ-
ing, as you go along. It is a mistake to wait until you feel sure that you can
produce what the journals want before you write anything. In fact, if you have
been avoiding writing for some time, that thought may be what has been
stopping you.
‘That’s interesting!’
‘That’s interesting!’ may be the last thing you want to say about papers you
read in academic journals. Once you have started to study them closely, you
may be more tempted to say ‘That’s obvious’, or ‘That’s boring’, or even ‘Who
cares?’ Yet someone found something ‘interesting’ – perhaps not new theory,
but something sufﬁciently new – in every paper published in your target
journal.
Some time ago, a paper with exactly this title, ‘That’s interesting’, described
research into what makes a paper ‘interesting’ to readers (Davis 1971). The
author concluded that it is not just papers that follow a journal’s lead that get
published; papers that go against the grain may be even more interesting:
QUESTION: How do theories which are generally considered interesting
differ from theories which are generally considered non-interesting?
ANSWER: Interesting theories are those which deny certain assumptions
of their audience, while non-interesting theories are those which afﬁrm
certain assumptions of their audience.
(Davis 1971: 309)
This does not, however, mean that the published papers studied broke all the
conventions, but that they offered a clear contribution that explicitly stood out
from the rest of the work in an area. Of course, you can do this while still
following the conventions of your target journal; you do not have to break all
the conventions in order to inject your papers with a ‘that’s interesting’ factor.
‘THAT’S INTERESTING!’
37

Davis provided a useful question to help us work out what would constitute
the ‘interesting’ factor at a certain point in a journal’s history: if an interesting
paper attracts the attention of readers, you have to work out ‘Where was the
[readers’] attention before it was engaged by the interesting?’ (p. 310). It might,
in fact, be valuable, if you have not already developed this knowledge, to learn
about the types of ‘interest’ represented in a recent selection of issues of your
target journal over the past year or so. This analysis would give you a very real
understanding of what is – and is not – likely to be published in that journal.
A further implication of Davis’s argument is that you should have developed
not only your knowledge of your subject, but also ‘an intense familiarity’
(p. 337) with your audience’s assumptions about your subject:
• What does your audience assume about your subject?
• Which aspect of your subject do they assume is still open to question?
• Which aspect of your subject do they assume is not open to question?
• Will you challenge either of these assumptions in your paper?
On the other hand, you have to be wary when certain areas are branded as
important for research and writing, careful that these areas do not lock you out
of other areas that are equally worthy of research, areas that you might have an
interest in researching.
Nor is there only one way of being ‘interesting’, of challenging existing
thinking in a rational and well-argued way. Nor can you avoid the task
of making the case that your work is as interesting as you imply it is or in
precisely the way you say it is.
Your job, as a writer for academic journals, is to work out what constitutes
the ‘That’s interesting’ factor speciﬁc to your target journal, noting exactly
how that quality is put into words. If you do not ﬁnd any of the papers inter-
esting, you may have to revise your deﬁnition of what constitutes ‘interest’ for
this context. You may have to admit – at least to yourself – that you have a
different set of criteria. You may even have to review your understanding of
what constitutes publishable work.
Getting to know the journals
In order to choose a journal, there is probably no way of avoiding having
a look at them all. Browse the journals in your ﬁeld. Identify the types of
journal. For example, Blaxter et al. (1998a) deﬁne six types: popular, profes-
sional, applied, academic, multi-disciplinary and electronic (p. 150). Is there
the same range in your ﬁeld? Do you have all these options?
You can develop a proﬁle of the journals in your ﬁeld. Rank them in order
of status. Some would say that you should aim for the top-ranked academic
TARGETING A JOURNAL
38

journal with your ﬁrst papers, but that clearly depends on the quality of
your work, the extent to which it is considered relevant by your research
community and, perhaps, other factors speciﬁc to your discipline.
Are there articles published in some of the journals to which you could
refer in your paper? This would make a direct connection between your work
and that of the journal. Starting with this question is not ‘cheating’; it makes
you begin to read a few papers with the eye of a writer, rather than as a reader.
You would have to make explicit the connections between your work and
the work of other published authors, showing how you are taking the work
forward, complementing it or taking the ﬁeld in a different direction. Think-
ing this way may already begin to shape your paper. Or you could be drawing
up a list of possible topics.
More speciﬁcally, browse the titles of the papers published. Think about
how you might package your work in one of these types of titles. Examine a
few types of title in detail. For example, you may ﬁnd that some titles are
deﬁnitive, while others are more tentative or propositional. Some signal what
type of paper it is – such as a review paper or research paper. Others fore-
ground methodology. Then there is the title-plus-subtitle option, allowing
two types of heading to be combined in one; perhaps there is a topical title
before the colon and something more ‘dull’ or descriptive after the colon. Is
this used in your target journal? Other possibilities – though you may have
other ways of describing them, appropriate to your discipline – include the
descriptive, allusive, elusive, humorous, ironic, topical, generic, speciﬁc,
alliterative, ambiguous, puns and titles using quotations. Some of these, you
will know already, would not ﬁt at all in any of your journals. Some of them
will seem to you useless. Write yourself a short list of options you are prepared
to consider.
This is not just about making it up, pretending to write a paper, but about
beginning, with an appropriately modest goal, the process of writing a paper.
Of course, your title will change, possibly many times, as you write, but, on the
other hand if you choose a title that will ﬁt easily into your target journal’s
agenda, then you may ﬁnd that you have a useful focus for the rest of your
writing process. Moreoever, by writing a working title, you are, it has been
argued, creating a link between your developing identity – as a writer – and the
titles of your works: ‘the titles of published papers also help to frame an
academic’s public identity’ (Blaxter et al. 1998a: 147). Your titles may be
Writing activity
A key writing task at this stage is to write several different working titles for
your paper.
GETTING TO KNOW THE JOURNALS
39

an initial expression of your developing identity. Once you see them in
writing, you may realize what that means in a way that is not possible if you
simply keep possible topics running around in your head.
Over the longer term, it is worth thinking about creating a pattern of titles in
your papers, if this works with the range of journals you target: ‘it is worth
giving some attention to the ways [the title] may contribute to creating a sense
of cohesion across . . . several research projects’ (Blaxter et al. 1998a: 147). This
helps you to develop a body of work, a proﬁle and a focus in your chosen area.
You may ﬁnd it helpful to read whichever of the many books on writing for
journals in speciﬁc disciplines relates to your ﬁeld, such as Sternberg’s (2000)
Guide to Publishing in Psychology Journals.
As you begin more and more to look at the journals as a prospective writer,
you can also be thinking about your options. Take time to think – and, above
all, write about – your developing ideas, however half-formed or half-baked
they seem to you.
Read a selection of papers from your potential targets and try to deﬁne and
distinguish the ‘spin’ or argument of each. Think about how it positions the
writer and reader. Are there any ways in which you can adjust the ‘spin’ of your
paper? It might be a mistake to use the word ‘spin’ here, since it has particular
associations, but it is used here to mean adjusting your argument and to char-
acterize the scale of that adjustment. It need not always be a huge adjustment.
For example, if you want to write a critique of current developments,
methods or concepts, as many new writers do, you could well end up by
putting your head above the parapet, drawing too much ﬁre, being too critical,
or over-relying on your own perspective and motivation. An alternative could
be to make the case – and write your article around the argument – that lessons
could be learned or should be learned about the subject. This is a more positive
line of argument. It can mean that you can write about the very same topic,
but from a different, more positive perspective. Another alternative might be
to argue that future developments should take into account, or be founded on,
even partly, lessons learned from the past. Or you could argue that while
lessons have been learned, there are underlying issues that have not yet been
resolved. You might want to question whether lessons have been learned from
the past or suggest that those lessons have been inﬂuenced by certain factors,
results or approaches. Can you connect your perspective to a different set of
factors, results or approaches? In other words, you do not need to turn your
ﬁeld on its head in order to critique it. This type of adjustment of the overall
pitch of your argument can sometimes more quickly be achieved in discussion
with colleagues, perhaps in a writers’ group (see Chapter 8).
This type of topic is a popular one among new writers, who see – and feel –
the need for change and have that as a focus and motivation for their writing.
There is no need to abandon this focus; rather, there should be a moment in
which you consider how to covert it into a reasoned argument. Above all, write
about it, in any form, before it slips away. This subject may be one of your
prime motivators to write. If you lose that, you may decide not to write. You
TARGETING A JOURNAL
40

may, of course, decide, after looking at the available journals, that this is not
for you, that you would rather devote your time to other types of writing or to
other professional tasks. But this decision would, at this stage, be based on a
partial analysis of the ﬁeld. There is more analysis to be done before you really
know what is expected of you as a writer for a particular journal.
Peer reviewed or professional?
New writers often spend a fair amount of time debating the pros and cons of
publishing in ‘academic’ or ‘professional’ journals. The academic journals,
they argue, will reach a minute readership, while professional journals will
convey their ideas to the people who can implement them. At this point I
usually ask the question, ‘How many papers have you published in this or that
journal?’, and the answer is ‘none’. In other words, there is a quantity of
informal knowledge about these two types of journal that is not based on
experience or even on hearsay.
This is not to say that new writers are lacking in ability, but that they have
often formed ﬁxed beliefs about journals and readers that can inhibit their
motivation to write. Although this discussion is a crucial moment in a writer’s
development – without it they may never overcome their resistance to writing
for academic journals – it can lead to a block.
It is important to see the value in both types of journal and to consider, over
the longer term, whether you could or should publish in both. ‘Academic or
practitioner’ is, therefore, less a dilemma than a set of rhetorical choices. In
practice, there are journals in some ﬁelds that bring the two together:
Academic
Professional
Both
• Research
Practice
Study of practice generates new
knowledge
• Small audience
Large audience
Mixed
• Values theory
Values experience
Researches experience
You can probably identify the journals in your ﬁeld that combine ‘theory’
and ‘practice’. This may involve you in updating some of your assumptions
about what constitutes an academic subject.
In practice, however, this discussion of choice has to be much more speciﬁc
to your subject area, and this would be a good topic for you to write about now,
even using the informality of style and writing in the ﬁrst person singular in
order to explore what you really think:
PEER REVIEWED OR PROFESSIONAL?
41

Practitioner journals may have less status, particularly if they do not use peer
review. It is worth checking, however, whether this traditional distinction still
applies to the journals you are considering.
You may see the low/high status decision as a kind of ‘stepping stone’ model:
aim for journals with less status ﬁrst and work your way up to the higher ones
later. Being strategic about where you publish is not just about matching what
you want to say with what they currently print; it may be much more about
having outputs that count. Frequently, new writers have enough material for
both types of journal, but they do not realize it. Hence the need for some deep
discussion with more experienced writers about your potential publications.
You do not have to limit yourself to one type of journal, and you may argue
that this is not a healthy, motivating strategy in any case: ‘it is dangerous for us
to allow academic institutions to remain the primary site where our ideas are
developed and exchanged’ (hooks 1999: 140).
Remember that there is plenty of information about journals, about their
impact factors, half-lives and the role of citations indices in establishing a
journal’s status. If you are not sure what these terms mean, or doubt whether
they are even used in your ﬁeld, enlist the help of a librarian. Librarians know
all the latest information sources and can probably teach you a thing or two
about writing for publication in your ﬁeld. At the very least, they can probably
update your literature searching.
Instructions for authors
Many editors report that, incredible though it seems, writers often ignore their
journals’ written requirements. This section is here to spell out the point,
however obvious, that you must follow the instructions for authors to the
letter.
Writing activity
• What experience can I draw on?
• What do I want to analyse?
• What is the underlying theory?
• What theory can I relate my work to?
• What new perspective do I want to bring?
• How can I relate that to others’ perspectives?
TARGETING A JOURNAL
42

Instead, use the recommended style manual or the journal’s house style.
Of course, you probably know all this already, and cannot believe that an
astonishing number of writers do not follow the journal’s guidelines. If you
need any further motivation, some editors claim that they will not even con-
sider papers that do not follow their guidelines.
Another part of your ‘instructions’ as a writer is the journal’s aims and scope.
Unlike the guidelines for presentation, these are open to interpretation. If
possible, talk to someone who has been published in the journal recently and
try to develop an understanding of how these aims are being delivered in
practice.
There may be other important requirements for submissions, such as ethical
approval, statement of potential conﬂicts of interest and any ﬁnancial support
you have had for the work you are writing about.
Journals that ‘count’
Who decides on the status of the journals? In some countries, such as South
Africa, there is a list of journals that academics have to publish in, if their
publications are to count. However, that list may change from time to time.
Writers have to know how to keep up with such processes.
Some journals will count in research audits, some do not. Some count for
more than others. This might depend on the scale being used in your system or
institution. You can always check the citations index for your discipline to
determine a journal’s status:
Citations have three merits: they reﬂect the view of the international
community rather than that of a small expert panel; they are objective
and transparent; and they are immune to grade inﬂation. Drawbacks
include bias towards established researchers and against excellent work in
obscure ﬁelds. Poor work may sometimes be cited in order to correct it.
(Smith and Eysenck 2002: 15)
What not to do
• Invent your own referencing style, use the wrong one or provide
incomplete references.
• Go well over the word limit.
• Omit abstract/summary, author biography or other requested elements.
• Submit your paper single-spaced or double-sided.
JOURNALS THAT ‘COUNT’
43

You may not agree that citation counts are so important in measuring the
status of publications, but you will have to acknowledge that others see them
as a kind of ‘gold standard’.
Of course, it should not just be your publications that count; it would be
nice if you could get some credit for making what is, for some, the not
insigniﬁcant effort of starting to write, for, as one institution sees it, ‘getting off
zero’. At the University of Swinburne Business School, for example, there is a
system of rewarding those who take early steps, such as joining a writers’
group. While many systems reward the successful writer, others reward those
who are getting started.
In some disciplines, and at some times, it is difﬁcult to get a deﬁnite answer
to the question of a journal’s status. Be ready for a confrontation with different
value systems as you research this question. One academic’s top journal is
another’s Journal of Insigniﬁcant Studies.
• Ask the editor – editors know about citations indices.
• Review citations indices yourself – ask the librarians.
• Check web sites of top-rated departments: where do they publish?
• Look up web sites of those you read and admire: where do they publish?
This list suggests that, rather than waiting to be told what to do, you should
take an active role in researching the journal. In the absence, in some ﬁelds, of
deﬁnite answers about the relative status of journals, you will have to use
several different types of information to make the choice about the one you
want to target ﬁrst.
Analysing a journal
In the same vein, there are other features of the journal itself that you would
do well to analyse in some detail. Again, this is not to say that you are a
complete novice, if you already read the journals; instead, the point is to
develop your knowledge of the journal further through systematic analysis.
How to analyse a journal
1 Read the full instructions for authors.
Some journals only publish an extract in certain issues.
Check the web site. Read/print titles and abstracts.
2 Skim and scan last few issues for topics and treatments:
which topics appear most often and how are they treated?
How can you adapt your material to suit the journal’s agenda?
TARGETING A JOURNAL
44

Look at how structure is signalled in each paper. Even in short articles, there
are versions of the generic structure of academic writing – rationale, aims,
methods, results, meanings, though not always in these exact terms – but in
what form for your target journal?
Note the clever qualiﬁcation, at the end, of the signiﬁcance of the ﬁndings:
‘not a panacea . . . not in itself new . . . not the whole answer, but . . . part of the
solution’ – is this the kind of thing you ﬁnd in your target journal? Will you
have to write this kind of qualiﬁcation on or weighted judgement of your work
in this, or in some other, way?
Develop a proﬁle for each journal, reviewing it from time to time. You
will have internalized a lot of this information, but it can help to make your
observations explicit. You can then check them against others’ observations.
3 List the headings and sub-headings used in two or three papers.
How are the papers divided up: number of words per section, proportion
of whole paper?
4 Which methodologies or theoretical frameworks are used?
How long, and how deﬁned, is that section of each paper?
5 Discuss your analysis with experienced, published writers in your ﬁeld,
preferably those who have been published in your target journal
recently.
Ask them: ‘Are the editors/reviewers likely to go for a paper about . . .?’
How the structure of the article is signalled
At Oxford Radcliffe Hospitals NHS Trust we have been rolling out a
programme in which . . .
The key components of the US programme were: . . .
. . . of 441 patients who contributed to the survey
This illustrated that . . .
The ﬁndings suggested that . . .
The infection control team . . . to disseminate . . .
. . . it was decided to roll out . . .
Learning points [heading]
The success of the programme . . .
This programme is not a panacea . . .
What we have done . . . is not in itself new . . .
. . . is not the whole answer, but . . . is a big part of the solution.
J. Storr (2000) Hand in hand, Nursing Times, 96(25): 28–9
ANALYSING A JOURNAL
45

Taking this type of analytical approach can also help you to move beyond
scepticism about the journals’ agenda; for example, as you take a closer look
at what is going on in the papers, you might see that they are not all as
narrowly circumscribed as you think they are. More importantly, once you
have deﬁned more speciﬁcally the range of types of paper, you will probably
ﬁnd that you are already generating ideas for how you will shape your
paper.
You – perhaps along with colleagues or in a writer’s group – can analyse a
journal in some detail by looking at how the arguments are articulated across
all the abstracts in one issue:
Analysing every paper in one issue of your target journal:
example
British Journal of Educational Technology, 32(1), 2001
1 Ford & Chen
Starts with ‘This paper + verb’: ‘This paper presents results’.
Followed by speciﬁcs of the study.
Results take up the bulk of the abstract.
Key word at start of sentence: ‘Signiﬁcant differences in’
Implications in second-last sentence in propositional style: ‘The ﬁndings pro-
vide support for the notion that’.
Last sentence refers to future research, but is not speciﬁc.
2 Pedler
Starts with background/context statement in general terms.
‘This paper + verb’ comes second: ‘This paper examines’.
This structure in also used in sentences 3 and 4: ‘It ﬁrst describes . . . It then
presents . . . and ﬁnds that’.
Sentence on ﬁndings included.
Implications stated as a proposal statement, minus the phrase, ‘The ﬁndings
suggest’: ‘Spellcheckers need to use’.
3 Morris
Starts with ‘This paper describes’.
Method is described in general terms: ‘A summative evaluation study’.
‘However’: good link word to signal balance of interpretation.
‘The implication of this research outcome is considered’, but not speciﬁed.
4 Holsbrink-Engels
General opening statement.
Almost half the abstract is background.
TARGETING A JOURNAL
46

The next step is, of course, to analyse a whole paper in your target journal.
Once you have decided what type of paper you want to write, choose one of
that type and take it apart. Work out exactly how it is constructed and how
that construction is signalled in words. What stylistic choices and rhetorical
devices are used here?
The following two examples are from the Manufacturing Strategy:
Operations Strategy in a Global Context Conference (London Business School
1996).
General statements in the continuous present tense.
Then ‘The results are described’: good sentence variation, but too cryptic?
Explicitly signals ‘The main conclusion’.
Wordy (in my view): ‘is considered as having the potential to assist’.
5 Sandberg, Christoph & Emans
Change of style: ‘In this article we’.
Uses narrative structure, with time words: ‘First we established . . . Then the
requirements were . . . description . . . evaluations . . . Conclusions’.
Pros and cons of ﬁndings referred to, not speciﬁed.
6 Salmon
Starts with ‘This paper describes and discusses critically’.
Claims study is ‘unique’ in ﬁrst line.
‘Useful lessons’ learned from the study are semi-speciﬁed.
Analysing an abstract: example 1
Neely et al. ‘Developing and Testing a Process for Performance
Measurement System Design
Abstract
• First word is ‘Traditionally’.
• Second sentence deﬁnes problem with ‘tradition’: ‘Dissatisfaction with
these traditional . . . systems’.
• Scope of this dissatisfaction?: ‘widespread’.
• The solution?: ‘balanced scorecard . . . in an attempt to overcome this
problem’.
• Link with next sentence, and next step in this mini-argument: ‘For such
frameworks to be of practical use’.
• The research question: ‘the process . . . has to be understood’.
ANALYSING A JOURNAL
47

• Aim of this paper is to research the process: ‘This paper documents . . .
which has sought to understand this process’.
• Focusing on ‘methodological issues’ [that is, not the whole study].
Introduction
Each element is developed in the introduction, for example, ‘Dissatisfaction’
is developed in ‘short-termism . . . lack . . . fail . . . encourage [a negative] . . .
minimise . . . fail’.
Note how the sequence of ideas is signalled in topic sentences:
1 ‘Traditionally businesses have used ﬁnancially oriented measures of per-
formance, derived from criteria such as DuPont’s return on investment
(ROI).’
2 ‘The main performance measurement tool of today is undoubtedly the
balanced scorecard.’
3 ‘The paper begins by explaining how the authors developed a pro-
cess for performance measurement system design through a programme
of collaborative action research.’
Notice the use of the three-part sentence structure:
‘The paper provides justiﬁcation for these research questions, demon-
strates how the researchers collected and analysed the necessary data,
and documents the learning that ensued.’
The authors forecast the elements of paper; they deﬁne the function of each
section in advance. Note links between this forecast and the headings and
topic sentences that follow:
‘The paper begins by explaining how the authors developed a
process . . .’
‘DEVELOPING THE PROCESS’
Background literature
Use of listing: ‘. . . three main steps. The ﬁrst involves . . . The second
encompasses . . . The third focuses . . .’.
Use of author’s name + date + verb in summary of literature, for example
‘Wisner and Fawcett (1991) also assume . . .’.
Developing the process
Two graphics placed together for comparison, but no detailed comparison
done.
TARGETING A JOURNAL
48

If you ﬁnd this analysis too detailed, you will have to ﬁnd some other way of
establishing the type of paper that you have to write. The value of the analysis
is that it deﬁnes your task. Without it, you may have no more than a general-
ized idea of what form your paper should take. This will mean that you have to
Testing the process
As throughout this paper, listing:
‘Maskell (1998) offers the following seven principles of . . .’ (p. 472).
‘It was decided that to answer this question comprehensively, ﬁve research
questions had to be addressed’ (p. 475, para 1).
Note use of sentence variation:
‘The learning from the two clubs was quite different’ (p. 476, line 1).
Conclusion
Strong statement of what has been achieved:
‘This paper has demonstrated how a process . . . was developed.’
Analysing an abstract: example 2
Voss et al. ‘Learning, Benchmarking, and Manufacturing
Performance’
• Statement of result in abstract: ‘The results show’.
• Deﬁnitions at the start.
• Statement of research gap: ‘This paper addresses that gap by . . .’
(p. 689).
• ‘In this paper, we focus on two mechanisms. . . . First, . . . Second,
. . .’.
• Substantial theoretical review, pp. 689–90.
• Passive voice in methodology section:
‘A structured interview was used to gather the data . . . Data were gath-
ered . . . respondents were asked . . . questions were taken’ (p. 691).
• Forecasting: ‘Each is further deﬁned below’ (p. 691).
• Short (compacted?) statement: ‘Thus, Optimism Index is expected to be
negatively related to Performance’ (p. 691).
• Language of work-in-progress: ‘We expect . . . therefore we expect . . .
This leads to our ﬁrst research proposition . . . are likely to be . . . we
predict . . .’ (p. 692).
• Highlights outcome: ‘This study clearly points to a link between . . .
The results of the regression analysis show . . .’ (p. 693).
• Conclusion highlights implications for theory and practice.
ANALYSING A JOURNAL
49

develop the form as you go along, with none of the certainty that this type of
analysis provides. As you write, you will not know whether your paper
will meet the journal’s expectations. This additional uncertainty may under-
mine your conﬁdence as you write and may even stop you completing and
submitting your paper.
Working out what is acceptable
What is acceptable might be quite narrow in some journals and quite wide in
others. Some journals have only two or three types of article; others have
several types: ‘conventional academic articles . . . research notes, viewpoints,
work in progress, responses to previously published articles, review articles,
autobiographical pieces and poems’ (Blaxter et al. 1998a: 146).
Although it is contentious, the case can be made that you can deﬁne what is
acceptable for publishing in your target journal in terms of what has been
accepted, although there are, of course, exceptions in some ﬁelds: ‘Many of
the more recently established journals . . . allow for and even encourage less
conventional kinds of writing’ (Blaxter et al. 1998a: 146).
You may ﬁnd that you resist or reject this approach to targeting. You may
even be uncomfortable with the idea of targeting. Yet this is what constitutes
effective writing – writing that persuades its audience – and it also, it has to be
emphasized, deﬁnes the work you have to do.
Becoming a scholar of the journal
You can take the analytical and targeting processes one step further, making
your study of the journal as thorough as your study of your ﬁeld. It might even
help to put aside your current ‘reading knowledge’ of your journal, and look at
the journal as if it were in another area.
You already know the journals. The purpose of this section is to argue that
you could and should know them better. You certainly will have absorbed
subconsciously certain features of their style, structure and layout, in the
course of reading articles for content, but what you need now is an analysis of
the writing.
My use of the word ‘scholar’ is quite deliberate; it is not enough, I would
argue, to ‘familiarize yourself’ with the conventions; that is an important pro-
cess, but you can bring your considerable analytical ability to all the features of
academic writing, not just its conventions. After all, once you have studied the
conventions, how will that produce appropriate writing?
TARGETING A JOURNAL
50

This argument is not targeted solely at those writing outside their own
ﬁelds:
Because disciplines vary, you should familiarize yourself with the conven-
tions of the ﬁeld in which you are publishing. If this is the ﬁeld in which
you have done most of your research, you probably have absorbed such
conventions subliminally. You will have to make a special effort, though,
if you are writing in an area outside your usual territory.
(Luey 2002: 10)
In any case, if you are writing your ﬁrst journal paper you are, in a sense, doing
exactly that. This argument is aimed at writers staying within their own ‘terri-
tory’ who may therefore assume that they know enough already, when more
detailed knowledge would improve their chances of communicating with
their readers.
If you take a research approach to understanding your target journal, you
might even go as far as to conducting a mini-survey of its readers:
. . . start by conducting a small, informal survey among members of your
intended audience to see who really would like to know what you’re
planning to tell, and what the general level of ignorance is. Then you can
avoid alienating readers either by dishing up background they already
have or beginning your discussion on too advanced a plane.
(Appelbaum 1998: 71)
Even if you think this is going too far, or wasting valuable time that could be
spent writing, you can see the sense in trying out the idea for your paper with
real people. An added beneﬁt is that it works as a rehearsal of your paper,
making you articulate the main message and perhaps thereby clarifying one
or two points. The trick would be to capture the sentences that seem to make
most sense to the potential reader by writing them down. If you don’t, you
will be potentially starting all over again when you ﬁnally do sit down to
write, and, more importantly, you may have lost the essential focus on
audience.
Even if you think that having material that is ‘too advanced’ is unlikely,
there may be other adjustments that you need to make. You may, for example,
be thinking about your subject on too esoteric a plane. Discussion will show
you where you have to make adjustments. Whether you actually make them
all or not is, of course, a complicated decision in itself. This is where writing –
rather than just thinking – can help you to clarify your purpose. The kind
of writing that works well at this stage need not necessarily be ‘academic’;
paradoxically, it is sometimes best to work in quite un-academic ways
(see Chapter 3).
BECOMING A SCHOLAR OF THE JOURNAL
51

Analysing abstracts
This section is about learning to look for the shapes of argument that a journal
has accepted recently. It is also about seeing the patterns that occur across
disciplines: problematizing sentences, methods for approaching the problem,
contingent answers to your chosen question and so on. Abstracts begin with
what is known, then move to what is not known and needs to be researched,
then to the justiﬁcation of the work done, followed by the argument that it
needed to be done and so on.
Three abstracts from one ﬁeld – probably, deliberately, not your own – are
analysed in some detail in this section. If you think the ﬁeld of academic
writing – as an area of research in itself – is likely to be narrow, wait until you
see the range of current research and the different journals in which it is pub-
lished. This means that in this area – as in many others – different types of
writing are available to writers, but for any paper they are writing, they have to
carefully match their research and writing with the journal they are targeting
at any particular time.
These examples also illustrate an important point for new writers, touched
on in an earlier section: if you can adjust the pitch of your argument you
can write about your topic in different ways for different journals. In doing
this, you do not just re-hash your material, but develop it in new ways,
sometimes even taking your thinking or research in a new direction. These
abstracts deal with different kinds of research; yet you could write about the
topic in different ways without always doing new and different research.
In fact, it may be essential to do so in order to truly test and develop
your ideas.
Although higher education is not your ﬁeld, there is a purpose to this exer-
cise for other disciplines: this section shows the kind of analysis that you need
to do on abstracts in your area. Doing this analysis outside your area, in the
ﬁrst instance, is a good way to avoid being distracted by the articles’ content.
Since you might not care too much about the content of the papers in my
selection, you can focus more on the analytical approach I am demonstrating
and arguing that you should adopt yourself.
Perhaps more importantly, although this activity is meant to be analytical, it
often draws out academics’ personal preferences. Some people just do not like
certain styles of writing. Of course, there is nothing wrong with that in itself,
as long as you put your stylistic preferences on hold in order to produce the
type of writing that is acceptable to your target journal.
The ﬁrst abstract begins with a good example of that clever rhetorical device,
the ‘uncontentious opener’, marked in bold. The opening sentence problemat-
izes an issue without drawing too much ﬁre. While it makes a sweeping state-
ment, the terms are general enough to stay on the right side of overstatement
and familiar enough not to require references at the end of the sentence. The
TARGETING A JOURNAL
52

case is made for the work conducted without critiquing the work of other
researchers.
The second sentence creates a brilliant, economical shift of gear from con-
text to the work reported in the paper: ‘In the light of these changes, it is
appropriate to ask’. The authors do not say, ‘We have to consider’ – which
would be much more debatable – nor do they propose that this is a neglected
area of study. This is also relatively uncontentious: in many ﬁelds, it is indeed
always ‘appropriate to ask what is known about’ many subjects. This is an
excellent way of introducing a review paper. The authors build a solid founda-
tion for the sentence, ‘The existing literature . . . is reviewed’, so that their
review develops logically from the context.
One statement in this abstract often strikes academics as overstated – ‘no
single comprehensive text available’ – yet, on closer examination, we see that
while it might be foolish to claim that ‘no text was available’, what the authors
have said is that there is no ‘single comprehensive’ text, a claim that is not as
extreme as it ﬁrst seems. Likewise, ‘relatively little’ qualiﬁes the statement
‘little has been written on’, as the authors suggest merely that there could be
more work in this area. The word ‘appears’ prevents the authors from sounding
Abstract 1: the review paper
During the last two decades the higher education system in the UK
has moved from an élite to a mass orientation, while academic
careers have become less secure and more demanding, and a
greater accountability has been imposed upon the system. In the
light of these changes, it is appropriate to ask what is known about the
nature of academic work. For the purposes of this article, academic work has
been conceptualised as involving one or more of ﬁve overlapping roles: the
commonplace triumvirate of teaching, research and managing, plus writing
and networking. The existing literature on each of these roles, and on
academic careers in general, is reviewed. At the time of writing, there was
no single comprehensive text available on academic work in the UK.
While much has been written in recent years on the teaching role (and, to a
lesser extent, managing) relatively little of a cross-disciplinary nature
appears to have been written on academic researching, writing or network-
ing. The future development of these, and other, areas of writing on
academic careers, is considered.
177 words
Blaxter et al. (1998b) Writing on academic careers, Studies in Higher
Education, 23(3): 281–95
ANALYSING ABSTRACTS
53

too categorical in their assertion – a standard device in academic writing, by
means of which authors acknowledge that much of what they are saying is
open to debate.
Finally, what the authors provide that is new is described only in the most
general of terms – ‘the future development of . . . is considered’. We are not
told the outcome of their review, analysis and ‘consideration’. For some
readers, this is unsatisfying; they want to know whether or not it is worth their
while reading this paper, and they make that judgement based on the abstract.
However, the fact remains that this paper was published and therefore was
judged adequate in its present form. This is not to say that no papers published
in this journal ever specify the outcome of the research in the abstract, but it
does mean that this is an option, whether or not every writer would choose to
write that way.
The purpose of this analysis is to make two points, particularly for new
writers:
1 There are established rhetorical devices that can be used in many disciplines
to set up and develop academic arguments.
2 If you analyse abstracts you will learn what these are in your discipline.
This abstract is particularly relevant to new writers, including postgraduate
students who are extremely well placed to write review papers: they are at
the cutting edge of research in their areas and are up to date with the litera-
ture. Since they normally have to review the literature, in some form, in any
case, writing a review paper will not take them too far from the writing of a
thesis.
In the second example – same subject of research on academic writing, same
ﬁeld of higher education – the writer does more work to establish that there is a
gap in the literature.
Abstract 2: deﬁning the research gap
A review of literature on released-time programs shows a trend
away from uncritical acceptance. Emerging skepticism about
released time from teaching or service stems from a lack of evidence
supporting its usefulness and from the mixed messages it gives about the
value of teaching. Four demonstrational experiments conﬁrm that
skepticism by showing that (1) veriﬁed assessments of normal work loads
contradict faculty claims of being too busy for additional scholarship; (2)
faculty given released time usually persist in old habits; (3) new faculty
showed no obvious beneﬁts of a typical released-time program; and (4)
faculty in released-time programs verbalized real doubts about how to use
extra time for meaningful scholarship. A ﬁfth experiment suggests an
TARGETING A JOURNAL
54

The opening sentence, ‘A review of literature on . . . shows a trend away from
[or towards]’, is one we could all write regularly. This is not to say, of course,
that we should all plagiarize this paper, or any published writing. The point is
that there is a limited range of rhetorical techniques that work in each discip-
line, and a limited number of ways of saying that your work needed to be
done. What is interesting about this variation is that the author did not write,
‘There is a trend away from’, but rooted his assertion in literature, or at least
the review of it, which ‘shows’ such a trend.
‘Emerging skepticism’ develops the point that such programmes are no
longer viewed uncritically, while the term ‘released time’ is given more deﬁn-
ition. This sentence also identiﬁes that ubiquitous trigger for research: ‘lack of
evidence’. It is logical to assume that if we had more evidence of effect, we
might be more willing to consider a programme. It is a useful, reasonable and
recognizable argument for research.
The essential link between the literature, and the question it leaves
unanswered, on the one hand, and the author’s research, on the other, is
implied, rather than made explicit: ‘Four demonstrational experiments’. The
link between the statement of the need for the work and the beginning of the
description of it is made by repeating the word ‘skepticism’. Like the ﬁrst
example, this abstract tells us nothing about the author’s methodology. We do
not know how the ‘experiments’ were conducted, or how the data were ana-
lysed. Yet, clearly, this was judged appropriate for publication in the journal at
the time of publication.
Some academic readers like the listing and numbering – 1, 2, 3, 4 – of
research outcomes. It makes for a very long sentence (66 words), but each
element of the list follows the same pattern, making reading easier. Yet many
feel relief when the last sentence breaks the pattern with ‘A ﬁfth experiment’.
Others ﬁnd the style very difﬁcult. Whether or not you like this style, the point
is that there are certain recognizable, generic rhetorical manoeuvres that Boice
used that you will see, in different guises, in your ﬁeld. Again, the main point is
that the paper was judged acceptable by the reviewers and editors.
Finally, a third example – same discipline, same research area, different
journal – shows a different approach. There is no contextualizing opening
sentence, uncontentious or otherwise; instead, we go straight into a descrip-
tion of the study.
alternative to traditional released-time programs: faculty who claimed too
little time for regular scholarship learned to produce signiﬁcant amounts by
ﬁnding time for brief, daily writing sessions.
142 words
Boice, R. (1987) Is released time an effective component of faculty
development programs?, Research in Higher Education, 26(3): 311–26
ANALYSING ABSTRACTS
55

Knowing from the ﬁrst word of the ﬁrst sentence that we are about to ﬁnd
out about three studies, we then follow a pattern of reports on each, as each of
the subsequent sentences starts with a number, again setting up a pattern.
Unlike abstract 2 (Boice), with all its results presented in one long sentence,
here each result has a sentence. A synthesizing sentence, beginning ‘All three
courses’, neatly pulls them together and makes a positive statement about
them, quickly qualiﬁed in ‘but’.
‘These ﬁndings suggest that’ is another generic phrase which we will prob-
ably all write at some time. Certainly, there is no avoiding the word ‘suggest’ in
academic writing, particularly at the conclusion of academic argument, imply-
ing as it does the process of interpretation – rather than proof – so important in
research.
We would all probably be happy to say that our work led to ‘signiﬁcantly
greater improvements’ in our ﬁeld (whether or not that means statistically
‘signiﬁcant’ will, of course, have to be clariﬁed, but not, obviously, for
abstracts in this particular journal). Some form of branding of your paper’s
‘contribution’ will be required for some journals: does your work contribute
something ‘new’, ‘fresh’ or something that ‘can be of beneﬁt’? How are contri-
butions described in your ﬁeld – exactly which words are used in the closing
Abstract 3: straight to the study
Three different two-day thesis writing courses were designed and
evaluated. Forty-one graduate research students completed a product-
centred course which taught grammatical and stylistic rules for good
research writing. Thirty students completed a cognitive strategies course
which introduced heuristics for generating and organising thesis content.
Thirty-three students completed a generative writing and shared revision
course which entailed the production of an unplanned draft followed by
extensive revision on the basis of reviewing by peers. All three courses
were well received by the students, but those who attended the product-
centred and generative writing courses showed signiﬁcantly greater
improvements in productivity than did the students who attended the
cognitive strategies course. These ﬁndings suggest that short writing
courses can be of beneﬁt in teaching research writing to graduate students
but that such courses should focus directly on the production of text rather
than on strategies for generating and organising information and ideas prior
to composing.
152 words
Torrance et al. (1993) Training in thesis writing: an evaluation of
three conceptual orientations, British Journal of Educational Psychology,
63: 170–84.
TARGETING A JOURNAL
56

sentences of abstracts and conclusions in journals in your ﬁeld? Signiﬁcantly,
in this third example, the claim to a contribution is qualiﬁed, again in the
word ‘but’, so that the authors not only clarify their claim but also do not
appear to claim too much. Is this current practice in your target journal?
These three examples show the range of rhetorical choices made by writers
in one discipline. Although the three are, in some ways, quite different, there
is not an inﬁnite variety across any one ﬁeld; if you study your journals in this
way, you will have a better understanding of how successful, accepted papers
are put together. Without that understanding, how will you make your rhet-
orical choices? If you become a scholar of abstracts in your own discipline,
conducting this level of analysis, then you are more likely genuinely to have
learned about how writing is produced in your discipline’s journals. If you are
not a scholar of your journals, how will you make all your writing decisions? –
confusingly, some will be straightforward, but others may be shots in the dark.
You can use recurring phrases – or what almost seem like ‘catchphrases’ at
times – as prompts for your writing. They need not be a constraining factor in
the expression of your own ideas in your own voice. However, if you decide
you do not need to write regularly – see Chapter 7 – then you may ﬁnd this
analysis inhibiting or even insulting. Others will immediately see the point of
understanding the rhetorical norms of writing in their journals, even seeing it
as learning the ‘formula’ for a speciﬁc journal. Wherever you stand in this
debate, you can surely at least see the sense in working out what your audience
– editors and reviewers – have judged acceptable in the recent past.
Deﬁning genre
There are distinctive ways of thinking, stating ideas, and constructing and
pacing arguments in each academic discipline. There are what could be called
sub-genres within disciplines, represented by or within different journals.
What we can learn from studying abstracts
• How to write uncontentious openers
• How to make the case for your work
• How to link what is known/not known and your work
• How much to write about your methodology
• How much detail to give of your results
• How to deﬁne your contribution
DEFINING GENRE
57

There are also features of the genres of academic writing that appear across
disciplinary boundaries. These can be considered generic features of academic
writing.
I thought this was a relatively uncontentious position until I was vigorously
challenged by a scientist who strongly disagreed: ‘How can you say that there
are such generic features? How do you know? What is your evidence?’ The fact
that we were, at the time, analysing examples from his and other disciplines
which included similar features did not make him see it that way. This is not to
say that he was being obtuse, but the strength of his reaction was interesting.
Some academics are so invested in the distinctiveness of their discipline that
they feel they can learn nothing from the others, that there are no common-
alities and that we are wasting their time talking about the genre of academic
writing because each discipline is different. Can it really be true that his discip-
line was so distinctive from all the others that no comparisons could be
drawn?
This is what I have come to call the ‘tribal’ response. Meaning no disrespect
to anyone or to any discipline, I want to make the point that while it is crucial
to study the genre of your discipline, it is equally important to learn about the
generic forms available to all disciplines. Later in this book examples from
different disciplines are used to illustrate effective strategies in academic
arguments. Will you only read those from your own discipline?
It is probably important to warn new writers that, even as you learn about
genre, there may be others in your discipline who think like our colleague
mentioned above. They may think that you are just being naïve, that you still
do not really know what is going on in journals in your ﬁeld, that you are just
too new to the game. Some may even think that you are proving too slow at
picking it up, particularly if you seem to want to debate their views, rather
than just acting on their suggestions. Clearly, you will have to gauge for your-
self which, or perhaps whose, advice to use and how to express your responses
to it, but as you learn more about writing you may ﬁnd that you have opened a
new debate in your department.
Perhaps we can agree that academic writing is not inﬁnitely various; there
are recurring patterns and dominant norms and forms within and across dis-
ciplines. Consequently, the range of structures and styles at your disposal is
not inﬁnite. Your writing choices are limited by the conventions currently
operating in your target journal. Each journal has its own genre, certain types
of arguments that are privileged over others. There are those who have made a
study of genres:
Gould’s synoptic history of evolution unfolds as a kind of narrative.
Life begins (prokaryotic cells), develops (eukaryotic cells), diversiﬁes
(Ediacara and Tommotian creatures), explodes into the modern fauna of
the Burgess Shale and then subsequently subsides through large-scale
attrition until we arrive at the ever diminishing number of extant species
co-habiting the planet today. To make his point Gould rewrites Darwin’s
TARGETING A JOURNAL
58

model of evolution as a puzzling story, whose climax (the Burgess Shale) is
clear, but whose interpretation is a matter of considerable debate.
(Halliday and Martin 1993: 36)
Narrative is a genre linked by time words, with implied or stated continuity
between stages, which themselves may be open to question – does everyone
agree that these are the key stages? – and perhaps avoids the more complicated
cause-and-effect mode. Simply saying that one thing followed another is still
open to question, but it may require a different type of evidence than causal
analysis. Some might question the link made by the words ‘we arrive at’,
since it implies a connection that either has already been well argued or is
about to be.
The point is to identify the genres that are used not just in your discipline,
but in your target journal. If not narrative, then what?
Joining the conversation
This does not mean that your writing should be ‘conversational’; although
there is a place for informal writing as part of your writing process, it may not
appear in your paper. It depends, as always, on the journal.
Lack of rhetorical education – lack of awareness of the skills of written
debate – leads some new writers to write in ways that are closer to conversa-
tion than is appropriate, but, again, it depends on your ﬁeld and your aims as
a writer. New writers’ personal engagement with their topics and their con-
cern about ﬁnding their own voices can lead them to make their writing too
personal.
What you are doing, in writing an article for a journal, is joining an on-going
conversation. It may have been going on for many years. You can analyse this
conversation:
• Who is already participating in this scholarly conversation?
• Who decides who can join in?
• Do you know anyone who is already taking part?
• Who has been excluded?
• What are they all talking about?
• What is already being discussed?
• What have they not talked about for a while?
• What do you want to tell them?
• What do you need to do and know in order to join the group?
JOINING THE CONVERSATION
59

Your answers to these questions could, in some ﬁelds, be topics not only for
exploratory freewriting but also for your academic writing.
You have to establish your place in the conversation: on what terms can
you join the on-going debates in your ﬁeld at this time? Even when you have
thoroughly analysed the conversation, make a clear case for your contribution,
as persuasion counts more than performance in this type of conversation.
You can use writing at this stage to develop your ideas. If you do no writing at
this stage, as you study the writings of others, there is a chance that you could
get distracted from your own ideas. In fact, writing regularly can help you to
develop your ideas, perhaps exploring several potential lines of argument.
Besides, it should be clear to you now that even those whose papers you ﬁnd
dull or unoriginal have put a fair amount of blood, sweat and tears into getting
published. They may be well aware of the ﬂaws and deﬁciencies in their
writings. Yet, experienced people at the journal judged them to be adequate.
To say that we can have compassion for other writers will seem, to some, to
be taking it too far, but something in that direction helps you to see published
papers not as part of some great game or fraud, but as the efforts of real people
to make a real contribution to knowledge. Perhaps others will see your writing
in the same light. Imagining readers giving your writing this more receptive
response can help to maintain motivation; in which sub-group of your target
audience is such a compassionate or collegial response likely to occur? Can
you usefully focus on that sub-group as your audience for at least some of the
time? Of course, it is also important to consider the voices of those who will be
critical of what you say and write: who are they, what will they say, how will
you respond?
Taking this one step further: can you see yourself as part of a community of
writers, all facing the same challenges? If so, you can position yourself, as a
writer, not on the outside looking in, but on the inside looking around at how
other people are getting on with their writing.
Cloning or creativity?
It is precisely because common structures of evaluation and advancement
in various academic jobs require homogeneous thought and action . . .
that academia is often less a site for open-minded creative study and
engagement with ideas and more a space of repression that dissenting
voices are so easily censored and/or silenced.
(hooks 1999: 140)
Some academics feel that targeting a journal by becoming a scholar of it is like
‘cloning’, losing your identity as a writer, losing your own voice. Some new
writers say this feels like compromising, blending in, losing your originality.
TARGETING A JOURNAL
60

One even put it as strongly as ‘prostituting’ the work, although he immediately
withdrew the remark, stating that he had taken it too far.
Yet, it can be exactly the opposite: targeting is about working out where,
within the on-going discussion in your discipline, what you want to say can be
rendered relevant and, at the same time, original. This is not about losing
creativity; it is about applying your creativity to ﬁnding ways to have your say.
This is not a way to lose your voice; it is a way to choose how to give voice to
your message, rather than just expressing it in the way that suits you. This is a
process of giving external voice to your thoughts and ideas. Finally, if you do
not test your writing, by submitting it to peer review, then you will have no
voice, only thoughts and ideas.
In any case, as has already been acknowledged in this chapter, you may be
very far from ‘cloning’ if your paper is going to ﬁll a gap in the journal’s
publications:
Matching your subject to a company’s [or journal’s] strength may be
the single best placement strategy, but matching it to a company’s [or
journal’s] obvious weakness can make sense too.
(Appelbaum 1998: 81)
You can see an area in which your target journal has not published as a ‘gap’
in a different sense.
. . . pick a topic from within a journal’s remit on which it has published
little.
(Blaxter et al. 1998a: 152)
There is pressure towards ‘homogeneous thought and action’, but this
need not silence you altogether; perhaps the challenge of writing in your ﬁeld
is ﬁnding ways of saying things that go against the grain but still ﬁnd an
acceptability within your ﬁeld.
The best strategy is to know what is dominant in that sub-ﬁeld of your
discipline represented by those who are published in your target journal, and
to let that inﬂuence your writing, while, if it is feasible, still being able to move
away from that when you choose, and still get published. It may be that to
write with too much of an eye on the business of what ‘counts’ may change
‘the nature and spirit of the words that come together on the page’ (hooks
1999: 163). This may be inevitable, but it does not always mean that the
‘change’ will be negative and limiting. Nor is it predictable, and this is one of
the things that makes writing both frustrating and exciting.
CLONING OR CREATIVITY?
61

Mediating
Rather than take yourself out of the running, there are ways in which you can
build the apparent interrogation of your ideas into your writing. Anticipate
the refutation of your work and build it into your paper. Show the debate in
your writing. Establish a mediated position for your paper.
You can redeﬁne some of the terms that you think might be thrown at
your writing: ‘practice’ orientation, for example, can be deﬁned in many
different ways, not all of them pejorative. If you check the literature, you
will probably ﬁnd many of these deﬁnitions, allowing you to recover the
term for the purposes of your argument. If you cannot ﬁnd a sufﬁcient range
of deﬁnitions in your own ﬁeld, of this particular term, check out other
ﬁelds.
Your work could be based on a body of practice, draw on practice-based
research, use research conducted at one institution to prompt research at
another or establish connections between practice and research orientations,
arguing that this is, in some cases, a false distinction.
Any potential tensions between what you want to write and what they want
to hear can be built into your writing: you can make it the subject of part of
your paper. In some ﬁelds, this might be the subject of an entire paper.
Personal negotiations
Do I contradict myself?
Very well then. . . . I contradict myself;
I am large. . . . I contain multitudes.
Walt Whitman, ‘Song of Myself’
It is not certain that you will hold to the same position, in the scholarly
debates you enter, for your entire writing life; you may change your mind. As
your ideas develop, you may take a different slant, or you may disagree entirely
with something you wrote earlier. You may have new ﬁndings that contradict
the old. Or you may ﬁnd that you ﬁnally do accept to modify your argument
in light of recurring responses. Whatever the reason, there is nothing wrong in
making this shift, as long as you signal it, deﬁne and justify it, and make it as
explicit as is appropriate for your discipline.
TARGETING A JOURNAL
62

Contacting the editor
This may be one of the most important steps in your paper-writing process. It
can provide you with information that is not available anywhere else.
Many new writers are surprised by the suggestion that they email the editor
of the target journal directly and immediately, as a ﬁrst step in the process. Yet
only by doing this can you genuinely check that the journal you have decided
to target is interested in (a) your subject and (b) what you want to say about
that subject. Because this is only an initial enquiry, you can legitimately
email several editors at once, to see if one is more likely than the others to be
interested in your paper.
This strategy has worked for many new authors, helping them to adjust the
slant or emphasis of their papers so as to achieve a better ‘ﬁt’ with the journal
and thereby to increase their chances of being published. For example, I
wanted to write a paper about writing development for academic staff and
emailed the editor of the journal I wanted to target to that effect. He replied
that his journal was a ‘research’ journal and thus not receptive to papers on
staff development. I adjusted the pitch of my paper to focus more on the
evidence of impact in my work: focus groups, questionnaires and actual pub-
lished output showed that my programme worked. I could still write about the
same subject but could demonstrate research outcomes: there was evidence of
an effect. I emailed this back to the editor. He was much more receptive to this
approach. I wrote my paper that way, and it has since been published. The
point of this narrative is that I would have wasted several months of my time
had I not sounded out the editor initially. The editor’s one-sentence response
was enough to guide me in shaping my paper to ﬁt in with his agenda, while
still – important point – writing about the subject I had chosen. This is not to
say that we should all ask editors how we should write our papers, but should
be sounding them out at the earliest stage to see if they are interested at all in
what we are writing.
As always, there may be disciplinary differences: according to one senior
scientist, emailing the editor with an initial enquiry about your paper is abso-
lutely the wrong thing to do. What you do, this scientist stated, is write the
paper and send it in; everyone knows what they have to do, he argued, and
discussing it with the editor is wasting everyone’s time. This point was put so
strongly that either you have to believe it is true all across the board in that
discipline or it is, in some ways, challenging to this senior scientist’s practice.
However you interpret his response, it would be worth getting a response from
more than one published author in your ﬁeld, particularly if you are new to
the game, but it might also be fruitful if you are not new to the process but
trying to raise your game. It has to be said that there is no great risk in trying
this strategy – if editors think it is wrong to approach them in this way, they
will surely tell you so.
CONTACTING THE EDITOR
63

Besides, can all journal editors in any one discipline really be using exactly
the same practice? How likely is that? And how would you know? Will there be
none at all who see the beneﬁt of initial enquiries from authors? In order to
ﬁnd your own position in this debate, you ought to note that some journals –
including scientiﬁc journals – explicitly ask you, in their ‘instructions for
authors’, to contact the editor before submitting a paper or abstract. Some
want to see a summary ﬁrst. Some make no such request, but this may not
mean that they are not amenable to the practice.
First check whether your target journal explicitly invites or forbids such
early dialogue. If it is not explicitly discouraged, and if you make it clear in
your email, if you feel the need, that you are trying to save the editor time,
rather than wasting it or, worse, looking for writing tips, then it is no more or
less than good professional practice.
A further reason for and beneﬁt of this practice is that it can produce
a conﬁdence boost when the editor responds to say that he or she is interested
in your topic. Such a positive response, from such a senior ﬁgure in the ﬁeld,
is the ﬁrst many new authors have had. Even new authors understand that
this brings no guarantees of publication; but they appreciate being given
the ‘green light’ to write the paper. There is, at last, a real audience for the
paper-in-progress.
A further argument for such early discussion with editors is that it saves you
and them time: you do not waste time writing a paper on a subject that you
know they are interested in, but that they would prefer to be treated in a
different way, and they do not waste time wondering whether or not to bother
reading and reviewing your paper.
We all know that in some disciplines what is and is not required for a paper is
very prescribed in some journals and much less so in others. Presumably the
senior colleague who objected to this strategy was used to the former. He cer-
tainly stated his case so strongly that there was no debate on the matter. New
writers might ﬁnd such deﬁnitive advice quite refreshing; yet, again, unless the
journal explicitly forbids early contact, we have to bear in mind those
advantages.
Send an email with the subject ‘Initial enquiry’ to the editor. Say three
things:
Emailing the editor
1 State the subject of your paper.
2 Say what you are saying about that subject.
3 Say why you think this paper would be of interest to readers of
the journal at this time – unless it is obvious, make the connection
explicit.
TARGETING A JOURNAL
64

With this version you are not giving the editor any work either in trying to
work out what you want to know or in making the connection between the
journal and your proposed paper. Alternatively, you could end your message
with a question, since this prompts a response: ‘Do you think this would be of
interest to readers of the journal at this time?’.
It may be important not to say that your paper is already written, meaning
that you can still act on the editor’s feedback. Keep your message short and
you are more likely to get a quick – sometimes immediate – response. Three
sentences is plenty. Keep the sentences short enough that your reader does not
have to scroll down at all.
Editors’ responses
Some respond within two minutes. Some take longer, perhaps 20 minutes. If
an editor has not responded to your initial enquiry within 24 hours, email him
or her to check that your message was received. If you still hear nothing back,
try emailing another editor, if the journal has more than one. If you still hear
nothing, you will just have to go ahead and submit your paper.
Wait time
After you have submitted your paper put a date in your diary, six or eight
weeks on, or whenever the editor has said feedback will be sent to you. When
that day comes, if you have not heard from the editor, send an email to ask
about the progress of your paper through the reviewing process. If you are
going to be out of the ofﬁce for any length of time, this is the moment – or ﬁnd
another excuse – to contact the editor.
Example
Subject
Journal of X Studies: Initial enquiry
I am writing a paper on XXX which argues that YYY. . . . This could be of
interest to readers of the Journal because it contributes ZZZ . . .
65
WAIT TIME

Checklist
• Analyse your target journal: focus on structure, style and rhetorical features.
• Develop an idea for your paper that either ﬁts or challenges the dominant
norms and forms of your target journal.
• Email the editor at the start of your writing process.
TARGETING A JOURNAL
66

3
Finding a topic and
developing an argument
Finding a topic • Conference presentations • Thesis
• Freewriting • Generative writing • Writing to prompts
• The writing ‘sandwich’ • Finding readers: critic,
mentor, buddy and others • Finding a voice • Finding
an argument • Formulating a hypothesis •
Constructing an argument • The quality question
• Calibrating your topic • Writing a working title
• Checklist
The ﬁrst part of the title of this chapter may sound odd – surely everyone
knows what their topics are. They are obviously to be found in your work and
research, so you already know what you are going to write about. Yet in some
disciplines academic work does not automatically translate into topics for
papers. There is still work to be done in developing a topic for a paper.
The purpose of this chapter is to suggest ways in which you can (a) shape
your ideas into topics for papers – this is particularly aimed at those who have
not already done so – (b) develop your idea beyond just thinking about it, and
(c) start writing.

This may mean starting to write your paper before you feel ‘ready’, ‘sure’ or
‘certain’ of your topic or argument, but, as you are probably well aware, if you
wait until you feel ready to write you might not start at all. Getting to the point
where you can say to yourself, ‘Yes, I am ready to write today; I have the time
and I now know exactly what I want to say’ is perhaps not an achievable goal
at this stage.
This chapter introduces the notion of writing as a social act that beneﬁts, at
times, from interaction with and feedback from others. Productive writing
strategies are introduced and illustrated. Their pros and cons are illustrated in a
range of different writers’ reactions – positive, negative, contemplative and
inquisitive. The emphasis is on the value of these strategies for both starting a
paper and generating ideas for your future publications.
The value of these strategies is that they produce what Elbow has called ‘low
stakes writing’. They help writers to defer editing to a later stage in the writing
process. The ‘high stakes’ question of whether or not the writing you do is
‘good enough’ is, without doubt, ultimately highly important, but may be
destructive, or at least dysfunctional, at this early stage.
The purpose of writing in these ways at this stage is to develop topics along
academic lines without applying too heavily the standards of academic
writing. If this sounds counter-intuitive – and it does to some academics – this
may be because you did not learn about these strategies during your student
years or in your training for higher education teaching, for example. The
methods are well established in pockets in higher education, but are nowhere
near to being universally adopted. This chapter, therefore, offers what will be,
for some, a set of challenging new strategies, not difﬁcult in themselves to
apply, nor requiring extensive reading to understand, but potentially
demanding reform of some of your most cherished – even if unproductive –
writing habits.
It is also, perhaps, time to face up to the important fact that these strategies
do, almost always, generate text. Some academics will see this as a simplistic
goal; yet we all know how crucial it is – how excruciatingly difﬁcult it is – to
ﬁnd ways to force ourselves to write when we are tired, stressed and generally
in need of a break. We need new strategies to do this, strategies that will
not consume even more of our personal time – since that may simply be
impossible – but allow us to ﬁt academic writing into our professional lives.
Finally, it may be that these strategies help writers to ﬁnd a space for writing
that is unmediated and unconstrained. This is not just about ﬁnding a space
that is free from evaluation, but about recovering creativity, pleasure and
authority in writing. This is the theme of this chapter; the rest of the book
makes the case that a productive academic writing process is likely to include
both mediated and unmediated writing. The case for a combined strategy is
developed further.
For those who have published in the past, but are looking for a way back
to writing, or for those who are mentoring new writers, these are important
talking points.
FINDING A TOPIC AND DEVELOPING AN ARGUMENT
68

Finding a topic
It helps to have strategies that are speciﬁcally designed to let you write when
you feel neither sufﬁciently ready nor informed about your topic, even if you
have been thinking about it and teaching it for years. If you have not written
for publication before – or if you have been unsuccessful in your submissions –
you probably feel that you have much more reading to do before you can even
think about writing a paper for an academic journal. However, you can start to
write with what you have already:
In many disciplines these are topics for writing, not just for continuing
to mull over. For new writers, some of their new topics, like the last in this list,
are accompanied by their old barriers and fears. All the more reason to start
writing, to get the ball rolling.
A key point – particularly if you are not convinced by the above paragraphs –
is that writing for publication does require you to think about your ideas in a
new way; you are about to take your ideas to an on-going conversation. You
have something to say that you think needs to be heard, something that will
improve things in some way. You not only have to argue your case for your
idea, you also have to make the case that your idea was needed in the ﬁrst
place. You may have to make the case that what you see as a ‘problem’ or ‘issue’
to be addressed is, in fact, a problem: why is it a problem?; how did it become a
problem?; who else thinks it is a problem?; and, last but not least, who does
not? In order to say what you want to say about the subject of your paper you
have to negotiate with what has already been said by others.
This does not mean demolishing the work of those who are already in print –
as many new academic writers do, at ﬁrst – but making the case that aspects of
your topic ‘remain in dispute . . . [and] still invite contention’ and that you
have identiﬁed an area that ‘has not been sufﬁciently explored’ (Selzer 1981:
70–1). In some disciplines, and perhaps for some – not all – journals in your
discipline, you have to develop the delicate art of identifying an area of
contention without being too contentious yourself; in other disciplines,
Finding a topic
• What I am interested in is . . .
• I did a couple of small studies that looked at . . .
• I could do better than . . .
• That paper on . . . by . . . is exactly the type of thing I’d like to do.
• I’d like to write about . . . but that’s already been done by . . . who . . .
FINDING A TOPIC
69

of course, it is more cut and dried, but you still have to make a case for your
work in writing – as you had to do for your grant proposal, perhaps – without
being unfair, inaccurate or inﬂammatory in your assessments of others’ work
and writing. You may, of course, have to ﬁnd out what the literature contains
and where the gaps are, but sometimes this is a retrospective writing task, once
you have started to develop your topic; it need not be your ﬁrst step in writing
your paper.
There may also be a need for an important reorientation: rethinking your
work in terms of potential papers. Some people see this as just a bit too mech-
anistic, but the intention is to prompt you to think differently about your
work, and that is certainly not mechanistic:
1 What are your topics?
2 How many can be made into papers?
3 Can any of these be subdivided to make more than one paper?
4 Which one could be developed most easily/quickly?
The approach here is not to look for topics in the literature, but to start with
what you know, developing topics from familiar subjects. In a sense the topic is
already there, before you start. Based on the body of knowledge that you
currently have, the body of experience that you already have and the reading
that you have already done, you can write a paper for an academic journal, if
you ﬁnd the right journal for your topic. This will probably mean adjusting
your topic to achieve a good ‘ﬁt’ with one target journal. This will help you to
extend your knowledge, gradually, not all at once, and to see for yourself
that it is not necessary to do so before you write. Rethinking your topic for a
particular, high-level, academic audience is hard work, but if you can focus at
this early stage, you will progress your paper, rather than just read more.
You may then, of course, extend your reading, doing a highly focused search
and some highly selective reading, so as to maintain your focus. This is easier
said than done, as it can be distracting and diverting to start seeking out more
new – to you – reading. But, some will say, ‘Surely you have to immerse your-
self in the literature before you write?’. Some will tell you that you should not
be writing at all until you thoroughly know the literature; this is, potentially, a
recipe for deferring writing. Every academic knows the importance of referring
to the literature. It is not just a game of who cites whom and mentioning all
the big names. It is difﬁcult conceptual work linking your writing to others’,
particularly the ﬁrst time you do it for publication. But the importance of
literature in your ﬁeld should not develop into dependency on it. The literature
provides a scaffolding, or structure, on which to build your work.
I understand that this discussion is appropriate for some academic disciplines
and heresy in others. I have found that some writers – old and new – are
adamant in holding their ‘immerse yourself in the literature ﬁrst’ position.
This suggests that they may not be starting their paper for between six
and eighteen months, or whenever they decide that they have done sufﬁcient
FINDING A TOPIC AND DEVELOPING AN ARGUMENT
70

reading. This is an acceptable route, and it may indeed be the only route in
some ﬁelds, or where there are multiple authors. But this route can also involve
writing, writing as you read, developing your understanding as you read. Just
because you, or some inﬂuential person in your ﬁeld, has said that you have to
‘immerse’ ﬁrst and write second does not mean that you should not write as
you read. If you do not write at all during this phase, the risk is that you will
ﬁnd the idea you started out with has diminished to the point where you can
no longer see any reason to write about it. You will also have missed out on all
the other potential beneﬁts of writing: from clarifying your understanding to
getting into the writing habit.
Of course, you have to contextualize your work, for the purposes of your
paper, in the literature, but this means your writing task is to produce a highly
selective piece of whatever length your target journal likes literature reviews to
be. You can probably write the overview piece of your literature review now,
since you know the ‘big names’ already, and you can top that up with their
more recent work in due course, but only if their more recent work is directly
relevant to your paper. It may not be.
Conference presentations
You may think that even your most recent presentation is well out of date. You
may think the presentation you gave to your faculty or department is just too
small-scale. You may not even have thought about these as potential topics for
papers. You may be right, but the fact remains that for any presentation you
have put in a fair amount of work, have developed the idea and given it struc-
ture and have brought closure to a piece of writing about it. More importantly,
you have had feedback on, or at least a reaction to, it. This means that you
have what you could see as a draft of a paper already.
If you have a presentation coming up, see if you can miss the session after
yours, and take that hour or so to write notes on participants’ responses and
feedback.
Writing session at a conference
1 Write down all the questions and responses from the audience.
2 Write down your responses.
3 Copy and paste your overheads or Powerpoint presentation into a
new ﬁle.
4 Keep a copy of the paper for conference proceedings, if requested.
5 Reformat the text to 12-point font.
CONFERENCE PRESENTATIONS
71

Take a few recent issues of your target journal to the conference and adapt
your format, layout, style, headings, title and so on to suit the journal. If you
ﬁnd it difﬁcult to make a connection with the journal’s agenda, you might be
able to make this struggle part of the paper. You may want to adapt the focus
and key words of your paper – probably explicitly linked to the conference
theme – to the journal’s style and current agenda. You may feel that you have
to develop a whole new outline for your paper, but that may not, in fact, be
necessary.
Check the word count again. How far short are you of the journal’s
requirements? Is that including references or not? Do you have any ﬁgures,
diagrams or tables to include? Plan the additional writing you have to do
section by section: for example, how many more words do you have for your
introduction, methodology/approach and so on? Or are you over the word
limit? What can you cut?
It is a mistake to spend all your time – in this post-presentation writing
session – outlining or reading articles in the target journal. Perhaps this implies
that you should do a bit of reading of the journal on the way to the conference,
a bit of browsing at a coffee break or a bit of scribbling during a boring presen-
tation. Of course, some of your attention and time should go on outlining, but
you also need to write. Your outline is, after all, a list of the topics you need to
write about, and there are others:
So there is no excuse for not writing. If, at the end of your hour’s ‘time out’
from the conference, you have a detailed outline, but no writing, take another
ten minutes just to write in sentences. If you have done two or three short
blasts of writing, you will probably have both a decent outline and between
500 and 1000 words of text, in addition to the headings from your presentation
and your notes on what you said about them.
Counting the number of words is – or is not – important, depending on
6 Fill in your oral comments, as you gave them in your presentation.
7 Do a word count. Check your target journal’s requirements.
Write for ﬁve or ten minutes (in sentences) on
• Questions asked during/after your presentation
• Discussions you had with people who are interested in your work
• The key message of your journal paper
• The key themes you will develop in the sections
• Other references mentioned by participants – do you need them?
• A paper published recently in your target journal – can you use it?
FINDING A TOPIC AND DEVELOPING AN ARGUMENT
72

where you stand on the issue of what constitutes a useful writing goal and,
equally important, how you measure whether or not you have ‘achieved’
anything in your session of writing. Setting yourself a goal to write for a ﬁxed
amount of time and/or to produce a certain number of words strikes some
writers as too simplistic. Yet, it can be an effective antidote to the impression –
so quick to set in – that you have not achieved much. If you complete all the
tasks suggested in this section during that hour after your presentation, you
can be justiﬁably pleased with yourself. Time for a rewarding coffee/drink/
workout/swim/phone call/visit to the bookstore.
If you have not already done so, contact the journal editor while you are at
the conference. (See Chapter 2 for guidelines on what you can say in your
email.) A response will help you further focus and develop your paper.
Take this time, while you are away from other commitments, as writing
time. If you leave all this until you get back to your workplace or home
base, you know what will happen: you will quickly be swept up in a wave of
catch-up tasks. The priority you give to writing may be highest when you are
preparing for a presentation. The energy and enthusiasm you have for your
ideas may be at their highest levels during and just after your presentation. The
trick is to capture both the energy and focus of that moment and translate
it into writing.
Just as important, of course, is to plan your next writing session: when will
you be able to spend another hour on this paper? The secret to connecting up
your writing sessions is to write an instruction for yourself, so obvious that you
will know exactly what to do when you come back to this paper next week or
next month, such as ‘My next writing task is to summarize the research of
Brown, Jones and Hoolihan in 300 words. I’ll do that in 20 to 30 minutes.
My prompt for starting is “Brown argues . . . Jones conﬁrms . . . Hoolihan
combines . . .” ’. If your writing instruction is speciﬁc, in terms of content,
scope, word length, time and prompts, then you will know exactly how to start
where you left off, rather than going back through what you have already
written – also important, but perhaps stalling your progress. This is one of
the ways to become a regular writer, even if you do not have regular writing
time at the moment and do not envisage having it when you return to your
workplace.
Thesis
The same applies to your thesis as for conference papers, only more so, since
you probably think your Masters or PhD thesis is now so old – which it is
to you, since you have lived with it so long – and out of date, which it may be,
but this does not mean that all your ﬁndings are useless. Nor does it mean that
you have to spend six months catching up with the literature.
THESIS
73

Even the review chapter could be an important paper, since you are up to
date with the literature, your work is at the cutting edge of your area and you
are well positioned to give an educated guess about possible future directions
of research in your ﬁeld. Clearly, you will have work to do to ‘translate’ a
chapter of your thesis into a paper for a journal, but you can follow the steps
outlined in this chapter.
Freewriting
If your response to the idea of doing any writing – let alone freewriting – is that
you have nothing to write about yet, then these could be the very words to
start a session of freewriting: ‘I don’t have anything to write about yet. I don’t
feel ready. I don’t see how this leads to writing a paper anyway. This is not how
we write papers in my area’, and so on. The aim is to start writing.
By starting in this way, new writers are often freer to generate ideas and
possibilities, without evaluating them. You start to write, even if you are, in
fact, not sure about where the writing is going. Even your reactions to writing
are legitimate subjects for writing. Writing about writing can help new
writers get into the writing habit while they identify writing barriers and
motivations.
There is an old cliché that you should ‘write about what you know’. For the
purposes of academic writing, ‘what you know’ may be an accumulation of
your experience, education, experiments, reading, worries, feelings, conversa-
tions and teaching. This may be constituted as a solid body of work or as
something that seems to you to be more transient and intangible. The point is
that you can write about it in any form; it is not necessary to wait until you see
it taking some kind of ‘academic’ shape. As a writer, you must actively set
about giving it that shape, perhaps even reshaping your work as ‘academic’.
This cannot be done in one easy step and this is where freewriting comes in,
since it lets you write from where you are now:
Freewriting was good. I normally write in a more structured format, but
this gave me a chance to just get what I needed down on paper.
(Writing course participant)
For those who are further down the line towards academic writing, or who
work in disciplines where the connections between their work and academic
writing are obvious, freewriting also has uses. You can use it in two ways: (1) as
a bridge between experimental work and writing, and (2) to make the step
from outlining to writing.
FINDING A TOPIC AND DEVELOPING AN ARGUMENT
74

Writing without stopping helps you to silence your internal editor. You
might think this is a mistake, since you will cease to apply the criteria
for academic writing, but writing without stopping can help you to write by
stopping you from compromising on content for the sake of grammar or punc-
tuation. This does not mean that you have to completely ignore grammar and
punctuation, which might be impossible in any case, but that you can ignore
that level of writing choices for a few minutes.
Writing in sentences can help you to make connections and, paradoxically,
to persist with writing when you do not see any connections. Freewriting
sometimes produces new connections. You may prefer to work with a list of
bullet points. Many do. Yet this will not produce the same beneﬁts. This is not
to say that you should never use bullet points; the point is that you should do
some ‘writing in sentences’ for your writing project every day.
You may feel that you write best when you have a plan ﬁrst, rather than just
‘diving in’ to writing. Again, the point is not that you should abandon all
planning activities; instead, you can combine planning with freewriting
(Chapter 4).
An even greater challenge in freewriting may be the ‘snacking’ approach;
many academic writers insist that they can only write in large chunks of time.
Freewriting takes only small chunks of time and this, too, seems counter-
intuitive to those who think that they need plenty of thinking time before
they can write.
The unstructured, possibly even disjointed, nature of freewriting is also a
challenge for academics. Yet much of our thinking and research is not laid out
in the linear structure required for papers in our journals. Freewriting can help
us to capture some of the different types of analysis and reﬂection that do not
immediately seem to ﬁt the paper, yet which we can transform into academic
writing at a later stage. Does this seem like making extra work for yourself,
creating more stages in the writing process than are strictly necessary? All I can
say to that is that you might want to let go of what I would argue is an illusion:
that you can match the way you think to the way papers are written.
Undoubtedly, some people do, but it has probably taken them time and
practice. You can always ask them.
Some people are prepared to articulate what it is about freewriting that they
How to do freewriting
• Write for ﬁve minutes
• Without stopping
• In sentences
• For no reader
• Without structure
FREEWRITING
75

do not like. This can be an interesting discussion, and it can make writers more
aware of what writing means to them. In the course of talking about freewrit-
ing they reveal their assumptions about best practice. Since some of these
are based on anecdote and a kind of academic hearsay, they merit periodic
scrutiny. For example, many academics reveal a belief that all of their writing
should be of an acceptable ‘quality’, in many cases meaning a level that is not
achievable in the early stages of writing. In reality, writing is a series of
sketches and drafts that could all be called ‘rough’ or even – why not? – ‘free’.
In fact, the quality end product you are striving for, or even your topic, will
not always emerge immediately. Ideas you have been thinking about for some
time do not necessarily constitute a topic for a paper. They are perhaps only
the starting point. What do ‘topics’ look like? Presumably they can take all
sorts of forms, at different stages in the writing process: what do they look like,
and what types of words are used, at the working title, rough title and ﬁnal title
stages? In the context of your discipline, you will know what they look like in
the ﬁnal stage, but that tells you nothing about what the topics looked like at
the earlier stages.
Freewriting may serve different purposes at early and later stages in your
writing project. It may also serve different purposes early and later in an
academic writing career. There is further unpredictability of outcome: will you
use your freewriting text or not and does it matter? You may develop your
thinking through freewriting, but not produce text you can use.
Once you have started, freewriting is habit-forming: it is easy to make time
to do it, but not as easy as you think. It requires a tiny amount of your time –
ﬁve minutes – but a large change in your behaviour. Try regular freewriting: for
example, writing for ﬁve minutes two or three times a week. Then assess its
effects.
As you do so, it is probably as well to decide on a purpose that is meaningful
to you, even if you are writing without a topic in mind. Over the years, in
workshops with academics, we have generated a wide range of potential uses
for freewriting:
Uses of freewriting for academic writers
• As a warm-up for academic writing
• To overcome procrastination
• To start writing
• To develop conﬁdence – that you can write
• To develop ﬂuency – ease of writing
• To write your ﬁrst draft
• To clarify your thinking or your argument
• To stop yourself editing and getting bogged down
• To generate topics for your papers and sections
FINDING A TOPIC AND DEVELOPING AN ARGUMENT
76

Can you live with freewriting’s initial unpredictability, not knowing in
advance whether or not you will produce useful, useable writing? Because
freewriting is done quickly, without planning and without attention to
structure, spelling and grammar, you will probably think it has little value, but
you could be wrong. Those who persist with freewriting, twice a week for
ten minutes, ﬁnd that it is useful. They identify a wide range of beneﬁts on,
interestingly, their thinking, writing and, in some cases, general wellbeing.
Many writers report that freewriting lets them produce text that they can then
work on for their paper.
While responses to freewriting may be discipline-speciﬁc, academics are able
to analyse what is going on here and to extrapolate some potential uses and
even to observe some immediate effects on their writing and thinking. They
can also see potential uses and effects that are arguments for continuing to use
freewriting over the longer term.
What is striking about this list is the number of references to what I would
consider intellectual development. This is surprising, given the wide disciplin-
ary mix – academics in the sciences and arts. This list suggests that freewriting
• To start developing the habit of writing in increments
• To develop ‘snack’ writing
What academics say they use freewriting for
• For self-discussion, thinking about both sides of the issue
• To think through alternatives to your own view
• For linking different ideas
• Developing the writing habit
• Thinking through ideas
• Breaking through rigid or established ideas that do not ﬁt the outline
• Doing the ﬁrst draft
• Getting initial thoughts
• Generating ideas – it’s OK to abandon one and go back to other work
• Preparing the analysis
• Emotional expression
• ‘Ventilating’ feelings and ideas
• Thinking beyond your patterns
• Breaking free of existing structure in your thinking and your discussion
• For notes, revision or conﬁrming your understanding
• Summarizing knowledge
FREEWRITING
77

has potential to bring many different types of beneﬁt to many different types
of writer.
Some of these – for example, ‘thinking beyond your patterns’ – are quite
creative, not in the sense of ‘creative writing’ but in the sense of ﬁnding new
ways to think about your material. Some academics ﬁnd that freewriting fulﬁls
several different functions at once – for example, ‘notes, revision or conﬁrming
your understanding’.
Oddly, you may think, some ﬁnd it useful to have a writing activity that is
completely separate from their academic writing; although it assists academic
writing, it sits apart from it in some way. Scientists may be thinking at this
point that it is patently obvious why freewriting sits apart from academic
writing. Yet the above list shows how it can also be connected to both
academic thinking and writing.
For me, and for the purpose of this chapter which deals with how papers get
started, the main beneﬁt of freewriting is that you can start to write, using
writing to develop potential topics:
This approach is like brainstorming in sentences – a contradiction in terms
designed to make the point that you can use freewriting in the exploratory
phase of writing an academic paper, as you generate topics, make connections,
establish distinctions and change your mind.
Over the long term, the key beneﬁt of freewriting is that it lets you have your
say, say what you think and, perhaps, achieve both more quickly. In the process
of accommodating your writing in the on-going debate, the mountain of
knowledge and the phalanx of experts in your area, it is easy to lose sight of
exactly what you want to say or why you ever thought it was sufﬁcient to make
some kind of ‘contribution’ to your ﬁeld. You can say exactly what you think
in freewriting. You know full well this will have to be modulated for your
paper, but it helps you to focus on the key point.
This effect may be related to the impact of freewriting on writers’
motivation: it gives you a space to voice your commitment to making a contri-
bution, however small, about your topic. As soon as you lose this commit-
ment, writing becomes much harder. As research or publication audits of
one kind or another begin to bite, paradoxically, for some people they under-
mine their motivation to write. In any case, even if they put research-monitors
What are you going to write about?
1 What is your area of special interest/concern/study?
2 Can you combine two or three of your areas?
3 What are all the possible angles for writing about it?
4 Write about two or three of these in a little more detail.
FINDING A TOPIC AND DEVELOPING AN ARGUMENT
78

on people, it will not necessarily change how they write or how they think
about writing. Some people love being able to meet targets, but there are
others who simply do not believe in them. Wherever you are in this debate,
it is important that you have a way of getting back on track with your own
special interest.
You can also use freewriting in your teaching role, since that is what it was
developed for in the ﬁrst instance, and this is one way of ﬁnding time to do it:
as your students do their freewriting in the classroom, you can do yours; in
the midst of a supervision session, you and your postgraduates can do some
freewriting, thus building writing into supervision and, possibly, supervision
into writing. This may make for a talking point in itself and students are often
intrigued to ﬁnd out that academics face similar challenges in writing.
If this whole argument has passed you by: you tried freewriting and hated
it; you know that could mean something, but you frankly cannot see the
point of working out what it is; if freewriting is just too ‘unacademic’ for
you to even want to begin to make sense of it, even though you know you need
something new in your writing, then you are not alone among academics and
researchers:
It is, of course, important to question any new approach. Ideally, you would
go back to the original source, Peter Elbow, and read his very interesting books,
check his web site for current publications and read his papers for evidence of
impact. Yet, most of us do not have time to do all that. If that thorough follow-
up seems a bit of a luxury to you, then perhaps freewriting critiques – be they
elegant or emotional – are also a bit of a luxury. Surely, it would be a good
idea to try the thing out for yourself before you reject it on the basis of a
semi-informed reaction?
At the very least, you can use freewriting as a warm-up for other kinds of
writing. All that time you spend getting ready to write – some people say they
cannot do any writing in ﬁve minutes because it takes them half an hour,
some even an hour and a half to get started – what is that all about? This
makes getting started so time-consuming that you really do need a fair
amount of time, or it will not be worth it, and this too can become another
reason not to write. Freewriting can help you to get started without delay or
delaying tactics.
Why [some] academics reject freewriting
• It bears no relation to the ‘real thing’ – academic writing.
• It is a waste of time.
• They are afraid of it (some say).
• It produces ‘bad writing’.
FREEWRITING
79

Even if freewriting is ephemeral – like the newspaper, you discard it when
you are ﬁnished – it is still writing. If writing is a skill – without wanting to get
into a great debate about skill acquisition and maintenance – then you need
to practise it. If you do not practise, the skill becomes that much harder to
perform. The standard of your performance may also fall. This is not simply a
metaphor for writing; there are, for some, very real beneﬁts from regular short
bursts of writing.
The list of potential negatives is probably endless. The point of this list is
to illustrate that even strongly negative feelings about writing and actual
weaknesses in your paper can themselves be the subject of a ﬁve-minute
warm-up for writing. For some academics, the person they have to work
hardest to convince that they have something to say that constitutes a contri-
bution to the literature is themselves. If this is true for you, then you have to
attend to that internal critical voice in some way: deﬁne the weaknesses –
we all have them – assess their seriousness and address them in your paper, as
appropriate. Alternatively, cut them out. The internal critic can, if handled
properly, be helpful in strengthening your paper.
Whatever your current thinking about your paper, you can write for
ﬁve minutes on that. Many people surprise themselves by coming up with a
solution to a problem in the paper. If that sounds just too good to be true, then
I can only repeat my suggestion that you try it before you dismiss it. I can
accept that if you have never used writing this way, it would seem unlikely to
you, and I have been in hundreds of conversations where I have tried to point
out the potential value of freewriting for academics. At the end of the day, all
my cognitive persuasion will have no effect; you have to do freewriting to see
the beneﬁts.
You can use freewriting to vent the feeling or thought that might be
Writing warm-ups
• I really do not feel like writing now because . . .
• I really want to watch the football/soaps/ﬁlm/clouds in the sky . . .
• I really want to spend time with my partner/kids/volleyball team/TV . . .
• I know what I want to say, but can’t be bothered . . .
• I have no energy right now for writing about . . .
• This is all such a big game anyway . . .
• I am bored with this paper because . . .
• My methods section needs more work than I have time to do . . .
• The feedback is just too much to . . .
• I am not looking forward to the reviewers’ comments on . . .
• There is little chance that this will be published because . . .
FINDING A TOPIC AND DEVELOPING AN ARGUMENT
80

stopping or inhibiting your writing. In ‘ventilating’ you sometimes see a way
to reframe your writing. You might actually calm down. Some people ﬁnd that
they can relax into their writing in this way. This is probably a very different
process from simply discussing your writing, or talking to someone about one
or more of the items on the above list. You could engage in lengthy speculation
about why that might be so – what is the mechanism? – or you could simply
use it for the beneﬁts you know that many other academics, in many
disciplines, have observed quite soon after they started to use freewriting.
Finally, freewriting is a way to force writing – and to stop procrastinating.
You can write even when it is the last thing you want to do, even when you are
tired. This is not to say that it is right or fair that you should have to write
when you are tired, but it is useful to have a way to get a certain amount done
in a limited time and on a restricted amount of energy and motivation. In fact,
if you do not expect too much to come out of your freewriting, so much the
better, since you have lowered the stakes, and this makes writing, and thinking
about writing, less daunting and draining.
Freewriting, or some variation of it, is the perfect solution to the new writer’s
lack of conﬁdence in writing, lack of time for writing and potentially crushing
uncertainty about the value of their writing – even before they have done any –
to any reader. Fears of writing build up over many years; they are not going to
be easily dismissed. Freewriting is one way to start to unravel many fears and
bad habits and to become immediately more productive.
Writers who use freewriting report that writing is a completely different
experience when they know that no one is going to read it. Then, when they
look at their writing again later, they are surprised at how good it is, or at least
useable. They ﬁnd great relief in knowing that they can get on with their
writing, get something down on paper and work on it later. Freewriting, there-
fore, seems to work well in staging writing, breaking a complex process into a
series of manageable steps.
Generative writing
As with freewriting, ideally you should go and read Robert Boice’s Professors as
Writers (1990) to understand this approach. Alternatively, for reasons I have
argued above, you might be as well to try it ﬁrst and see what you think.
Generative writing is the same type of routine as freewriting – more ‘snack’
writing – but with a couple of differences that generally appeal to academic
writers, apart, that is, from the last feature in the following list:
GENERATIVE WRITING
81

This type of generative writing activity combines well with freewriting.
Some academics prefer it. Some decide that their freewriting was actually more
like generative writing anyway, because they are used to writing with a topic in
mind. If you ﬁnd this, it could be a moment to pause and think about whether
you have to stick with your current writing practice: rather than adapting this
writing activity so that it resembles what you ‘normally’ do when you write,
could you not, instead, practise writing differently to see if it makes you more
productive?
In many writing workshops, academics ﬁnd that knowing one other person
will read their writing immediately changes it in ways that you might be able
to predict: some writers are more hesitant, some feel they have to provide more
explanation and deﬁnition, some write more, others much less. Asking them
to show such early pre-rough-draft writing to a colleague seems to some to be
unfair and unhelpful. Yet if the writing is at an early stage, your colleague will
lower his or her standards accordingly. In addition, they know that they can
ask you about anything that seems unclear and you can ﬁll in the gaps.
The purpose of including this feature is, of course, to help you overcome
your fear of peer review at an early stage and, if possible, to get you into the
habit of showing your writing to your colleagues. You can also begin to
develop the skills of giving and receiving feedback on writing.
A productive writing process will probably involve both freewriting and
generative writing, and you can probably see that the combination of the two
could establish a progression in your writing, as you gradually, step by step,
move towards more structured and ‘academic’ writing.
Writing to prompts
The downside of freewriting is that you can feel that you are drifting, not
focused, and even wasting your time. There may be no sense of moving
towards achieving your goal of structured academic writing. As an alternative,
How to do generative writing
• Write for ﬁve minutes
• Without stopping
• In sentences
• Without structure
• Write about one part of your freewriting or the subject of your paper
• Let one other person read it
FINDING A TOPIC AND DEVELOPING AN ARGUMENT
82

writing to prompts can work as a good compromise, the best of both worlds:
you can engage with a topic, perhaps in academic terms – or a writing problem
– without the constraints of building an argument at the same time. This
approach involves writing questions or fragments – incomplete sentences – that
actually prompt you to write more.
One of the most effective prompts, in many different settings, is perhaps one
of the simplest:
This prompt gives everyone something to write about. It always generates
text. It actually gets people started with their papers. There is no more beating
about the bush, no more delaying. It is probably important to use the word
‘want’ rather than ‘must’ in this prompt, as that is more likely to focus you on
what motivates you.
As a next step, you can follow this up with freewriting and/or generative
writing. Or you may prefer to do freewriting and generative writing ﬁrst and
follow them up with writing to prompts. The key point is to try all three
strategies, perhaps in different combinations, perhaps for different purposes in
your paper-writing process.
If, in practice, you ﬁnd that your prompt does not actually, literally, prompt
you to write, then it is failing. There may be something in it that stops you
from starting. Rather than seeing yourself as failing at this task, change the
prompt. Perhaps you chose too big or too wide a topic to cover in one block of
writing – perhaps, instead, you should plan two or more blocks. Perhaps, as in
the above starter prompt, you had two prompts in one – separate them out
and write about one at a time. Perhaps your prompt is written in an academic
style, and that is inhibiting the ﬂow of your thinking and writing. Change
the style: use personal pronouns, simple language and short questions or
fragments.
Try using different forms of prompt:
Fragment
Question
What I want to write about next is . . .
What do I want to write about next?
You may ﬁnd that prompts in the form of a question lead to open explora-
tory writing, as you generate several possible answers, while the fragment form
keeps you more focused and produces one sentence. Alternatively, you may
Starter prompt
What writing for publication have you done and what do you want to do?
If you have not done any writing for publication yet, what is the closest
thing to it that you have done? – write about that.
WRITING TO PROMPTS
83

ﬁnd the opposite is true for you in practice. The point is to try them both.
Otherwise, how would you know if they work and how?
This particular prompt is, of course, one that you can use again and again. It
can help you to take stock, noting your writing achievements or outputs so far,
and then look forward to your next writing goal or task. Because of this it works
as an effective warm-up activity, enabling writers to focus on the task in hand.
These are not the only prompts that you will have: it is interesting to study
the internal prompts that you already have, some of which may not be very
positive or productive:
You will have to learn from practice – from what works and what fails – how
to write good prompts for yourself. For example, you will ﬁnd out whether the
question or incomplete sentence form works best for you. Does the academic
or informal style prompt writing best? Or is there another style that you can
develop?
It may also be important to keep the informal style for some of your writing,
or, more importantly, to frame your prompts differently:
Poor prompt
Effective prompt
What literature is there on this subject?
Where do my ideas come
from anyway?
Who has researched/written about this?
Who has inﬂuenced my ideas?
The so-called poor prompts can lead writers to be overwhelmed by the
literature – a common complaint among new writers – whereas the effective
prompt leads to an immediate, relevant and manageable selection of the
literature, and perhaps of particular works by a few authors. In this way,
you can write prompts that help you to do some of the thinking that you
need to do for your paper. You can also, of course, write prompts that are
much more speciﬁc to your target journal, as long as they actually produce
writing.
The point is that you are your own prompt writer. It is up to you to tackle
poor prompts and to create productive ones. It may help to write these down,
so that you can consider them, analyse them and, if need be, revise them so
that you have ones that work.
Internal prompts that can inhibit writing
• I had better do more reading ﬁrst.
• The reviewers are not going to like this bit.
• I should have had more done by this point.
• I said I would submit this by the end of last month.
FINDING A TOPIC AND DEVELOPING AN ARGUMENT
84

As time goes by, and as you are more successful, more published, you may
ﬁnd that you no longer need to write your prompts down; you have internal-
ized them. As more time goes by, and perhaps you become head of department
and have to put your writing to one side for a year or two or more, you may
ﬁnd it useful to revert to the tactic of writing down your prompts, ﬁnding
which ones work for you to actually generate writing and so on. But, above all,
you will always have a strategy for producing text.
The writing ‘sandwich’
The idea is quite simple: you combine writing and talking in a kind of
‘sandwich’, with alternating layers of writing-talking-writing.
Step 1
Writing in a short burst, for example ten minutes’ private writing.
Step 2
Talking for ten minutes with a peer, ‘writing buddy’ or writers’ group
participant about what you have both written, ﬁve minutes each.
Step 3
More writing for ﬁve or ten minutes, building on what you
discussed.
The challenge of this activity is to make time for discussion – that is to stop
writing, even if you feel that you could go on writing for another ﬁve minutes
or even for longer, since that is, usually, what academic writers do. The point is
to use the ﬁve minutes to set out, in writing, the main point of your paper –
and, it has to be said, sometimes just to see what comes out in your writing –
and to use the very short deadline to force you to focus. The argument for this
is that if you had more time you might range more widely in your writing. Not
that this is essentially a bad thing, but the focus that the ﬁve-minute deadline
brings can sharpen your thinking.
The most important feature of this activity is to do more writing after your
discussion. At ﬁrst, you may ﬁnd that you end up talking for much more than
ten minutes; in time, you will have to make sure that you are able to cut that
short, at least some of the time.
In order to ﬁnd someone with whom you can do this – if you are not already in
a writers’ group, and perhaps even if you are – you will, of course, have to discuss
and agree with your colleague(s) what you are trying to do, that this has purpose
and how exactly you are going to manage your time. You will have to agree to
just try it and to learn about how to manage this kind of session as you go along.
It is not a complex process to manage. You just need someone to keep an eye on
the clock so that you do move from writing to talking and back to writing.
There is a temptation, in many of these group and peer activities to spend
much or all of your time just talking about writing, promising each other and
yourselves that you will actually do the writing at some later date. This is to
THE WRITING ‘SANDWICH’
85

miss an opportunity to get some writing done and, more importantly, to get
some of the essential thinking done.
The value of this mode of working is that it captures the positive response of
your peer discussion and lets you use the impact of that to motivate you to
write more. Such discussions often throw up other subjects for your writing,
and you can capitalize on your writing time by doing it right away, rather than
trying to remember what you wanted to write about later. In addition, you are
rehearsing your arguments, and verbal feedback can help you to sharpen
them. For example, subjects for further writing that can be prompted by such
discussions include:
• I have to deﬁne this more carefully . . .
• I need to add a bit on . . .
• I can move on to write the bit on . . .
• I have to elaborate on what I wrote about . . .
• I have made a bit of a jump here, the connection is . . .
These new writing topics are not just responses to your peer’s comments;
they arise from the thinking about your writing that carries on while you are
talking or listening. This does not mean that you should direct your writing
towards your peer – you might have to watch out for that – unless he or she
actually reads your target journal and is, therefore, part of the audience for
your writing and is prepared to respond appropriately; instead, you are using
him or her as a sounding board – and not just for your ideas, but for your
writing practices. By doing this you are opening up the many stages in
academic writing, often left unspoken in academic environments, revealing
your on-going choices, decisions and uncertainties. The more you work with
each other, the better your understanding will be of what you are both trying
to achieve in your papers.
Peer discussion is also important for motivation to write. Giving each other
mutual encouragement can be even more motivational, as you are helping
someone else, in a small way, to get on with their writing. In these short
discussions, there can be valuable consolidation of work that you have already
done, thereby preventing you from getting bogged down in your sense of what
you still have to do to ﬁnish the paper.
These discussions also provide feedback on your writing. You can use them
as an early form of peer review. You can discuss the types of feedback you are
looking for – structure, content, style, ‘contribution’, focus and so on – and
can make it as ‘hard’ or ‘soft’ as you want at any given time.
In fact, the writing ‘sandwich’ structures feedback into your writing practice.
Rather than waiting until you have brought your paper to a stage of comple-
tion, and you are ready to submit it, you get feedback at several much earlier
stages, and from someone who knows what you are trying to achieve in your
paper, and who is, therefore, potentially well placed to tell you whether or not
you are achieving it.
FINDING A TOPIC AND DEVELOPING AN ARGUMENT
86

An added beneﬁt of this, as an academic writing practice, is that it normalizes
incompleteness. Clearly, any paper is incomplete for a certain amount of time,
but this rather obvious statement can become problematized, particularly for
new writers, or for anyone who does not have a clear sense of writing as a
process, to the extent that they lose sight of the writing goal, only seeing a
messy, incomplete paper where there could be a gradual progression towards
completeness. In other words, these regular discussions of your on-going
writing project can help you to be realistic and positive about your developing
paper, not just in an emotional sense but also in an intellectual sense: the writer
who does not see the paper as gradually developing may be tempted to add
further points, with the aim of strengthening the paper, that actually detract
from the main argument by blurring its focus. More is not necessarily better.
The ‘writing sandwich’ is another strategy for getting into the writing
habit. In such ‘sandwich-structured’ meeting you are building writing into
work time, and not just giving up your personal time. Perhaps more signiﬁ-
cantly, you are bringing writing into peer interactions. Workplace discussions
that might previously have been limited to the topics of teaching, marking
and meetings can now also include your writing. Initially, you might want to
share this with no more than the select few with whom you work in this way,
but later you might alert others to the fact that you are actively writing.
For example, it might be politic to remind your head of department of what
you are doing – and how much you are producing – in these ‘sandwich’ meet-
ings, even if you do not use precisely that term in such discussions. You might
even want to go a step further and externalize your goal: tell your head of
department exactly what you are writing about, which journal you are target-
ing, and roughly or exactly when you expect to submit. If your paper has
developed out of a conference presentation, funded by the department, be
sure to say that too. Mention your progress towards your goal of submitting
your paper the next time you see him or her. Later, of course, you can happily
report submission as and when that great day dawns. Do not worry if the
response is complete indifference; the purpose of the conversation is to give
information not to seek reinforcement. On the other hand, you may actually
pick up a tip or two about the journal that will help you to target it more
effectively, although if the information provided is liable to take you down
a completely different tack in your paper, you might want to get a second
opinion.
Above all, in the sandwich meetings you are protecting time by putting
writing, cloaked or disguised as a ‘meeting’, in your diary. If these meetings are
not in your diary, they are not in real time, and it is highly likely that they will
be displaced by one of your other responsibilities or tasks.
It has to be emphasized here, as for other writing activities in this book, that
someone in another discipline can give you useful feedback, even if you
are not initially convinced of the possibility; sometimes this is better than
feedback from someone in your discipline, ‘better’ in the sense of holding the
focus on what you want to say, rather than adding all sorts of related issues and
THE WRITING ‘SANDWICH’
87

potential topics. People in your discipline are likely to react to the content of
your writing; discussion is likely to range over debates and deﬁnitions. This
may not help you to keep going with the argument you are formulating; it may
stimulate you, instead, to add new points and may, thereby, disrupt the focus
of what you want to say and unravel your argument. Of course, at some stage,
feedback from colleagues in your discipline will be crucial; I am not arguing
against it. The point is to be aware of the pros and cons of feedback from
both types of reader, particularly since many academic writers – because our
discipline base is so central to our writing and thinking – are not aware of the
beneﬁts of trans-disciplinary discussions of this type.
How often you do this ‘writing sandwich’ will, of course, depend on a
number of factors, but if you feel that it has to come last in a long list of other
tasks, then either you might be on the way to deciding not to do it at all before
you have really given it a proper chance to work, or you might make the
sensible decision to meet once a month at ﬁrst, if that is all you can manage.
Once a week sometimes seems to be too often. Once every two weeks generally
works better.
How long you meet for can vary in the same way, but you should probably
set aside an hour, knowing that you can get through the writing sandwich
process in 50 minutes. Over time, with practice, you can probably develop
your meetings:
• Try quick taking-stock meetings of 20 minutes over the phone, if you do not
have time to meet face-to-face.
• Try using more of the 50-minute meeting to do writing, with very brief
discussions of writing goals at the start and end of the meeting.
• Try building up to using the whole session for writing, starting where you
left off at your previous meeting (at which you wrote yourself a writing
instruction for your next task, so that you could start writing immediately).
You do not all/both have to do the same task at each session. The above list
gives you some of the options that you might want to try at different times.
You may also ﬁnd that you come up with other options. As long as you stick to
the time limit you have allocated yourselves, then you will be able to manage
the writing, rather than letting it run away with you and, potentially, creating
problems in other areas of your lives.
What can go wrong? What is most likely to happen to undermine your good
intentions to use the writing sandwich is that you meet and decide that you do
not really need to do any writing there and then, and that you will instead just
talk about it. This means that your writing is postponed, rather than pro-
gressed. To avoid this, you should arrive at any writing meeting feeling that
you want to seize any opportunity, any time slot – however small – to write.
Another problem might be that one of you has to cancel the meeting, meaning
that you both lose out on the potential beneﬁts of the interaction, at least,
and, at worst, you fail to write. To avoid this, you have to have an alternative
FINDING A TOPIC AND DEVELOPING AN ARGUMENT
88

up your sleeve: if your colleague cancels, where will you go, what and how
will you write, and is there anyone else with whom you can discuss it in the
meantime, until your rescheduled meeting?
If this is all beginning to sound just a bit too ‘scheduled’, then you can reﬂect
on why it is that stages in a writing project generally are not scheduled in this
way, or, if they are, why no one talks about it. Other professional tasks are
usually scheduled. This is not to say that we should bureaucratize writing, but
that not to have some timetable for completing the task is one way of making
sure it does not get done.
To sum up, there are many potential beneﬁts of progressing your writing in
this way:
If you do ﬁnd that you are tiring of this way of working, you can, of course,
move on: build up to longer bouts of writing, work with other partners, bring
together a writers’ group, use the ﬁve-minute writing slot as a warm-up only,
then move on to more academic writing. As your paper takes shape and as your
structure becomes ﬁxed, you can probably write straight from your outline,
using it as a kind of agenda for writing.
It is perhaps worth pointing out an obvious feature of this strategy that is a
key to its effectiveness, but that academic writers often struggle with both
conceptually and behaviourally: the importance of keeping these interactions
short and focused. Any time you sit down to write, you should try to design
the writing slot in terms of time, content, using speciﬁc verbs – rather than
the general verb ‘writing’ – and in terms of number of words required for the
section.
As writers who have attended writers’ groups or retreats begin to develop an
incremental writing strategy, using the ‘snacking’ strategies, some report that
they wrote regularly for three months after the retreat and then stopped. How-
ever, thanks to the strategies they learned on the retreat, they know how to get
back on track. Sometimes they beneﬁt from a refresher course or meeting, yet
another argument for repeat retreats or regular departmental writing days
away.
Beneﬁts of the ‘writing sandwich’
• It’s quick. It doesn’t take up much of your time.
• You have a real audience who gives you a real response to your writing.
• You get immediate feedback, usually a positive reaction.
• You can respond to it immediately, in further writing for your paper.
• Each meeting constitutes a deadline.
• The meeting may be your only writing time, but at least you have that.
• The discussion usually stimulates more writing.
THE WRITING ‘SANDWICH’
89

Remember that unless you have some way of dividing up the writing task, in
terms of small sub-goals that are achievable in small amounts of time, then it is
difﬁcult, and at times impossible, to ﬁt writing into smaller blocks of time.
There may, at certain points in the working year, be no large chunks of time
available for writing at all.
For new writers, the strategies in this chapter involve repositioning yourself
as writer: for example, you can email an editor and say that you missed your
end of the month deadline, but could have your paper in by the end of next
week. In other words, create a new deadline and externalize it, rather than
wasting any more time and energy worrying about whether or not they
will still want it or feeling guilty about having missed the ﬁrst – or second or
third – deadline.
You can see yourself as actively solving writing problems. You get yourself to
the position where you come up against a reason for not writing or another
commitment that is getting in the way of your writing meeting and, instead of
letting anger and frustration build up, you immediately start thinking about
how you are going to make another time slot. Sometimes you do all this
by yourself, sometimes in discussion with others, but you are always looking
for solutions to, particularly, the problem of making time for writing and
protecting it.
In any case, even as you solve that problem, another is coming along. There
are still uncertainties. One of the stages of becoming a writer is to develop
strategies that get you though this, that actually get writing done, and to be
able to change strategies when the one you chose fails.
It may be time to do a bit of targeted reading. Perhaps there is an area where
you now see you need to have a better grounding in the methodologies or
approaches that others have used, so that you can measure yours against them
and, if possible, make a stronger case for what you did, particularly if your
piece of work is more modest than others’. This is not the end of the world – or
your paper; it means that you might have to write more about methodology,
or whatever that area is called in your target journal than you had originally
planned. You might have to include some new topics, comparing your study to
others in order to show that what you did, while contested and not as strong as
others, was still sufﬁcient to answer your research question.
This ‘stop-and-read’ moment may occur at any time. The trick is making
sure that it does not stop you from writing altogether. It may be useful,
for example, if you are writing about new reading, to rehearse how you will
write about it, if at all, in your paper.
Writing can show up gaps in your thinking, and sometimes that prompts
you to read more; yet, a gap in your writing does not necessarily represent or
signal a gap in your reading. In fact, reading more can create new gaps – or the
impression of them – in your writing. Any developing argument has gaps, gaps
that require further writing, not just reading. The writing sandwich process
can help you to develop further writing to ﬁll the gap, through interaction
with a peer rather than a pile of books and journal articles.
FINDING A TOPIC AND DEVELOPING AN ARGUMENT
90

The school of thought that says you should not be writing until you know
all the literature may make its voice heard at this time – either actually or
internally – but writing as you read is one way of mastering the literature,
and it is certainly possible to write without full ‘mastery’ of others’ writing
and research.
Knowing that dissatisfaction is part of the writing process, it might help
to develop a sense of ‘contingent satisfaction’, meaning that you have deﬁned
what is ‘good enough’ to submit and can develop sufﬁcient satisfaction to
force yourself to let someone read it or to send it off to the journal. This is not
to say that you send in a draft and use the reviewing process for feedback, but
that you should not expect to feel completely happy with everything in your
paper. Anyone who has written a PhD will recognize this feeling; it was meant
to be your best work, but you know it has deﬁciencies. Yet you passed.
This feeling of the work not being good enough may have important origins
in your lack of knowledge about what constitutes an/‘the’ acceptable standard
of writing and research. Both your knowledge and your sense of the
inadequacy of your work diminish somewhat as your papers begin to be
published, because you begin to learn what that standard is. Moreover, this
habit of questioning our work – by ourselves – is, of course, useful. We would
not want to be complacent.
Finding readers: critic, mentor, buddy and others
A writing mentor is someone who actively wants you to develop and achieve
as a writer. For the purposes of writers’ groups, I have developed a note
to guide those who are willing to take on this role. For writers, it might help
them think through what they are looking for and to listen carefully to
anyone who appears to be giving this kind of support. Clearly, you can deter-
mine the role in a number of ways, or you may ﬁnd that you have to take what
you get.
This role might be formally or informally instituted in your department. You
and your mentor might have to negotiate how you want to work together
within certain parameters, such as the frequency of your meetings.
Notes for writing mentors
This note provides an initial guide to the role of writing mentor. Its purpose is
to prompt discussion among those learning to play the role, those who are
already mentors and those who are being mentored.
FINDING READERS
91

In my staff development role I provide advice for mentors, who also need
support, particularly if they are to ﬁnd time to support writers and still have
time for their own writing. Not everyone is a natural mentor. Many are willing
to admit this and seek advice on how to play this role. Some do not feel that
they are experts with sufﬁcient authority, perhaps even lacking a credible
body of publications themselves. Some mentors, therefore, will provide expert
help; others might simply provide a more general form of support, which can
be equally important. If you are writing your ﬁrst paper and the resident
experts seem intimidating, or simply will never make time to give you the
beneﬁt of their knowledge and experience as writers, then you will have to
resort to some other form of mentoring, and for some that will suit them
better in any case.
Remit
The remit of the writing mentor could be deﬁned as follows:
• To support the development of speciﬁc, achievable goals and sub-goals
and maintain the writer’s focus on them
• To maintain contact with writers
• To provide support and speciﬁc advice to writers as required
• To monitor the writer’s progress towards achieving speciﬁed goals
• To monitor ‘study buddy’ and other mentoring relationships
• To follow up on lapses, delays and failure in writing.
Experience suggests that writers may each require different forms of
support; that is, all of these forms will not be required by all writers. Further-
more, the role can be customized by writers and mentors.
Tasks
The mentor’s activities could include the following:
1 Weekly email contact with writers
2 Occasional one-to-one discussions as required
3 Occasional discussions with groups of writers, as appropriate
Time
One hour per week/month maximum, as agreed
FINDING A TOPIC AND DEVELOPING AN ARGUMENT
92

Finding a voice
The paper will achieve a far wider readership under my name than under
the name of an unknown. Surely these considerations are more important
than mere personal vanity?
(McCall Smith 2003: 31)
It is not simply ‘personal vanity’ that makes us want to have our say, in our
own voices, and to be acknowledged for that.
Would voice-activated software or talking into a Dictaphone help you to
ﬁnd a writing voice? Some people wonder if this would help them to become
more ﬂuent in their writing, helping them to record ideas and rehearsals of
text as they think of them; others ﬁnd it a useful way to capture ideas
quickly, particularly if they are engaged in another activity, like driving, for
example.
If you do not have typing skills, speaking has obvious attractions. Perhaps in
due course we will all use voice recognition software for many tasks, not just
for writing. Without wanting to get into that debate – particularly on some-
thing that seems to be, for the moment, quite a personal choice – you could try
these strategies and see what happens.
However, it may be that discussing your ideas and writing with others is
a better, quicker way of developing your writing voice; doing regular writing,
in a variety of modes, will help you, over time, develop your writing.
Finding an argument
There is nothing more to be said on this subject. Nothing.
(McCall Smith 2003: 11)
Writing about the connections and distinctions between your work and
others’ may reveal that you do not really know what they are, have not clearly
worked out what precisely the main ones are and/or what exactly constitutes a
viable argument in your ﬁeld at the time of writing. Using this as a prompt for
writing can help you to hone your own argument:
• What are the connections between your work and the work of other
scholars and researchers?
• What are the distinctions between your work and theirs?
• What is the main connection between your paper and their publications?
• What is the main distinction between your paper and theirs?
93
FINDING AN ARGUMENT

Making a proposition:
Propositions are interesting or uninteresting only in relation to the
assumption-ground of some audience.
(Davis 1971: 328)
Asserting a proposition is a legitimate way of writing for publication, but for it
to work you will have to contextualize it thoroughly. You will also have to
include the debate around your proposition in what, to borrow a term from
Davis (1971), could be called an ‘internal dialectic’ (p. 331):
• What propositions have been generated about your subject?
• Which of these have become ‘taken from granted’ assumptions?
• What new proposition have you generated?
• How does your argument relate to established propositions?
• How does your argument relate to current assumptions?
This is not just a matter of including both sides of the debate, but about
ensuring that your set of assumptions stands up against others’ in a way that
shows the sense of yours.
Formulating a hypothesis
The role of hypotheses in research is an interesting one. Some writers on
research methods treat hypotheses as a necessary part of research . . .
However, this is an unnecessarily limited view of research. It ﬁts well with
a situation where there is an already well developed body of knowledge –
that is, established theory from which hypotheses may be derived – but is
less appropriate where the research is more concerned with developing
our understanding of a relatively new ﬁeld of study, that is, where the
need is for theory building more than theory testing.
(Burton and Steane 2004)
Scientiﬁc research begins with a problem . . . Problems are tackled by the
method or investigation, in an attempt to obtain evidence related to a
hypothesis. If the problem is stated as a question, then each hypothesis is
a possible answer to the question or a possible explanation.
(Barrass 2002: 2–3)
A hypothesis is a general proposition. It is often taken as a principle on which
an argument is based. It is a premise from which to draw a conclusion or,
FINDING A TOPIC AND DEVELOPING AN ARGUMENT
94

alternatively, the basis for action. The hypothesis tells us that certain things
are known and that we can base future action and thought on these. In science
it is used as a starting point for further investigation.
These deﬁnitions raise questions for your writing. If you are to include a
hypothesis:
• Which type of research have you done – in a new ﬁeld or in an established
one?
• Were you testing or building theory?
• Are hypotheses used in journals in your ﬁeld?
• If so, what do they look like?
• How exactly are they written – in what terms, using which words?
In other words, you can develop your understanding and use of hypotheses, if
they are appropriate at all, by studying papers published in your target journal.
Constructing an argument
An argument starts by establishing a problematic, which is an argument in
itself: how is this done in your target journal? List and analyse the published
authors’ ways of referring to the literature and/or to the published work of
others.
How is the research gap deﬁned? How is the literature deﬁned?
• deﬁcient
• open to debate
• incomplete
• missing certain components
• narrow
When you problematize – that is, when you make the case that you have an
issue worth writing about – your issue in the literature, you do not have to
problematize the literature itself.
A good technique for modulating the problematic is to refer to or quote
someone in your ﬁeld who has been even harsher or more radical than you
want to be in his or her critique of a piece of research or a publication. This
works particularly well if the harsh critic is an authority who is widely
respected in your ﬁeld.
The process of contextualizing your ideas in others’ work – reviewing the
literature – is not just a means to an end, going through the motions of men-
tioning the great, the good and the not-so-good-at-all; it is a way of honing
your ideas and your thinking processes. You may feel that the end result is
CONSTRUCTING AN ARGUMENT
95

that you have blunted your original idea, when, in fact, you are likely to have
sharpened it.
How you actually produce the type of sentences that are required, the type
of academic writing you need, will be shaped by your target journal. Examples
of academic arguments are analysed in Chapter 6 to demonstrate some of the
key techniques.
The quality question
This chapter has introduced three strategies for generating text: freewriting,
generative writing and writing to prompts. This gives you three ways to force
yourself to write, even when you least feel like it and even when you are most
uncertain about your topic and your ability in writing. All of them can be
practised in very short amounts of time, a key feature for overloaded academics.
Simply being able to produce text on demand is reassuring and builds con-
ﬁdence. These are important outcomes for academics who want to become
regular, productive and successful writers.
For every research task, there can be a writing task. The writing strategies
covered in this chapter are primarily about getting new writers started. At
some point, you know you have to address the question of the quality of
your writing, but, it has to be emphasized, this does not mean that you
should stop using these generative strategies and move into a stage of
revision.
The quality question means attending to the structure and style of your text,
and your ability to do this may depend on how much effort you put into
analysing articles in your target journal. Quality is deﬁned in a particular way
for that particular journal.
Calibrating your topic
Once you have (a) developed your topic, (b) started writing about it, (c)
discussed it with your trusted peers, (d) topped up your reading and (e) had
some pre-peer review – perhaps not exactly in that order – you need to check
that your paper is still aligned with your target journal. If you have not already
done so, write a working title to help you and your readers focus on the main
point and your treatment of it. If you have, revise it now. Then compare your
paper with a paper of a similar type published in your target journal within
the past year. Assess the extent to which you are still doing what you set out
to do:
FINDING A TOPIC AND DEVELOPING AN ARGUMENT
96

• Are you doing what you said you would do in your email to the editor?
• Go back to your proﬁle of the journal: does your paper ﬁt it so far?
• Scan a couple of recent issues of the journal. Read a paper of the type that
you are writing. Then review your own paper.
• Ask someone who reads the journal to read your writing so far and/or to
discuss your ideas with you to assess how they ‘ﬁt’.
• Better still, if you know and trust someone who has been published in
your target journal, and if they have time, ask them to read what you have
written so far.
Use the feedback you get as prompts for further writing, developing your
topic and perhaps even planning some of your sections. Write your develop-
ment points in sentences – rather than notes – so that you think them through
a bit more and, in the process, work out whether or not you need them in your
paper at all.
It is perhaps worth repeating that this does not involve you in ‘cloning’
yourself to the journal; instead this is one of your focusing devices. This is
another activity that you can bring to your writers’ group.
Writing a working title
As you are thinking about writing or revising your working title, you might
want to consider Sternberg’s (2000) take on titles in academic publications
(‘Titles and abstracts: They only sound important’):
Whether your article will be read by many people, few people, or virtually
none at all . . . can be largely a function of the title and the abstract.
(p. 37)
A working title can be a useful focusing device as you write. It can keep you
from straying too far from your main line of argument. It gives your paper a
name – distinguishing it from your other projects – with which you can refer to
it over the weeks and months of planning, researching and writing.
You will already have identiﬁed your key words. How can you ﬁt them into
your title? Having scrutinized the journal, you know what types of titles they
like to see:
• Is it the catchy buzz word?
• The contentious statement?
• The main catchy title – colon – then a more descriptive title?
• Is it a question?
• A question and an answer?
WRITING A WORKING TITLE
97

Your title can be an important starting point in catching the reader’s
interest, but since your ﬁrst reader will be the editor, it is a good idea to model
the style and content of your title closely on the limited range that appears in
the journal. Remember also to put in the key words that will bring up your
paper in literature searches.
Checklist
• Look for topics in what you already do, know or think.
• Use regular ‘snacking’ activities to produce text quickly.
• Defer the ‘quality question’ until later.
• Discuss your writing with others, show it to them at an early stage and get
feedback.
FINDING A TOPIC AND DEVELOPING AN ARGUMENT
98

4
Outlining
Level 3 outlining • Allocating word lengths • Writing an
abstract – Brown’s 8 questions • Outlining a paper –
Murray’s 10 prompts • Calibrating your
outline • Checklist
It would be foolish to maintain that all writing must be planned. But it
does not seem unreasonable to assert that good writers must be able
to plan.
(Bereiter and Scardamalia 1987: 192)
. . . trying to follow a written plan can interfere with the generation of
ideas through writing.
(Torrance et al. 1991: 46)
. . . planning encompasses more than the cognitive process of deter-
mining ‘what to say’ and ‘what to do’ in the text to be written.
(van der Geest 1996: 9)
The ﬁrst quotation is itself a model of good academic writing: the authors use
the device of starting with an overstatement and then distance themselves
from it, not only making it clear that they do not intend to go that far, but also

making their position in the to-plan-or-not-to-plan debate seem reasonable.
They also make subtle, persuasive use of the double negative in the prop-
osition that follows: how different is the effect of their chosen expression, ‘it
does not seem unreasonable to assert’, from ‘it seems reasonable to assert’ –
much more effective in the context of academic argument, much less likely
to provoke instant refutation.
As a result, for all that every single academic will already have formed his or
her own views on the value of planning in academic writing, the authors have
eased themselves into the debate without immediately drawing too much ﬁre
– cleverly done. The authors must have thought carefully not only about the
subject of their writing – how planning and writing interact – but also about
how they could make their case persuasively in the context of on-going
debates.
We can all agree with the authors that it is a good idea to plan writing or, for
the purposes of this chapter, to produce an outline of your paper; the question
is how to go about it when you are writing a paper for an academic journal:
how much outlining should you do, in what form, what should an outline
of this type of writing look like, and how will you use your outline as you write,
if at all?
The second quotation – from a very different type of writing – questions
whether planning serves any useful purpose at all; it may, instead, simply
interrupt your writing process:
Elbow [1973] and Wason [1985] both suggest that, as an alternative to
constructing a plan, writers should simply start to compose in full text,
allowing thought and inscription to run concurrently. This, they argue,
may facilitate the generation of ideas in a way that is not possible when
the writer is constrained by a pre-determined plan. Similarly, Scardamalia
and Bereiter (1985) argue that writing strategies that permit an interaction
between idea generation and inscription will produce text that is richer in
both content and expression. However, they also observe that the skills
required to manage such an interaction effectively are underdeveloped in
many writers.
(Torrance et al. 1991: 53)
While this study was conducted on undergraduates, it would be difﬁcult to
argue that it has no relevance whatsoever for academics who write, since the
undergraduate years are, for many, the ﬁnal opportunity for learning about
writing. (At the doctoral level it is often assumed that writers already know
what they need to know about writing.)
Perhaps the most contentious sentence in this quotation is the last one:
‘writers’ – which must include some academics, perhaps particularly new
writers – will not necessarily have developed these skills. This is not to say
that they cannot do so; if there is a barrier – to writing and development – it
may exist among those who think they do not have to develop their skills.
OUTLINING
100

The speciﬁc skills needed may not be what are often referred to as technical
skills; it may be much more important that you develop the skills ‘to manage
[the] interaction of “idea generation” and “inscription” ’. Planning, or outlin-
ing, can be a separate process, but it is not a good idea to stop writing
while you plan. Nor should you expect your writing to ﬂow once you have
an outline. Nor will your best outline remain intact throughout the writing
process.
Outlining – whatever that might mean in practice, in terms of speciﬁc
activities – involves a range of very different thinking processes.
Finding a way to do all of these at once may not be an achievable goal, or it
may be a long-term goal, the by-product of multiple publications. What is
feasible, even for new writers, is combining outlining and regular writing.
Since this may be easier said than done – given the research referred to above –
examples of frameworks and suggested writing activities are included in this
chapter. The key point is that although the subject of outlining is treated here
in a separate chapter, as if it were a discrete step, the activities described in
other chapters are to be used here too.
The third quotation, drawing on earlier important work by Flower and
Hayes (1981), identiﬁes three different but related processes involved in the
planning or outlining stage: ‘setting goals for the execution of the writing task,
generating ideas for the content of the text, and organising the ideas generated
in a particular text structure’ (van der Geest 1996: 14–15). This helpfully
deﬁnes the different tasks: goal-setting, generating ideas and structuring, each
of which might involve a different type of writing activity. Yet, if it is also true
that ‘separate tools for planning . . . and reviewing . . . will be experienced as
drawing an artiﬁcial line between two activities that are intricately related’
(van der Geest 1996: 21), then the collection of writing tasks that make up
planning or outlining could be experienced, by the writer, as quite ‘messy’.
Perhaps this is a problem that writers who get bogged down fail to solve: yes,
there are various different tasks to be done, but not in any linear order. Even
The purpose of outlining
• ‘idea generation’
• forming a structure
• linking ideas
• clarifying a contribution
• creating coherence
• sifting and eliminating ideas
• ﬁnding direction
• contextualizing your work
OUTLINING
101

when you have a linear outline, you may ﬁnd yourself changing it and
subsequently losing your way in your writing.
Analysis of the quotations from writing research shows how carefully you
need to be thinking about your audience while you are outlining your paper –
not just while you are writing it. Outlining is part of the writing process, after
all. Your sense of other positions in the debate, as represented in the readership
of your target journal, will, of course, shape what you write and how you write
it. You can anticipate where opposition to your argument will come from. You
can modulate your arguments accordingly.
In other words, the outlining stage may involve some writing, while the
writing stages may include some revision of your outline. In fact, it may seem
artiﬁcial to separate outlining from writing, but the point is to introduce in
this chapter several strategies that have proved useful. Each is described in a
separate section, but you can continue to use strategies for regular writing
covered in other chapters, so that you can develop an integrated writing
process. You can develop a set of techniques that you know work for you. This
– together with your experience of submitting/publishing your ﬁrst paper –
will help to make production of your second and subsequent papers more
ﬂuent.
This chapter deﬁnes and illustrates strategies for outlining your paper in
different ways: answers to lists of questions, headings, sentences, abstracts and
graphics. All of these are important steps in the writing process; they all consti-
tute ‘writing’ tasks that help you to maintain the focus of your paper as you
write it.
You may be sceptical about some of these strategies: while some academics
argue that they can only write an abstract once they have written the paper,
writing an abstract is presented here as an important step in the process of
designing your paper. There are also implications for your actual writing prac-
tices in this approach: the argument is that you also need a design for writing
before you can allocate time slots to actually getting it done.
Moreover, a draft abstract or summary gives you text that you can email
to an editor or give a colleague to read, in order to elicit early feedback. Feed-
back is crucial at this early stage, not just at later stages when you have a draft
that you are relatively happy with. It can save you wasted time, stopping you,
for example, from going off on a line of argument, or presenting what you
think are all your signiﬁcant results or detailing your speciﬁc methodology,
when none of these is what the audience of your target journal will ﬁnd most
interesting in your work at this time, as judged by the editor, as expressed in
his or her response to your ‘initial enquiry’ email. A further beneﬁt is that
discussion with subject experts and others at this stage can accelerate your
writing/revision.
How much time should you spend outlining? It has been argued that you
should spend 90 per cent of your time outlining and 10 per cent writing (Reif-
Lehrer 2000). Whether or not you agree with this calculation, it does raise the
question of how much is ‘right’ or ‘enough’. Most of us probably spend less
OUTLINING
102

time outlining and more writing, or rather revising. This might be because, if
we spend less time outlining, we still have many decisions to make as we write.
That makes writing a more complex process than taking structural decisions
before starting to write paragraphs and sentences.
This is a more complex process in the sense that you have to make several
different levels of decision at once: deciding on content, sequence, style, level
of detail, references to other work, coherence and so on – all at the same time.
And all of these decisions have to be made ‘in sync’ with each other. This may
be one of the reasons why academics rebel against the ‘snack’ writing mode: it
is more difﬁcult, perhaps impossible, to write in this way in short bursts, as
such complex writing requires constant sustained concentration if you are to
get it right.
Yet if that is how you learned to write, if that is how you see the outlining
process, you may be wondering if it is really possible to do a kind of ‘total
design’ for your paper. Certainly, the value of doing so is not difﬁcult to under-
stand, but it does require sustained concentration in the outlining stage and, if
you remain sceptical, it can be difﬁcult to put into practice. The frameworks
suggested in this chapter are there to help you try this new type of outlining
practice. They have been tried and tested in many writing workshops among
academics and others, in various disciplines, in many parts of the world. This
suggests that they are in a form that you can use as of now.
It is, therefore, a good idea to spend plenty of time in the outlining stage.
This may save you an enormous amount of time later in the writing process, as
you are able to write well, in a focused way, in your ﬁrst draft. In fact, your ﬁrst
draft may be very good.
However, the route to being able to do that is, paradoxically, through regular
writing; if you do not write regularly, your writing time may be just as long as it
ever was no matter what you do at the outlining stage. In fact, if you increase
your outlining time without decreasing your writing time, you may take even
longer to write your paper.
As you develop an outline, therefore, keep writing in sentences. Use
the regular writing strategies described in other chapters. You also have to
‘calibrate’ your writing at all these stages with your target journal. Targeting
your writing continues to be critical.
There is another good reason for spending more time than you currently do
on the outlining stage: ‘Use the word processor to type the outline and then
convert the outline to prose when you are completely satisﬁed with the
content and logical ﬂow’ (Reif-Lehrer 2000). The important words here are
‘completely satisﬁed’: you may wonder whether you will ever use these words
about your writing, but the point is that you have a chance, in your outline, to
create a momentary satisfaction. Because the ultimate – and you might say
‘real’ – satisfaction of writing only comes when your paper is (a) accepted and
(b) published, satisfaction can be deferred for a year or two. You therefore have
to manage your level of satisfaction with work-in-progress by creating small
satisfactions with what you have already done. The moment of satisfaction
OUTLINING
103

that comes with a completed outline derives from having a clear goal and a
clear output: you either have an outline or you don’t. Having an outline
becomes a goal.
A more important question might be, what constitutes an outline that will
drive your writing? This question is addressed in the next section, where ‘level
3 outlining’ is suggested as a mode of outlining a paper, one that takes up
strategies for productive writing dealt with in earlier chapters, such as writing
to prompts, and integrates them into this step in the writing process.
Do not wait for writing to ‘come to you’; your outlining practices should
still involve regular, short-burst writing, in which you continue actively to
make yourself write regularly. This means that while the outlining stage is
about making your writing linear, there are still non-linear – or perhaps paral-
lel – processes going on. There is no need to attempt to stop this happening,
and it may not be possible in any case, but you do need to have a way of
capturing and ﬁltering ideas and sentences as they pop up. This is not to say
that they ‘pop up’ at random, since your brain will be working on your paper
even when you are not actually writing it. Find a way to capture these
sentences, since they do not always appear when you are sitting at your
keyboard.
As you do all this outlining, you may ﬁnd that whole sentences or para-
graphs come to you, apparently at random. Write them down. If you know
exactly where they ﬁt in your paper, write them in under the appropriate
heading, without worrying too much about how you will make the text
around them ‘ﬁt’. If you are not sure where they go, or if they even belong in
your paper at all, save them in a separate ﬁle and leave the decision about
whether or not to include them at all in your paper until later.
The references quoted in this section show that scholars have been thinking
about the planning process in writing for some time. There is a vast literature
out there. Perhaps the most salient point, for the purposes of this chapter, is
that juggling planning and writing is a difﬁcult process that may itself have to
be learned. Moreover, it supports the suggestion that you should be writing
regularly during your planning stage.
Level 3 outlining
Everyone does outlines. Many people actually use them to shape their writing.
Some use them most at the start of the writing process as a device for getting a
sense of the paper as a whole, and then abandon them as they write. Others
create an outline at the start and then modify it as they go along, making
outlining part of the iterative process of writing, using the outline to document
the changes they make as much as to structure the writing they do.
Everyone knows what an outline looks like:
OUTLINING
104

Every writer does a column 1 outline, going to the ﬁrst level of outlining,
some go into slightly more detail, moving into column 2, but, as far as I can
tell, almost no one bothers to go as far as column 3.
There may be good reasons for this. Perhaps people feel that they will be wast-
ing their time by doing so much outlining. Perhaps they have internalized the
sub-structures that column 3 requires, although for new writers this may be less
likely. Perhaps those who never go as far as column 3 are not aware of the bene-
ﬁts; they are not aware, for example, of how the columns can structure the essen-
tial thinking processes that are an important part of writing an academic paper.
Producing column 3 may take hours of thinking, checking and rethinking.
Yet, each level has a purpose in the writing process. All of them can be used
for different purposes, as you design your paper. In practice, you may ﬁnd that
while you favour one or other level – or perhaps you have some other way – of
outlining, each has a distinct effect:
• Level 1 outlining is useful for setting out the proportions of your main
sections. In this form it is easy to calibrate your outline with the target
journal, checking that your sections are named in a way that is appropriate
for that journal and that the proportions match.
LEVEL 3 OUTLINING
105

• Level 2 outlining means making additional content and structure
decisions. You can also do some checks on continuity: are the sub-sections
in the right order? Do you really need them all? Can some section topics
be compressed into a sentence or two? You can begin to think of the links
and transitions you will need to use to make connections and changes of
direction in your argument explicit.
• Level 3 outlining is a way of developing a detailed ‘design’ for your paper.
You can decide exactly what is going into each section. At this level you
can also check for internal continuity: are the content, proportions and
connections coherent?
Each level can be seen as having its own purpose in the writing process,
helping you to make different levels of decision. Staging the decisions in this
way may be easier for new writers or for busy, experienced writers who can
only work on their outlines in short time slots.
Of course, you will adapt your outline – even the level 3 outline – as you write,
but you will more quickly and coherently be able to distinguish between what
you should add and what you should cut from your paper if you have level 3
outlining; even with a detailed outline, you may ﬁnd that you write a section
that is not relevant to your paper. You can calibrate your writing with your
outline: should you change one or the other? Will that still ﬁt your target
journal?
There may, of course, be a level 4 outline, which is even more detailed:
• Level 4 outlining means that you deﬁne the content of your sub-sub-
sections, the points to which you have allocated 100 words. For example,
if you decide you want to make three points, that could be three short
sentences of about 30 words each, or a long one of 60 words plus a short one
of 30 words.
This level of outlining raises recurring questions: are your points in the right
order? Or should they be the other way round? Your choice of sentence length
depends, of course, on how your points relate to each other: which ones will
make sense handled in the same sentence, and which ones need separate
sentences? Which of your points can be treated quickly, perhaps in general
terms only, and which require a little bit more detail? How are they linked?
Which link word will you use to make that link explicit?
This is where you may ﬁnd that you have written 500 words before you
know it. Will you then keep all of these words? Do they make the point that
you set out to make in that sub-sub-section? Possibly not. You then have to
cut out the sentences or part of sentences where you have gone off your
point. Or you can change your outline, but you have to then check that
your revision ﬁts the rest of the section. If you lose sight of your main
point, this is an ideal opportunity to do some freewriting or writing to
prompts:
OUTLINING
106

Outlining is not about word-counting for its own sake; it is about you
ﬁnding a way to prompt yourself to make the numerous decisions about
content and order that will construct your argument. Each stage involves
much more thinking than counting, but counting words as you go is a way of
keeping a check on your writing. It is safe to assume that you will not always
write exactly the number of words that you set out to write. You are likely to
write more or less, in unpredictable patterns. In order to keep control and
focus, you need to have some way of checking that what you are writing is
relevant to your paper. An added beneﬁt – and an important motivational
tool – is that as you complete each section you see yourself achieving
numerous sub-goals.
What are the implications of these approaches for your writing practice? If
you only do level 1 outlining, you create a set of writing tasks that inevitably
require large chunks of time. If you only do level 2 outlining, you still have
decisions to make about content and continuity, and you will have to make
these as you are writing. If, on the other hand, you have writing tasks as small
as 100 words, you know that you can do these in short bursts. You can more
easily ﬁt them into your busy timetable. Your writing process is more easily
and coherently ‘fragmented’, in a positive sense.
Once you have designed writing tasks, get them into your timetable, diary or
electronic organizer. Establish writing slots for each task: how much time will
you need for each task? When will you ﬁnd it? This may involve some trial
and error: how much time do you need, for example, to write one of those
100-word sub-sub-sections?
Writing activity to recover focus in the drafting stage
What is it I am trying to say in this section?
What is the main point of this part?
The main point of this section is . . .
Scheduled short focused writing task
Tuesday, 2 June, 9–9.30am
• Time allocation: 30 minutes for warm-up + writing
• 5-minute warm-up: ‘What I want to write about is . . .’
• 25 minutes writing to prompt, taken from detailed outline: 100 words
• If completed, write another 100 words for another sub-sub-section.
LEVEL 3 OUTLINING
107

If you do not deﬁne your writing tasks precisely – perhaps even as precisely
as this – you may struggle, and even fail, to establish how long you will need
for each one.
In fact, you may not even see the point of doing so. You will fail to learn
how long you need for each different writing task. This is not to say that there
is one set pace of writing to which you should aspire, but if you note how long
you take to produce each section you can begin to set yourself realistic goals,
goals based on your actual experience of writing, rather than on someone
else’s output or some notional ideal rate. Setting speciﬁc, realistic goals is an
important step in the process of becoming a productive writer.
Allocating word lengths
I never approach writing thinking about quantity. I think about what it is
I want to say.
(hooks 1999: 16)
Many writers, like bell hooks, approach writing ‘without thinking about quan-
tity’; surely what you say matters much more than how many words you use to
say it? Yet, just as your time for writing is not unlimited, so too your space –
meaning the number of words – for writing it is limited. Clearly, it will depend
on context; journals have stated word limits.
This is your starting point: take the total number of words available and
divide them up according to what you think needs to be said. If this sounds too
simplistic, you will soon ﬁnd that it is far from simple, since it involves quite
high-level decisions.
Academic writing involves a fair amount of thinking as you write, but you
can think through some of the points you want to make – or know you have to
make for the context in which you are writing – before you start to generate
what you might call your ﬁrst draft. Writing this way, with limits and limita-
tions quite explicit at an early stage, means that your ﬁrst draft will be good
and may need less revision.
Writing an abstract – Brown’s 8 questions
Only by introducing formal procedures such as a list of questions to
be answered – procedures that effectively disrupted the continuity of
production – was it possible to get idea generation to take place apart from
text production.
(Bereiter and Scardamalia 1987: 202)
OUTLINING
108

Devices such as lists of questions can help you to structure your ideas and
move towards outlining and ‘text production’. It could be that the various
steps in writing – thinking, ‘idea generation’ and composition – can be
progressed using different techniques or frameworks. It may even be that dif-
ferent stages require different frameworks. For many years scholars and
researchers of writing have asked themselves these questions:
There is a venerable tradition in rhetoric and composition which sees the
composing process as a series of decisions and choices. However, it is no
longer easy simply to assert this position, unless you are prepared to
answer a number of questions, the most pressing of which probably is:
‘What then are the criteria which govern that choice?’
(Flower and Hayes 1981: 365)
This is all very interesting and rigorous, and this is one of the key papers in
the development of cognitive approaches to writing, but for those not working
in this ﬁeld, the questions may not be that ‘pressing’; you may be much more
interested in frameworks that help you to make writing ‘choices’ and not at all
interested in the criteria on which they are based. You need frameworks that
help you think about writing, think as you write and write as you think. Most
academic writers I have met have taken a passing interest in explanations of
the thinking processes involved in writing, but they are primarily looking for
ways of translating their thinking into writing. Whether they are right or
wrong to do so is not really the issue. The point is that they need tools for
getting started quickly, preferably tools that have been tried and tested in
academic contexts.
One example is Brown’s 8 questions. This has proved to be a useful tool for
prompting those writing for academic journals, particularly new writers, to do
some of the important thinking that is required for writing their paper. It gives
you a framework for drafting the abstract or summary of your paper, consider-
ing such key questions as audience and the main purpose for that audience.
This lets you see the paper as a whole, a perspective that helps you hold the
paper together throughout the writing process.
An abstract is, in some ways, different from other forms of academic writing;
you have to make a rhetorical adjustment. For example, while in the full paper,
it is essential to provide a context for the work you have done, in the abstract
you assert a reason why the work needed to be done, perhaps in no more than
one sentence. This form of thinner contextualization liberates you from pro-
viding much in the way of deﬁnition and explanation. This again means that
you can focus on the main points of your argument. At later stages in your
writing process, you can use your abstract as a tool for maintaining that focus;
it provides a kind of ‘ﬁlter’, helping you to decide what to put in and what to
leave out as you write your paper.
This has advantages at this stage: writing on such a small scale, particularly
at an early stage, means that it is easier to match up the different elements
WRITING AN ABSTRACT – BROWN’S 8 QUESTIONS
109

of your story; there are fewer distractions, fewer deﬁnitions and fewer explan-
ations than will appear in your completed paper, so it is easier for the reader
and, more importantly, for you the writer, to see and make explicit the con-
nections between, for example, your aims and your methods. Nor do you have
to represent the debate that has preceded your work in your abstract. If you
have to refer to it at all – and that depends on the target journal – then you
might need a sentence at most in your abstract or summary.
You have to write the abstract so well that the so-called ‘general reader’ can
understand it. However, this does not mean that you should write it for some-
one who is not an expert in your area. When people tell you that a general
reader should be able to read your paper or abstract, what they probably mean
is that it should be extremely well written, with the connections between
sentences crystal clear and the purpose and value of your paper explicitly
deﬁned.
For these reasons it can be useful to write your abstract at an early stage in
the paper-writing process. In the past, you may have thought of it as the last
writing task; many people do. But if you write it ﬁrst you can use it as a touch-
stone as you write. In addition to revising it as you go along, you can revise
it after your ﬁnal revisions of the paper. In other words, write it ﬁrst and revise
it last.
Writing the abstract of your paper, therefore, forces you to capture the
‘essence’ of the whole: ‘The word limits are arbitrary, but important for the
discipline of getting down to the essence of what needs to be said’ (Brown
1994/95).
Use Brown’s 8 questions to draft your abstract:
How to use the questions
• Answer as many questions as you can in 30 minutes.
• If you get bogged down in one question, move on to another.
• Take all the questions literally, including the ﬁrst one. Do not simply
answer ‘Those who are interested in my subject’, since to assume that
readers are inherently ‘interested’ in your writing is a mistake. People
often object: how am I supposed to know who reads the journal? How
indeed? How can I ﬁnd that out anyway? The best excuse I ever heard
was, ‘How can I ﬁnd that out? – I live in Fife’. The beauty of this question is
that it makes you focus – for real – on a real audience. As soon as you do
come up with two or three names, you will see that (a) your audience is
more mixed than perhaps you thought it was and (b) what they are likely
to ﬁnd ‘of beneﬁt’ (see question 7).
• Adapt your work to these questions, rather than vice versa.
• Do not be put off by the apparent focus on experimental research, which
you might think is implied by the word ‘results’.
OUTLINING
110

Remember that these questions can be and have been successfully used across
a wide range of disciplines, including many non-scientiﬁc areas.
In practice some writers, perhaps those with experience of reading and/or
writing abstracts, get through all these questions in 20 minutes. Whether you
take 20 or 30 minutes may also depend on your discipline. Some journals, of
course, require very particular forms of abstract, and you will, at a later stage,
have to adapt yours to that form, but the purpose of this activity, at this stage,
is to set the limits for your whole paper.
If you want to analyse why Brown’s questions work well at this stage of
writing, note the proportion of the whole abstract that is allocated to each
question. Speciﬁcally, note how much is allocated to writing that actually
deals with your work – questions 2, 3 and 4 – as opposed to the proportion
allocated to contextualizing and providing the rationale and explanations –
questions 5 to 8. This allows you to concentrate on the main moves in your
argument. If reading an abstract lets you see the paper as a whole, writing an
• Stick to the word limits. Twenty-ﬁve words is one short sentence.
• If you are confused by questions 5 and 6, think of 5 as asking if your paper
should make us think differently about anything and 6 as asking if your
paper should make us do anything differently. If you ﬁnd your answers
overlap, you may not have really worked out the difference.
• Be sure to answer question 7, as it is the most important one. Revise it
several times, if necessary. Once you have that sentence (25 words) you
have the ‘destination’ of your paper. This is the answer to the ‘so what’
question, deﬁning your contribution. In academic journals this is often the
last sentence of the abstract/summary – check your target journal to see
what forms this sentence can take.
• Discuss your answers – and emerging abstract/summary – with someone.
Write for 30 minutes on the subject of your journal article
1 Who are the intended readers? List three to ﬁve of them by name.
2 What did you do? (50 words)
3 Why did you do it? (50 words)
4 What happened [when you did that]? (50 words)
5 What do the results mean in theory? (50 words)
6 What do the results mean in practice? (50 words)
7 What is the key beneﬁt for readers? (25 words)
8 What remains unresolved? (no word limit)
(Brown 1994/95)
WRITING AN ABSTRACT – BROWN’S 8 QUESTIONS
111

abstract lets you work on it as a whole. The ﬁxed limits for each sentence,
moreover, ensure that you keep to appropriate proportions, not letting any
one element of your argument overshadow any other.
Brown’s statement that the ‘word limits are arbitrary’ should not be
taken to undermine his strategy. In fact, I am not convinced that they are
entirely arbitrary, since they have worked so well for so many writers and since
they do help you to set appropriate limits. Yet, I do not want to give the
impression that the number of words is more important than the choice
of words. The word limits are, however, hugely important in making you get
to the main point. This often involves thrashing through a number of
other interesting – but not ‘main’ – points. In some disciplines the process of
weeding out all the points that are not the main point is what reveals,
for the writer, what the main point is. Working to these speciﬁc word limits
is very hard work, but it is the type of hard work that produces a focused
paper.
Whether or not your paper is ultimately, in its ﬁnal version, preceded
by your answers to these questions is not really the point. This may not, in
fact, be the form your abstract will take. The point is that answering these
questions will help you to sketch the whole paper and seeing it as a whole lets
you check its internal logic. You can, of course, adapt the questions to suit your
discipline – and many have been tempted to do so – although in practice they
have worked well across a range of subjects. Alternatively, you can take your
target journal’s criteria and transform them into prompts for writing, if, and
only if, you ﬁnd that this works to generate focused text. If it does not, you
may have to revert to Brown’s questions.
What is it, in any case, that makes writers want to adapt the Brown
framework? Is it that they already have a series of questions in mind? Is it that
the discipline base, and being steeped in the journal’s conventions – even if
only as a reader – has given them an alternative set of questions? Or is it that
they have never thought of writing for academic journals in this way? Many
new writers have never broken the whole process down into stages like this.
Naturally, therefore, this approach comes as a bit of a surprise, if not a
challenge. The best response – surprise or no surprise – is to try the approach
with your writing. Simply acknowledging that you understand what Brown’s 8
questions are doing, or that you can see the sense in such an approach, is not
enough; understanding does not necessarily lead to writing. Try this approach
and then decide. Once you have spent 30 minutes answering these questions,
you will have a sound basis for your argument. You can then use your answers
to focus the sections of your paper.
As you adapt your abstract to your target journal’s criteria and conventions,
you may want to make use of some of the key words that seem to be dominant
in your ﬁeld at the time of writing. Alternatively, you may deliberately move
away from this dominant set. Again, as discussed earlier, this may feel like
you are cloning yourself to the values of the journal and its select group of
editors and reviewers, but being rhetorical is about making sure you pitch your
OUTLINING
112

arguments in a way that is likely to be persuasive to the group who will
actually hear or read them.
Which types does your target journal publish? Structured abstracts, with
headings? The whole story in miniature, or just the background, leading up
to the point where the introduction starts? Are they mostly background,
outlining the problem, problematizing the issue, making the case that it is a
problem, that it is where work needs to be done? Does it include no more than
a general reference to or much more detail on methodology? Do your target
journal’s abstracts foreground results or outcomes? Or are these only alluded
to, but not speciﬁed? Again, the point is to study, as if you were trying to
become a scholar of, your target journal’s abstracts.
Then there is the question of the extent to which the sentences – their order,
proportion and level of generality or speciﬁcity – signal the structure of
the papers that follow. To what extent, in other words, will you be able to
shape your paper around what you have written in your abstract? This is an
important question, as it affects the next step in developing your paper.
In any case, you can use these sentences – your answers to Brown’s 8 questions
– as prompts for your writing. You can take this suggestion quite literally:
connect each sentence of your abstract directly to the corresponding section of
your paper.
Each sentence in your abstract may itself appear, in an expanded or
developed form, in your paper. You can develop your draft by using your
abstract as a kind of key for your paper. Of course, this will not prevent you
from changing your mind as you go along, but it may stop you from adding
something that will require a complete rewrite, unless, on balance, you
decide that a complete rewrite is unavoidable, once you have seen how the
paper would look. However, if you do decide to keep your abstract as it is, for
the moment, as you make changes in your paper, adjust the abstract to
match.
Remember also that you may do too much ‘smoothing’ in your ﬁrst paper,
and certainly for the purposes of the abstract. Do not worry about this. You can
always go back and write problems, glitches and unanswered questions back
into your paper. They may, in fact, strengthen your argument, by showing that
you overcame some difﬁculties, or acknowledge limitations, but nevertheless
Building on your abstract
• Take the key words in each sentence of your abstract.
• Write them into section headings.
• Use them in the topic sentence and throughout the section.
• Deﬁne and explain the terms, as needed.
WRITING AN ABSTRACT – BROWN’S 8 QUESTIONS
113

can make a claim to a modest contribution. For example, you might want to
include things that did not go quite so well in your study, but are not so serious
that they undermine your results, outcomes or conclusions – things that you
will probably have excluded from your abstract.
Outlining a paper – Murray’s 10 prompts
Working along the same lines, you could use these questions to capture the
essence of your paper, forcing yourself to make decisions about the main
points and establishing a strong logical ﬂow at an early stage.
Note the proportions here that allow much more time, twice as much, for
you to write about what you did, rather than why you did it or what you think
it means. For the purposes of your paper, of course, you will be writing in the
past tense, reporting on work done, which is why the 10 prompts are in the
past tense.
As for Brown’s questions, take 30 minutes to continue or complete these
prompts within the word limits shown. If you ﬁnd you have completed them
in less than 30 minutes, go back and revise: for example, is there a logical ﬂow
between all of your completed prompts?
If we compare Brown’s 8 questions with these 10 prompts, we can see a shift
in the proportions allocated to each element:
Murray’s 10 prompts
1 This work needed to be done because . . .
25 words
2 Those who will beneﬁt from this include . . .
25 words
3 What I did was . . .
25 words
4 How I did that was by . . .
25 words
5 When I did that what happened was . . .
50 words
6 I worked out what that meant by . . .
50 words
7 I did what I set out to do to the extent that . . .
25 words
8 The implications for research are . . .
25 words
9 The implications for practice are . . .
25 words
10 What still needs to be done is . . .
25 words
Brown
Murray
1 Your work
150 words
175 words
2 Context, rationale, explanations, implications
125 words
125 words
OUTLINING
114

The purpose of this comparison is not to show that one framework is better
than the other, since they both have different purposes in any case; instead, it
is to make concrete the point that you need to decide about the proportion of
what might be considered writing about your own work and writing to support
your writing about your work.
Clearly, what you decide to do will be affected by, or have to be calibrated
with, your target journal, but it might be more effective simply to press on
with this writing about your own work ﬁrst, so that you generate ideas and text
that are based on your work, rather than based on others’. Yes, you are joining
an on-going conversation by targeting a journal, but you can use these
frameworks to focus on developing your ideas in writing.
Calibrating your outline
The point has been made earlier in this chapter that you have to check that
your paper is aligned with your target journal. This subject is given a ﬁnal
separate section here for emphasis. It may also work as a reminder. Even when
you ﬁnd that you are, ﬁnally, relatively happy with your outline, give it one
ﬁnal check: does it ﬁt or challenge – as you intend – the norms and forms of
your target journal at the time of writing?
Go back to your target journal and your initial analysis of it. As with any
stage in the writing process, you may have become so engrossed in what
you have to say in your paper that you have lost sight of what they want
to hear.
Remember that the point of this exercise is not to compromise your research
– though it may feel like that – but to be persuasive in your writing, ﬁtting it to
the rhetorical context you have selected: the journal.
In fact, in this so-called ‘outlining’ stage, you could and perhaps should be
doing several different activities at once.
What to check
• Cut and save in a new ﬁle any section that does not ﬁt.
• Adapt the style of your headings and sub-headings.
• Do you have too many? – can you cut one or two?
• Check the relative length of your sections.
CALIBRATING YOUR OUTLINE
115

Simply drawing up a graphical outline, even to level 3 or 4, will not
necessarily produce writing. You do have to do some of these other activities, or
at least some form of regular writing. These parallel activities, however, show
how you can integrate the various types of writing and thinking to progress
your paper.
Checklist
• Do various levels of outlining – they all have their purpose.
• Keep writing in sentences.
• Plan time for parallel tasks.
Parallel writing tasks
1 Calibrating your outline with your target journal.
2 Putting your Brown/Murray sentences into your outline.
3 For each heading, writing sub- and sub-sub-headings in sentences.
4 Setting word limits for all sections.
5 Freewriting and generative writing on these headings.
OUTLINING
116

5
Drafting
What constitutes good writing in journals? • Shaping
sections • Streamlining • Turning headings into
prompts • Internal critique • Checklist
Drafting involves many different types of activity: writing to develop your idea
in paragraphs and sentences, outlining and revising your outline as you go
along and, ﬁnally, producing some of the features of academic writing.
The key point in this chapter, the secret that no one sees ﬁt to tell us during
our undergraduate or even postgraduate years – perhaps, to be fair, because it is
not widely understood or acknowledged – is that when you actually do regular
‘snack’ writing about your paper and you have a detailed outline to guide your
writing, then your ﬁrst draft is pretty good. You will have less revision to do,
and that saves you time and energy.
However, unless you do the regular writing, you will not be able to write ‘on
demand’. You may ﬁnd that you do not stick to the focus provided by your
outline. You may ﬁnd yourself veering off onto other subjects. You may not
actually get any writing done, even though you have a great outline.
The short, sharp ‘snacking’ writing tasks do change how you write, not
just in letting you dribble on about whatever is on your mind, but in helping
you to develop an overlooked skill: focusing. Because such snack writings are
low stakes, academics often get the impression that they are no more than

therapeutic, but what you can learn to do is to focus immediately on the topic
or prompt for your ﬁve or ten minutes. Over time, you will ﬁnd, if you per-
severe for a few weeks, that you get better at this. Even when you are writing
about a subject you do not know very well, where your conﬁdence in what you
have to say and how you are going to say it is low, your focusing skills will help
you to develop your thinking.
Many projects falter at the drafting stage, as writers fail to use the work they
have done so far in structuring the whole paper. They get a kick out of
freewriting, or they kick against it, but fail to make regular time to write. They
fail to keep up their promised writing buddy or writers’ group meetings. They
allow writing time in the diary to go to other priorities. They lose sight of what
they were trying to do – and its value – and to get back on track begins to feel
like starting the paper from scratch.
Just as writing without a detailed outline can leave you feeling that you are
starting over, every time you sit down to write, not having a sense of your ‘time
outline’ means that you are likely not to progress your paper. Just as having an
image of the paper as a whole – in the form of your outline, your abstract and
your analysis of the journal’s framework – helps you to focus and, therefore,
write, having a sense of the whole timeline for your paper means that you
know where you are in the process at any given time and are more likely to stay
on course, to resist distractions and to defer other ‘priorities’, even if only for
30 minutes.
This pattern suggests that there must be quite deep-seated reasons for not
writing. Or, it may be that there are cognitive or behavioural gaps at this point,
as there were, arguably, at earlier stages in the writing process. In other words,
some writers, particularly new writers, simply do not have a process for
progressing from outline to draft.
The structure of your whole paper can be designed using one or all of the
range of strategies covered in this book so far: building on Brown’s 8 questions,
using generic structures or modes, or adapting one of the dominant structures
in the target journal. Your key strategy here is to produce a detailed design
for the whole paper, more detailed than new writers normally expect, before
starting to write paragraphs and sentences.
If you do not do this, what you are doing is deferring the step of setting
conceptual and word limits to each part of the paper and you will still be
making structural decisions, still facing options and choices on several differ-
ent levels: structure, content, focus, wording, style and so on. In practice, in
order to manage these very different processes, you can continue to do different
types of writing activity:
1 Outlining
2 Revising the outline
3 Writing-related tasks
DRAFTING
118

What constitutes good writing in journals?
Every academic is familiar with the norms and forms of good academic writing
in his or her discipline. Where academics’ knowledge runs a bit thin is on the
rhetorical strategies used in published papers. Only when you analyse papers
in some detail do you see that there are effective – and recurring – strategies
that you can use in your papers. This type and level of analysis prompts some
academics to respond, ‘Aren’t we analysing this too much?’. But how else will
you increase your understanding of what constitutes good writing at this level
in your discipline?
The examples analysed in this section may not be in your own ﬁeld, but
they demonstrate the type of analysis you can do on papers in your ﬁeld. This
is one way of developing your expertise in academic writing. If you do not do
this analysis, clearly you are going to be writing on the basis of your existing
knowledge of academic writing, and that may simply not be sufﬁcient.
The key strategies of academic writing in journals, it could be argued, are
similar across the board: academic writing is highly signalled and signposted,
there is usually a forecast of the whole paper in an introduction, and there is
acknowledgement of other people’s work.
If you can get past your ignorance of the authors’ subjects and can put aside
your prejudice against a different referencing system than the one used in your
Example 1
More has been written on The Duchess of Malﬁ than on almost any
other non-Shakespearean tragedy of its time. Yet the major thematic
issues with the play remain in dispute: the question of the Duchess’
guilt, the motives of Bosola and Ferdinand, and the difﬁculties posed by the
allegedly ‘anti-climactic’ ﬁnal act still invite contention. While the emo-
tions that the Duchess and her play inspire may be too heated for one more
article to cool, I nevertheless believe that a fresh approach to the play
– an approach that investigates the conﬂict between merit and degree –
can contribute to a resolution of these issues. Indeed, an assess-
ment of Webster’s treatment of the tension between merit and degree not
only helps to vindicate the Duchess’ actions, to explain the actions of
Ferdinand and Bosola, and to justify the play’s ﬁnal act, but it also estab-
lishes Webster’s play as an unblinking assertion of the primacy of worth over
inherited position.
(Selzer 1981: 70–1)
WHAT CONSTITUTES GOOD WRITING IN JOURNALS?
119

discipline, then you can see that there are many skilful rhetorical features in
this argument:
• uncontentious opening sentence, identifying the ﬁeld for this paragraph
and the paper;
• identiﬁcation of the ‘issues’ that ‘remain in dispute’ and ‘still invite
contention’;
• statement of the author’s proposed contribution, ‘I nevertheless believe’
(alternative style could be ‘It nevertheless could be argued’);
• branding of the type of contribution, ‘fresh approach’ (alternatives could be
‘new’, ‘different’, ‘innovative’ and so on – which ones are used in your
target journal?);
• claim that this paper ‘can contribute to a resolution of these issues’, not out
to ‘prove’ anything, still open to further debate, writing in the language of
debate;
• purpose of the paper identiﬁed in key verb, ‘investigates’, purposes of
stages in the argument – or sections in the paper – also in verbs, ‘assess . . .
vindicate . . . explain . . . justify . . . establish’.
Example 2
A literature review demonstrates that since 1969, many authors have
used variances of Verkoshanski’s methodology in an attempt to establish the
best stretch-shortening technique and training program (3, 6–8, 11, 32, 36).
There is agreement on the beneﬁts of basic stretch-shortening principles,
but controversy exists regarding an optimal training routine (12, 16,
29, 38). Today, the chief proponents of the stretch-shortening approach are
still found in the track and ﬁeld society, since they continue to use Verko-
shankski’s ‘reactive neuromuscular apparatus’ for reproducing and
enhancing the reactive properties of the lower extremity musculature (1, 5,
32, 36). Numerous authors have documented lower quarter stretch-
shortening exercise drills and programs, but the literature is deﬁcient in
upper extremity stretch-shortening exercise programs (16–18, 42–45).
Adaptations of the stretch-shortening principles can be used to enhance
the speciﬁcity of training in other sports that require a maximum amount of
muscular force in a minimal amount of time. All movements in competitive
athletics involve a repeated series of stretch-shortening cycles (5, 13, 15).
Speciﬁc functional exercise must be performed to prepare the individual for
return to activity. Perhaps in no other single athletic endeavor is the
use of elastic loading to produce a maximal explosive concentric contraction
and the rapid decelerative eccentric contraction seen more than in the vio-
lent activity of throwing a baseball. To replicate these forces during rehabili-
tation is beyond the scope of every traditional exercise tool. For example,
DRAFTING
120

The comparison of the Selzer (1981) and Wilk et al. (1993) papers shows that
even in very different disciplines there can be striking similarities. Separated in
time and discipline they clearly are, but there are several direct links. In two
quite different journals the authors have set out their arguments in almost
identical ways. This is not to say that you can write one way for all journals –
quite the opposite is argued throughout this book – but that you can and
perhaps should reveal the deep or generic structure underlying much research:
context, rationale, problem, method, result, interpretation, implications. It
depends on the journal.
Examples of articles published in journals in different ﬁelds show not only
the generic features of academic writing but also the range of writing genres
that can appear – and that you have to choose from if you are writing in this
area – in journals within one ﬁeld. Your choice of target journal may not be an
entirely free one; it may depend on the type of work you are doing and the
stage that your work has reached.
The range of publications within one discipline, in terms of length, depth of
treatment and balance of theory and other content, can be demonstrated in the
ﬁeld of organic chemistry. The next example comes from a quick-turn-around
journal that does not require the detail of the others: in the journal Chemical
Communication the priority is to get the information out quickly, while Tetra-
hedron requires more complex and detailed papers. These journals, therefore,
range from concise to complex, with some combining the two. All may require
careful communication of the methods, but in quite different forms.
the isokinetic dynamometer that reaches maximal velocities of 450–500°/sec
is not speciﬁc to the greater than 7,000°/sec of shoulder angular velocity
seen during baseball pitch (20, 34). Consequently, speciﬁc exercise should
be an intricate part of every upper extremity training program to facilitate a
complete return to athletic participation. The purpose of this paper is to
explain the theoretical basis of stretch-shortening exercise and to present
a philosophy for utilizing the stretch reﬂex to produce an explosive reaction
in the upper extremity.
(Wilk et al. 1993: 225–6)
Example 3
Optically pure lithium amide bases have proven to be versatile tools in
modern asymmetric synthesis. Indeed, highly enantio-selective deprotona-
tion reactions have been accomplished for several sets of substrates,
including conformationally locked ketones . . . In turn, many of the more
recent advances in this area have been accomplished by the devel-
opment of new homochiral ligands and the tuning of reaction conditions to
WHAT CONSTITUTES GOOD WRITING IN JOURNALS?
121

Even if all this sounds very foreign to you, you can track the stages
in the argument in the usual way: the words in bold signal the move-
ment from existing work and what it has shown, to the area that has received
less attention to date, and ﬁnally to the proposed new work and its speciﬁc
aim.
Note also the use of link words between and within sentences (in italics),
and that many of the link words are positioned at the start of the sentence.
Note the popular academic sentence that tells us, in a verb, the purpose of this
paper: ‘report the ﬁrst use of’. Not everyone likes this sentence type – some ﬁnd
it annoying – but it does still appear in many published papers, and when it is
not there, academic readers, in discussion, often say that they miss it. So it
must serve some useful purpose.
The chemistry journal Tetrahedron allows – or requires – authors to go into
much more detail. In order to preserve the unity of the more complex paper
the authors maintain focus on the aims of the study by pointing out how each
successive phase of the experimental work moved them forwards:
This sentence works well to make a coherent and explicit link not only
between one stage of the work and the next, but between the stage being
improve the selectivity of these lithium-mediated deprotonations. In contrast
to the Li-based strategies, magnesium reagents have received relatively
little attention for use in asymmetric synthesis . . .
More recently, studies within our laboratory have shown how . . .
magnesium amides can be employed as alternatives to their more widely used
lithium counterparts . . . Consequently, with a view to developing asym-
metric Mg-based protocols we considered that these observations . . .
would allow good levels of stereoselectivity in organic transformations to
be achieved. Herein, we report the ﬁrst use of homochiral magnesium
amide bases as reagents . . .
(Henderson et al. 2000: 479)
Example 4
In an effort to further establish and, moreover, widen the scope of
our novel Mg-amide mediated enantioselective depronotation process, our
attention was turned to consider the desymmetrisation reactions of alterna-
tive prochiral cyclic ketones and, more speciﬁcally, 2,6-disubstituted
cyclohexanones.
(Henderson et al. 2000: 479)
DRAFTING
122

discussed and the ‘big picture’ of the research aims. Further links between
stages in the work are created throughout the section reporting on results at
the beginning of each paragraph:
Based on these promising results and to further explore the potential of
this reaction system . . .
Returning to our Mg-amide base (R)-3, we remained unsatisﬁed at
the length of time required to achieve an acceptable level of conversion of
cis-6 to 7 . . .
Moving on to consider 
reaction 
of 
trans-2,6-dimethylcyclo-
hexanone . . .
Following on from these encouraging results, we then decided to
investigate the behaviour of . . .
(Henderson et al. 2000: 479)
A ﬁfth example, ﬁrst published in 1985, was republished by the journal
editor in 2000, to represent the editor’s years in ofﬁce. It is worth noting the
editor’s reasons for positioning this one paper in this way, since it gives some
insight not only into this particular editor’s perspective but also, perhaps, into
the characteristics of good academic journal writing:
Val Belton described a project which, as she took great pains to point out,
was very simple and did not even solve a problem. It merely helped the
decision-makers to understand the problem before taking the decision. I
have to take issue with the ‘merely’. It is a well-researched fact that the
majority of ‘bad’ decisions stem not from a poor selection from available
options but from the mis-identiﬁcation of the real problem. Providing
a better understanding of problems is generally what I have hoped to
achieve.
(Hough 2000: 896)
Example 5
INTRODUCTION
This paper describes the use of a simple multi-criteria model as a decision
aid in a large service company, which will be called Financial Information
Services Ltd (F.I.S.L.) engaged in the process of choosing a company with
which to place a contract for the development of a computer system. The
computer system, a ﬁnancial management aid, was to be provided to clients
as a chargeable service. [66 words]
F.I.S.L. did not have expertise in-house to develop a proven and reliable
system of the type it wished to market sufﬁciently quickly to respond to
WHAT CONSTITUTES GOOD WRITING IN JOURNALS?
123

pressure from competitors. By involving an outside organization, it hoped
to be able to overcome these difﬁculties whilst meeting the objective of
educating its own staff in this type of system. A further possible objective
was to bring the system in-house at some time in the future. The system is
a large-scale one involving the extraction and collation of data from world-
wide sources and the formatting of the data into reports for use by clients
anywhere in the world. [104 words]
Evaluation
. . . No formal checks were made of the independence assumptions
necessary for an additive model of this type to be valid, but we were aware
of these in the speciﬁcation of the model and throughout the analysis. It is
generally accepted that the additive model is a robust one,2,3 and it was
felt that greater insight would be gained in the time available from
the use of a simple model than to attempt to construct a more complex
representation of the decision. [82 words]
The next stage was to weight the criteria at level-2 in line with their
contribution to the overall objective. The weights at this level represent the
cumulative weight of all level-3 criteria which are sub-criteria of a particular
level-2 criterion. These weights can be assessed either by direct comparison
of the criteria at level-2 or by selective comparisons of criteria at level-3. It
was decided to adopt the former, more direct approach and to supple-
ment this by consistency checks using the implied level-3 weight. Initially
the persons responsible for each section of the analysis were asked to give
their personal opinion on the weights to be used at level-2. This informa-
tion was used as the basis for sensitivity analysis before the group came
together to discuss this issue. This approach avoided the possibility of
long discussions about these weights when the disagreements may have
been inconsequential. [146 words]
Thus it seemed that the real decision was to be made between Com-
pany A and Company B. The overall weighted score emerging from the
multiple-criteria analysis indicated a preference for Company B. The scores
were 59 and 68 for Company A and B respectively; Company C had scored
only 27. However, too much emphasis should not be placed on
these numbers. Further inspection of Figure 2, the graph of results
aggregated to level-2 of the hierarchy, shows that there are criteria of
greater and lesser importance on which each company is ranked more
highly. A thorough sensitivity analysis was carried out to identify those
changes in inputs to the model which would signiﬁcantly affect the
outcome – i.e. which would reverse the ordering of companies A and B in
the overall evaluation. The working group was conﬁdent about the
evaluation of the companies on the majority of the criteria, although there
were a few areas for which information was lacking which were
considered in detail in the sensitivity analysis. [167 words]
DRAFTING
124

Certain features of this paper work very well:
• purpose of paper stated in opening sentence;
• little background/context – focus on the ‘project’;
• analysis criteria deﬁned and numbered;
• pros and cons addressed, showing knowledge of research method;
• effective use of mini-arguments;
• ‘model’ is constructed from research data (p. 269);
• links at start of paragraphs.
The author makes a clear case not only for the contribution the study makes,
but, perhaps more importantly, for the scale of that contribution; as the editor
said, this study will not solve all problems – in fact, potential weaknesses in the
study itself were identiﬁed in the work and are addressed in the paper – but will
provide a means of understanding them.
All of the examples of published academic writing show similarities and
differences across the disciplines. Within disciplines there can also be wide
variations in published papers. This type of analysis reveals the rhetorical
modes, the norms and forms, the dominant conventions operating at a par-
ticular time in a particular journal. The question for new writers is which ones
are operating in your journals at this time and how can you incorporate your
work within that format?
Shaping sections
Use the work you have done already in outlining and ‘abstracting’ to develop
your draft.
We were aware that such an analysis is necessarily simplistic and
that if more than one weight or score were to be changed simultaneously,
the outcome may be more marked. . . .
Thus, at this stage of the evaluation, it appeared that Company C
was emerging as preferred, with Company A a close second and Company C
a distant third. This was in accord with the feelings of the working group
[short paragraph] . . . .
The decision to recommend Company B was not shaken by further
recourse to the negative review of each company. [one-sentence paragraph]
SHAPING SECTIONS
125

Write topic sentences that express the main idea of each step in your argu-
ment, soon to be, or already emerging paragraphs, and then develop the point
that follows each one. In this way, you can use the writing of topic sentences as
a bridge between the outline and a ﬁrst draft text: you are moving towards
prose step by step.
Take a look at your target journal, particularly the type of paper that
you are aiming to write. Are there any changes you should make to the shape,
such as:
• making mini-arguments;
• including internal critique;
• anticipating refutation;
• writing the debate into your paper?
Even if someone has just published a paper that is close to yours, say so.
Include it in your debate. Say how yours differs, what yours adds.
From this point on, you may think that there are endless revisions, when,
in fact, you are probably responding to some set of internal prompts,
assumptions and understandings of what is expected in writing for a par-
ticular journal. Yet, if your revisions are focused in this way, you will
have less of that sense of uncertainty about the direction of your writing;
you will know that the revision is part of the plan for the paper. You have
a perspective that lets you see that your revisions are all moving in the
right direction – the direction you set and ﬁxed, as far as possible, in your
outline.
Streamlining
This is where you own up and realize that you may have more than one paper
in your paper. Many new writers do. They try to put all their eggs in one basket,
thinking that it will make for a stronger paper, when, in reality, it weakens the
paper by making it unfocused. Cut out anything that does not seem to be part
of it, saving it in a new ﬁle, possibly for future papers.
Building on the abstract
• Take each sentence of your abstract – drafted using Brown’s 8 questions or
Murray’s 10 prompts.
• Copy and paste them into your draft ﬁle.
• Write for ﬁve minutes on each.
DRAFTING
126

At a certain point you have to ﬁnish it off and acknowledge that you will not
be including all the points you thought you would because you have run out
of time, ideas or energy or, more importantly, because you realize that those
points are no longer relevant. However, you may not realize this last point
until you have submitted your paper or perhaps until after it is published,
when you realize that someone else has judged it to be sufﬁcient, even when
you yourself were not sure that it was.
Drafting may be more about getting your paper ﬁnished and submitted by
your, perhaps self-imposed, deadline than about taking as much time as you
need to include all that you have. Be prepared to abandon material, notes,
ideas that you think are excellent. Save them for another paper.
Turning headings into prompts
It is all very well having a detailed outline, but that is no guarantee that you
will do the writing. Designing an outline is, after all, a very different type of
activity from writing in paragraphs and sentences.
Yet the two are so closely bound together – and both are important for
progressing a writing project – that you have to ﬁnd a way to keep both
going. Perhaps most importantly, you have to persevere with regular writing
while still working on the outline, so that you can stay in the writing ‘habit’.
If you do not write regularly, getting started can be much more laborious
and this, in turn, can undermine your conﬁdence, taking you back to where
you started, or at least leaving you with the feeling that you are starting
over. This is possibly where those who have tried to write and failed lost
momentum or motivation; their writing process would not see them
through this stage.
You can bridge the activities of outlining and drafting by using prompts,
using your outline as a driver for writing. If you re-write your headings and
sub-headings in the form of sentences, you can turn them into prompts for
writing, even for writing in short bursts. This is an important way of integrat-
ing the strategies covered in this book: combining the ‘simply start writing . . .
just do it’ approaches with the rigorous academic thinking and structured
writing needed for a journal paper.
In order to use headings as prompts, they have to be written as prompts. The
characteristics of good prompts are, to recap: written in simple language, using
personal pronouns and, at this stage, perhaps using verbs. There are, of course,
other styles of prompts; in fact, you may feel that you want to use prompts
written in a more academic style.
For example, instead of having section headings that are, normally, one or
two words or a short string of words, write a sentence that describes the writing
task for each section in more detail, using, if possible, a verb:
TURNING HEADINGS INTO PROMPTS
127

The heading tells us what the subject of the section will be, while the sen-
tence gives us a writing instruction. Your outline can now be a set of sentences
like this, each an instruction to write. In fact, the verb ‘write’ is now too vague;
a more precise verb, describing the task, is more useful, and makes it easier to
manage the set of tasks as you write them. This also means that you will be able
to go back to your outline and know what it means – what would ‘cardiac
rehabilitation’ mean to you after a day or two, in terms of a writing task? This
means that your outline will work as an outline.
You can use verbs to write headings for your paper, in order to decide what
the main point is and how you are going to build up to that point:
Choosing the verb for your paper
The aim of this paper is to . . . [verb].
You can also select verbs to articulate the stages in your argument:
Choosing verbs for your sections
This paper analyses . . .
It argues that . . .
It also illustrates . . .
It goes on to argue . . .
Using . . . the paper analyses . . .
to illustrate . . .
The paper concludes by
suggesting . . .
(Kitson 2001: 86)
Once you have written your string of verbs, you can check that your
sequence is coherent, logical and sufﬁcient to add up to your main argument
verb. In other words, before/as you start writing pages of paragraphs and sen-
tences you have a checking mechanism, so that you do not waste time and
give yourself extra revision work to do that could be avoided. This is how you
can develop a progressively more and more detailed design for your paper,
and the more detailed it is, in theory, with practice, the less time you will need
for revision.
Verbs can help in this way because they make you deﬁne the function of
Comparison of a heading and a sentence
Heading
Cardiac Rehabilitation
Sentence
Deﬁne the form of cardiac rehabilitation that involves exercise, as
developed in the west of Scotland over the past ten years, in 200
words (30 minutes).
DRAFTING
128

your argument – what is your paper trying to do? – and the function of the
stages in your argument – how is each section moving your argument forward
– what is each section doing? Even if, in your completed paper, you do not use
verbs in exactly this way, it can still be a useful outlining tool.
For further examples to add to your repertoire of verbs for academic writing,
see Ballenger’s (2004) list of 138 ‘Active Verbs for Discussing Ideas’. The ﬁrst
ten in this wide-ranging list signify different lines of argument and/or types of
paper that, for example, the main verb will promise to the reader:
informs
reviews
argues
states
synthesizes
asserts
claims
answers
responds
critiques
(Ballenger 2004: 238)
These are all possible lines of argument, each requiring a particular type
of writing. Some will be more relevant to your discipline than others. Analyse
the use of verbs in your target journal. There is probably a limited set of verbs,
not an inﬁnite list of possibilities, that are acceptable in that journal at
any particular time. Think about what each verb signals in terms of type of
argument and structure.
For example, a paper that ‘narrates’ will move through a set of time stages,
with those stages marked out by time words, like ‘Firstly . . . secondly . . . next
. . . further . . . following . . . subsequent’ and so on towards ‘ﬁnally’. If you
write a ‘narration’ paper, you will have to think about how much time you
want to cover – and why – and how much detail you need to allocate to each
stage – and why. Do you really need to write about all the stages? Or will you
select some and leave out others – probably and why? Which will you include,
and why; which will you not include, and why not? How many words will you
need – according to the journal’s style – for these mini-arguments? Are they
even there at all in recent issues of your target journal?
Alternatively, if you are writing a ‘categorizes’ paper you will have to
decide which categories to put items into and why this might constitute a
‘contribution’ to the literature or to knowledge. Does this bring a new per-
spective to your subject? That might be sufﬁcient in some disciplines, in
some journals.
How would you organize a ‘contrast’ argument, perhaps contrasting your
work or idea with others’? First deal with one subject or approach, then the
other? Treating each separately? Describing their pros and cons as you go
TURNING HEADINGS INTO PROMPTS
129

along. Then dealing with their main similarities and differences in a third
main section? Or focusing on the main difference? Or the main similarity?
Would that be the main point of such an argument?
While this discussion of three types of argument, signalled by three different
verbs, handles each separately, you can, of course, combine these – and many
others – in your paper. With one eye on ‘what you want to say’ and another on
‘how they want to hear it’, you are trying to decide how to focus and pace your
argument. These crucial structural decisions are quite difﬁcult to make as you
go along. It is not impossible to make structural decisions as you write – and
you will make changes as you go anyway – but it is a more complex process
and much more demanding for new writers.
There will, of course, be other ways of signalling the main line of argument
and its articulation, other than using verbs. You may ﬁnd that your journal
uses a different style. Even if this is the case, using verbs at the outlining stage
can help you during the writing process to work out the stages in your argu-
ment, even if you ﬁnally change the style of writing before you submit it. This
is a useful tool for structuring your points and making sure all your writing
focuses on your main point.
Even if you do not particularly like this style, with its predominance of
verbs, personifying the paper and its sections, as if sections – rather than the
author – were doing the analysis, as in the Kitson paper quoted above, there
are two points to be borne in mind: ﬁrstly, Kitson’s paper was published,
which we can take to mean that such a style was acceptable for that journal at
that time (2001); and, secondly, our own preferences in style and structure
should not – but often do – limit our stylistic choices. If you were to target this
journal, this would be an appropriate style to use. This is not to say that you
should plagiarize, but that you should carefully consider the extent to which
you should observe and (re-)produce features of the style endorsed by your
target journal, rather than simply acting on your preferences. While this may
seem to be common sense, it does not, from discussions with writers, appear to
be common practice: they frequently resist the very idea of writing in a style
they ‘don’t like’.
Here is the whole abstract with the verbs highlighted:
This paper analyses the relationship between government and nurse
education policy using the current changes in England as a case study.
It argues that there are times when ideologies of governments and profes-
sions coalesce, signifying the most opportune times for advancement.
It also illustrates times when policy shifts are made because nursing is
perceived as relatively insigniﬁcant in the order of health policies and
politics. It goes on to argue that nursing leaders need to be aware of the
political and policy context in order to select the most effective methods
of moving the agenda forward. Using UK reforms, particularly the English
strategy document Making a Difference (Department of Health 1999d)
as a case study, the paper analyses recent events in nurse education to
DRAFTING
130

illustrate key points. The paper concludes by suggesting that the
nursing profession must recognize promoters and barriers for change
and commit itself to the transformation of nursing practice through the
realization of a new educational agenda that embraces the principles of
new democracy. Namely, these are equality, mutual responsibility,
autonomy, negotiated decision-making, inclusivity, collaboration and
celebrating diversity.
(Kitson 2001: 86)
Another example of an abstract shows similar techniques:
This article seeks to explore the complex underpinnings and dynamics of
the act of forgery, compared with instances of copying witnessed in art
therapy sessions involving people with learning disabilities. The argu-
ment focuses on two theoretical frameworks: the ﬁrst concerns the
concept of joint attention behaviours; whilst the second focuses on
psychoanalytic concepts which underlie both the infant’s early visual
experiences and the nature of the art object for the perceiving individual
and its relevance to the broader culture. The central intent is to establish
an equitable conﬂuence of both developmental and psycho-analytical
concepts – the product of which can usefully inform the art therapeutic
process.
It is proposed that forgery and copying, although separate in essence,
share similar factors, insofar as both seek to adopt a false and acceptable
image for the spectator. This is traced to, and given meaning by,
Winnicott’s concepts of the mirror-role and the false self.
The text also concerns itself with the biographical interpretation of
three well-known forgers, whose lives appear to indicate causal reasons
for their eventual act of deception. This is juxtaposed with the learning
disabled client’s need to employ the work of ‘recognised artists’ to present
an acceptable and valued self-image.
(Damarell 1999: 44)
Further examples of abstracts in different disciplines show further uses of
verbs, including nominalization, turning verbs into nouns, such as ‘overview’
and ‘analysis’, and the passive voice:
This paper seeks to identify whether the slow progress in transition
experienced by the countries of the former Soviet Union (FSU) arises
from weaknesses in implementing effective corporate governance or
from weaknesses in the broader economic environment. An overview
of progress in transition in the FSU is presented followed by analysis
of developments in enterprise ownership and governance. Problems
in measuring the link between governance and performance and
TURNING HEADINGS INTO PROMPTS
131

alternative mechanisms for enhancing the efﬁciency of enterprise in the
FSU are discussed. The paper concludes that the problems of transition
in the FSU concern delays both in introducing corporate governance
mechanisms and in introducing an appropriate competitive market
environment.
(Estrin and Wright 1999: 398)
Personalized Web applications automatically adapted for different clients
and user preferences gain more importance. Still, there are barely tech-
nologies to compensate the additional effort of creating, maintaining and
publishing such Web content. To address this problem, this paper intro-
duces a declarative, component-based approach for adaptive, dynamic
Web documents on the basis of XML-technology. Adaptive Web com-
ponents on different abstraction levels are deﬁned in order to support
effective Web page authoring and generation. . . . Finally, hierarchical
document components playing a speciﬁc semantic role are deﬁned. The
hyperlink view for deﬁning typed links is spanned over all component
layers. Beside the reuse of both implementation artifacts and higher level
concepts, the model also allows to deﬁne [sic] adaptive behavior of com-
ponents in a ﬁne-granular way. As a further beneﬁt the support for ubiqui-
tous collaboration via component annotations is introduced. Finally, the
stepwise pipeline-based process of document generation is introduced
and performance issues are sketched.
(Fiala et al. 2003: 58)
There are clearly other ways of signalling structure here, along with the
verbs, such as the combination of problem and solution, cause and effect, and
verbs that refer to the work done, rather than to sections of the paper:
Optically pure lithium amide bases have proven to be versatile tools in
modern asymmetric synthesis. Indeed, highly enantio-selective deproto-
nation reactions have been accomplished for several sets of substrates,
including conformationally locked ketones . . . In turn, many of the more
recent advances in this area have been accomplished by the develop-
ment of new homochiral ligands and the tuning of reaction conditions
to improve the selectivity of these lithium-mediated deprotonations. In
contrast to the LI-based strategies, magnesium reagents have received
relatively little attention for use in asymmetric synthesis.
(Henderson et al. 2000: 479)
More recently, studies within our laboratory have shown how . . .
magnesium amides can be employed as alternatives to their more widely
used lithium counterparts . . . Consequently, with a view to developing
asymmetric Mg-based protocols we considered that these observations
. . . would allow good levels of stereoselectivity in organic transform-
DRAFTING
132

ations to be achieved. Herein, we report the ﬁrst use of homochiral
magnesium amide bases as reagents.
(Henderson et al. 2000: 479)
There are also ‘Verbs That Help You Integrate Quotations’ (Rozakis 1999:
110).
It is probably obvious that as writers we have to be ready to vary our style for
each audience. What examples of published papers show us is how stylistic
variation, or any other form of variation, can challenge our sense of what
constitutes ‘good writing’.
At this point, it might help to refocus on your goal: is it to write what you
like as you like, or is it to get published? This may sound cynical, but it is not
intended to be; instead, it is about being rhetorical, making writing choices
that are ‘right’ not for your own taste but for your audience and the discourse
in which they perceive themselves currently to be engaged.
The beneﬁt of taking time to write sentences rather than headings in this
way is that you now have a set of writing instructions for yourself. You know
what your writing tasks are. Whereas your headings told you no more than the
subjects of your writing, your sentences tell you what type of writing to do, in a
certain number of words, to a certain level of detail and in a number of
minutes or hours. This writing instruction sets useful limits to the writing task.
This is not a matter of counting words until you have enough; it is about
making tough decisions about how much, or how little, to say about each
subject or, when you review your collection of sentences, to check whether
you need to write about the subject at all.
This process requires you to do a lot of hard thinking; in fact, this can be one
way of structuring that thinking. It is also a means of stopping yourself from
running off after interesting tangents.
People often ask me where, in all my writing activities for just ‘getting on
with it’, all the thinking that writing requires is going to happen. They imply
that I am somehow misrepresenting the labour of academic writing, drawing
an idealized process. They point out my apparent assumption that everyone
has the material, knowledge and intellectual capacity required to write for
academic journals. Not at all. You may ﬁnd, in the course of doing the writing
activities I suggest, that you do not have enough knowledge, that you do
need to check references or that you have a limited understanding of what
constitutes a publishable argument.
My point is that this is the very agony and ecstasy of writing. It is not a
reason to stop, but a point at which to persevere. My argument is that these
writing activities will expose such limitations, not hide them. Your task is
not to try to ﬁll all your knowledge gaps before you write, but to use writing
to develop your understanding. In some ﬁelds, this statement will seem
plainly absurd, but even in chemistry, writing about an experimental pro-
cess with all the required precision and accuracy can reveal limitations in
the new writer’s knowledge. Putting your knowledge down in writing is,
TURNING HEADINGS INTO PROMPTS
133

literally, a testing – you could even say almost ‘experimental’ – process in
itself. In fact, because the approaches suggested here are new they may seem
strange in other ﬁelds too, but if you wait until you have ‘done all your
thinking’ before you write, you may ﬁnd, it has to be emphasized, that
you do not write at all, or, at least, you do not publish as much as you set
out to.
Ultimately, of course, it is up to you to ﬁnd a way to connect up the stages in
your writing-thinking process. Clearly, this may be a very individual matter. It
may be related to discipline base, learning style and other factors. Or it may
not be. But you can use these outlining strategies to keep your thinking
focused and to keep yourself writing. Remember that people in many discip-
lines have done so. Of course, it goes without saying that you will only realize
these beneﬁts if you try the strategies.
You can also use freewriting to produce draft text. How does freewriting
progress a paper? How does it progress to draft? If you have practised it
enough, then you will ﬁnd that you can write on demand, as if you were
simply freewriting, to the headings or sentences in your outline. Again, it is
not sufﬁcient to think about these writing practices in the abstract; you have to
develop actual practices that produce writing.
Since you will be no less busy at this stage in your writing process than you
were when you started writing your paper, it is important to continue the
‘snack and binge’ strategy. The strategies for generating text covered in
Chapter 3 will help you to work out what you want to say, to focus on
actually saying it in writing and to dispense with procrastination. Equally
important, they can help you work out what you do not want to say in your
paper.
As you write, keep checking your word count – easy to do, if you are writing
straight on to the laptop – so that you can see when you achieve, or exceed,
your word limit. As the words mount up, it can help to keep your motivation
going. As you meet one target – 200 words in this section already – set yourself
a new target – 200 more words to complete this section (given that I know that
I have two more topics of 100 words to cover). Again, when you reach that
target, set another one. Keep checking the total word count. At the very least,
this will help you to calibrate your writing with your outline and its word
limits per section.
Internal critique
Many new writers assume that they have to ‘smooth’ out any weaknesses in
their research and ignore potential refutations in their paper, but building
critique into your paper, writing the debate into it, will strengthen your
argument.
DRAFTING
134

You can do this either early on in your paper, as you review both pros and
cons of your method or approach to your subject, for example, or at the end of
your paper, where you anticipate refutations of your conclusions, or both.
These are not just intended to be prompts for your thinking; you can write
explicitly about these questions, checking whether or not they appear at all,
and if they do in what form(s), in your target journal. How much you
should write about them will depend on the context, but you could write a
sentence or two now, acknowledging that there are other ways of doing
what you did and of making sense of it; and also that there are different
interpretations others could make. It would not hurt to include this even as a
kind of aside. It does not require a whole section, unless, of course, some aspect
of your paper is highly contested or controversial, in which case you might
even have to write a section on it, perhaps as much as 500 words, perhaps even
more. Clearly, you would have to balance such a word allocation with other
parts of your paper.
If you really have to write so much justiﬁcation for this section, then per-
haps that could be a paper in itself, in which you really go into detail on the
pros and cons. You could consider more of the complexities of research
choices and interpretations, such as pros in certain contexts being cons in
another.
As you weigh the pros and cons of this type of internal critique, it is a good
idea to go back to your outline: where and how does this phase in your
argument ﬁt? This is where you can start revising your outline in ways that
add detail and strengthen your argument. Your outline, however detailed, is
still changing as you write, but if you have already put some detail in it, it
will not completely change shape. You may ﬁnd that you want to make
sweeping changes in light of a new insight or something you read recently,
but it may be a better idea to save that for future papers. You will have to
weigh it all in the balance. If you have already had good feedback on your
discussions, scribblings and outlinings from trusted colleagues, then it might
be a mistake to pull your paper into a new shape. Likewise, if you have
sounded out an editor and he or she has shown interest in your paper as
outlined, you might ﬁnd that they lose interest if you change it radically. Go
with what you have.
Anticipating refutation
• What are the pros and cons of your approach?
• Why did you reject the very good reasons for doing it differently?
• Have you built a strong enough case for your methodology?
• Have you made a strong case for any adaptations of standard methods?
INTERNAL CRITIQUE
135

Checklist
• Use both structuring and generative strategies.
• Write from your outline.
• Write regularly, using freewriting and generative writing to get into the
habit.
DRAFTING
136

6
Revising the draft
Foregrounding generic aspects of academic style
• Revising the outline • Revising drafts • Generative
writing • Using the writers’ group • The critical friend
and the ‘tame’ subject expert • Revision processes
• Iterative processes • Developing a concise style
• Polishing • The ﬁnal revision • Checklist
Even after all your work on structuring, there may still be work to do in reveal-
ing the plan of your paper. In reality, what this means is that you probably did
not produce, in paragraphs and sentences, an exact replica of your outline.
And even if you had, you would still be revising it at this stage. In other words,
in revising your draft, you will be looking to make the structures clearer and
more explicit, but you will also be thinking about and rethinking that structure
at the same time.
You used the outlining process – your graphic, list of sentence or series of
verbs – to decide in advance what you were going to write about – and that is
crucial for stimulating focused writing – but the revising process still involves
discovery of the structure in the course of writing. If this sounds contradict-
ory, that may be because this stage of writing is contradictory: writing
involves both deciding in advance what to say and discovering what you
want to say as you make choices about how to say it. It is not, therefore, a

weakness to make changes to your text that are not based on your outline;
quite the reverse, this shows that you are thinking about your subject, per-
haps reﬁning your ideas. You can, of course, still use your outline as a point of
reference, to check whether you are sure that you want to add a point that
has just occurred to you. As you make changes, you have to go through
certain steps in the revision process again, and this is where the iteration
comes in.
Moreover, at this late stage in your paper-writing process, you are not simply
looking to complete your outline, you are aiming to invent a form of closure
for your paper, whether or not that involves replicating, or even completing,
your outline. It may not even mean retaining all of your draft.
At this stage, when you are most acutely aware of your potential audience(s),
therefore, you have to concentrate on the coherence of your text – its internal
coherence. Whether or not it will be seen to be coherent by those judging your
paper is another matter. Their impending judgement can interfere with the
essential revision processes, sometimes leading writers to work too hard at
buttressing their arguments:
The specter of . . . judgment . . . has created problems for the woman
writer: problems of contact with herself, problems of language and style,
problems of energy and survival.
(Rich 2001: 13)
Assuming this to be as true for male writers seeking to enter the select group
of published writers for the ﬁrst time, as it is for females, this presents a whole
new set of potential barriers to writers. This analysis might also explain why
writers’ energy for writing threatens to seep away in this last stage, even when
they have done so much and have relatively little left to do. Revising is still
writing, with all the same decisions and, perhaps, uncertainties of the earlier
stages.
There may be more to the revision step, therefore, than simply honing
academic writing style. It comes as a shock to many postgraduates and staff
that so much revision is required, but lengthy revision may be the result of
inadequate planning and feedback. For academic staff, the tendency is to see
the need for multiple revisions as a weakness in their thinking: ‘I thought I had
ﬁnished that bit . . . How did I miss that?’ You may, therefore, learn something
about the strengths and weaknesses of your outlining process during the revi-
sion stage. There may be things you did that you would do differently for your
next paper.
Finally, whether your outline works well or not, revision involves many
iterative steps, as you make smaller and smaller changes to your text, and this
iteration is reﬂected in the sections of this chapter: an initial long list of
revision steps is gradually whittled down to a smaller list of minor reﬁne-
ments. As the list of revisions reduces, the revisions are themselves scaled
down.
REVISING THE DRAFT
138

Foregrounding generic aspects of academic style
Academic writing is highly signalled and signposted. Readers are generally
supplied with a route map for the whole paper at the start, assisted by sign-
posts along the way and signals to take a turn here or make a connection there.
This should mean that readers never get lost in your paper. They never have to
retrace their steps. They always know where they are, how far they have trav-
elled along the road, and how long they have to go to reach the end of your
paper. They know how everything ﬁts in and, most importantly, they do not
have to read your mind to work out how sections or paragraphs are connected
to each other or to the ‘big picture’ of your on-going argument.
Consequently, the most important revision – and one that new writers often
forget or simply do not know – may be signalling your structure explicitly. It is
one thing to have a logical structure and another to make it transparent in
your writing. This may mean making it more explicit than you think it needs
to be. Even if you feel you have done this already, check it.
If all this seems just too, too deliberate, then you may want to do a couple of these
revisions, not all. It might be a good idea to have one last look at a recent paper from
your target journal, just to see how the line of argument is signalled throughout.
Reveal the plan
• Do you have a forecasting paragraph at the start of your paper, saying
what each section does?
• Do you need to state how each section progresses your argument?
• Do you end each section with a sentence, or two, on how it has
progressed your argument?
• Do you start each section with a reminder of what it is going to do?
• Does your key term appear regularly throughout the paper? Have you
used different terms, in the interests of variation – if so, will they be clear
and unambiguous to your readers?
• Have you built the case that your research makes a contribution throughout
your paper, and not just at the end?
• Is there an exact match between the aim, at the start of your paper, and
your claim, at the end of your paper? Do the same terms, that is the same
words, appear in both places?
• Have you put link words at the start of paragraphs and, where necessary,
at the start of sentences? Run your eye down each page of your paper: is
the logical ﬂow obvious? If you feel there is a jump in the story line, put
link words at the start of paragraphs.
139
FOREGROUNDING GENERIC ASPECTS OF ACADEMIC STYLE

Work hard at getting a few sentences to be very clear, particularly those that
mark key steps or turning points in your paper, as in the following examples
from papers published in different academic disciplines, illustrating concise
writing, link words at the start of sentences, sentence length variation and
even a one-word sentence.
Ten clear sentences
1 In conclusion, we have been successful in developing a straightforward
preparative route to a novel homochiral Mg-bisamide reagent, from a
structurally simple, readily available, and relatively inexpensive chiral
amine. (Henderson et al. 2002: 479)
2 The model was never viewed as prescriptive or normative by the deci-
sion-making group; neither was it a descriptive model, nor a requisite
model, as described by Phillips1 – ‘a model whose form and content are
sufﬁcient to solve a problem’. (Belton 1985: 273)
3 I do not mean to overstate the positive resolution of the conclusion of
The Duchess of Malﬁ. (Selzer 1981: 79)
4 Are we arguing that facts are useless, or that the discourses of expository
intent, such as the modernist research paper, be abandoned? No. We are
suggesting, however, that facts and expository writing have limits; they
allow only certain types of inquiry to take place. (Davis and Shadle 2000:
440)
5 Other factors must be considered in order to answer the question as to
why the nanomechanical properties of the treated samples (cryosec-
tioned and time-varying etched UHMWPE samples) were higher than
the untreated samples. (Ho et al. 2003: 364)
6 Furthermore, this short study demonstrates that, depending on the
nature and demands of the cyclisation substrates, mild modiﬁcation of
the initially established DSA protocols can lead to further improvements
in reaction efﬁciency. (Caldwell et al. 2001: 1429)
7 Although the existence of the slow component has been demonstrated,
the putative mechanisms have not been clearly established. (Carra et al.
2003: 2448)
8 Prima donnas seldom write great scholarly books. (Pasco 2002: 82)
9 But these survey data have a limitation: They only show what people are
willing or able to tell us about themselves in regard to writing; awareness
of inhibitions about writing, as teachers or writers, is probably
incomplete at best. (Boice 1990: 14)
10 Thus, this study aimed to extend the study of Bethell et al. [6] by deﬁning
the grade and involvement of physiotherapists in the United Kingdom in
delivery of cardiac rehabilitation. (Thow et al. 2004: 99)
REVISING THE DRAFT
140

What is it that each of these sentences does well? What can we learn from
looking at them in isolation, out of context? There are features of good writing
in each that you can adopt in your papers. These authors demonstrate how
important steps in academic arguments can be taken in a single sentence.
Key steps in your argument – in one sentence
1 Not claiming too much, while using the word ‘successful’.
Choosing words that precisely deﬁne your contribution.
‘Straightforward . . . simple, readily available, and relatively inexpensive’.
Sentence starts with link word.
Patterning: three points on what they developed and three more about
the amine.
2 Similarly, Belton takes great care to clarify that her contribution is not to
provide a solution to a problem but a means of understanding the prob-
lem better. In this sentence she leaves no room for doubt: three nega-
tives – ‘never . . . neither . . . nor’ – tell us what not to think about her
work. Perhaps forestalls refutation too.
3 Making explicit what you are and are not claiming in your paper.
Avoiding overstating by specifying that that is what you do not want to
do.
Building potential (mis-)interpretations of your writing into your writing.
Addressing them directly.
4 Rehearsing decisions made in analysis or interpretation.
Using a rhetorical question to focus.
Writing about ‘what you are arguing’ explicitly.
A one-word sentence, unusual in academic writing, but very clear.
Using ‘arguing’ for what they do not do and ‘suggesting’ for what they
do.
Semi-colon to make a point concisely and follow it up with elaboration.
5 Managing the transition between one phase of discussion and the next.
Distinguishing stages in your answer to your research question.
Showing how stages in the research relate to each other.
Showing how these stages, taken together, build up the answer.
6 Starting key sentences with link words.
Clariﬁcation of factors/conditions in which interpretation will stand up.
But still claiming the result loud and clear.
Specifying the scale of the result: ‘short study’.
Modulating the claim: ‘can lead to’.
141
FOREGROUNDING GENERIC ASPECTS OF ACADEMIC STYLE

Each of these stages in your argument could, of course, be allocated more
than one sentence in your paper. The point is to be sure, on the one hand, not
to omit such important statements entirely and, on the other, that you do not
spend too long on them, either in terms of words or time; one sentence may be
enough.
You have to judge whether these steps can be handled in a long complex
sentence, for example, linking the paper to the literature, or in one simple
sentence, followed by ampliﬁcation, or in one sentence divided into two parts.
There are, of course, disciplinary differences between these examples, but they
display some of the same characteristics of good written debate across the
disciplines.
In practice, you may end up with a much longer version of your point,
perhaps a string of sentences, and then have to prune them back to one
sentence. Or the reverse may happen; having written one sentence, you then
feel that you need to elaborate. You will, surely, choose to do both these types
of revision, for different purposes, perhaps at different points in your paper,
with the overall ‘design’ and intended structure of your paper shaping your
revision decisions.
Revising the outline
Your outline can also be a useful part of the iterative process of revision: all
along you have used it as a kind of touchstone for your writing, providing
focus at every stage. But it too may still be evolving. There may be a point that
requires, on reﬂection, more words than you had allocated for it in your out-
line. Go back to your outline and use it to judge whether or not you need to
7 Distinguishing, in one sentence, what has and has not been done.
Frequently, there is evidence of an effect, but not of the mechanism that
creates it.
8 Using a short sentence to assert a view.
Summing up the point to be made, using colourful language.
9 Using short opening sentence, linked to elaboration by colon.
Distinguishing what you can and cannot evidence in your analysis.
Saying explicitly what your data can show, using exactly those words.
10 Linking your work to the literature.
Moving from previous research to your new work, reported in one short
sentence.
Linking with a speciﬁc, named piece of published work.
REVISING THE DRAFT
142

add anything. You will, of course, also have to circle back to your abstract and
introduction, whether or not you decide to make the change you are
considering.
Probably the best way to make sure that you do not go off on a tangent and
lose the coherence you worked so hard to create at the outlining stage is to
force yourself to revise your outline before you write the extra section you
think you now need:
• What is the subject of the new section?
• Write a one-sentence prompt.
• Set a word limit.
• Insert this into your outline: what is the effect?
• Where will you take the extra words you need from?
• What does that do to the overall balance/sense of your paper?
• Are you sure you have to add this to your paper?
• Or can you save it for another paper?
There may, of course, also be sections or sentences that you now see should
be cut. Again, check your outline ﬁrst: will the paper still be coherent if you
make that change, and will other changes need to be made in order to smooth
over what might now be a ‘jump’ in your argument?
These questions merely make explicit the decision-making process, creating
a pause in your rush to revise. Consider the possibility that your paper may be
good enough – although it could always be improved – as it is.
Revising drafts
Topic sentences are important; they clarify what the topic of your paragraphs
are, in the ﬁrst sentence of each paragraph. In a well-written paper it is often
possible to scan the topic sentences and form an immediate impression of the
whole argument. This has the effect not of making your argument seem obvi-
ous and your articulation of it laboured – as new writers sometimes fear – but
of showing your reader that you have a logical structure and giving them an
overview of what it is. In this way, topic sentences can function like headings
and sub-headings; in fact, topic sentences, used well, will develop the key
words of your headings.
In practice, it may take several revisions to achieve this effect. Drafts can
move some way towards it, but there may be further honing to do, and topic
sentences should be on your checklist for revision.
For example, you may have put two points in your topic sentence, without
indicating, through punctuation, which is the more important:
REVISING DRAFTS
143

You could improve this paragraph – as a step in an argument – by making
three simple changes:
• Put one point in the topic sentence, not two.
• ‘It has been suggested’ is ambiguous; clarify who ‘suggested’.
• Cut the long last sentence; state the main point at the end of the paragraph.
If you decide to keep two points in a topic sentence, use parentheses: two
commas show which is more important:
Either
It has only been since the early 1960s that isokinetic devices, which
allow for movements to be performed at controlled velocities, have been
available on the commercial market.
Or
Isokinetic devices, which have only been available on the commercial
market since the early 1960s, allow for movements to be performed at
controlled velocities.
The words in bold mark the main point; the point between the commas is
secondary. The ﬁrst option means that the main point of the paragraph is the
commercial availability of the devices; the second option means that the main
point is what these devices do.
Once you have made the ﬁrst change in the topic sentence, it becomes clear
what you should do to improve the rest of the paragraph, since the rest of the
paragraph should develop the point made in your topic sentence.
Example
It has only been since the early 1960s that isokinetic devices i.e.
devices that allow for movements to be performed at controlled
velocities, have been available on the commercial market. These
devices such as the Cybex II Isokinetic Dynamometer (Lummex Inc.) measure
the torque produced throughout the range of voluntary limb movements
held at constant pre-set velocities. It has been suggested that these devices
provide an ideal means of measuring an individual’s torque generating cap-
acities and that the measures given provide greater information on the
expression of strength in maximal voluntary limb movements relative to
other methods traditionally used.
REVISING THE DRAFT
144

For the purposes of illustration, link words have been added and emphasized
in this revision in bold. If they are placed at the start of the sentence, then it is
clear how the reader has to connect your sentences. If the link words appear
later in the sentence, the reader has to hold some information in his or her
head until the link word arrives.
Again, you may be thinking that this is just too much linking, but over the
course of several thousand words, and at certain points in your argument, you
really have to ask yourself if there is any such thing as ‘too much linking’ and
what negative consequences could realistically result if you did overdose the
reader on link words. Futhermore, at certain points in your argument, even
what you might see as ‘over-linking’ might, in fact, be essential, if you are to
take the reader through every step of your procedure, your justiﬁcation or your
interpretation, for example.
You can also use topic sentences to place your main theme or key words
regularly before the reader, unifying your paper. You can also refer back to your
study’s aims or your paper’s purpose – using these as key, unifying words. You
may wonder whether this, too, is a repetition too far – many new writers worry
about repetition, when, in fact, it is a useful device – but if a key word is not
repeated, it may not emerge as a key word.
Links within paragraphs and links between paragraphs do not, of course, all
tumble out in all the right places in your drafts. These are further items for
your revision checklist. Checking, by scanning, your topic sentences, without
reading the paragraphs, is another way of checking the coherence of your
paper in these ﬁnal stages.
Revision
Isokinetic devices, which have only been available on the commercial market
since the early 1960s, allow for movements to be performed at controlled
velocities. These devices, such as the Cybex II Isokinetic Dynamometer
(Lummex Inc.), measure the torque produced throughout the range of volun-
tary limb movements held at constant pre-set velocities. They provide an
ideal means of measuring an individual’s torque generating capacities
(Reference), and thereby greater information on the expression of strength
in maximal voluntary limb movements. This is what traditional methods
could not do.
REVISING DRAFTS
145

Generative writing
What purpose can ﬁve-minute bursts of writing serve at this stage?:
• You can write about uncertainties in or about your paper.
• Develop a few answers to anticipated critiques.
• Continue writing practice.
• Maintain conﬁdence in your ability to put words on paper.
• Write about any part of your paper you are not, even at this stage,
completely satisﬁed with and try to ﬁnd a better way of saying it.
• If it gets too complicated, start with the prompt, ‘What I am really trying to
say here is’.
• Write to focus on how much – or how little – you still have to do.
• Write about your sense of audience for this paper, how they will read it.
• Rehearse ways to build uncertainties into your paper, as appropriate,
without undermining your whole argument.
Generative writing is perhaps most useful at this stage for keeping you
focused on the task in hand.
Using the writers’ group
At this late stage the writers’ group can serve a number of purposes:
• providing general support;
• readings of and feedback on your ﬁnal draft;
• objective assessment of your paper;
• hints and tips on effective targeting and writing;
• acknowledgement of how much you have achieved;
• afﬁrmation of the purpose of writing for academic journals;
• reminder of your personal writing goals.
Perhaps the most useful purpose, as you are forcing yourself to complete
your paper, is helping you to make time for the many ﬁnal revisions.
REVISING THE DRAFT
146

The critical friend and the ‘tame’ subject expert
Recruiting a critical friend, who knows the aims and plan of your paper, and a
‘tame’ subject expert, who will not rip your paper to shreds, can help at this
stage. The former can help you maintain focus within a series of drafts; the
latter can provoke the sharpness and accuracy needed for your ﬁnal draft. Both
can help the writing project along if they are aware of what it involves: realizing
the planned structure.
This is when you need ‘hard’ feedback. Although it may not be comfortable,
if this is your ﬁrst paper, you are likely to have made some mistakes, either in
the technical work or in your writing or both, and you can safely assume that
some of them will not be apparent to you. The purpose of getting hard feed-
back at this stage is to make sure that you correct these errors before sending
the paper in. Do not look to the journal editors to provide that feedback for
you – they will not appreciate your using them in this way.
You just have to acknowledge that no matter how much time you have put
into revising, there will be more to do. It might help, also, if you can acknowl-
ege that you are still, even at this late stage in the writing process, learning
about writing for academic journals.
If you feel some of the feedback your subject expert gives you is more savage
than ‘tame’, then you can, of course, go back and discuss this with them. But
ﬁrst check that there is not some purpose to their apparently over-critical
comment.
Tell your critical friend what your deadline is – when you want to send your
paper off to the journal – and, if you can, give him or her a deadline for getting
feedback to you.
Revision processes
Rather than thinking that everything has to be revised, to inﬁnity, shift your
focus to key points in your text:
• Forecasting: have you written a short summary of your whole argument at
the start of your paper, including the paper’s purpose and stating how each
section will move towards achieving it?
• Signposting: do you provide references to the main argument throughout
your paper, stating, possibly at the end of each section, how it has advanced
your argument?
• Signalling: do you provide links and transitions – when you change
direction – at each stage in your argument?
147
REVISION PROCESSES

If this seems like overkill, remember that if you do not provide these signs,
the reader will have to work out how your paper holds together as they go
along. In many cases, of course, they will manage this; but you are asking them
to do all the thinking, and to do it along the lines that you did. They will
already ﬁnd things to challenge in your paper without you feeding them fur-
ther opportunities to question what you wrote. In other words, assume that
however well argued your paper is, it is still going to be subject to debate; it is
still contested. This is why you need to make the logic of your argument
explicit.
Iterative processes
Move from abstract, to draft and back to abstract again, as you verify that what
you said you would say is, in fact, what you do say in your paper.
Notice how you circle back and forth, making smaller and smaller changes.
See this as a process of reﬁning, and spare yourself the misconception that you
should have spotted a required revision earlier. Recast what you might previ-
ously have seen as errors or lapses in concentration as necessary steps in a
thorough academic writing process.
You can take this a step further and establish a systematic iterative sequence:
1 Abstract: which words are used to describe the aims/purpose of your paper?
2 Introduction: are these same words used here? If you have used different
words, should you revise them to match?
3 Abstract: does your revision match the terms you use in your abstract? Are
you making the same point?
This may seem a bit tortuous – more irritation than iteration – as if you are
simply making more work for yourself: one change surely leads to another.
There may be some truth in this: you may be adding rather than matching,
and, if this is your ﬁrst paper, you will have to watch out for that, or get your
readers to watch out for it. Expect it to happen and have some way of noticing
it: go back to your outline, for example.
This is iteration with a purpose. You should ﬁnd that you make smaller and
smaller changes, as you consolidate and reveal your outline. This is not to say
that major changes are forbidden, but to acknowledge that they may not
always be as important as you think they are.
Your continuing uncertainty about how your paper will be received by
reviewers may lead you, at this late stage as at earlier stages, to feel that you
have to add ‘extra-strength’ arguments, as if that would, in any case, forestall
further debate.
REVISING THE DRAFT
148

Developing a concise style
The ﬁrst principle of developing a concise style must surely be accepting that
you can cut words, sentences and even whole sections of your hard-earned
writing.
You can cut whole sentences, where there is elaboration – is it really needed?
– or repetition, even if for emphasis. Consider cutting whole paragraphs, par-
ticularly in the conceptual/theoretical sections – is there too much of that? Are
there too many deﬁnitions? Too much going back to ﬁrst principles? Do you
need them all? Finally, re-read your conclusions – are there too many? Could
you sharpen the focus by cutting one or more?
What to cut
• Words you know you use, that have no particular effect and are
sometimes just vague, like ‘some’ or, as in this sentence, ‘sometimes’.
Instead of saying ‘some’, why not just say how many? It is good technique
to hedge your statements, so as to write debate rather than dogmatism,
but this is just pointless. Cut it.
Once you have cut one of these words, develop the habit of asking
yourself if you really need that word whenever you see it from now on.
Make a list of words you know you will regularly have to cut.
• Adjectives and adverbs – are they really making your point or your
emphasis clear? Sometimes a sentence is stronger and clearer when an
adjective has been cut, like the word ‘really’ in that ﬁrst sentence.
• Using bullet points?
Make them one-liners.
Use verbs to start them.
Work at pruning them until you can ﬁt your point on one line.
• If your word count is over the journal’s limit, cut all of these – it is amazing
how much is non-essential when you have to cut 1000 words.
DEVELOPING A CONCISE STYLE
149

Polishing
‘Polishing’ implies minor, surface revisions:
• Check the format against the journal’s instructions for authors.
• Remove any unnecessary words: adverbs and adjectives?
• Check your references carefully: punctuation and so on.
• Check them against the references in your paper.
• Check the word count. Note it at the end of your paper.
• Check that you have the current editor’s address.
• When submitting electronically, tell the editor which operating system and
word-processing package you used.
These are far from superﬁcial in the sense that editors report, informally,
that they do not read papers that have not been submitted in the required
format. With the quantity and quality of submissions, they can afford to
do so.
These ﬁnal polishings are also not superﬁcial in the sense that they
require your close attention, and that may be difﬁcult if you are approach-
ing your deadline, desperate to send your paper off, or just tired and
demoralized:
I am having such trouble this week – it is a sloppy slippery week. My work
does not coagulate. It is as unmanageable as a raw egg on the kitchen
ﬂoor. It makes me crazy. I am really going to try now and I’m afraid that
the very force of the trying will take all the life out of the work.
(Steinbeck 1970: 130)
Sometimes you just lose sight of what still needs to be done, of whether any
polishing is needed, of whether it is good enough yet for the polishing stage.
Ask someone to read your paper and to answer the question, ‘Is this ready to
submit?’.
You may feel that by doing any more revision at all you will be squeezing
the life out of your writing. You may not recognize when you have done
enough. Or your paper may cease to make sense or to have value. You are too
close to it.
There is no deﬁnitive answer to the question of when you know that it is
time to stop revising, let it go and send it off. This is where an agreed
deadline will be extremely useful, forcing you to get rid of your paper in
spite of your array of dissatisfactions. At some point the iterative process,
going back and forth between text, outline and abstract until you get them
to match, has to stop. The list of polishing steps may help you to move to
that point.
REVISING THE DRAFT
150

The ﬁnal revision
No more, the text is foolish
King Lear, IV, ii, 37
Read the whole paper, from start to ﬁnish, one more time, going through all
the sections in order.
Check that you have made it crystal clear what you are – and are not –
claiming to contribute in your paper. Can you refer to that quality when you
submit the paper to the editor?
Checklist
• Find someone to read your complete draft.
• Keep up the regular writing.
• Revise key points in your paper very carefully.
151
 CHECKLIST 

7
Finding time to write
Incremental writing • ‘Binge’ or ‘snack’? • A writing
plan • Goal setting • 30-minute slots • Monitoring
progress • Creating a place for writing in your life
• Becoming a regular writer • A six-month writing
programme • Checklist
If you set a short term deadline (even of ﬁve minutes) you will write
something/produce something and more often than not, it’s as good as
what you would have done with double the time!
(writers’ group participant)
There is a popular misconception that we need to wait for mood, ideas or
inspiration before we can write and that once we have started we have to keep
going. This is what people often call ‘ﬂow’. In their accounts, it does not occur
very often, but many new academic writers seem to aspire to it.
Along with this conception, there is the popular belief that even once you
have decided to write, you have to ‘work yourself into writing again each time’
(Blaxter et al. 1998a: 141). Since both assumptions make writers delay in
actually getting started, particularly if they do not have much time, they are
worth challenging. How often do you have any time to write, let alone a time
slot that coincides with your mood or inspiration? If your answer is ‘not very

often’, or even ‘not often enough’, then waiting for a writing ‘mood’ to come
along is going to be a mistake. Some new writers may never even have had the
experience of being in the mood to write, in any case: ‘It isn’t a question of
mood. It’s a question of concentration’ (Coward 1999 [1941]).
Disappointingly, to some, Boice has argued, based on his empirical research,
that if you had more time, you would not necessarily write more. This ﬁnding
makes some heads of department very happy, as they take it to mean that they
can immediately cancel all sabbaticals. This is not what it means. Boice has
shown that if you had more time, you would be likely to persist with the
writing habits you already have, and this would not necessarily lead to
increased productivity.
This suggests that we need to consider changing our writing habits and that
the nature of that change should be regular writing in short bursts. Rather than
waiting for inspiration or mood, you can get into the writing habit through
regular writing. This will seem crashingly obvious to some, but writing for
academic journals does not seem to be done in this way. There may be a good
reason for this: academic writing requires the highest standards of content and
writing; this cannot be achieved in small increments. In addition, the really
intricate and difﬁcult thinking work cannot be done in 15-minute bursts. This
is true. And if you do have large amounts of time to write – and if you ﬁnd you
write plenty in the time you have – there is no need for you to change. How-
ever, if you ﬁnd that you are not achieving much – or anything, in terms of
publications – in the limited time that you have, you may have to change your
writing habits.
An even more obvious way to capture this idea is ‘If you are not writing
regularly, you are not writing regularly’, and one student in a workshop
improved on this further by saying ‘If you’re not writing regularly, you’re not
writing’.
This chapter presents the argument that combining ‘binge’ writing, writing
in large chunks of time, and ‘snack’ writing – writing a little often, for example
in 30-minute slots – is a productive strategy for making time for writing in a
professional schedule, and still having a life. This topic – changing personal
writing practices in order to increase productivity and enjoyment – could ﬁll a
whole book in itself.
Then there is the question of ‘selﬁshness’, putting yourself, and your desire
to write more, ﬁrst, more frequently, which is often cited – among new writers
– as one of the main reasons those who publish a lot manage to do so. The new
writer, by contrast, invests value in teaching, sometimes in over-teaching. This
is a contentious issue: am I going to go as far as to suggest that you should
spend less time on your teaching in order to make time for your writing? Well,
it is certainly worth looking at how you spend your time. You are probably far
too busy already. Where is writing time going to come from? Something has to
change.
What this range of issues indicates is that you have to ﬁnd a way to ﬁt
writing into your life; this may mean making changes to other areas of your
153
FINDING TIME TO WRITE

life and getting the support of others in your life as you make such changes. Or
as others have put it – although they were referring to thesis writing rather
than writing for journals – you can see ﬁnding time for writing as a ‘lifestyle
change’ (Burton and Steane 2004: 98). This may lead you to think of writing in
new ways:
First, it helps you recognize the level of effort and the intensity of effort
needed, and second it helps you to reﬂect realistically on how you spend
your time now, and on ways that you can integrate the tasks associated
with the thesis into your existing lifestyle.
(Burton and Steane 2004: 99)
The same could be said of writing for journals.
There are, therefore, many sound strategies you can use in your writing for
journals, but if you are still hung up on the question of protecting time for
writing – to the extent of failing to do it – you will not write. If you are deter-
mined to persist with your old habits, you may not write. Until you make time
regularly to put words on paper or screen, you will not know that you can
write.
Incremental writing
I’m too busy to publish! This is like the excuse of the manager who is too
swamped with brush ﬁres to take a time management course. Time man-
agement isn’t the problem. Change is the problem. Unless people are
ready to alter their lifestyle, they will always be too busy. People like to
pretend that they are using all their time wisely. But if you watch them,
you quickly become convinced that they are not as productive as they
could be. For example, I am missing lunch with my friends to write this
article. I don’t want to skip too many lunches with the gang because that’s
fun, but so is publishing.
(Matejka 1990: 9)
A sensible way to become a regular writer is to make small demands on
yourself, at any one time. This is easier than it sounds, since it may require you
to plan your papers in different ways.
Incremental writing is the approach advocated throughout this book,
involving treating the writing of an academic paper as a design project: think
about audience, purpose, scope and structure before you worry about para-
graphs and sentences. Chapter 4 showed how you can produce the total design
of your paper. Once you have this, you can write in short bursts. You can even
write with a certain amount of conﬁdence since you have already decided
FINDING TIME TO WRITE
154

what you want to say and how you have to say it. You can be conﬁdent to the
extent that not only have you found something to say but you have also
thought it through and tested it against your reading.
If you divide the writing into small tasks, small increments, you can ﬁt
writing into your busy life:
To overcome fears about writing, I began to write every day. My process
was not to write a lot but to work in small increments, writing and
rewriting.
(hooks 1999: 15)
Regular writing can have the effect of removing the fear. Each increment is
small enough to be manageable, rather than daunting. On the other hand, if
you do not have an incremental model, you do not experience that sense of
gradually, little by little, making progress. In fact, you may not make any
progress.
This is one of the ‘soft’ outcomes that this book is driving towards: the ‘hard’
outcomes are the outputs, the numbers of papers readers of this book publish
in academic journals, while the ‘soft’ outcomes are the writing habits they
develop along the way, the conﬁdence they feel in their ability to write and the
barriers to writing they remove.
‘Binge’ or ‘snack’?
All of them did it by making time to write rather than waiting to
‘ﬁnd’ time.
(Cameron 1998: 14)
You might as well wait for time to ﬁnd you as wait to ﬁnd time. Making time for
writing – for anything – is an active process. One of the most challenging transi-
tions is moving from ‘binge’ writing – ‘I can only do my best work in large
chunks of time’ – to ‘snack’ writing – you can write almost anywhere and almost
any time. So many new writers resist this suggestion that I have come to assert
that the most productive model is ‘snack and binge’, with the proviso that all
binges should be structured, perhaps not as ‘three-course meals’, but along
those lines. Some have taken issue with the word ‘binge’, suggesting, instead,
the word ‘feast’, so as to capture the enjoyment that comes with the headlong,
seemingly unstoppable, magical ‘ﬂow’ of writing that does sometimes happen.
‘Flow’ is a word that crops up again and again. It is part of how people deﬁne
good writing practices and good text. The downside is that it seems to come
unbidden and, even when ‘bidden’, does not come often enough. It is possible
to induce this ﬂow state by a combination of regular writing and joining up
the writing sessions.
‘BINGE’ OR ‘SNACK’?
155

This seems counter-intuitive to many new writers, yet, again, it has to be
said that their discomfort with the idea of writing this way is based on no more
than thinking about it; in practice, in other words, it might prove less radical
than they think.
Even if you feel that you will be sacriﬁcing what you feel are your most
‘creative’ moments (large chunks of time) by carving your thinking and writ-
ing into such small ‘snacks’, your brain will be working on your writing project
while you are not writing; be ready to note ideas, headings or questions as they
come to you at unpredictable moments. Capture these in sentences – rather
than notes, bullets or fragments – so that they will be more meaningful when
you come back to them later and so that you develop the point a fraction
further.
A writing plan
The key point of this section is that while there are general principles for
making writing time, you have to create real time slots in your diary. This
means ‘matching’ your outline to your diary, literally using the detailed out-
line you have created of your paper-in-progress to map out the writing slots
you now need to produce text.
Many authors have quite rightly addressed this question of planning for
writing, offering useful general advice:
Planning time to write: general advice
1 Decide to do it.
2 Decide on your focus.
3 Plan your work.
4 Remember how many things, in real life, get done in the last 10 per cent
of available time.
5 Think in terms of small blocks at a time.
6 Open your daily planner.
7 Commit to the schedule.
8 Unplug the phone, close the door . . .
9 Try not to exceed your allotted time.
10 Plan to edit later.
11 Schedule time for peer review.
12 Plan time to celebrate!
(Black et al. 1998: 20–1)
FINDING TIME TO WRITE
156

However, an effective writing plan has to be more speciﬁc than this, and it
has to ﬁt into the time that you actually have. I still think that if writing is not
in your diary, it is not in real time. Of course, there are people who can carry
this information – tasks, times, priorities – in their heads, and if you are one of
them, then this may all seem a bit too programmed. Yet this is a model for
changing your behaviour and this may mean changing some aspects of how
you normally think about and do writing, particularly for your ﬁrst few papers.
What would a more speciﬁc writing plan look like? It would deﬁne writing
tasks and place them in the diary. It would include the full range of writing
tasks, not just drafting sections of the paper. More importantly, it would show
the results of breaking your writing goal into sub-goals:
You can do one of these plans for the coming week, or month, or year.
Yet is this really going to work? Does this tell you when you are going to do
your writing? To a certain extent it does, of course, but there is no deﬁnition of
two key features: time and length. How many words is each task to produce –
what is the scale and scope of each? How long is each slot to be, in terms,
literally, of minutes or hours?
While the plan illustrated is a good start – and it looks like what new writers
present when they ﬁrst draw up writing plans – I would argue that an effective
plan has to be more speciﬁc than this, at least for your ﬁrst few papers, as you
are actively seeking to establish your routine of regular writing for publication.
What would a more speciﬁc plan look like? – it would look and function
more like a programme for your writing. How you produce it is by going back
to your outline:
1 Take each heading, sub-heading and sub-sub-heading separately.
2 Allocate each one a time slot of its own.
3 Go through your whole outline if you have time.
4 If not, just do what you can in the time you have.
Writing plan: general
Week
beginning
Goal
Sub-goals
Activity
Monday 1 Oct
Choose target
journal
Analyse papers
Copy and read
Contact editor
Email (follow up?)
Three sentences
Monday 8 Oct
Literature review
Classify readings
Write overview
Monday 15 Oct
Review articles
Critique Smith
paper
Write summary
Monday 25 Oct
Outline paper
Summary
Brown’s 8 questions
A WRITING PLAN
157

For example, the prompt for a short burst of writing used in Chapter 4
deﬁnes the writing task. It speciﬁes one element of the outline as a writing
instruction, using a verb to deﬁne the type of writing required, ‘Deﬁne’, and
allocating a word limit:
Deﬁne the form of cardiac rehabilitation that involves exercise, as developed in
the west of Scotland, over the past ten years (200 words).
This could ﬁt into a 30-minute slot in the writer’s diary. The same approach
could be used with other sections and sub-sections, if you have done the ‘level
3 outlining’ described in Chapter 4. These have to go into the diary, alongside
all your other tasks. If you do not use a diary, it may be time to start.
You may wonder at these as headings for an academic paper. You may won-
der if the word allocations are right. You may even have started to question the
purpose of the research. However, the point of this illustration is to show how
you can map your level 3 outline on to real time slots. If each of your writing
tasks does not have a time slot, how will you know when you will be able to do
it? By not allocating a time slot are you not more or less planning not to do it?
More importantly, if you do not produce something along these lines, how
will you do the task of working out when – realistically – you will be able to
write?
If, in practice, you ﬁnd, for example, that you fail to write your 200 words on
Monday, then move on. You certainly know what your next writing task is: to
do that task in your next designated slot. You may also ﬁnd that you cannot do
one of these slots every single day. You can, of course, do a longer slot, as long
as it is structured around your outline. At the end of the week, take stock: to
what extent have you been able to write to plan? Can you already tell that
certain slots will never work, while some always work? Or is it too soon to say;
Writing plan: speciﬁc
Monday
8.30–9am
Deﬁne the form of cardiac rehabilitation that
involves exercise, as developed in the west of
Scotland, over the past ten years (200 words).
Tuesday
11.30am–12
Overview the different professionals involved in
this development (150 words).
Wednesday
12.30–1pm
Describe the role of physiotherapy (100 words).
Thursday
8.30–9pm
Summarize Newton and Thow papers and state
how present study takes this work forward (200
words).
Friday
6–6.30pm
Deﬁne and justify aims of the study (200 words).
FINDING TIME TO WRITE
158

should you give this approach another week or two? Are you able to note – in a
separate ﬁle – emerging ideas for future papers, using your outline to mark
what to leave out of the one you are working on now?
If this seems like just too much planning – time spent planning that could
more usefully be spent writing – then, again, remind yourself that what you
are doing here is trying to change the habits of a lifetime and to make sure that
they stay changed. When do you have time to do all this planning? Well, if the
outlining is already done, all you really have to do is sit down with your diary
and be realistic: resist the temptation to do too much in a short time slot or to
run over the end of your dedicated time slot, perhaps creating a new ‘catch
up’ problem, unless that too is part of your plan, and you can see a way to
streamlining the task that you are currently ignoring.
There will, of course, be times when you have to interrupt your writing
programme, perhaps dropping a time slot for other professional or personal
reasons; it is not the end of the world, but in some situations it might point to
a weakness in your planning process. For example, maybe it is not a good idea
to allocate too many writing slots to Friday afternoon, if you are usually
exhausted by then. Or, you might surprise yourself, and ﬁnd that the sudden
onset of euphoria that the prospect of the weekend brings gives you a brief – 30
minutes will not exhaust you – burst of energy. It is possible, for example, to
do one of those 30-minute time slots between getting home and going back
out again, settling down to relax or taking over the caring for the evening.
This step – planning your writing slots – has to be integrated with all of the
other work you are doing on your paper; it has to include the many different
types of writing activity that are proposed in this book: freewriting/generative
writing, or some version of it, some form of regular focused and unfocused
scribbling in short bursts as well as the more structured ‘writing-to-the-outline’
time slots.
Goal setting
Probably one of the most serious and motivating activities is to set goals.
How many articles or books could you realistically expect to get published
in the next ﬁve years? Add another one, or two, to that total. (Remember
you are always capable of much more than you think.)
(Drake and Jones 1997: 52)
This is good advice, if it makes you think ahead and develop a plan for a
body of work. It might help you to see your work in ‘units’, rather than trying
to ﬁt too much of your work into your ﬁrst paper.
However, it could be bad advice if it makes you overreach, as many academics
do in their writing, trying to do too much in the time available, or rather in the
GOAL SETTING
159

time that is not available. The error that many new writers make is thinking
that they can, for example, write a paper over a weekend or a month – then
they become depressed and guilty when they ﬁnd that they cannot. When I
suggest that they should take six months, many object. Of course, if you do
write a paper in a weekend, that is excellent. Some people can write that way.
Some ﬁnd that they can write about some subjects that way, subjects that they
know and have been thinking of writing about for some time, for example. But
most of us need more time.
The following examples illustrate how learning to set writing goals and sub-
goals may itself take time. Three writers, from a group of about 30, wrote out
their goals, after an initial discussion of the range of strategies that, I suggested,
they needed to be thinking about and adopting over the longer term. The
point is not to show weaknesses in their planning strategies, since, for many,
this was their ﬁrst formal discussion of writing in a professional context;
instead, the aim is to show that while each writer picked up on my suggestions,
they still had some work to do to bring deﬁnition to their goals. Otherwise,
they would, experience suggests, be unlikely to achieve them.
They are all picking up on the ‘right’ tasks, but are in danger of trying to
do too much in the time they will have, and it is not even clear from these
goals how they will be using that time. No matter how small the goal, there
still has to be a real – and realistic – allocation of time to do it.
New writers’ over-reaching goals
Writer 1
• Review articles in several journals.
• Decide on target journal.
• Email editors.
• Do some freewriting sessions about ideas for article.
Writer 2
• Clarify topic.
• Identify journal – determine style and preferred article type.
• Request ‘notes for authors’.
• Five minutes freewriting per day.
Writer 3
• Identify a journal.
• Consider what type of paper.
• Do ﬁve minutes writing practice daily.
• Organize meeting with someone else for feedback.
FINDING TIME TO WRITE
160

What these examples show is that even when we have discussed what
constitutes ‘good goals’, and even when the group is very experienced and
knowledgable in goal setting, having helped patients, for example, set goals for
recovery, rehabilitation or health promotion, there is still a lack of deﬁnition
of writing goals. This suggests that good goal-setting skills are not automatic-
ally transferred to writing tasks, as if writing were a completely different task –
different from all others – for which goal setting were not appropriate for some
reason.
This might be an overstatement, but the ‘over-reaching’ tendency seems to
be strong among academics. What happens is that they set goals that are far
too large, even when they think they are setting sub-goals. For example, they
set a goal of ‘writing the literature review section’ by the end of the week. This
goal is nowhere near speciﬁc enough.
Contrary to the quotation at the start of this section, therefore, the best
advice might be to do less than you think you can. If you admit that you are
still learning about setting writing goals that will work, then you can start by
changing your perception of what is ‘enough’. Do less. Do much less than you
think you ‘should’ achieve in the small amounts of time available for writing.
Make the sub-goals as small as possible, so that they are genuinely feasible. Be
prepared to fail, to revert to your old habits or to feel uncomfortable with the
new regime even if it does work. But persist with your speciﬁc sub-goals.
Realistic goals: do less than you think you can
How long is that section to be?
800 words
What is the content?
Literature from 2000 to 2004, UK and US
How is it structured?
Options:
As a debate/two schools of thought/
three main approaches/as a narrative/
chronology/two main groups of
researchers
How many sub-sections?
4
What is the length of each section?
Section 1
100 words
Section 2
200 words
Section 3
200 words
Section 4
400 words
What is the story of each?
Section 1
Overview of . . .
Section 2
Summarize work of X, Y
and Z
Section 3
Evaluate . . .
Section 4
Demonstrate need for . . .
When will you write it?
Monday 3–4pm and Wednesday 7–8pm
GOAL SETTING
161

Unless the writing goal is deﬁned to something like this level of detail, there
will be problems achieving it. If the sub-goals are not small, then they cannot
be achieved in small amounts of time. Only large amounts of time will do, and
if large amounts of time for writing are not available, then you have a model of
writing that is dysfunctional.
This method will work if you ﬁnd a way to join up your small sub-goals, that
is, if you can connect the work of one session, Monday 3–4pm in the above
example, with Wednesday 7–8 pm. At the end of each writing slot, write yourself
a writing instruction:
The purpose of these is to make sure that you know exactly what you
have to do when, after a gap of a day, a week or a month or more, you
come back to your writing project with no more than a vague memory of
where you were when you left it. Instead of re-reading what you wrote last
time, you can get straight on with the next bit. Instead of getting bogged
down in revision, you can take your paper a stage further. Most importantly,
instead of feeling that you are, in a sense, starting from scratch every time
you go back to your paper, you will feel that you are always moving it
forward. This is crucial for your motivation, as much as for actual progress
with the paper.
So much thinking is still to be done; thinking and writing will have to occur
simultaneously. No wonder people report that it takes them so long to get
started. No wonder they feel that they must have time to think before they
write. If they have not designed the task, then, of course they need thinking
time. Thinking and designing time will also have to be timetabled.
I sometimes get the feeling that academics denigrate goal setting as a bit too
simplistic, behaviourist, not entirely appropriate for academic work, and con-
straining their creativity and cramping their style. I wonder if some of them
see goal setting as a kind of lower-order skill that they feel they should have
moved beyond, even though many have not yet developed effective practices
or alternatives.
Yet this may be exactly the problem with academic writing: it is positioned
apart from other forms of writing – when, in fact, it has much in common with
other forms. Perhaps part of the problem is that there is a knowledge gap:
academics do not learn the literature on academic writing.
Write yourself a writing instruction
• My next writing task is to deﬁne . . .
• The next section will summarize . . .
• My next 30 minutes will be for describing . . .
FINDING TIME TO WRITE
162

30-minute slots
If, after reading the previous chapters and sections, you are still not convinced
that this short burst approach works, then it is time to try it for yourself. If you
have tried it once or twice, then I would suggest that you persevere, since this
‘snacking’ approach constitutes signiﬁcant behavioural change.
Write for 15 minutes. Do it twice. Count the number of words written.
Write for four sets of 15 minutes. Prove to yourself that you can write 1000
words in one hour. The aim is to generate text – try to forget/delay the ques-
tion of quality. You can use any topic at all, but it might make more sense if
you used some of your prompts. To really make this work, you need to
top-and-tail your writing sessions: as you end one session, deﬁne your task for
the next one.
Remember that the word ‘write’ may no longer be adequate in deﬁning your
writing tasks and sub-goals: what kind of writing do you want to do? Review-
ing? Summarizing? Analysing? Reporting? See other examples in other
chapters.
Monitoring progress
You can monitor your progress, in terms of output, as you go along, looking
back to take stock and looking forward to set new goals. This could be a further
variation on your 30-minute meet-to-write session:
30-minute monitoring meetings
1 Five minutes’ writing: taking stock
What writing have you done since the previous meeting: amount of time
spent writing, number of words written, topics covered?
2 Ten minutes’ private writing
Write about the theme/sub-theme or sub-heading that is next on your
outline or next on your writing plan.
3 Ten minutes’ discussion of 2 with a partner
Five minutes focusing on each person’s writing
4 Five minutes’ private writing on your next sub-goal
What writing do you want to do next? Headings? Time set aside?
Number of words?
163
MONITORING PROGRESS

This can be useful for calibrating your motivation, checking that you are not
trying to do too much and acknowledging that you – sometimes – have done
more than you thought you had.
In practice, again and again writers turn up to such meetings and, after
reporting that they have not done much since the previous meeting, then
reveal that they have, in fact, done more than they set out to do. They have
completed more than they set out to do, by the deadline of the meeting, and
yet feel that they have not done ‘enough’. What is that about? Over-reaching?
Setting unrealistic goals? The frenzy of academic life that causes them to lose
sight of what is ‘enough’? The answer to this question is probably quite indi-
vidual, but it is as well to look out for this pattern and to have some way – if
not this, then what? – of reorienting yourself towards your sense of progress.
Creating a place for writing in your life
Although some writers feel that they need to write in the same space, the same
physical space, it may be more productive, and worth trying, to write any time,
any where:
. . . in your dentist’s ofﬁce, on an airplane, at the train station waiting for
someone else’s commuter train, between appointments at the ofﬁce, at
lunch, on a coffee break, at the hairdresser’s, at the kitchen table while the
onions sauté.
(Cameron 1998: 14)
Over the past ten years, ﬁnding time and space have come up so often as the
absolute barriers to academics who want to write more for journals. Is it that
there is a connection between creating space in your life and ﬁnding space for
yourself in the published world? Is it impossible to create space for writing
while you still see no space for yourself in writing? Is it that we have to invent a
writing self before we have actually published? Or is it that we are trying to
invent a published self when what we really need is a writing self?
Perhaps it is not until you are ﬁnally part of the published world that you
can legitimize your time and space for writing, to yourself and to others. Perhaps
this is because, as new writers, we are not yet in an environment to write and
perceive the writing environment as ‘other’ or ‘out there’. Perhaps there are just
too many other demands on your time and space: ‘Rare is the woman writer of
any race who is free (from domestic chores or caring for others – children,
parents, companions) to focus solely on her writing’ (hooks 1999: 167) is a
statement that may be true for male writers too.
Limiting the time for each writing activity often brings sharper focus to
writing, and having limited time in one place, for example when you are
FINDING TIME TO WRITE
164

travelling, can sit well with these short bursts of writing. The trick is to ‘make
writing time in the life you’ve already got’ (Cameron 1998: 16).
Becoming a regular writer
Habit . . . functions in human life as a ﬂywheel functions in a machine, to
overcome temporary opposing forces, to keep us behaving for a time in a
particular way, according to a predetermined pattern, a general rule . . .
habits function to help us avoid making decisions on a case-by-case basis,
to commit us to decisions made earlier, and to reap the beneﬁts of following
abstract rules rather than particular impulses.
(Rachlin 2000: 7–8)
Rachlin (2000) argues that this is not – in spite of popular belief – an internal
battle only; external factors, particularly social environment, play their part.
This raises the question of why we need to develop ‘harmonious patterns’
(Rachlin 2000: 8), harmonious with what? With our ambitions? Aspirations?
Family? Friends? Colleagues? Our personalities? How are these patterns cre-
ated? – by developing good habits speciﬁc to writing? Do we know enough
about the literature on self-control to do this? We think we do, then we fail,
then we blame ourselves. Alternatively, we could learn more about how to
establish ‘harmonious patterns’, have more likelihood of success, and achieve
what we want to in writing.
. . . the more I write the easier and more joyous a labor it becomes. The less
I write the harder it is for me to write and the more it appears to be so
arduous a task that I seek to avoid it.
(hooks 1999: 168)
For academics, the answer is that you just have to ﬁnd ways to write – prefer-
ably some of the time in private writing – if you are to become a regular writer.
There is no mystique to it, and there are numerous strategies for forcing
yourself to try it. The key might lie in the social dimension: can you ﬁnd others
who are trying to become regular writers with whom you can work as you
move towards this goal?
A six-month writing programme
For new writers particularly, it might be helpful to think about the whole
process of writing your ﬁrst paper in real time. If you are not only aiming to
165
A SIX-MONTH WRITING PROGRAMME

write a draft of your paper, but also develop your academic writing practices,
you should be careful to pace the different activities over a realistic period,
such as six months.
This programme does not actually state that you should include feedback
cycles at each stage, but it is assumed that you will be either writing with
others – in the sense of meeting to write and discuss writing – or having others
read your writing. It will also help to have milestones along the way, for taking
stock, calibrating goals and generally coordinating your efforts to write your
paper by your deadline. There are certain stages in such a six-month pro-
gramme where such coordination could occur, and there are certain topics
that you might ﬁnd it useful to focus on in such meetings.
Writing for publication
Structured programme for productive writing
Six months
Phase 1
Months 1 and 2
1 Getting started: freewriting, generative writing, prompts
2 Personal writing goal: targeting one journal
3 Developing an outline
Phase 2
Months 3 and 4
4 Detailed outline: themes, sub-themes and prompts
5 Draft abstract/summary
6 Regular writing: freewriting and generative writing
Phase 3
Months 5 and 6 . . .
7 Draft introduction and revise
8 Draft review of literature and revise
9 Draft all sections and revise
10 Feedback from journals and resubmitting . . .
Coordinating meetings
Start-up
Day 1
Barriers to writing, strategies for productive writing, personal goals,
sub-goals, study buddy, incremental writing
FINDING TIME TO WRITE
166

At the end of one such six-month programme, one group of participants
were asked about the persistent ‘time’ problem – it had come up again and
again in discussions throughout the six months. It would not go away. For
some, the problem persisted, but as a group they had begun to generate new
analyses of the problem and, at last, and to their immense relief, some solu-
tions. Some of these involved a change in their priorities, or at least beginning
to think about such a change. This is one advantage of such long-term pro-
grammes: participants have time to work through recurring complaints, which
can become boring or just frustrating if repeated over several discussions. It
was possible to discuss solutions that had failed, in an instructive way, and
attitudes that were holding them back, which became obvious once they were
externalized. The group ﬁnally came up with their own list of solutions,
some of which are ambiguous, because there are no easy answers. They were
intending to be positive, while describing ways of making time as an on-going
challenge:
Set-up
@ 2 weeks
More sub-goal deﬁnition, targeting journals, contact with editors, getting
into the writing habit, demystifying academic writing, routines of writing,
structures, soft and hard outcomes, diary time, monitoring
Check-up
@ 3 months
Outlines, productive writing habits, resetting goals
Round-up
@ end
Successful strategies and processes, making time for writing and protecting
it, sharing achievements, setting new writing goals, non-academic writing
Making time for writing?
• ‘Research is not a residual . . . But it can become that.’
• ‘Maybe other things should become residual?’
• ‘Put a notice on your ofﬁce door.’
• ‘Being selﬁsh is not a bad thing.’
• ‘Don’t feel guilty about doing research.’
• ‘Even when I have a half-day for research, I don’t use it; something else
comes up, like marking.’
• ‘Any time we have for research is just by chance.’
A SIX-MONTH WRITING PROGRAMME
167

One person had come up with a more devious approach: putting a notice on
her ofﬁce door that said ‘Please use other door’, when there was no other door.
Whether or not she put this into practice remains a mystery, but what is
clearer from the other comments about how to make time to write is that there
are blocks. It is difﬁcult. There are people who will stand in your way. Even
though there is a research imperative – I have heard it called ‘research myopia’,
calling into question the potential for neglect of teaching – in all our institu-
tions, there may be no facilities or ‘permission’ to take writing time. Making
writing time is almost bound to feel like you are going against the grain. It can
even feel wrong, but this does not mean that you will never solve the problem.
Many already have.
Checklist
• Put writing time in your diary: speciﬁc tasks at speciﬁc times.
• Expect this system to break down initially – persevere.
• Monitor your progress in terms of your sub-goals, not your goals.
• ‘Technology makes it easier for people to ﬁnd us.’
• ‘Students always ﬁnd you.’
• ‘At certain times, students must take priority, for example at times of
course work submissions.’
• ‘You can’t protect the half-day for research.’
• ‘There is no space for research/writing at work.’
FINDING TIME TO WRITE
168

8
Dialogue and feedback
A writers’ group • Writers’ retreat • Dialogue • More
freewriting and generative writing • Checklist
This chapter argues that writers can use or build a network of contacts – people
engaged in writing – meeting regularly to write and for support and feedback.
New writers may beneﬁt from having access to different audiences at different
stages in the writing process. The value of the writers’ group is as a forum that
allows you to rehearse your arguments orally among other academics. The key
point is to get as much feedback as you can, but also to engage in dialogue
about your work.
Such networks of writers may exist already in your institution or in your
department, but if not, you can set one up yourself. In the midst of what is
often a completely competitive culture, it is possible to build collegiality. In
the midst of fragmented days, it is possible to meet to write. It may seem
paradoxical to be taking individual responsibility for creating a new collegial-
ity, but it may be your only option. Otherwise, you will have to go it alone, and
that can take much longer.
You may have to choose your colleagues carefully. If this sounds overly
cautious and more than a bit paranoid, then count yourself lucky that you
have not yet encountered academics who set out to undermine each other. Just
when writing becomes the ﬁrst thing you want to do – rather than the last
thing you want to do – other people may start to put up new barriers.

Of course, if your department is already collegial, and you are surrounded by
mentors and positive peers, then this will be less of an issue, as long as you are
able to get the type of feedback on your writing that actually moves your paper
towards publication and helps you develop your understanding of what
writing for academic journals involves.
A writers’ group
There is no point in waiting for the culture around you to change; you can,
instead, create a micro-culture that supports you as a writer. This micro-culture
need not only include people in your own area. There may be someone in your
institution who can set up and/or run a writers’ group of people across the
institution but, if not, you can do it yourself.
While the idea of a writer’s group will seem a new departure to some, it is
similar to other activities routinely used to support research in some disciplines,
such as reading or journal groups. The difference is that in a writers’ group you
focus on writing for journals rather than reading them. A writers’ group can
provide a range of readers. It can also create a more positive, cooperative
environment for writing than seems possible in many departments, where
there appear to be so many other agendas running.
Clearly, there are many ways of using such interactions, but having a source
of positive – yet critical – responses to writing-in-progress can help writers to
keep writing. The knowledge that someone values your writing and sees you as
a writer can be motivating. Writers – even new writers – can facilitate each
other’s writing. ‘Buddy’ relationships often spring up in this context, and two
writers working together can share the load of researching the journals, pool
information on editors and put their heads together to develop productive
writing strategies to overcome blocks and barriers.
This book draws on academic writers’ experiences, and in this chapter they
illustrate how writers’ group discussions of writing can normalize barriers to
writing and neutralize some of the guilt and ‘baggage’ that new writers often
carry with them about their writing, since they know full well that they could
have done more to make sure that they got more done.
Why set up a writers’ group? Why not just get on with your writing? You
may want to think through the potential purposes of a group, particularly if
you are going to be the one to set it up. This need not be a huge task; a
writers’ group can involve as little as four or ﬁve people, as long as you all
want to write. With such a small number, it should be easier to focus on one
main purpose that suits everyone. Frequently, the most motivating purpose
is simply making time for writing. Making even a small amount of time for
writing – such as two or three hours per month – can be an extremely
effective starting point, since it is a small and therefore achievable goal.
DIALOGUE AND FEEDBACK
170

Trying to make more time, on your own, without support, would be more
likely to fail.
This is not a hierarchy of tasks, nor is any one of these exclusive of the
others. It is up to the group to establish its primary purpose. In fact, there is no
need to ﬁx one purpose and then try and limit the group’s discussions and
activities to that; there probably has to be some ﬂexibility. Each member of
the group may well be looking for something different, and while no group
can accommodate everyone’s needs, there has to be some agreement on the
broad purpose, so that it can become a collective purpose. Since the problem
of making time for writing – and protecting it once you have made it – seems
to be so prevalent for academics, and not just new ones, this should probably
be a kind of ‘bottom line’: whatever the level of productivity, and it might be
slow at ﬁrst, at least the group will have made real time to write. This is why
it is so important that meeting time is not taken up entirely with talking
about writing; the writers’ group involves participants doing writing at each
meeting.
For some academics, this will be the only time they have for writing, at least
initially. It may be that they have no control over the allocation of their
workload, but if they can secure agreement that they can attend a writers’
group, they have started to make professional time for writing, in, admittedly
– but perhaps cleverly – a small way. Once they are in the group and discuss-
ing ways to write, they may well ﬁnd other strategies for making other time
slots available for writing. If this leads to outputs then the case is made that a
writers’ group has beneﬁt for the institution and the department, and not just
for the individual.
Some new writers have felt the need to ‘cloak’ their writing time as
‘meetings’, since meeting time is easier to protect than writing time. It is
easier to decline another meeting if you already have one in your diary. It is
already established practice to have meetings; it is not a practice the writer
has to ‘invent’. This strategy demonstrates how difﬁcult it is to establish time
to write and to legitimize it. This strategy may seem dishonest to some, since
it involves what some see as an element of deception. An alternative is, of
course, to arrange a real meeting with other writers in the writers’ group and
Purpose of a writers’ group
• Making time for writing
• Getting feedback on writing
• Discussing writing practices
• Developing productive practices
• Sharing information about journals, editors and reviewers
A WRITERS’ GROUP
171

to establish that this is a regular and legitimate use of your time – your
professional time, not just your personal time.
Once you have started writing, every group has an important choice to
make: are you going to read, and comment on, each other’s writing, or not?
It is legitimate and useful to discuss writing practices, including writing
goals and progress towards them, and that may be enough for your group –
talking about your writing. Or, you could agree to review each other’s
work:
To improve your writing you don’t need advice about what changes to
make; you don’t need theories of what is good and bad writing. You need
movies of people’s minds while they read your words. But you need this
for a sustained period of time – at least two or three months. And you need
to get the experience of not just a couple of people but of at least six or
seven. And you need to keep getting it from the same people so that they
get better at transmitting their experience and you get better at hearing
them.
(Elbow 1973: 77)
‘You don’t need advice about what changes you need to make’ – this is an
interesting statement, since it does not represent even a new writer as a com-
plete novice. New writers already have knowledge of what does and does not
work in academic writing. More importantly, Elbow deﬁnes the learning that
is needed: developing a sense of audience. This most important of lessons, in
Elbow’s view, is one that can be developed in writers’ groups.
Elbow’s representation is of a sustained development period, more sus-
tained than a one-day workshop or a couple of discussions with your head of
department at review or appraisal time. An initial commitment to two or
three months is helpful, since it provides a framework for the ﬁrst stage of a
writers’ group. In fact, some people make such speedy progress, in terms of
acquiring skills and strategies, that two or three months may be all that they
need.
Elbow’s advice is novel, given the practice in many educational contexts
of single readings of a piece of writing, and given the secrecy and reticence
that often surround academic writing, and given the workshop practice of
working with different partners. It makes sense to develop such reading
knowledge, so as to be able to provide informed help, informed in the sense
of someone else becoming familiar with the developing argument of your
paper and aware of what you are trying to achieve in it. There is also the
frequently neglected and underdeveloped skill of listening to feedback. This
too might take two or three months, if you are only meeting once or twice a
month.
As the purpose and membership of a group are established, it might be
useful to discuss and agree on more speciﬁc aims.
DIALOGUE AND FEEDBACK
172

Each writer needs a speciﬁc writing project, and a speciﬁc aim to achieve
within the ﬁrst three months. Aims will change over time, and you can review
them after the ﬁrst phase, after two or three months. Everyone in the group
should know each other’s writing goals.
As each group meets for the ﬁrst time, there may be all sorts of potential
talking points on the agenda. Some people will simply want to sound off about
how hard writing is, about how unfair it is that there is no support and about
the absurdity of academic journals themselves. This is an important discus-
sion, but it can only go on for so long. The ﬁrst development phase may well
be moving yourself beyond this point – if this is where you are at – and if you
have one or more of these voices in your group, you, or someone, is going to
have to facilitate a ‘moving on’ discussion. Simply talking about these prob-
lems is not the only way to resolve them; you can also write about writing
problems and solutions. However, you can also write about potential topics at
this stage, in ways described in Chapter 3.
The very plurality of the group can, of course, be a strength, even if it takes
some getting used to: ‘Very few of us have a reasonably ﬁlled-in vision of the
world. We tend to develop only those areas we are interested in’ (Mailer 2003).
Naturally, as an academic, you have to develop the area you are interested
in, but your development can be accelerated by interactions. Their unpredict-
ability can be both refreshing and frustrating.
There may be dominant characters in your group. That can be a strength or
a weakness, depending on how you all manage each other. There may be too
many agendas running. There may be uncertainty about the writers’ group as
a mechanism to increase productivity. There may be confusion about what
you are actually meeting for or about what useful purpose the group is likely
to serve. You may lose sight of what you set out to do and you may not
realize that you are already beginning to achieve your appropriately modest
goals.
Aims of the writers’ group
• To progress a writing project
• To make real time at work for writing
• To provide a forum for discussion of writing
• To provide a framework for the writing process
• To develop and exchange effective strategies
• To complete and submit a paper to a journal/chapter for a book or
whatever.
A WRITERS’ GROUP
173

It is easy to over-complicate the writers’ group, but all you are doing is
prioritizing writing through a group process. You therefore all have to bring
your group work skills to this initiative and you have to be comfortable with
the others in your group fairly early on. If you have hand-picked your own
group – not a bad idea – you should be off to a strong start in this respect.
However, remember that you are all in this for yourselves, and participants – not
the group – are responsible for their progress.
For the structure of your group’s meetings, you can opt for a loose or tight
set-up, but the key elements are discussion and writing, and for these you can
use activities described in earlier chapters.
‘Presenteeism’ – the pressure to simply be present and visible in your
department – can be a problem, but as long as your head of department has
not actually said you must be in the department at all times – and even if he or
she does, is that non-negotiable? – then you have the option of working else-
where. You cannot allow others’ petty reactions to shape your writing. There
have even been situations where the head of department has agreed to writing
time away from the department, as long as no one else knows about it. This is,
by design or otherwise, likely to divide you from your colleagues – which may,
of course, be the intention – but if it is your only option, and if it gives you
what you want – time to write – then you might want to jump at it regard-
less. You are never going to be able to keep everyone happy, nor are you
Keep it simple
• We all want to publish in academic journals.
• We can give each other feedback on writing practices.
• Our writers’ group will make time for writing during the working week.
• We can support each other in our writing.
• We can develop more productive writing habits in this group.
Activities
• Analysing journals you are targeting
• Discussing your writing plans
• Doing writing: writing about writing or writing your paper
• Setting goals for writing and monitoring each other’s progress
• Giving and receiving feedback on writing
• Identifying strategies that work: making time and getting published
DIALOGUE AND FEEDBACK
174

responsible if everyone is unhappy because you are writing. As long as you
achieve the necessary outputs, this is good for the institution and the depart-
ment. This may be yet another motivation for working with writers in other
departments.
There are pros and cons to working across disciplinary boundaries. Some of
the pros are: (1) you are not so likely to get caught up in discussing primarily
the content of a paper; (2) you can concentrate on the ﬂow of each other’s
argument, spotting gaps or inconsistencies; and (3) you can leave behind the
‘baggage’ of the department, including, if your group is going to work, its
internal competitions. Some of the cons are: (1) you will not get expert feed-
back on the content of your paper from your writers’ group – you will have to
get that from someone else; (2) this may create uncertainty that you feel you
cannot resolve and that, in turn, may inhibit your writing; and (3) you may
not ‘test’ your idea sufﬁciently at an early stage.
For new writers, the pros should outweigh the cons for one main reason: the
group will help you get started and help you keep going. It is, of course,
important to have input from published people in your ﬁeld and you will, of
course, be hugely grateful if you can ﬁnd someone who is prepared to give up
their time to give you feedback on your paper. But it is equally important that
you have feedback along the way, as you are drafting your paper, that is not
too critical and that focuses on developing the argument. If that sounds too
soft – or even unwise – then clearly you can combine the two; this does not
have to be an either/or proposition.
You may not be looking for ‘profound insights about’ yourself, and since the
learning that people do in such groups is difﬁcult to measure, you may not be
persuaded that it actually occurs as claimed. However, there is more to writing
well, at the top of your profession, than grammar and punctuation. It is difﬁcult
to disentangle thinking and writing abilities; they may develop in tandem. For
example, as you improve your skills of articulating your ideas to others, you
may ﬁnd that this improves your ability to articulate your ideas to yourself,
that is, your thinking.
Finally, perhaps the greatest beneﬁt of attending writers’ group meetings is
that people often report that they arrive at the meeting ‘in a frenzy, but leave
on a high’. Some turn up with very low feelings about their writing and about
academic life in general, and leave with a sense of satisfaction at having, in
spite of everything, progressed their writing project. This facility for turning
around very negative feelings is perhaps one of the healthiest outcomes of a
professional activity.
A WRITERS’ GROUP
175

Writers’ retreat
One way to kick-start a writers’ group is to have a writers’ retreat, taking writers
off-campus. Of course, there may be permissions to seek in order to do this,
and even when you do have permission, there will be those who think you are
mowing the lawn, putting up shelves, going to the gym, or whatever it is that
these people think – it need not have any basis in reality – when they cannot
actually see you in the workplace, while they are slaving away on the
treadmill.
This mode of protecting time for writing is very effective. While you might
think that getting completely away to do nothing but write is a luxury that you
simply cannot afford, there are ways in which you can adapt the retreat mode
to your environment. The idea is to protect some time – however short –
for nothing but writing and talking about your writing with others who are
prepared to do so too.
One of the potential beneﬁts is that in a retreat environment you can make
swift changes to your writing behaviours. A vast literature tells us that chang-
ing our behaviours takes a long time, that there are numerous ‘steps’ that we
have to follow to achieve long-term change and that we need social support to
make it work. Clearly, there is so much evidence across such a wide range of
human behaviour that we would not want to challenge this.
Yet, when you take people out of their normal environments, change comes
quite quickly: at a writers’ retreat you can make signiﬁcant progress with your
project. The difﬁculty is when you go back to your normal working environ-
ment: there is no protected time for writing and your momentum runs into
the sand. What you can do is adapt some of the features of the complete retreat
to your working environment, making quite short ‘meetings’ to write, ideally
with a colleague or two, at least in the ﬁrst instance. This means in practice
bringing the activities of retreat into your working environment, or ﬁnding
some other place where you can do so. In other words, you can create a
mini-retreat for yourself in a variety of different places and at different times.
There are several modes of retreat, each suited to different goals and each
making different demands on your resources: the week-long retreat, the two-
day mini-retreat, the ‘day away’ and the one-hour retreat meeting. They all
share the same key features:
• Get off campus and, if you have more than one day, make it residential.
• Get away from distractions, email, phone, other responsibilities.
• Focus on your writing and actually do some.
The key is to get away from the ofﬁce, since many ﬁnd that they can do no
writing whatsoever there. A few people do ﬁnd it possible to write in their
ofﬁces, as long as they can quit email, turn on the answering machine and
DIALOGUE AND FEEDBACK
176

have an ofﬁce where they can shut the door, put up a notice saying ‘Meeting in
progress – do not disturb’ and know that they will not be interrupted.
Some people ﬁnd that they can ‘retreat’ to write at home; but others ﬁnd this
impossible, as they are distracted by tasks that need to be done there, or there
are potential interruptions there too. Where you go to retreat to write is clearly
a personal choice, and if you go with someone else, or several others, you have
to ﬁnd a space that suits you all or, more realistically, make it suit most of you
most of the time.
The longest of these modes, the complete retreat, involves a week off campus.
This can be organized with a self-selecting group from work, perhaps by your
staff development unit or teaching and learning centre. One of the best
examples of this mode has been run for several years at the University of
Limerick (Ireland) (Moore 2003). Brieﬁng sessions before the retreat help to
establish the retreat concept, prompt participants to prepare and focus and test
commitment to the full week’s work.
The programme for the week’s retreat starts with an orientation session on
the ﬁrst night, followed by social time over dinner. Every morning participants
attend ‘springboard’ sessions for the ﬁrst hour each morning, if they wish, and
then have the rest of the day, from 10.30 am until 8 pm, to write. These
sessions help participants to get started, to set goals for the day’s writing and,
after the ﬁrst day, to take stock of progress since the previous day. Private
writing, freewriting and pair-share discussions seem to work well to trigger
focused writing during these sessions. Some of the strategies for regular writing
are new to participants, and therefore time is allocated for discussions of the
strategies themselves, their immediate impact and their long-term use. Other
subjects covered in brief presentations include ﬁnding your voice, responding
to reviewers’ feedback and behaviour change. The writers can also have discus-
sions with each other in the course of the day, and one-to-one discussions with
a reader in residence, who reads and comments on drafts of papers.
The pros of this model are that writers have plenty of real time and space to
write. The cons are that they have to be ready to confront their writing targets
head-on and are under pressure to make real progress with their project. You
might be thinking that having so much time and space would take the pres-
sure of, and that does seem to happen to begin with. By the middle of the
week, however, participants begin to feel that they should have achieved
much more than they have, and often feel under even more pressure to pro-
duce precisely because they have so much uninterrupted time. Even though
there is no ‘account’ taken of people’s written output at the end of the retreat,
departments who have contributed to the cost of participation are going to
want to see some ‘return’ for their money in terms of publications or other
outputs. This is yet another very good reason for setting clear, explicit goals
and letting others know what they are. Almost all the participants are highly
productive during this week, achieving their goal and, often, making progress
towards other goals and deﬁning new goals for future outputs.
There are additional challenges for writers with families, particularly if they
WRITERS’ RETREAT
177

have young children. Some single parents ﬁnd it a struggle to get sufﬁcient
childcare. Anyone with any caring role might simply ﬁnd that this is not a
model that works practically for them, in spite of its obvious attractions. But
there have been participants with these responsibilities on previous retreats,
which suggests that it is not impossible.
Participants’ evaluations show that this is a very positive experience, but
there is always the ‘return to reality’ factor: will they be able to continue to be
productive writers, or to do any writing at all, when they return to their
departments, where their ﬁrst task will be to catch up with everything they let
drop in order to attend the retreat? This is such an important question that it is
directly addressed as part of the retreat experience, on the last day. This is
where the writers’ group comes in, since it is one way of sustaining the impact
of a retreat over the longer term and transferring some of its features to the
work environment.
A retreat of this type obviously comes with a cost; in fact, it can be quite
expensive to run, although the argument can be made that the return to your
institution – in terms of research culture and outputs – is worth the investment.
It is possible to include external participants and to use their fees to subsidize
internal participants. This might be beyond your own organizational remit,
but you might suggest this strategy to someone who can make it happen. You
may have to push for this, or ﬁnd someone who is prepared to do so, since
even when funding has been secured, it is not always possible to ﬁnd someone
who is prepared to take on this new and substantial task.
You also need staff: the person who does the ‘springboard’ sessions prob-
ably has to be someone who is an enabler, who knows a bit about writing and
is not too focused on any one discipline to the exclusion of others. This is
someone who can look across the disciplines and can stimulate discussion of
writing across disciplinary boundaries. They can use the activities described
in this book for the important ‘getting started’ and ‘warm-up’ writing
sessions.
If the week-long retreat is simply not feasible, there are other shorter modes
of retreat: the two-day mini-retreat, the ‘day away’ or, at the very least, the
one-hour retreat meeting.
The two-day retreat, whether residential or not, allows you to focus on your
writing without worrying too much about the work you have left behind.
Unlike the week-long retreat, which is ideally held far enough away from cam-
pus that participants are not able to get home, the two-day retreat allows
participants to meet domestic responsibilities. It has the added advantage of
being cheaper. Because time is short, it is probably as well to include only those
who have speciﬁc papers or other projects in mind.
The programme should probably be more structured than the week-long
model. The writing day should probably be timetabled with a progressive
series of writing tasks that build the paper, combining generative writing activ-
ities and structuring activities with discussions and mutual reviewing of out-
lines and drafts. Individuals may have their own way of structuring such a
DIALOGUE AND FEEDBACK
178

writing day, and people will be at different stages, so some ﬂexibility will need
to be built in.
For the purpose of building, or building on, long-term writing relationships
and on-going discussions, it is probably important to intersperse writing time
with discussion. The proportion of writing time to other activities can be as
much as one third; that is, 20 minutes in any one hour can be spent doing
some form of writing towards the paper. Using or developing a detailed outline
is probably a key task for the second half of the ﬁrst day, since that can then
drive focused writing on day two.
Some participants will doubtless respond that they have not yet chosen their
topic, but this should be the work of the ﬁrst half of the ﬁrst day; until the
topic has been ﬁxed, it is very difﬁcult to make progress in writing. Of course,
the topic can be selected and focused through writing, and writing tasks that
do this should therefore probably feature in the ﬁrst half of day one:
Two-day retreat
Programme
Day 1
Morning
Choosing topic
Writing prompt and
‘sandwich’
Developing topic
Freewriting
Discussion
Focusing topic
Generative writing
Discussion
Afternoon
Developing abstract
Brown’s 8 questions
Discussion
Detailed outline
‘Level 3’ outlining
Discussion
Writing
Day 2
Morning
Targeting a journal
Discussing extracts from
published papers
Reasons for rejection
Writing prompts
Using the outline
Writing
Discussion
Afternoon
Writing
Discussion
Planning
Writers’ group
Goal-setting
WRITERS’ RETREAT
179

You can, of course, vary the order of these activities. For example, it might
make more sense, in some groups, to start a retreat with ‘targeting a journal’,
rather than leaving it until day two. It depends on the group: what stage are
they at?; will they ﬁnd the analysis of published examples intimidating if it
comes ﬁrst?; do they already have topics to write about, such as conference
presentations to convert into publications?; are some of them writing a thesis,
with publications a secondary goal? As long as both text-generating and struc-
turing strategies are in the programme, as long as there is time for both writing
and discussion, and as long as the participants are actually willing to write
there and then, it will work. Since most academics report that writing by hand
is not their normal practice, it helps if participants have laptops for the retreat.
A further alternative is the quick retreat: a day away. There is more of a
tradition – if that is the right word – of departmental away days at some
institutions, but the one-day retreat for writing would be a new approach, and
a new case might have to be made for it. It may be that only some members of
the department will choose to participate, and it is probably as well to establish
who wants to and to work with them. Others will ﬁnd their own ways to write.
Keeping it in the department is not the only way to run a one-day retreat.
Mixed groups can work just as well, sometimes better. It could be more difﬁcult
to organize, you might think, but if all the writers are self-selecting, and you
start with the people you already know, and if they are all keen to write, then it
might be easier than you think.
The value of the one-day retreat is that you do not have to drop everything
else for longer than one day. The value of the departmental retreat is that you
are establishing a culture of writing in the department; the department has
acknowledged that writing is sufﬁciently important to attract dedicated time.
The format alternates writing and discussion: writing for different periods of
time – 5, 20, 30 and 60 minutes at a time – discussing in pairs and in the whole
group. Discussion provides peer review, support and encouragement, as
required. The speciﬁc writing activities maintain focus while prompting struc-
tured development of the paper. All these techniques are described in this
book.
One-day retreat
Programme
Morning
Decide on topic and type of writing
Write to prompt
10 mins
Set goals for the day in pairs
Writing sandwich
10 mins
Introduction to Brown’s 8 questions
20 mins
Draft abstract/summary
Brown’s 8 questions
20 mins
Break
15 mins
Discussion in pairs
15 mins
Writing
30 mins
DIALOGUE AND FEEDBACK
180

Once you have run one department programme, the argument for dedicated
time for writing, while not quite won, has moved on a step from leaving
individuals to take responsibility for changing their time-management strat-
egies. If the day has been even partially successful, then you can consider when
you want to repeat it: could there be regular writing days? Could there be one
per month? Or one per year, always in the same month? Could it be held in the
department? As with other interventions described in this chapter, such days
might constitute some people’s only writing time.
Meet to retreat: some writers ﬁnd it useful and productive to get out of the
ofﬁce to write for as little as an hour. We should, of course, have such things as
lunch hours, but in the present culture, there seem to be few of those. The one-
hour writers’ meeting involves meeting not simply to talk about writing, but
also to do some. This means ﬁnding a place where you can both/all talk and
write, where there is a surface, as much space and peace and quiet as you can get
by with, and where you can open a laptop without disturbing anyone’s sense of
decorum and without getting robbed of it on the way back to the ofﬁce. Ideally,
this should be in a place where you are unlikely to meet colleagues from work,
unless, of course, you want to make your writing visible in that way. Some
people have managed to ﬁt such meetings into visits they have to make to other
campuses or to students on placement. If your writing partner is some way
away, you can meet half-way. There were two writers who met at a supermarket
café for this reason. The key factor in this strategy might be that you have
disguised writing as a ‘meeting’, making it easier to protect the time slot. You do
not even have to tell everyone what the purpose of your ‘meeting’ is.
There are beneﬁts to simply getting off-campus. This can immediately
change a person’s feelings about the subject of their writing. In some cases,
what seemed like a chore and a bore suddenly becomes interesting again.
Writers recover their interest in writing by, perhaps ironically, taking it away
from the work environment. Many academics report that they cannot write in
their ofﬁces, and there is no ‘writing room’ in any organization. Nor is there
any timetabled ‘writing period’. In a sense, writing does not exist in real time
and space in a university. You have to invent the time and space for yourself.
At least initially, it may be easier to start writing somewhere else.
This does suggest that some work environments are not only not conducive
to writing but positively working against it, not just in the sense of not provid-
ing time or support, but, perhaps more importantly, in the sense of creating a
context where writers lose sight of their motivations. Without wanting to get
Afternoon
Outlining/writing to outline
30 mins
Peer review discussion
Whole group
30 mins
Break
15 mins
Writing
60 mins
Goal-setting: long- and short-term in
pairs
20 mins
WRITERS’ RETREAT
181

too deeply into this analysis, it must be said that getting away from the work-
place for a week, a day, or even an hour – with the express purpose of meeting
to write – can have beneﬁts. Any form of writers’ retreat can lead to a surge of
momentum and enthusiasm for writing, overcoming many of the barriers –
real and imagined – to writing. I have seen people get stuck into a pile of old
data, that they have been meaning to write up for months or years, with new
enthusiasm and commitment.
Getting completely away from the workplace may seem like an impossible
luxury; some may not even have that option. Yet it can be positioned as a
legitimate staff development activity. It is an important activity, if you
can demonstrate outputs, for the university or organization, not just for the
individual writer.
Another model for writers working in groups is Brown’s ‘learning set for
writers’:
A learning set is a group that meets regularly to talk about common prob-
lems and to look for solutions. A learning set of authors provides face-to-
face reviewing by friends, most of whom lack preconceptions about the
content of a paper or its context. This approach has strengths that blind
refereeing can never provide. It provides an immediacy and support that
allows authors to get deeper into their papers than they would otherwise
do . . . there is less defensiveness and this makes it easier to see the grains
of truth that lie in most criticisms. After a few meetings, it can also bring
authors to profound insights about themselves and their work.
(Brown 1994/95: 3)
This model emphasizes the value of ﬁnding participants who ‘lack pre-
conceptions’ about your paper, or about your writing or writing in your discip-
line. This can interfere with the developing articulation of your ideas. This
again suggests that there is more value in inter-departmental groupings than
many academics would anticipate. Brown even goes as far as arguing that this
process can do things that the alleged ‘gold standard’ of blind reviewing can-
not do. What he seems to be saying here is that the instant feedback – and the
additional interactions – with real readers can help writers more.
The word ‘friends’ rather than, for example, ‘peers’ or ‘colleagues’ suggests a
different type of relationship can develop in such learning sets. Identifying
common problems and generating solutions is where genuine learning can
occur. Perhaps this terminology will appeal to some more than others, but it
does, interestingly, open up more possibilities. It also goes directly against the
competitive culture that dominates in some departments.
None of these activities – writers’ groups, retreats and learning sets – is seen
as ‘remedial’ in any sense – though they might be perceived as such in some
parts of your institution. The popular misconception that all you have to do is
write, and that as long as you are not actually writing you are wasting your
time, is, unfortunately, persistent. Instead, the retreats and writers’ groups are
DIALOGUE AND FEEDBACK
182

about creating new structures that support writing, establishing collegial rela-
tionships and bringing writing – and discussion of writing – into the working
day. Because becoming a regular writer, to the standard required, takes con-
siderable time and effort, it makes sense to have some developmental – rather
than remedial – activities in place. If writers are actually to change their
behaviours, they surely have to have some support. This may not be available
within departments.
How much time you put into making the case for such interventions, or
getting someone else to take up the case, is up to you. But you do not need a
full-blown institutionally funded system to initiate some of the more small-
scale versions of them. How exactly you begin to set it all up is quite simply to
get together a few colleagues and run the ﬁrst and all subsequent sessions
with a fairly loose agenda. The following starter prompt can be used to start
numerous meetings, not just the ﬁrst one:
This type of structure will help you take stock and look forward, maintaining
your goal-setting skills. More importantly, you will produce writing. While
stopping the discussion for a session of writing is unusual – it’s not how we
normally work – it does create writing time. Defer the ‘quality question’ for the
moment. If you are writing to your outline, which you should be as soon as
possible, the goal is not to produce ‘quality’ academic writing, but to generate
rough draft. You may have to keep telling yourselves that.
I am not sure that every writers’ group has to spend time and expend energy
thrashing out its aims or objectives before participants can start writing. I am
not even convinced that you really need an agenda, in the normal sense of the
word. It seems to me that you can focus the whole session – 60 or 90 minutes –
on writing and talking about the writing you have done, are about to do and
have just done. If this seems simplistic, I should add that this structure seems
to work quite well with quite diverse groups, and on that basis is worth a try. In
the course of trying, you will quickly learn what works and what does not:
going round the group asking, ‘Who has completed the task they set them-
selves at the last meeting?’, may not be conducive to sharing and collegial
Writers’ group: getting started
1 Warm-up for writing (ﬁve minutes, in sentences, private)
What writing have you done and what do you want to do?
OR
What part of your paper/outline are you going to write today?
2 Writing on chosen topic (20–30 minutes, private or for peer review)
3 Discussion of writing done, progress made and/or exchange of papers for
review
WRITERS’ RETREAT
183

discussion. But we can all learn from our mistakes. If you ﬁnd something does
not work, or seems to work against writing and sharing, then you can all agree
not to do that again.
Dialogue
Dialogue – meaning genuine, engaged, two-way discussion of writing; discus-
sion of the content with someone who has read your writing and doing the
same for them – has real value. It can help you to clarify a point in your
argument; in fact, it can persuade you to clarify a point that you thought you
had already stated sufﬁciently clearly. Thanks to the response of a real reader
you see your writing in a new light. You can even begin to write in a more
positively dialogic way, taking more account of the different perspectives in
current debates in your area. You may end up worrying less about what your
intended readers might think and more immediately getting on with the task
of addressing their needs and interests.
You can use dialogue with peers to grow your sense of audience: by address-
ing real audiences’ responses to your writing – in a writers’ group, for example
– you can develop a sense of where your academic writing needs revision. If
you do this regularly and if your discussion goes into some depth, you can
develop your skills of written argument and, sometimes, be prompted to
develop alternative lines of argument. You can also become much more sensi-
tized to the value – rather than feeling that you are going through the motions
– of making a strong case for your work, perhaps stronger than you thought
you needed to. You can become much more skilled at addressing refutations,
and you can include this within your paper. This helps you with the important
task of writing the debate into your paper.
The face-to-face nature of the discussions, the potential for instant feedback
and the opportunity immediately to engage with feedback, mean that you
cannot just note the feedback, thank your reader and head off to mull it over
on your own. Although that is always an option, you have an opportunity to
go into more depth and to rehearse one or two options for revising what you
have written. If the writing your reader was looking at was, in any case, a rough
draft, then this is extremely valuable revision time: you can actually get some
revision done, or at least started, immediately. Leaving it until later, when the
clarity, purpose and usefulness of your reader’s comments may have evapor-
ated, will mean that you have to start from scratch: you have to take time to
recall what your readers said, you have to try and place their particular com-
ments, and you have no one to rehearse your revisions with and no immediate
feedback on your proposed revisions.
Dialogue is, therefore, very much a part of the writing process. For this to
work in reality, there probably has to be both talking and writing time, so that
DIALOGUE AND FEEDBACK
184

you can capture some of the revisions you know you have to make, some that
your reader suggests and other points that occur to you in the course of the
discussion.
More freewriting and generative writing
The stakes are higher at this stage in the writing process, as you are now com-
mitted to delivering a certain line of argument, having moved well beyond the
exploratory stage, the planning stage and even the research stage. The stakes
are also higher because you have contacted journal editors and one of them is
now perhaps if not exactly ‘waiting’ for your paper, then at least expecting it to
arrive some time soon.
Yet there is still value in low stakes writing. The original uses of these activ-
ities, such as doing freewriting as a warm-up for academic writing, are still
there, but they may have different purposes at this time, or you may use them
in different ways. This is not to say that you should move on from the earlier
uses; quite the reverse: the writing habit is always supported by low stakes
writing. Both high and low stakes writing can run in tandem from now on.
As with earlier uses of freewriting, deferring the ‘quality question’ will help
you to focus on developing the idea. The aim is to work out your writing
problem in writing. The result of these activities may be that you clarify your
thinking or that you produce writing you can insert – as it is or with some
revision – into your paper, with one eye on the total word length, in relation to
your target journal’s maximum. A missing step between you choosing one of
the purposes in the above box and generating text might be that you do not
yet have a prompt. You could, for example, use a question posed by your reader
as a prompt. Or you could use the prompt ‘What I am trying to say here is’ to
start your writing. You can then compare it with the text that you have already
written to see if there are any major or minor differences, any sentences or
fragments that will clarify your point in your paper. Freewriting, generative
Continuing uses of freewriting and generative writing
• To work out your responses to your readers’ feedback
• To work out a step in your argument that is still not clear
• To clarify a complex section in your argument that is not yet clear
• To ﬁll a gap in your argument that has just been pointed out
• To begin to articulate why you disagree with some of the feedback
MORE FREEWRITING AND GENERATIVE WRITING
185

writing and writing to prompts can, therefore, still be useful at this late stage in
the writing process in this way. This is when you can see the full range of
writing strategies combining to make up a productive academic writing
practice.
Checklist
• Working with a writing ‘buddy’ or writers’ group can help you make time to
write.
• If you can’t go on a writers’ retreat, bring features of retreat into your
workplace.
• Keep up the regular scribbling, using it to solve writing problems, as
required.
DIALOGUE AND FEEDBACK
186

9
Responding to
reviewers’ feedback
The ‘grim reader’ • Examples of reviewers’ comments
• Destructive feedback • What to do with hostile
reviews • Contradictory comments • Rejection
• Resubmission • Responding to feedback from editors
and reviewers • What now? • Acceptance • Proofs
• Offprints • Marketing your writing • What next?
• Recycling and ‘salami-slicing’ • Writing a book
• Developing a programme for writing • Checklist
It would be easier for them to reject your paper outright.
(Day 1996: 120)
Start by assuming that you’re fully entitled to applause if you have: . . .
• Gotten bad reviews with good lines in them.
(Appelbaum 1998: 241)
Even famous novelists have had their share of bad reviews: ‘Catch-22 has much
passion, comic and fervent,’ said The New York Times, ‘but it gasps for want of

craft and sensibility’ (Appelbaum 1998: 241). You should expect to get some
bad reviews in your time, and there is no reason, when you think about it, that
you should not learn something from some of them.
This chapter covers the critical ﬁnal step in writing a paper: what to do when
your paper is returned for revision. Reasons for rejection are covered ﬁrst:
anecdotally, we are told that the most common reason given is that the paper
was sent to the wrong journal, although this may just be the editor’s way of
saying your paper has not met the journal’s standard in some way, without
taking the time to tell you why.
Insights into why papers are rejected are provided in, for example, a British
Medical Journal publication listing methodological weaknesses that lead to
rejection; and the argument is made that inadequate targeting might be a more
common problem that you would think. Targeting a journal is not, it seems,
simply a matter of common sense. It seems that people frequently get it wrong.
However, it may be that your paper has not been rejected, and that you have
revisions to do. A process for working through your reviewers’ comments is
described in this chapter, along with discussion of examples of real reviewers’
feedback. A strategy for focusing on what revision actions you might want to
take is provided, along with hints and tips for writing an effective cover letter
or email.
Above all, be content that you have received feedback, since it is much worse
when a paper goes missing for months or more. Then you have to start pursuing
the editor for feedback, and this can be time-consuming and frustrating. You
may not always like the feedback you get, but it is better than not hearing
anything.
The ‘grim reader’
When you were writing your paper you naturally had to have a sense of your
reader in mind. That imagined reader may be quite different from the actual
readers. Reviewers do generally give papers a thorough critique. This may well
be the toughest critique you will ever receive on your writing, until you submit
your next paper for publication.
Sometimes reviewers appear to be unnecessarily ‘grim’; they seem to take
too hard a line, to miss points you felt you had made thoroughly in your paper
or to want you to write a completely different paper. After all the work that you
have put in to get to this point, you feel that you simply cannot be bothered to
revise it again. This is a big mistake. If the editor invites you to resubmit, the
best thing you can do is to get on with the revisions right away and you will
have a good chance of being published if you can respond positively to the
reviewers’ comments. There are no guarantees even at this stage, but you will
have a good chance if you can make the revisions they are looking for.
RESPONDING TO REVIEWERS’ FEEDBACK
188

Feedback is not always fun. Sometimes it seems plain wrong. But you can
always learn from it – perhaps an overstatement to say ‘always’, but when you
look at the paper in its published form, you will probably, from that secure
position, be more able to admit that, yes, the reviewers’ comments did improve
your paper. If you never got any negative feedback, how would you learn?
It can almost be said that you should expect to have revisions to do when
the reviewers’ comments come back. For whatever reason, this has become the
norm. Expect there to be differences of opinion among the reviewers; this is
not that unusual, across the disciplines. Expect them not to have seen what
you see as the elegant symmetry of your sentences or the robustness of your
conceptual framework.
Expect them even to take issue with your literature review and, particularly,
with your deﬁnition of the ‘problem’ you set out to solve in your work. This is
a sensitive area: you are by deﬁnition critiquing a situation, perhaps even
people who have worked in that context, perhaps also people who have
researched it before you, including some quite noted names. Your statement of
the problematic that you set out at the start of your paper, however carefully
you crafted that section, is itself open to debate and may draw ﬁre.
Sometimes it is just one word that has pressed the reviewer’s button. You
may have been just too challenging or raised a challenge that the reviewer was
not comfortable with, or in terms that he or she would not use. Modulating an
assertion by beginning with the words ‘It could be argued that’ may help
lessen the dramatic effect that some of these statements seem to have on some
reviewers. You can also align yourself with an authority in the ﬁeld or, even
better, quote an established ﬁgure in the ﬁeld whose critique of the way things
are is even more vituperative than yours. This will make yours seem quite
moderate by comparison.
This is not to say that you have to comb through every single word of your
paper looking for triggers that have set the reviewer off, but you do have to
bear in mind that reviewers will bring not only a different perspective, but
also, potentially, a different vocabulary and a different sense of what consti-
tutes publishable work than you have, particularly if you are submitting your
ﬁrst paper. Their feedback will tell you a lot about where they are coming from,
much of which, it has to be said, you will not be able to anticipate.
Examples of reviewers’ comments
The purpose of this section is to show how bad reviews can be. My intention is
to take the shock – though perhaps not the sting – out of any negative, verging
on hostile, reviews you might receive.
The following two reviews are reproduced here, word-for-word as I received
them, including the italics, but with the paper’s and journal’s titles removed.
EXAMPLES OF REVIEWERS’ COMMENTS
189

This was a co-authored paper, although only I was singled out by the reviewers
by name. The paper has since been published, with revisions.
While the key message we take from reviewer 1 has to be those two words
‘very negative’, for reviewer 2, even if you do not speak or read French, you can
probably make out such key words as ‘problème important . . . très intéres-
sant . . . bien posé . . . excellent . . . bonne synthèse’ and, strikingly, ‘mériterait
une publication’. Reviewer 1 wants the paper rejected; reviewer 2 thinks it
should be published.
When I show these two reviews to new writers, their ﬁrst reaction is shock:
‘that must have hurt’. Well, yes, it did. New writers make a number of interesting
observations:
1 The reviews are contradictory.
2 They don’t really say what is wrong with the paper and what you can do
about it.
3 This is unprofessional. It’s just too destructive. Unnecessarily so.
My co-author and I shared made similar observations, when these reviews
Reviewers’ comments
Reviewer 1
My impression on the paper by Dr R. Murray entitled [title] is very negative. A
short, 2-printed-pages statement would be useful as an invitation for discus-
sion. The authors make many superﬁcial statements, often clearly not based
on any direct experience of curricular developments.
I am convinced that our Journal of [title] would not beneﬁt from such a
lengthy manuscript whose content is very limited.
Reviewer 2
Cet article aborde la question de l’interactivité dans l’enseignement. C’est un
problème important et l’exposé est très intéressant.
Même si on n’y trouve pas d’éléments nouveaux ni de recette miracle, il
me semble que le problème est bien posé et les considerations énumerées
me semblent constituer un bon point de la situation.
Ainsi par exemple, je trouve que pour organiser un débat sur la question, la
lecture préalable de ce texte constituerait un excéllent point de départ et
éviterait de recommencer une analyse classique des avantages, inconven-
ients et difﬁcultés de l’enseignement interactif.
J’ai toutefois quelques interrogations (concernant plutôt la forme): . . .
Moyennant ces quelques remarques, je crois que, par sa bonne synthèse
d’une importante problèmatique, cet article mériterait une publication dans
l’[title of journal].
RESPONDING TO REVIEWERS’ FEEDBACK
190

arrived, but we were greatly helped and reassured by the editor’s letter, which
helped us to put the reviews in perspective. Interestingly, his opening
sentences conﬁrm both the new writers’ observations and our own:
Yet, this letter comes as a surprise to new writers: how can the editor have
decided to go ahead with the paper after even one hostile review? This raises
other questions: who decides on whether a paper is to be rejected or revised for
resubmission? How can we ﬁnd out the answers to these questions; is there
any data?
In spite of everything, and for obvious reasons, the authors’ reply to the
editor can always begin with the words ‘Thank you’. We kept the email short,
in order to save the editor time and effort, and given that we were not really
going to say very much at this time, apart from signalling the crucial point that
we did intend to resubmit:
Editor’s letter
Two experts on the Editorial Board of [journal title] examined your paper . . .
One is very opposed to the publication of your paper in its present form.
Another considers your paper interesting but suggests a re-writing of the
document. You will ﬁnd, attached, their comments. . . . Here are the most
important points to take into account:
• Introduce the problem of interactivity within the title of the paper;
• Avoid superﬁcial statements not consolidated by results;
• Reduce the length of the paper, limiting your text to the main points;
• Avoid, in the body of the text, the use of dialogue;
• Avoid also the use of ‘I’ if the paper is written by more than one author.
You will understand the need of such rewriting of your paper and I am
pleased to invite you to submit your new document as soon as possible.
Authors’ reply to the editor
Thank you for your feedback on our paper [title] which we found very useful.
As suggested, we will change the title.
We are revising the paper now and will resubmit later this month, or, at the
latest, early next month.
If there is a particular deadline you would like us to meet, can you let me
know now?
EXAMPLES OF REVIEWERS’ COMMENTS
191

Starting with ‘Thank you’ provides a positive start to our letter/email. What
else were we saying in this reply?: we signalled that we intended to be respon-
sive to the critique by our immediate action on one of the reviewers’ sugges-
tions, changing the title. We tell the editor our deadline, in order to motivate
us to get the revisions done by then. Without a deadline, or if we were the only
ones who knew when it was, revisions would fall behind a long list of other
priorities. By inviting the editor to give us a deadline, we are both trying to
be accommodating and prompting the editor to think about which issue of
the journal we will be published in. We then got on with our revisions,
resubmitted our paper and had it published in due course.
What we learned from this experience and, it must be said, from these
reviewers’ comments, is that we had overstated our critique of the status quo.
We had not provided evidence for all of our critique. We realized that much of
this problem was located in one section, so we cut it all out. This is another
important lesson: you do not need to keep every word, or even every section,
in for your paper to work.
There are, therefore, potential lessons for writers in reviewers’ feedback. The
challenge is to work your way through what can seem harsh, even overstated,
critiques, from reviewers who seem to be implying – and sometimes stating –
that the author does not know what he or she is writing about. Some reviewers
appear to want to undermine – rather than assist – writers, while others take a
more ‘instructional’ approach, though sometimes in a dogmatic tone:
Reviewer 1
Problem Number 8
Location – Page/Para: 21, last paragraph
The focus of the paper is on the quality assessment of research. The ﬁnal
paragraph makes no reference to research. It reﬂects an issue of the paper
warranting attention: this initial focus is on quality, but as one moves
through the paper the focus increasingly moves toward assessment and
evaluation. They are similar; quality is achieved through assessment and
evaluation. But the paper is on research quality. Keep to that topic.
Reviewer 2
The general case made in this paper is clearly stated and given quite good
general support both from the literature cited and from arguments within
the paper. However, I have several serious reservations, which can be sum-
marised as follows:
1 I think that the paper reveals a lack of comprehension about TQM and
furthermore it merely asserts its central inﬂuence in UK Higher Educa-
tion without citing evidence. The result is that some of its criticisms are
not necessarily aimed at the most appropriate target.
RESPONDING TO REVIEWERS’ FEEDBACK
192

The reference to ‘several serious reservations’ naturally rang alarm bells, but,
again, as long as the paper was not actually rejected, there was still work to be
done and a chance of publication.
We could critique the critiques: there are, of course, certain principles in any
ﬁeld that we can legitimately ‘merely assert’, since they are not open to ques-
tion, or, you may have judged, not as open to debate as other statements in
your paper. Yet, clearly, in our resubmission, we would have to distinguish
more carefully and perhaps explicitly between what can and cannot be merely
asserted. Comment number 2 makes this point again, locating the ﬂaw more
precisely in the paper. Comment number 3 may be making the point a third
time, though it would be worth thinking about this carefully.
As for the comment about recommendations: is it not the nature of
recommendations to be ‘sketchy’? We obviously thought so, and judged that,
whatever we thought, this was appropriate for this journal. Nevertheless,
something required further development in this case. This comment is a
reminder that even conclusions should be mini-arguments, with the case
made for them, and the link between evidence and conclusions made quite
clear: what is it that you can – and cannot – evidence?
By contrast, some reviewers can be quite positive, even encouraging:
2 A number of assertions are made, especially in the central part of the
paper, without adequate referencing or supporting evidence.
3 The recommendations in the ﬁnal part of the paper are rather sketchy
and lacking in both detail and justiﬁcation.
The encouraging review
Thank you for asking me to review this paper. This a comprehensive and
well-written paper about the use of medical humanities in occupational
therapy. While I enjoyed reading it, I am not sure it is ready for publication
as yet. Essentially it describes 3 courses in which medical humanities are
used. Although the courses do have outcomes, there are assumptions made
within the article that the outcomes have been met without any evidence or
data to support this.
In addition, the article is unduly long at 8,000 words.
I do feel it would be very helpful to have a contribution on how medical
humanities could be taught in the journal. I wonder if these authors would
be prepared to redraft this as a much shorter version on how a medical
humanities course could be constructed and the possible beneﬁts.
EXAMPLES OF REVIEWERS’ COMMENTS
193

It is difﬁcult to predict what kind of feedback you are going to get. The point
is to be prepared for the worst, to try to treat any feedback analytically – rather
than emotionally – and to work out the extent to which you can deliver what
they have asked for and how you are going to produce it. If there are issues
raised by the reviewers with which you disagree, you can, of course, go back to
the editor for further discussion.
Destructive feedback
It does sometimes seem that there are reviewers out there who like nothing
better than to tear a paper – and its author – to shreds. New writers some-
times feel that they are being held back for no good reason, that the
reviewers are simply protecting their power base and the narrow concerns of
a small group.
Reviewers, given the chance, might reply to that accusation by assert-
ing that they are responsible for upholding the standards of the journal
speciﬁcally and the discipline generally. They might complain that this
is quite an arduous job, when they are already very busy people, for
which they receive no reward or recompense in cash or time. In fact, many
reviewers report that they are frustrated by the falling standard of papers
they receive to review and are impatient when they feel that authors
have simply not done enough work, have not bothered to present their
papers in the appropriate format, or are using peer review as a development
process.
All of this speculation does nothing to take the sting out of destructive
feedback. Nor is it entirely acceptable to be destructive when we all know
they can write their comments in a different way. You have to wonder, if
reviews were not anonymized, would reviewers be so destructive? Some jour-
nals distribute written guidelines for reviewers, encouraging them to provide
constructive criticism, reminding them that their comments are sent to
authors.
However, there is another way of reading destructive reviews: what seems
‘destructive’, when you ﬁrst set eyes on it, may not, in fact, be as serious
as you think. The comments may be very negative, yet the editor may
only request ‘minor revisions’. Even comments that seem to destroy your
structure and style – carefully considered and targeted though they were –
can still be translated into revision action points, as long as the editor
has not used the word ‘rejected’. The editor is not out to undermine or
contradict reviewers, but they do often work at softening the blow. For
example, the following reviewers’ comments did not stop the editor from
using the word ‘positive’ in his or her cover letter, inviting the authors to
resubmit:
RESPONDING TO REVIEWERS’ FEEDBACK
194

The title is a bit weak, long-winded, and descriptive. A more direct title
is suggested.
The text uses a plodding and subject-indeterminate passive form,
and some awkward construction, such as, ‘The results identiﬁed . . .
to be . . .’. Sentences tend to be long and over-structured, ‘. . . the epi-
demiology of . . . on . . . may be inﬂuenced by . . . of . . . and . . . at . . .
during’.
. . . Results and Discussion: The authors proceed to analyze different
factors and conclude that some are more important and others not. They
proceed to discuss in great length various factors, explaining why some
intuitive ones, such as water temperature, did not turn up as signiﬁcant,
while others did . . .
Overall, I found the paper meritorious, but difﬁcult to read. The study
is of practical value and consequence in the industry, and may be applic-
able in other organizations. I do not have speciﬁc scientiﬁc changes (the
authors appear to be careful researchers), but it would help the authors’
case if they tightened up their writing style a bit, especially in the
Discussion, which is much too long.
What can we learn from this example of reviewers’ feedback?: that reviewers
have their own idiosyncratic view of what constitutes good academic writing?;
that there are no general rules in writing for publication at all?; or that the
authors of the paper can still improve their style and, more importantly,
targeting?
• Some of the comments seem to go against good practice: for example, the
reviewer is not a fan of descriptive titles, although for many of us, keeping
titles descriptive is a key goal.
• The passive form seems to be so heavily endorsed in some disciplines that
some writers will be surprised to see this critique of its use; but is it a prob-
lem with speciﬁcally how these authors used it, rather than with passive in
general?
• Is there an implied negative in ‘at great length’ – and does it matter? As
long as the editor has requested ‘minor revisions’, all the authors have to
do is work out how these comments translate into revisions and, it
would seem, how much to cut from the ‘much too long’ Discussion
section.
DESTRUCTIVE FEEDBACK
195

What to do with hostile reviews
Once we lose our sense of grievance everything, including physical pain,
becomes easier to bear.
(Greer 1991: 428)
Taking the subject of negative or destructive reviews one step further brings us
to what seem to be openly hostile reviews. Any of the above reviews could be
seen as hostile, at least in parts, by new writers. The point is that you have to
learn from all the reviews, even if your paper is rejected.
Having a sense of grievance is very different from taking out a ‘grievance’,
formalizing your complaint. A sense of personal grievance about a hostile
review can inhibit revision and resubmission. Yet, if your paper has not been
rejected, and if you have a good chance of getting published, why not just
follow the reviewers’ suggestions? Will they really change it all that much?
If your paper is rejected, you can revise it for submission to another journal.
There is no point in a hostile response to a hostile review. What, after all, is
your goal: to get your paper published or to improve the standard of reviewing
in academic journals?
Remember the recurring weaknesses, reasons for rejection and common
problems covered in this book – have you committed one or more of these
errors? Even if you worked hard to avoid them, you may have made a minor
slip that has irritated the reviewer. For example, remember how easy it is to
overstate a critique of others’ work. There may be one part of the paper that
has triggered the hostility, and if you can work out which part it is, cut it. As a
ﬁrst step, take a good look at your contextualizing section(s), where new
writers are at most risk of overstating a criticism of someone else’s work, or of
education in a certain ﬁeld or professional practice, giving the impression that
nothing is right. That may be where you have drawn ﬁre. Sometimes all you
need is a ‘perhaps’ or a ‘potential’ to modulate your argument where it is
overstated. The key point is not to take it personally.
You also have to own up and admit that you can still improve your paper.
Even though when you sent it in it was in a form you thought was as close to
‘perfect’ as you could get it, others will not see it that way. Some of this you can
anticipate; some of it will take you by surprise.
Contradictory comments
It seemed that reviewers did not overtly disagree on particular points;
instead, they wrote about different topics, each making points that were
RESPONDING TO REVIEWERS’ FEEDBACK
196

appropriate and accurate. As a consequence, their recommendations
about editorial decisions showed hardly any agreement.
(Fiske and Fogg 1990: 591)
It is not unusual for reviewers to disagree – not that they know this
themselves – in their comments on a paper. This can be disconcerting, but,
once again, if the editor has not used the word ‘rejection’, then you still have a
chance to do some revisions.
There is no need, therefore, to be thrown by such disagreements. Perhaps
they merely reﬂect on-going debates in your ﬁeld. Perhaps there are shades in
this debate of which you were not aware, and this is what has come out in your
reviewers’ responses.
Whatever the cause – and it might be more interesting than productive to
ponder this at any great length – your task is still to work out what the
responses mean, not how they came to be so divergent. There may, of course,
be lessons to be learned from this, but you should not be too shocked if it
happens.
Rejection
. . . perseverance and the ability not to get downcast by rejection, which is
certain and ongoing, is just part of the game – even when you’re
published.
(Messud quoted in Roberts et al. 2002: 50)
You need to be able to transform rejection – and what feels like rejection, but is
only a request for changes – into learning.
There is a useful and thought-provoking list of reasons why papers are
rejected in Greenhalgh (2001). Some would argue that papers are rejected
because the work is simply not good enough, but the number of contradict-
ory reviews – even in scientiﬁc disciplines – suggest that it is not as simple
as that.
Your paper may be rejected if there are weaknesses in your work; but there
may also be weaknesses in how you have explained your work or, more
importantly, in the case you have made for doing the work in the way that you
did. The following adaptation of Greenhalgh is designed to show what you
might be able to learn from common reasons for rejection about the skills of
written argument:
REJECTION
197

Common reasons why papers are rejected for publication
(adapted from Greenhalgh 2001)
• Your study did not examine an issue considered important by the journal’s
editor/reviewers. Spell out why it might be important to the journal’s
readers. Make a stronger case for its importance.
• Your study was not original, or you did not make a strong enough case for
its originality. If you cannot make the case for ‘originality’, try another
term, one that suits your work better.
• Your study did not test your hypothesis, or you did not make the connection
between the two sufﬁciently clear, strong or explicit.
• You should have conducted your study in a different way, or your argument
for your method in the context in which you were working is weak. Were
your research procedures sufﬁciently deﬁned and argued for? Were you
careful to make the case against logical and widely accepted alternatives
that you did not use?
• You compromised on your research design. Can you make a stronger case
for this? Even if this was the result of practical difﬁculties or resource
deﬁciencies, can you still learn lessons from this? Is a smaller-scale report
in order?
• If your sample was judged too small, should you be presenting and analys-
ing your data in different terms: as a pilot study or a case study? Are there
limited lessons you can learn? Can you make the limits to generalizability
more explicit? Did you acknowledge the potential limitations of a small
sample?
• If your study is judged to be ‘uncontrolled’, then perhaps you have submit-
ted your paper to the wrong journal. Or perhaps you have to be more
selective in what you are calling ‘data’.
• If your statistical analysis is found to be incorrect, then you have some work
to do before you submit your paper elsewhere, if it was found to be
inappropriate here.
• The conclusions you drew from your data were not justiﬁed. Is this, again, a
case for strengthening your argument for your conclusions, perhaps even
going through them one by one?
• The reviewers judged that you had a conﬂict of interest, for example
ﬁnancial gain from publication. Did you make a sufﬁcient case for your
safeguards against bias?
• If the reviewers tell you that your paper was so badly written that it was
difﬁcult or impossible to understand, then you may have some work to do
to improve your writing style – but you probably knew that anyway.
Alternatively, you may be a very good writer, but might have to make
more of a stylistic compromise between your preferred style of writing
and the dominant style in the journal at this time.
RESPONDING TO REVIEWERS’ FEEDBACK
198

When new writers see this list they are either incredulous that authors
would submit papers with such serious weaknesses or unclear as to the rele-
vance of these criteria: ‘What does this have to do with our writing?’ Presum-
ably, the many authors who were rejected for these reasons had worked hard
to avoid these weaknesses and knew full well how high reviewers’ standards
would be. Surely these are all common sense? Or perhaps the authors still have
work to do, not necessarily on their research, but on their writing.
Of course, this list only provides insight into one set of academic disciplines
– medicine and the health professions – but it also shows the range of reasons
for rejection, and we should remember that this list is offered as ‘common’
reasons. There are other such lists and perhaps the best use of them is to
consider how you can strengthen your arguments so as to avoid these weak-
nesses. Some writers who address common weaknesses take the more positive
line of suggesting how you might avoid them:
These suggestions seem to be about solving problems in the text, rather
than the methodology. Each problem may have its origins in insufﬁcient
argument for, to take point number 4, the literature that is referenced. In
other words, you could argue that the literature you have referenced is suf-
ﬁcient, and that to reference other literature would be to lose focus on your
topic and, potentially, in your argument. Yet, some reviewers do want you to
acknowledge a wide range of research. Whether that is because you have
left their work out of your review, or whether adding other references will
genuinely strengthen your review – and thereby the impact of your argument
– is for you to judge.
What revision actions could you take: could you simply add one sentence on
all the other sources, or one on each, without doing too much harm to the
continuity and focus of your paper? Or could you add a sentence that makes a
more explicit case for the literature you have referenced as sufﬁcient for the
purpose of this paper? Or should you really have stated, explicitly, why you
have not dealt with certain literature that some will think does belong in any
discussion of your topic; since you have a sound reason for doing so, should
Solutions to common problems
1 Following publication guidelines
2 Using appropriate terminology
3 Informing the reader of sources of information
4 Providing sufﬁcient background literature
5 Analysing and synthesizing the literature adequately
6 Providing continuity of content
(Hayes 1996: 25–7)
REJECTION
199

you perhaps go ahead and say what it is? You may be putting your head above
the parapet unnecessarily – and for no particular beneﬁt to your paper – since
what you most want your reader to notice and think about is, surely, other
aspects of your paper.
The point is you will probably have to have this mini-debate with yourself
about how to respond to reviewers’ comments. This debate may be easier or
quicker if conducted with someone else, particularly if this is the ﬁrst paper
you have submitted to an academic journal.
As with the previous list, the context is the health professions, but there are
points here that could be helpful to new writers in other disciplines. As with
the previous list, you may think that these are pretty basic errors for authors to
make. You wonder if that is because the discipline context – occupational
therapy – is not as mature, in terms of published research, as, say, medicine.
Yet the previous list was taken from the medical context, suggesting that such
errors are not just oversights on the part of inexperienced authors, since even
experienced authors have had such ‘basic’ feedback from time to time.
Remember how ‘basic’ some of the reviews quoted earlier in this chapter were,
commenting on the authors’ writing skills, accusing them of not knowing
about the subject and of not writing a paper about what they said they would.
These critiques may still seem overstated, but this is the one remaining hurdle
between you and publication.
At the end of the day, whatever the reason for the reviewer’s comment, be it
bias or genuine sense of weakness in your paper, you just have to get on with
revising it, unless, of course, you feel that the comment is inappropriate or
takes you beyond the scope of your paper. One thing is sure: you will learn
more about your target journal from reviewers’ comments on your writing.
Resubmission
If your paper has not been rejected, get on with the revisions and resubmit as
quickly as you can. Acknowledge that you may have overstated a point here or
lacked clarity in a point there.
For example, if a reviewer says that your critique of the literature, policy of
some other dimension of context is ‘well worn’, you do not necessarily have to
dig up the original and intervening critiques and reference them, nor do you
have to invent a new type of critique, since that might not work well with the
rest of your paper, nor do you have to delete it, if you think it is an important
foundation for your argument. Perhaps all that you need to do is to follow the
reviewer’s lead by acknowledging that it is a well-worn critique, but an
important one that is still current and, therefore, all the more serious for not
being new and, worse, for not being ‘ﬁxed’. Your revised text might therefore
read, ‘Although it is now well established that there are weaknesses in the
RESPONDING TO REVIEWERS’ FEEDBACK
200

current method of XXX, it seems that, as yet, no action had been taken to
address these weaknesses’, or ‘The argument that XXX is a weak method of
YYY has been much rehearsed/discussed in the literature; however . . .’ or ‘It
has been argued convincingly elsewhere (references) that . . .’.
If you are accused by a reviewer of being over-critical or even ‘vituperative’,
you could, again, acknowledge that your criticism is harsh, but well founded
or strongly stated for a purpose, such as to draw attention to the seriousness
of the issue or the severity of a problem that has been allowed to persist. Of
course, if you are going to say that, you will have to be sure that it is both
true and accurate. You can always take the moral high ground and say that
you have to do this difﬁcult harsh critique because there are those who are
suffering in some way, or that research itself is weakened in some way.
You can modulate such assertions, so as to avoid drawing a new form of
critique from the editor when you resubmit, by adding the odd ‘perhaps’ and
‘potentially’.
Check with someone who has been published in your target journal recently,
but start thinking about changes you can make and, as you go through the
reviewers’ comments note the types of changes they are suggesting:
• One section seems to have drawn a lot of ﬁre – consider cutting it.
• You do not agree with a reviewer’s comment – take it up with the editor.
• A couple of comments are ‘beyond the scope of this paper’ – say so.
• Offer to discuss your revisions further, if you think/know this particular
editor usually/ever takes time to do this.
Once you have had six or seven papers published, you will have your own list
of the types of changes you have to make.
Responding to feedback from editors and reviewers
Reply immediately:
1 Be positive; thank the editor for the ‘useful feedback’.
2 Say that you will revise your paper.
3 Ask for a deadline.
(4 Follow the editor’s interpretation of the reviewers’ comments.)
5 ‘Translate’ each comment into a revision action.
For example: Page 2
Cut  . . .
Page 6
Explain . . .
Page 11
Add . . .
6 Discuss them with someone.
7 Do revisions immediately; return the revised paper as soon as you can.
RESPONDING TO FEEDBACK
201

When you send in the revisions:
1 Attach a letter/attach it to an email.
2 Give a point-by-point account of how you have acted on the editor’s/
reviewers’ suggestions, using your revision action list. Keep these brief, easy
to scan.
For example: Page 2
Cut . . .
Page 6
Explained . . .
Page 11
Added . . .
3 Do this in bullet points or a numbered list, or two lists, if there were two
reviewers.
What now?
While as a new writer you were right to focus on getting one paper into print,
in reality, and perhaps from now on, you have to have more than one piece of
writing on the go at any one time. If you feel up to it, you can put in place a
more complex programme of writing, particularly if your institution has set a
target of two publications per year.
Nobody hates writers more than writers do. . . . Nobody loves them more,
either.
(Atwood 2002: 97)
Are other people happy with your success? Does it matter? Margaret
Atwood’s description of the love-hate relationship between writers may apply
less to you in the context of your writers’ group, if you have one, but it rings
true for some of the more competitive and even actively undermining
reactions of some colleagues.
Do not be shocked if some colleagues ignore your success while others be-
little it by, for example, remarking that the journal in which you have just been
published does not have much standing. Even when you write a best-selling
book, you can ﬁnd some senior colleague who is keen to tell you that he or she
had a book published that did not sell well because it was ‘not that kind of
book’. In other words, the put-downs may come thick and fast and you may
ﬁnd this heartily disappointing, if you were expecting collegial mutual respect,
but it is not just you – it’s them. Some people cannot stand others’ success.
They are not going to change, and they need not change your attitude to your
own work. You did what you set out to do. Time to set a new writing goal and
get on with that.
Focus on your writing: once you have had a paper accepted, take time to take
stock. What, if anything, did you learn in the course of becoming a published
writer? Did you ﬁnd that there were things you still had to learn? As you look
RESPONDING TO REVIEWERS’ FEEDBACK
202

to your next paper, can you gather some informal ‘intelligence’ about other
journals from other writers? Other newly published writers may be willing to
trade information with you.
Changing your ﬁrst name to ‘Professor’ might open some doors, but not for
long. Another option is to make some effort to join another élite conversation,
perhaps by working with a Professor. The top journals represent perhaps an
even more select group. There may be even more nepotism at that level, a
highly contentious statement, but people do tell me that there is evidence of
this. Since much of it is anecdotal, you will have to make up your own mind,
perhaps not being swayed by any one person’s anecdotes. Yet it has been said
to me on numerous occasions, in many institutions and in several countries,
that there is discrimination on the basis of gender, race and class in all aspects
of academic life, and we only have to do a quick scan of posts, publications and
senior appointments to see that they are not representative of the general
academic population. Nevertheless, if you are to be a publishing academic
writer, you have to ﬁnd a way to join the debate that they are effectively
running. This is a discussion that was covered in an earlier chapter, but these
issues may raise their ugly heads again as you set off on your next paper(s),
particularly if you are thinking of targeting one of the ‘élite’ journals.
Acceptance
The article’s acceptance for publication is the crucial proof of its value.
(Rossen 1993: 161)
What does acceptance of your article signify to you? That you have ﬁnally
reached the high standard required? That you have packaged your work in
such a way that it can be easily assimilated into the academic community? Or
that you have, with the help of the reviewers, learned how to make your
writing persuasive to that community?
What will it signify to others? It may indeed signal to others that your work
should be taken more seriously, since someone with power – the editor – has
accepted it. It may be time, therefore, for you to acknowledge, if you have not
already done so, that your work is important and that your writing can per-
suade others that it is important. This may be all the more important if, as you
go on to write more and more, colleagues challenge not only your publications
but also, oddly, the processes by which you produced them, as if you were
practising some dark art of writing, when all you were doing was putting into
practice the tried and tested methods for productive academic writing:
As long as I had only written and published one or two books no one ever
inquired or commented on my writing process, on how long it took me to
ACCEPTANCE
203

complete the writing of a book. Once I began to write books regularly,
sometimes publishing two at the same time, more and more comments
were made to me about how much I was writing. Many of these comments
conveyed the sense that I was either doing something wrong by writing so
much, or at least engaged in writing acts that needed to be viewed with
suspicion.
(hooks 1999: 14)
Let’s assume that there will always be people who excel at ‘damning with faint
praise’ and that publication will not give you immunity from that type of
assault; in fact, it may increase it.
Do not expect that the new status accorded to your work will be ‘accepted’
within your department. Colleagues or heads of department may actively
undermine your work, perhaps questioning the status of the journal in which
you have just been published. You already know who is and is not likely to
behave in this way. Welcome, therefore, those who ‘damn with faint praise’,
since that is a relatively mild attack. Above all, do not expect them to change
simply because you have. Your goal was to get published; it was not to convert
your peers to congenial collegiality.
To complicate matters – and motivations – further, you may have a sense of
anti-climax: it is so long since you started your paper, and you are so aware of
the modesty of its contribution and are now certain that it will make no more
than a gentle ripple in the sea of published work. You may ﬁnd yourself
agreeing with your colleagues’ critiques. Remember that their criticisms are
probably not based on a reading of your paper; they will criticize freely
whether or not they have even read the sentence or two on your web site
about this paper.
If their criticisms seem to be marginalizing you – and not just your work –
remind them of the relevance and value of your work for the university and
the department at opportune moments, such as appraisals, reviews and even
staff meetings. Don’t wait to be asked; just tell them. If this does not work,
persist. Do not expect to see or hear any marked change in their attitudes. They
are not going to say ‘Oh, yes, I see it now – your work is indeed very important.
I’m sorry I missed that before.’
If you feel you are genuinely being marginalized or even bullied, it may be
time to take a different course of action, rather than trying to sort it all out
yourself. You could start with an informal discussion, seeking advice from your
head of department, or manager, or personnel or human resources. If need be,
you have a right to take some formal action. Some people will tirelessly
undermine their colleagues; be ready to look for ways to make sure that does
not happen to you or to stop it if or when it does.
Once your paper has been accepted, you may feel a bit cynical – now you
know it’s all just a game, and it has to be played by their rules. You knew this
would happen. You have had to compromise your work and hedge your state-
ments so much that you feel your voice will not be heard and the value of your
RESPONDING TO REVIEWERS’ FEEDBACK
204

work is diminished. You still feel that you should be allowed to write what you
think; even if people do not want to know, they should be made to hear it.
In some ways, you may still feel exactly as you did when you started.
Although you are about to be published, you may be even more convinced
that academic power is wielded by a very select group, that they are not out to
share their power and that you will never be able to develop the kind of
authority they enjoy when they write. Your writing will always be coming
from a more contested place.
In some disciplines, of course, these issues have no relevance; it is the quality
of the work that matters. If your work is good enough, the argument goes, you
will be published in chemistry, for example. No question. Perhaps this is truer
for other disciplines than new writers realize or are prepared to admit.
Proofs
The proofs show you exactly what your paper will look like when it is
printed in the journal. This is editors’ and authors’ last chance to make ﬁnal
corrections to errors. This is not the time to make ﬁnal revisions. Make
essential corrections only, since any changes could be costly. Editors will tell
you what they want you to do and, more importantly, what they do not
want you to do, so check their instructions carefully and follow them to the
letter. Check every word against your original ﬁle. Check all your references.
There is usually a very quick turn around at the proof stage, often as little as
three days.
If you have to make a change that adds even as little as one line, try to ‘catch
up’ by cutting a line elsewhere on the same page. There is no point in saving a
line on another page, as that would require them to reset two whole pages. You
should have a really good reason for doing this, probably drawn to your atten-
tion by the proof reader, such as including a reference in your list at the end of
the paper that you have not actually referred to in the paper. This means that
you either have to add the reference to your text, if you can ﬁnd somewhere
that it will ﬁt on an existing line, or you may have to simply cut the reference.
It may be a reference left over from an earlier draft that can be cut. The key
motivation here is not to use this as an opportunity to ‘polish’ or ‘perfect’ your
paper, but to make no changes at all, if at all possible.
Once you are at this stage, when you know that the next stage is the arrival
of proofs, check with the editor about roughly when that will be. This is a
courtesy that may save you all some grief later. If you are going to be off
campus or out of the ofﬁce for even a day or two, this will cause problems for a
journal that has a three-day turn around time. Some journals allow longer for
authors to check the proofs. You need to know exactly what you are dealing
with. The editor may be able to tell you exactly when the proofs will be sent
PROOFS
205

out and expected back. You can then arrange for them to be sent to you – if you
are away – or emailed to another address.
Offprints
Offprints are quality prints of your paper, sometimes with a paper cover,
sometimes just stapled together like a high-quality photocopy on good paper.
They look a lot better than photocopies. Whether or not that means that it is
worth paying for extra copies is up to you. Some journals no longer provide
them.
If you have some money in a special fund, or if your department has, then
this might be a good use of what is bound to be a small proportion of the total
fund. It is good for the department and the university, not just for you, to
publicize your work by distributing offprints. If even part of the fund is desig-
nated for support of research, then you can make the case that this is one way
of doing that.
Some journals offer you a set of offprints – perhaps 20 or 50 – at no charge.
Others will send you a note of their rate for additional copies, sometimes
charging for orders of 50 or 100. Some will give you a complete copy of the
issue of the journal in which your paper appears.
The key use of offprints is to send them to people whom you know have
an interest in your work, either because they have supported you or because
they are working in the area themselves. Send them offprints as soon as
they come in. Send them to people you want to know about your publica-
tion, even if they are not interested in your area and are unlikely to even
read it. Give one to your boss. If your department has one of those glass
cases for publications, get one in there now. If it does not, suggest it. At the
very least, you can make your publication more visible in your department
by sticking an offprint on your wall, leaving your door open, so that every-
one sees it. Or you could stick it on the outside of your door, though it may
‘walk’.
Take your offprints to conferences and distribute them to those interested
people who come up to talk to you after your session. It may seem a bit arro-
gant to buy copies of your paper with the express purpose of sending them out
to people whom you think will want to read them, but this is just another
means of continuing the dialogue with your peers. They will probably read
your abstract and then ﬂick to your references to see if there is anything new
there, anything they have missed in the literature or any new connections you
make.
If you were worried about sending your paper to your peers, you may be
even more reticent about sending offprints to people you do not know, but, as
with any other aspect of research, you can ﬁnd out who is likely to be receptive
RESPONDING TO REVIEWERS’ FEEDBACK
206

and who is likely to be insulted, if that is what you are worried about. If you
have not done so already, research the peers – those writing in your area –
whom you do not know and ask around: who knows who? Finally, if there is
someone with whom you would like to collaborate or write, this is a good way
to introduce yourself to them.
Whatever you do with offprints, make sure that you ﬁle them in a sensible
place so that you can ﬁnd them if someone does ask for a copy. Start a new ﬁle,
even if it only has one paper in it for the moment. Above all, do not just leave
your offprints in a pile to gather dust. Put them to work.
Marketing your writing
Given that a small number of people may read your article once it is published
in the journal, there is a case for marketing published articles. No one will do
this for you; it’s up to you. Since getting people to read, or at least know about,
your writing is crucial for getting further responses and feedback, and possibly
invitations to write, this is a much more important topic than new writers
generally realize. Yet, with a few exceptions (Thyer 1994), this step is given
surprisingly little consideration in descriptions of the process of writing for
academic journals.
Some, of course, will tell you that if your work is good enough it does not
need to be ‘marketed’. Even when you successfully market your writing, some
will come out with veiled or quite openly snide remarks such as, ‘I’ll say this
for you, you certainly know how to promote your work’. Some people will make
that a compliment; others will always make it sound like an insult.
You can even try to get your work featured in the newspapers or educational
press. Most newspapers have an education day, often with a higher education
section. If you can interest the relevant editor, providing him or her with an
‘angle’ on your work – make it topical, ﬁnd something in your work that will
be of interest to people outside your ﬁeld – then you will reach a much larger
audience than you did with your journal publications. Can you relate your
work to recent events, trends or crises? Is there anything interestingly conten-
tious about your work? This may be your chance to have a say about some of
the issues you had to leave out of your paper.
There are also professional journals and magazines, for which you might be
able to write a short piece yourself. This will not, of course, ‘count’ in the great
scheme of things, but it will let many more people know about your publica-
tion. It may also develop your proﬁle and network. Again, this may be your
chance to bring in some of the issues, perhaps concerning practice or imple-
mentation – real-world issues – that you had to leave out of your more
academic paper.
Finally, remember that you can and should still be talking about your
MARKETING YOUR WRITING
207

subject at conferences and other meetings. Just because you have published a
paper does not mean that you have to move on to a completely new area; your
published paper, itself possibly the development of a conference paper, can be
the subject of your next presentation. If this seems like just so much recycling,
think again: writing about the same subject more than once, in more than one
way and for more than one outlet is the way to develop your expertise and
understanding. It is not just a matter of getting the maximum number of ‘hits’
from your material; it is about getting the maximum amount of learning out of
your publishing.
Publishers, and perhaps others, have certain likes and dislikes (Baverstock
2001: 47–8), which may be instructive to writers for academic journals:
While this may not all seem relevant to your paper, remember that some
journals do feature papers in their leaﬂets and web sites. One paper I had
featured in this way has been the one that most people have requested copies
of, leading to new contacts and, more importantly, contact with people who
are interested in my work.
What next?
One of the aims of this ﬁnal chapter is to prompt you to think strategically,
tactically and creatively about the potential subjects and stories of your
papers:
Publishers’ likes and dislikes
Dislikes
Rudeness . . . . Not thanking them
Failure to give information on request or help with promotion
Unrealistic expectations of advertising
Likes
Focus: think about what you want to discuss before you call/email
Efﬁciency: ask for things in plenty of time
Contact: Send your contacts the occasional note of forthcoming
key events and what might happen (for example, meetings at
which you are speaking and at which information on your book
[or paper] could be handed out) and a note of thanks if things
have gone well! This is not just good nature – you will be remem-
bered, and if any additional opportunities come up (for example,
‘ﬁller’ advertisements available at last-minute prices), maybe it
will be your book that gets included (p. 48).
RESPONDING TO REVIEWERS’ FEEDBACK
208

• Which journals should you be writing for now or soon?
• Which ones do you think you have little or no chance of getting into?
• Why exactly is that?
• Can you convert that into a plus?
• How could your topic complement their papers?
• What would it take to make them consider your topics/ideas/work?
• Can you make explicit connections with their publication?
If you are doubtful about these suggestions, remember how doubtful you
felt about your ﬁrst paper – possibly at every single stage of writing – and
recognize that having it accepted means that your work is worth something.
Talk yourself into thinking this way – or get someone to help you to do so –
about some other aspect of your work. Be creative. What would it take for
one of the top journals in your ﬁeld to give serious consideration to a paper
from you, particularly if you have limited research data, proﬁle or
experience?
Just because you have been through the process once does not mean that
you can dodge the systematic process of targeting a journal. In fact, if you are
planning to target a different journal for your next publication, you should
perhaps go through the same process of analysing it in some detail. This may
take you less time, but it should, I would argue, be no less thorough. As before,
you can learn a lot about writing from working out how published articles are
put together.
Consider collaborating with colleagues or students. There may be others, in
your writers’ group, for example, who are keen to publish in different areas.
You can also write about your teaching and supervision roles. Other aspects of
academic practice are open to debate. You may want to join current debates on
such matters as research training. In some systems these types of publication
will not count in the scoring system, but they can demonstrate your willing-
ness to develop in these roles and you might also learn something about
academic writing.
In some disciplines this will seem nonsensical: surely you can only learn
about writing for your journals by writing for your journals? Surely those who
have research to write about do so, and those who do not, write about their
teaching and supervision instead? Again, as teacher accreditation becomes
more established in higher education, it is a mistake to discount altogether the
practice of learning and writing about your teaching, at the very least. That is
one way of demonstrating your knowledge in this area, as in any other.
If you are thinking of writing in another area, you might want to co-author
with a colleague who is already established in that area, or whose home discip-
line it is. They will have more background than you; you will have a new
perspective to offer them. It can be an interesting combination.
Many outputs that do not ‘count’ can be useful stepping stones to publica-
tion and regular academic writing. They also get your name noticed in the
journals: book reviews, letters about published papers or current debates.
WHAT NEXT?
209

There is no need to wait until you are asked to review a book; write to the
reviews editor and offer to do so.
As before, you should start looking for your next paper in all the obvious
places: your conference presentations, workshops, consultancies and brieﬁng
papers can all work as starters for further papers, for disseminating your work
and ‘marketing your writing’ (Thyer 1994; Baverstock 2001). While in some
ﬁelds, none of these would be considered as ‘research’, they can be the starting
point for a piece of academic writing that might at some stage become a paper.
As always, you have to ﬁnd the right journal to publish it in.
The key step at this stage is therefore balancing three factors in your writing
decision:
• Which journal do you want to target now?
• Which topic do you want to write about now?
• What work have you done that is potentially publishable?
In some ﬁelds academics know exactly where their next paper is coming
from, since it follows on immediately from the one before. But in others the
process is a matter of juggling answers to these three questions; it is unlikely
that you will be able to answer all three questions right away and come up with
an instant topic. Your answer to one question may not match the others. For
example, your preferred topic may be the least likely one for your preferred
journal, and you will have to decide whether or not to persevere with it.
Whatever ﬁeld you are in, there are almost always things you left out of the
paper you have just completed. There are things that occurred to you as you
wrote. There are questions you did not answer and possibly new questions
generated by your work. There were matters – worth discussing in another
forum – that were beyond the scope of that paper. In your conclusion you
referred to other questions that merit further study or simply consideration.
These can, in some disciplines, be starting points for your next few papers,
your future research or for future collaborations.
Recycling and ‘salami-slicing’
A variant on duplicate publication is ‘salami publishing’, in which each
bit of research is divided into the thinnest possible slices (sometimes
referred to as ‘LPUs’, for ‘least publishable units’), with each slice submit-
ted as a separate article. This is marginally more ethical than duplicate
submission, but it is equally wasteful.
(Luey 2002: 16)
Yet, if you are to develop a proﬁle in a certain area, you will have to write
about it several times. It is a mistake, in any case, to look around for a new
RESPONDING TO REVIEWERS’ FEEDBACK
210

topic, once your paper has been published. Therefore the term ‘salami-slicing’
– often taken to be a cynical strategy – can be recovered to deﬁne the strategy
of planning a series of papers from any piece of work or project. It is also a
useful reminder to new writers not to put the whole salami into any one paper.
Similarly, ‘recycling’ can be a useful term for describing the process of covering
the same ground in a series of papers, not in the sense that you are repeating
yourself, but in the sense that you are taking up in a new paper where your
previous paper left off. This is a prompt to go back to all that material that you
cut from your ﬁrst paper and kept in a separate ﬁle. Can that now be the
subject of your next paper?
Writing a book
. . . the so-called research assessment exercise, a crazy Soviet-style set of
production targets for goods that nobody wants. It coerces even those
who have the decency not to want to publish much into fulﬁlling their
production norms.
(Allison 2004: 14)
Thinking of writing a book because you want to? Or because you think it is
expected of you? Or because a publisher has asked you to? Or some combin-
ation of the three? Writing a book can be one way of bringing all your papers
together – in a new form – to establish a synthesis and a coherent body of
work. The book form can allow you more freedom of expression than is pos-
sible in academic journals. In terms of time, it can take just as long to get a
paper from inception to publication, sometimes as much as two years, as it
does to write a book.
See publishers’ web sites for guidance on how to put together a proposal,
but, as for academic journals, contact the appropriate editor ﬁrst with an initial
enquiry to see if they are interested in your topic.
Developing a programme for writing
There are several ways in which you could draw up a programme of writing for
yourself for the next ﬁve years or so.
Year 1
First paper submitted/published (plus ideas for others)
Year 2
Draw up list of other possible papers, convert conference papers into
publications, writing several papers at the same time, target new
journal
211
DEVELOPING A PROGRAMME FOR WRITING

Year 3
Targeting higher level of journal
Year 4
Writing for journals and other outlets for dissemination
Year 5
Pulling papers together for a book (depending on academic discipline),
major research proposals and collaborations
Use the ‘Page 98 paper’ (Murray 2002a) to develop your ideas, beyond simply
being ‘ideas’, and to contextualize them in the literature. This is an activity
that postgraduates have found useful – to the extent of referring to it as a type
of paper – in helping them to map out the context and focus for their work. It
might also work for sketching a paper.
Once your paper has been accepted, you may ﬁnd that you have a slightly
different view of the publishing game. You may have learned a lot from the
reviewers’ feedback, and you may have picked up a few dos and don’ts from
how they have played their role. Whatever you have got out of the experience,
it is time to move on.
If you do not yet feel that you have a set of productive academic writing
practices, that will not necessarily be because you are slow on the uptake; these
skills take time to learn. In time, you will also develop your own strategies. In
the meantime, writing to prompts, freewriting, generative writing and the
outlining strategies in this book will serve as a reminder of the range of writing
activities that lie behind many published papers, even if their authors would
not all use these terms.
Writing for academic journals is always instructive. It makes us test our
ideas and forces us to submit to others’ testing. Publication can give you a
qualiﬁed conﬁdence in your writing, qualiﬁed by the knowledge that your
future work and writing will have to be tested in these ways if they are genu-
inely to amount to anything. Ultimately, this is where the genuine rewards of
academic writing lie.
What can I write about? The context/background
• My research question is . . . (50 words)
• Researchers who have looked at this subject are . . . (50 words)
• They argue that . . . (25 words)
Smith argues that . . . (25 words)
Brown argues that . . . (25 words)
• Debate centres on the issue of . . . (25 words)
• There is still work to be done on . . . (25 words)
• My research is closest to that of X in that . . . (50 words)
• My contribution will be . . . (50 words).
RESPONDING TO REVIEWERS’ FEEDBACK
212

Checklist
• Translate reviewers’ comments into revision actions.
• Learn from their feedback.
• Once you are published, promote your papers.
CHECKLIST
213

Bibliography
Albert, T. (2000) Winning the Publications Game: How To Write a Scientiﬁc Paper without
Neglecting Your Patients, 2nd edn. Abingdon: Radcliffe.
Allison, L. (2004) Why I . . . think we have too many books, The Times Higher, 9 April,
p. 14.
Anglin, J. (1999) The uniqueness of child and youth care: A personal perspective, Child
and Youth Care Forum, 28(2): 143–50.
Appelbaum, J. (1998) How to Get Happily Published: A Complete and Candid Guide, 5th edn.
New York: HarperCollins.
Atwood, M. (2002) Negotiating with the Dead. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ballenger, B. (2004) The Curious Researcher: A Guide to Writing Research Papers, 4th edn.
New York: Pearson Longman.
Barrass, R. (2002) Scientists Must Write: A Guide To Better Writing for Scientists, Engineers and
Students, 2nd edn. London: Routledge.
Baverstock, A. (2001) Marketing Your Book: An Author’s Guide. London: A. and C. Black.
Belton, V. (1985) The use of a simple multiple-criteria model to assist in selection from a
shortlist, Journal of the Occupational Research Society, 36(4): 265–74.
Bennett, J.B. (2003) Academic Life: Hospitality, Ethics and Spirituality. Bolton, MA: Anker.
Bensimon, E.M. (1995) Total quality management in the academy: A rebellious reading,
Harvard Educational Review, 65(4): 593–611.
Bereiter, C. and Scardamalia, M. (1987) The Psychology of Written Composition. London:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Black, D., Brown, S., Day, A. and Race, P. (1998) 500 Tips for Getting Published: A Guide for
Educators, Researchers and Professionals. London: Kogan Page.
Blaxter, L., Hughes, C. and Tight, M. (1998a) The Academic Career Handbook. Buckingham:
Open University Press.
Blaxter, L., Hughes, C. and Tight, M. (1998b) Writing on academic careers, Studies in
Higher Education, 23(3): 281–95.

Boice, R. (1987) Is released time an effective component of faculty development
programs?, Research in Higher Education, 26(3): 311–26.
Boice, R. (1990) Professors as Writers: A Self-Help Guide to Productive Writing. Stillwater, OK:
New Forums.
Boice, R. (1990) Faculty resistance to writing-intensive courses, Teaching of Psychology,
17(1): 13–17.
Boud, D. (1999) Situating development in professional work: Using peer learning,
International Journal for Academic Development, 4(1): 3–10.
Boud, D. and Walker, D. (1998) Promoting reﬂection in professional courses: The
challenge of context, Studies in Higher Education, 23(2): 191–206.
Bradbury, R. (1994) Zen in the Art of Writing. Santa Barbara, CA: Joshua Bell.
Brew, A. (2001) The Nature of Research: Inquiry in Academic Contexts. London: Routledge.
Brew, A. (2004) Conceptions of research: A phenomenographic study, in M. Tight (ed.)
The RoutledgeFalmer Reader in Higher Education. London: RoutledgeFalmer.
Brown, R. (1994/95) Write right ﬁrst time, Literati Newsline, Special Issue, 1–8 (http://
www.literaticlub.co.uk/writing/articles/write.html).
Burton, S. and Steane, P. (eds) (2004) Surviving Your Thesis. London: Routledge.
Bykofsky, S. and Sander, J.B. (2000) The Complete Idiot’s Guide to Getting Published, 2nd
edn. Indianapolis, IN: Alpha Books.
Caffarella, R.S. and Barnett, B.G. (2000) Teaching doctoral students to become scholarly
writers: the importance of giving and receiving critiques, Studies in Higher Education,
25(1): 39–51.
Caldwell, J.J., Colman, R., Kerr, W.J. and Magennis, E.J. (2001) Novel use of a
selenoalkyne within untraditionally mild Dötz benzannulation processes; total syn-
thesis of a Calceolaria andica L. natural hydroxylated naphthoquinone, Synlett,
9: 1428–30.
Cameron, J. (1998) The Right to Write: An Invitation and Initiation into the Writing Life.
London: Macmillan.
Carra, J., Candau, R., Keslacy, S. et al. (2003) Addition of inspiratory resistance increases
the amplitude of the slow component of O2 uptake kinetics, Journal of Applied
Physiology, 94: 2448–55.
Cummings, L.L. and Frost, P.J. (1995) Publishing in the Organizational Sciences, 2nd edn.
London: Sage.
Damarell, B. (1999) Just forging, or seeking love and approval: An investigation into the
phenomenon of the forged art object and the copied picture in art therapy involving
people with learning disabilities, Inscape, 4(2): 44–50.
Davis, M.S. (1971) That’s interesting!: Towards a phenomenology of sociology and a
sociology of phenomenology, Philosophy of Social Science, 1: 309–44.
Davis, R. and Shadle, M. (2000) ‘Building a mystery’: Alternative research writing and
the academic act of seeking, College Composition and Communication, 51(3): 417–46.
Day, A. (1996) How to Get Research Published in Journals. Aldershot: Gower.
Drake, S. and Jones, G.A. (1997) Finding Your Own Voice in Academic Publishing: Writing
Your Way to Success. Stillwater, OK: New Forums.
Elbow, P. (1973) Writing Without Teachers. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ely, M., Vinz, R., Downing, M. and Anzul, M. (1997) On Writing Qualitative Research:
Living by Words. London: Falmer.
Emerson, C. (1996) The 30-Minute Writer. Cincinnati, OH: Writers’ Digest.
Estrin, S. and Wright, M. (1999) Corporate governance in the former Soviet Union: An
overview, Journal of Comparative Economics, 27: 398–421.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
215

Fahnestock, J. and Secor, M. (1990) A Rhetoric of Argument, 2nd edn. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Fiala, Z., Hinz, M., Meissner, K. and Wehner, F. (2003) A component-based approach for
adaptive dynamic web documents, Journal of Web Engineering, 2(1 & 2): 58–73.
Fiske, D.W. and Fogg, L. (1990) But the reviewers are making different criticisms of my
paper!: Diversity and uniqueness in reviewer comments, American Psychologist, 45(5):
591–8.
Flower, L. and Hayes, J.R. (1981) A cognitive process theory of writing, College
Composition and Communication, 32: 365–87.
Frost, P.J. and Taylor, M.S. (1996) Rhythms of Academic Life: Personal Accounts of Careers in
Academia. London: Sage.
Gavin, J. and Lister, S. (2001) The strategic use of sports and ﬁtness activities for promot-
ing psycho-social skill development in childhood and adolescence, Journal of Child and
Youth Care Work, 16: 325–39.
Gere, A.R. (1987) Writing Groups: History, Theory, and Implications. Carbondale, IL:
Southern Illinois University.
Germano, W. (2001) Getting it Published: A Guide for Scholars and Anyone Else Serious about
Serious Books. London: University of Chicago Press.
Grant, B. and Knowles, S. (2000) Flights of imagination: Academic writers be(com)ing
writers, International Journal for Academic Development, 5(1): 6–19.
Greenhalgh, T. (2001) How to Read a Paper: The Basics of Evidence-based Medicine, 2nd edn.
London: British Medical Journal Books.
Greer, G. (1991) The Change: Women, Ageing and the Menopause. London: Penguin.
Grifﬁths, M. (1993) Productive writing, The New Academic, Autumn: 29–30.
Haines, D.D., Newcomer, S. and Raphael, J. (1997) Writing Together: How to Transform
Your Writing in a Writing Group, New York: Perigree.
Hall, G.M. (ed.) (1998) How to Write a Paper, 2nd edn. London: British Medical Journal
Books.
Halliday, M.A.K. and Martin, J.R. (1993) Writing Science: Literacy and Discursive Power.
London: Falmer.
Hanks, R. (2003) Let them eat cake, The Independent Magazine, 25 January, p. 20.
Hartley, J. and Branthwaite, A. (1989) The psychologist as wordsmith: a questionnaire
study of the writing strategies of productive British psychologists, Higher Education, 18:
423–52.
Hartley, J., Sotto, E. and Pennebaker, J. (2002) Style and substance in psychology: Are
inﬂuential articles more readable than less inﬂuential ones?, Social Studies of Science,
32(2): 321–34.
Hayes, R.L. (1996) Writing for publication: Solutions to common problems, Australian
Occupational Therapy Journal, 43: 24–9.
Henderson, K.W., Kerr, W.J. and Moir, J.H. (2000) Enantioselective depronotation
reactions using a novel homochiral magnesium amide base, Chemical Communications,
6: 479–80.
Hicks, W. (1999) Writing for Journalists, London: Routledge.
Ho, S.P., Riester, L., Drews, M., Boland, T. and LaBerge, M. (2003) Nanoindentation
properties of compression-moulded ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene, Pro-
ceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, H, Journal of Engineering in Medicine,
217: 357–66.
hooks, b (1999) remembered rapture: the writer at work. New York: Henry Holt.
Hough, J. (2000) Commentary on Belton (1985): The use of a simple multi-criteria model
BIBLIOGRAPHY
216

to assist in selection from a shortlist, Journal of the Occupational Research Society, 51:
895–6.
Huff, A.S. (1999) Writing for Scholarly Publication. London: Sage.
Kaye, S. (1989) Writing Under Pressure: The Quick Writing Process, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Kitson, A.L. (2001) Does nursing education have a future?, Nurse Education Today, 21:
86–96.
Lea, M.R. and Street, B.V. (1998) Student writing in higher education: An academic
literacies approach, Studies in Higher Education, 23(2): 157–72.
Lee, A. and Boud, D. (2003) Writing groups, change and academic identity: research
development as local practice, Studies in Higher Education, 28(2): 187–200.
Lodge, D. (1996) The Practice of Writing: Essays, Lectures, Reviews and a Diary. London:
Penguin.
Luey, B. (2002) Handbook for Academic Authors, 4th edn. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
MacDonald, S.P. (1994) Professional Academic Writing in the Humanities and Social Sciences.
Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University.
Mailer, N. (2003) The Spooky Art: Some Thoughts on Writing. London: Little, Brown.
Matejka, K. (1990) Unpublished? Perish the thought, Management Decision, 28(6):
9–11.
McCall Smith, A. (2003) Portuguese Irregular Verbs. Edinburgh: Polygon.
Montgomery, S.L. (2003) The Chicago Guide to Communicating Science. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
Moore, S. (2003) Writers’ retreats for academics: exploring and increasing the
motivation to write, Journal of Further and Higher Education, 27(3): 333–42.
Morss, K. and Murray, R. (2001) Researching academic writing within a structured
programme: insights and outcomes, Studies in Higher Education, 26(1): 35–51.
Moxley, J.M. and Taylor, T. (1997) Writing and Publishing for Academic Authors, 2nd edn.
London: Rowman and Littleﬁeld.
Mullen, C.A. (2001) The need for a curricular writing model for graduate students,
Journal of Further and Higher Education, 25(1): 117–26.
Murray, R. (2000) Writing for Publication (video and notes). Glasgow: University of
Strathclyde.
Murray, R. (2001) Integrating teaching and research through writing development for
students and staff, Active Learning in Higher Education, 2(1): 31–45.
Murray, R. (2002a) How to Write a Thesis. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Murray, R. (2002b) Writing development for lecturers moving from further to higher
education, Journal of Further and Higher Education, 26(3): 229–39.
Murray, R. and MacKay, G. (1998a) Supporting academic development in public output:
Reﬂections and propositions, International Journal for Academic Development, 3(1):
54–63.
Murray, R. and MacKay, G. (1998b) Writers’ groups for researchers and how to run them,
Universities’ and Colleges’ Staff Development Agency, Shefﬁeld.
Navarra, T. (1998) Toward Painless Writing: A Guide for Health Professionals. Thorofare, NJ:
SLACK.
Palumbo, D. (2000) Writing from the Inside Out: Transforming Your Psychological Blocks to
Release the Writer Within. New York: John Wiley.
Pasco, A.H. (2002) Basic advice for novice authors, Journal of Scholarly Publishing,
January: 75–89.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
217

Pazaratz, D. (2001) Deﬁning and describing the child and youth care worker’s role in
residential treatment, Journal of Child and Youth Care, 14(3): 76–7.
Peat, J., Elliott, E., Baur, L. and Keena, V. (2002) Scientiﬁc Writing: Easy When You Know
How. London: British Medical Journal Books.
Peter, D.P. and Ceci, S.J. (1982) Peer-review practices of psychological journals: The
fate of published articles, submitted again, The Behavioural and Brain Sciences, 5:
187–255.
Powell, W.W. (1985) Getting into Print: The Decision Making Process in Scholarly Publishing.
London: University of Chicago.
Rachlin, H. (2000) The Science of Self-Control. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Reif-Lehrer, L. (2000) The Beauty of Outlines (http://nextwave-uk.sciencemag.org/cgi/
content/full/2000/06/07/2).
Rich, A. (1986) Blood, Bread and Poetry, Selected Prose 1979–1985. London: Virago.
Rich, A. (2001) Arts of the Possible. New York: Norton.
Roberts, J., Mitchell, B. and Zubrinich, R. (eds) (2002) Writers on Writing. London:
Penguin.
Rodrigues, D. (1997) The Research Paper and the World Wide Web. Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice Hall.
Rossen, J. (1993) The University in Modern Fiction: When Power is Academic. New York:
St Martin’s Press.
Rozakis, L. (1999) Writing Great Research Papers. London: McGraw-Hill.
Rymer, J. (1988) Scientiﬁc composing processes: How eminent scientists write journal
articles, in D.A. Jolliffe (ed.) Advances in Writing Research: Volume 2 – Writing in
Academic Disciplines. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Sadler, D.R. (1990) Up the Publication Road: A Guide To Publishing in Scholarly Journals for
Academics, Researchers and Graduate Students, 2nd edn, Green Guide No. 2. Campbell-
town, New South Wales: Higher Education Research and Development Society of
Australasia.
Sanders, S.R. (1995) Writing from the Centre. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Selzer, J.L. (1981) Merit and degree in Webster’s The Duchess of Malﬁ, English Literary
Renaissance, 11(1): 70–80.
Smith, A. and Eysenck, M. (2002) Letter, Times Higher Education Supplement, 1 March,
p. 15.
Steinbeck, J. (1962) Travels with Charley: In Search of America. London: Pan.
Steinbeck, J. (1970) Journal of a Novel: The East of Eden Letters. London: Pan.
Sternberg, R.J. (ed.) (2000) Guide to Publishing in Psychology Journals. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Swales, J.M. and Feak, C.B. (2000) English in Today’s Research World: A Writing Guide. Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Thow, M., Rafferty, D. and Armstrong, G. (2004) A United Kingdom survey of physio-
therapists’ involvement in cardiac rehabilitation and their perceived skills and
attributes, Physiotherapy, 90(2): 97–102.
Thyer, B.A. (1994) Successful Publishing in Scholarly Journals. London: Sage.
Torrance, M., Thomas, G. and Robinson, E.J. (1991) Strategies for answering examin-
ation essay questions: Is it helpful to write a plan?, British Journal of Educational
Psychology, 61: 46–54.
Torrance, M., Thomas, M. and Robinson, E.J. (1993) Training in thesis writing: An evalu-
ation of three conceptual orientations, British Journal of Educational Psychology, 63:
170–84.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
218

Truss, L. (2003) Eats, Shoots and Leaves. London: Proﬁle Books.
Van der Geest, T. (1996) Professional writing studied: Authors’ accounts of planning
in document production processes, in M. Sharples and T. Van der Geest (eds) The
New Writing Environment: Writers at Work in a World of Technology. Berlin: Springer,
pp. 7–24.
Wager, E., Godlee, F. and Jefferson, T. (2002) How to Survive Peer Review. London: British
Medical Journal Books.
Wellington, J. (2003) Getting Published: A Guide for Lecturers and Researchers. London:
Routledge Falmer.
Wheatley, M.J. (2002) Turning to One Another: Simple Conversations to Restore Hope to the
Future. San Francisco, CA: Berrett-Koehler.
Wilk, K.E., Voight, M.L., Keirns, M.A. et al. (1993) Stretch-shortening drills for the upper
extremities: Theory and clinical application, Journal of Sports Physical Therapy, 17(5):
225–39.
Williams, J. (1996) Writing in concert, in H.A. Veeser (ed.) Confessions of the Critics.
London: Routledge, pp. 156–76.
Williams, J. and Coldron, J. (eds) (1996) Writing for Publication: An Introductory Guide for
People Working in Education. Shefﬁeld: PAVIC.
Ziegler, D. (2001) To hold, or not to hold . . . Is that the right question?, Residential
Treatment for Children and Youth, 18(4): 33–45.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
219


Index
abstracts
analysing, 46–50, 52–7
building on, 113
writing, 108–14
argument, 93–5
audience, 36
barriers, 33–4
binge writing, 155–6
brainstorming, 78
Brown’s 8 questions, 108–14
calibrating topics, 96–7
career implications, 16–18
citations, 44
‘cloning’, 60–1
collaborating, 32
conference presentations, 71–3
conﬁdence, 23
contextualising, 71
creative writing, 78
critical friend, 147
dialogue, 184–5
dimensions of writing,6–7
disciplines
Chemistry, 121–3, 133, 140–1
Computer Science, 132
Economics, 131–2
Education, 46–7, 53–6
Engineering, 140
English Literature, 119, 140–1
Management Science, 123–5, 140–1
Nursing, 45, 128, 130–1
Physiotherapy, 120–1, 140–2
Physiology, 140–2
Psychology, 40
discussion
peer discussion, 86–91
rehearsing arguments, 4
see also feedback, peer review and
‘writing sandwich’
drafting, 117–36
editors, 63, 191
contacting/emailing, 63–4
replying to, 191–2, 201–2
responses from, 65
feedback
from other disciplines, 87–8
peer discussion, 86
see also discussion, peer review, ‘writing
sandwich’
ﬂow, 155
freewriting, 74–81, 185–6

general reader, 110
generative writing, 81–2, 146
genre, 57–9
goals, 90, 159–62
realistic, 161
in form of writing instruction, 162
guilt, 28–30
habit, writing, 87
regular, 165
hypothesis, 94–5
identity, 39–40
incremental writing, 154–5
informal writing, 59
instructions for authors, 37, 42–3
integrative strategy, 34
journal proﬁle, 38
marketing, 207–8
mediating, 62
mentoring writers, 91–2
monitoring, 163–4
motivation, 1–2, 9–10, 13–16, 25,
32–3, 40, 60, 78–9, 86, 107, 162,
204
see also reasons
narrative, 59
network, 169–70
new writers’ errors, 3–4
offprints, 206–7
outlining, 99–116
allocating word lengths, 108
levels, 104–6
purpose, 101
using verbs, 128–33
over-reaching, 161
peer review, 188–9
acceptance, 203–4
contradictory, 196–7
destructive, 194–5
editor’s letter, 191
encouraging, 193
examples of reviewers’ comments,
189–91, 195
hostile, 196
learning from, 212
peer review from journals, 187–9,
194–7
pre-peer review, 27–8
responding to, 191–2, 201–2
see also feedback and discussion
perseverance, 197
planning, 100
for writing, 156–9
procrastination, 30–1
stopping, 81
productive writers, 5
prompts for writing, 82–5
fragment and question forms, 83
internal, inhibiting, 84
Murray’s, 10 prompts for outlining
a paper, 114–15
poor and effective, 84
starter, 83
turning headings into, 127–34
proofs, 205
research, deﬁning, 18–22
reasons for writing, 13
external drivers, 15
reasons for not writing, 22–3
internal drivers, 14
see also motivation
recycling, 210–11
rejection, 188, 197
reasons for, 198
resubmission, 200
revision, 137–51, 199
cutting, 149
for excellent sentences, 141–2
iterative, 148
polishing, 150
processes, 147–8
salami-slicing, 210–11
‘smoothing’, 113–14, 134–5, 143
‘snack writing’, 75
standards, 91, 96
status of journals, 43–4
strategy, 34, 68
streamlining, 126–7
style, 149
subjectivity, 22
INDEX
222

team writing, 32
thesis, 73–4
time, 152–68
6-month programme, 165–8
30-minute slots, 163
disguising writing time, 87
programme for writing, 211–12
protecting time for writing, 87
space for writing in your life, 164–5
titles, writing, 39, 97–8
topic, 67
ﬁnding, 69–71
topic sentences, 143–6
types of journal, 38
academic, 40
professional, 40
types of paper, 50
verbs, 128–33
voice, 61, 93
writers’ group, 5, 146, 170–5
as follow-up to writers’ retreat,
183–4
writers’ retreat, 176–84
one-day, 180–1
one-hour, 181
two-day, 178–80
week-long, 177–8
writing for publication programme,
4
evidence of impact, 4–5
‘writing sandwich’, 85–91
see also discussion, feedback and
peer review
INDEX
223

