YOUR
OCTOBER 1989 E 1 . 3 0
9 I
Things that go bump t h e  night
op
• Lifestyles 2000 Role Playing
Games • Program Pullout
9
ISSN 0 2 6 9 - 8 2 7 7
10
77
269 827007

✓Q u a lit y Commodore compa tible
 d a t a  re corde r.
✓Pa u se  control,  counte r, e tc.
✓ Suita ble  for 6 4 / 1 2 8 .
; S e n d  now for quick de live ry.
NLY E24.99
Full
Interface.
Connect your 6 4 / 1 2 8  to a range of
full size  Ce ntronics Pa ra lle l
Printe rs.
Ea sy to use - supports Commodore
Gra phics Se t.
Onboard M icroproce ssor Chip
means no powe r programmes to
load.
Works with  most a pplica tions.
feature
No more  t o  buyt
Ce ntronics Prin te r
NLY £29.99
EPROM
ERASER
Erases up to 4  I pronts a t once .
I
Even ﬁts in  your pocke tt
VONLY C39-99
MODEL & R O B O T
CO NTRO L MADE  EASY.
•
 4  output cha nne ls - e a ch with
onboard re la y.
•
 4  input cha nne ls - each fu lly
✓ b u f f e re d  TTL le ve l se nsing.
I F  Ana logue  input with  f r i  8  bit
conve retort.
•
 Vo ice  input for voice  control.
•
 Softwa re  features:- te st mode /
✓ a na logue  me a sure me nt/ voice
a ctiva te / digita l readout etc_
ONLY £39.99
INCLUDING H AR D WAR E/ SOFTWAR EI
MIC. ET C AST AT E T APE OR D I SK).
FULL MIDI I N TER FAC E FOR T H E
1141128 AT  A R EALI STI C  PRI CE.
11, M I D I  in/ M I D I  th ru / 2  z M IDI Out.
•
 Compa tible  with moa t le a ding
software packages.
ONLY £29.99
DIGITAL SOUND
SAMPLER
•
 The  ne w sa mple r a llows you to
record a ny sound digita lly into
me mory & the n re pla y I t with
astounding effects.
Playback forwa rds/ba ckwa rds with
•  e ch o / re ve rb / rin g  modula tion.
•
 N ow with full sound e diting module
to produce outsta nding effects.
•
 F u ll 8  bit D to A & AD C  conve rsion-
,
 M I D I  compa tible  with suita ble
Interface. (i.e . Da te ' unit for
E28_90. see a d.)..
Live effects me nu include s real
•  t i m e  displa y of waveforms-
•
 Line  in / m ic o u t / f e e d b a c k
v co n t ro ls.
•
 Powe rfull sequencer with e diting
features-
✓ Loa d/sa ve  sample. U p to 8  samples
✓ i n  me mory a t one time .
V  Comple te  software/hardware
v  pa cka ge . Tape o r D isk (please
state).
ONLY £49.99
G I TAL uRUM  S Y S TE M
✓ Now you can turn your digita l sound
✓ sa m p le r into a digita l drum syste m.
•
 8  digita l drum sounds in  me mory
✓ a t  one time .
V C omple te  with 3  drum kits. Re a l
v d r u m  sounds - not synthe sise d.
Create superb drum rhythms with
real & ste p time
✓ F u ll e diting. M e nu drive n. Loa d/
v Sa ve  fa cilitie s.
Output to 11111 or through T V
*weaker_
ONLY £9.99
STATE T APE OR D I SK
COM-DRUM
EDITOR
V
enable you to construct your own
drum kit .
FIF Re-arrange sounds supplie d with a
Corn-Drum to make ne w kits.
g
N
L
Y  C 4 - 9 9  D I SK ONLY
PARALLEL
PRINTER CABLE
I F  Conne cts full size  printe rs to the
parallel port o f your C6 4 / 1 2 8 .
I F  M a n y programmes and certridgea
(Action R e pla y/ Fina l Cartridge e tc.)
will drive  printe rs from this port.
ONLY Cl 2.99 COMPLETE
COM 3
U N BEAT ABL E VAL U E PAC K - T H E YAM AH A SH E 1 0  FM  MIDI C OM PATI BLE
SHOULDER SYN TH ESI SER ,  T H E AD VAN C ED  M USI C STU D I O SOFTWAR E & M I DI
I NTERFACE PLU S FR EE MIDI C ABL ES TO C ON N EC T EVER YTH I N G T O YOUR
COM PUTER SYST EM  
A
D
V
A
N
C
E
D
FREE MIDI
CABLES
YAPAAHA SHS 10 FM
SYNTHESISER KEYBOARD
i
a
✓ ch o ice s.
✓U s e s  TI E synthe sis.
Full M I DI  standard.
Superbly style d guita r-type
keyboard with shoulde r stra p.
Top qua lity brandname.
Supe rbly style d guita r-type
keyboard with shoulde r stra p.
✓R e q u ire s 6  "C
adapter.
I
NOTE.- use r port cheaper type
reset buttons offered by othe rs are
not unstoppable.
V
"unstoppable" programs.
I
g NLY £5.99
THE ULTIMATE DISK TOOLKIT FOR THE 1540/15411.
I
for the se rious d isk ha cke r. T o o lkit
IV ha s more features tha n most for
less,
/ I  D I SC  DOCTOR 112 - Read & write ,
v a n y  tra ck & se ctor including e xtra
& re numbe re d tra cks. Re pa ir
damaged se ctors.
•
 H EAD ER / GAP EDI TOR • Decodes &
displays ALL header informa tion
including off bytes & header gap.
Rewrite the  e ntire  header & header
gap_ Renumber se ctors. M a o e dit
any se ctor ta il gap.
v
Recover loot ﬁle s. D ispla y ﬁle  sta rt
/end addresses. Disassemble a ny
ﬁle program dire ctly from the disk
to SCREEN or PR I N TER  including
undocumented opcodes_ Edit Dam.
MUSIC SYSTEM
I F  A  full feature M usic Studio with
✓E d it in g  and sequencer features.
l
•
 So rry. d isk only.
MIDI INTERFACE
•  Kum inioarthni.
I f  Sim p ly plug in.
FOR ONLY
E99.99
, NO MORE TO BUY!!
3 SLOT
MOTHERBOARD
SAVE WEAR & TEAR ON
Y O UR EXPANSI ON P O RT
▪
 W ill a cce pt three ca rtridge s on I t s
v h i g h  grade PC B.
✓S w it c h  in / o u t a ny slot
✓ F u lly buffered_
✓ R e se t button a nd an onboard
7 sa f e t y fuse.
ONLY £16.99
PAST PI LE C OPY- Se le ctive  ﬁle
copy. Works a t up to 6  time s
normal speed.
I F  F AST  D I SK COPY - Copy an e ntire
✓ d i s k  in  2  minute s or le ss using
single 1 5 4 1 .
•
 F I L E COM PACTOR - Ca n compa ct
✓ m a ch in e  programs by up to 5 0 .
Save disk space.
✓F O R M AT T ER -  1 0  second forma t an
entire disk or forma t a ny individua l
tra ck or ha lf tra ck 0  to 4 1 .
g  ER R OR  ED I T - Qu ickly ﬁnd &
recreate a ll read e rrors including
extras & renumbered tra cks or
se ctor" & ha lf tra cks from 0  to 4 1 .
ONLY £9.99
T

SPECIAL
OFFER
PACK!
I r P t 
t
o
t
.
C ri l l y P d  d u o w
doog.
THE ULTIMATE
GRAPHICS
ACKAGE...
COMMODORE rIgNE
i r 1351 Mouse is a high resolution two button mouse featuring optical counting, teﬂon
guides, microswitches, rubber coated ball and high quality interface.
7  When combined with OCP Advanced Art Studio this graphics package Is quite simply
the best system available. The features are unmatched...
V
excellent printe r support.
V
rotate, solid or te xture d ﬁll and
profescional manual ma ke  Art
Studio simply the  best gra phics
package for the  Commodore
(please state Ta p,  or D isk).
1
It, move  it . rota te  it,  copy it,
colour it e tc.. e tc
V
e la stic line s - stre tch and
manipulate shapes.
Zoom in  to add de ta il in  ﬁne  mode
•
 Sim p le  plug-in me mory e xpa nsion
• ca rt rid g e s for your VI C 2 0 .
V
11, T w o  mode ls available - 1 6 K or 3 2 K.
•
 Bo t h  mode ls are switcha ble  for
v va r io u s me mory se ttings i.e . 3 K.
16K. 2 4 K. e tc.
11 M a n y VI C progra ms require e xtra
✓ R A M  - this is your answer.
ONLY C14-99 FOR 16K
ONLY £19.99 FOR 32K
NOW YOU CAN
INCREASE
THE MEMORY OF
YOUR Cl e  EASILY
C16 RAMPACK
▪
 PI n g  I n R AM  ca rtridge  gla ra  you up
• t o  I 6 K EXT R A MEMORY!!
ﬂa t s  ove r 2 8 K free for Ba sic and
even an e xtra  1 8 K in HiRe s mode!
i p  Plu g s I n to me mory expansion port
- the n Mist switch on.
ONLY £14.99
EPROM ERASER
ONLY £39.99
V
which a cce pt up to 3 2 K EPROM
each.
11, Pro g ra m  your own EPR OM . using
o w  EPROM  progra me r.
i
- just ma ke  a  se le ction from the
Superom me nu.
Fully me nu drive n on power up.
Select a ny slot unde r software
controls_
Unique EPROM  generator feature
will ta ke  your own progra ms - ba sic
or m / c A turn the m into a utosta rt
EPROMs. (EPROM  home r required).
V  Acce p t s 2 7 6 4 / 2 7 1 2 8 / 2 7 2 5 6
EPR OM ..
I
I I  O n  board operating syste ms n o
programs to load.
ONLY £29.99
Pulidown/ icon drive n me nus for
ease o f use.
Mouse ope ra tion. plus Joystick and
keyboard control.
16 pe ns. 8  spra ys. 1 6  brushes s o
ﬂexible anyone ca n create superb
gra phic. e a sily.
This ha ndy AC/ DC Eprom Era se r
will erase up to 4 chips quickly and
e a sily.
Built-in tim e r and safety switch on
cover.
Supe rbly style d - sma ll enough to
ﬁt in  pocke t - even as it works!!
Works from built-in ba tte ry
(supplied) or from AC / D C  adaptor I f
required.
LIMITED N U M BER S AT  TH I S
AM AZI N GLY LOW PiRICEll
COM 3
COMPLETE WITH
A top qua lity. easy-to-use EPROM
programer for the 6 4 / 1 2 8
Fully me nu drive n softwa re /
hardware package ma ke s
progra ming/ re a ding/ ve rifying/
copying EPROM s sim p licity itse lf.
O W  I M M U N E .
MID-
M i l
ADVANCED
ART STUDIOTm
ONLY
£29.99
TOTAL PAC KAGE I NCLUDI NG
1351 M O U S E  M OU SE M AT/
HOLDER AN D  OC P AR T STUDI O
v
 W ill progra m 2716, 2764, 2 7 1 2 8  &
27256 chips. 1 2 .5 . 2 1  o r 2 5  volts.
11" F it s into use r port for ma ximum
compa tibility with ca rtridge s/
Superom Boa rd e tc.
i f  P u ll feature syste m - a ll functions
covered like  de vice  che ck/ ve rify.
W
✓ m o s t  compre he nsive , most frie ndly
& be st va lue  for mone y programer
available for the  6 4 / 1 2 8 .
•  I d e a l compa nion for Superom
• Bo a rd ,  Cartridge Development
System, our ke rne l expanders or
Indeed a ny EPROM  base proje ct.
Comes comple te  with  instructions
- pine the  ca rtridge  handbook.
ONLY £39.99
COMPLETE
ALL ORDERS NORMALLY DESPATCHED WI THI N 48 HRS
HOW TO ORDER
BY PHONE
en) ﬁx =
0782 744707
24hr Cre dit
Card Line
BY POST
Send che que s/POs made
payable to
"Date! Ele ctronics''
PRICES AND SPECIFICATIONS CORRECT AT TI M E OF PRESS
AND SUBJECT TO CHANGE WI THOUT NOTICE
CALLERS WELCOM E Ple a se  reserve goods by telephone prior to visit
•••
FAX
0 7 8 2  744292
UK ORDERS POST FR EE
EUROPE ADD E l
OVERSEAS AD D  E.3
DATEL ELECTRONI CS LTD., FENTON I NDUSTRI AL ESTATE
GOVAN ROAD,  FENTON.  STOKE-ON-TRENT.  ENGLAND.
SALES ONLY
0782 744707
TE CHNI CAL ONLY
0782 744324


H'S
MME
T
AMME
H S
MME
to
PR
YOUR COMMODORE
411
A t
6 News t
MN 2 9 r .4025Ers
8 Amiga Workbench
Made from the purest
hardboard.
58 Indiana Jones and
the Last Crusade
No I'm not going to
repeat my Indy joke.
MONTH'S
PROGRAMME
10 Lifestyles 2000
Rik Henderson, roving
13 Desert Island Disks
Tony Crowther, come on
down! Ooo, what a
cliché.
GAMES'S
57 American Indoor I F
Soccer
But the Americans can't
play soccer, they've all
got oval balls.
60 Tom and Jerry
I'd love to tread on that
mouse'
s
61 Jaws
Oh no, it's the pathetic
shark.
62 Life and Death
Doctor, doctor, there's a
soup in my ﬂies.
glitt
22 Nightbreed
If you go down to
Pinewood today, you're
sure of a BIG surprise._ J V
28 Serious Software
Do you want to use your
C64/128 in a small
business?
30 Indiana Jones
He always gets it lady
reporter, stands on the e n d  (get it - In the endt
spot and reports. 
O
h
 well).
'11P
26 128 Corner
And you can go and
stand with him!
1
16 PC Corner 
'
 3 1  Your Programmer
Now go and stand in the L o a d s  of great
corner. (Who writes this p r o g r a m m i n g  articles to
page?)
t
I
78 Software for Sale
21 Big Wobbly C o m p o
AKA. Bribe the editor w o r r y  you can purchase
page. 
t
h
e
 listings anyway.
-
65 Hostages 
r
:
 69 Millenium 2.2
Help, I'm being held by 14: Space, the ﬁnal front ear.
the peoples republic of
Hemel Hempstead. - - - - - - - -
66 Time Scanner
I think I've run out of ball
inuedos 
/
I
 I
• • • • • •
67 Heroes of the Lance
Sounds like a boil
extraction clinic.
18 Role Playing Games•
Mummy, mummy there's
a strange man gibbering
about demons in our
kitchen.
82 Back Page
Rik's rather wacky
comment on life, the
universe and press
releases.
0
70 Robocop
I'm waiting for the sequel
- Robotrafﬁc Warden
71 Nightdawn
Night Rikt
I t
To cut a long story short.
rez
68 Treble Champions 
V
I
 1st CD Edition
Once, twice, three times C D s  Make great frisbees,
a champion. 
y
o
u
 know!
I .
1
Five
t E
1.

A
that his colleagues around him were acting in a
peculiar manner. Their eyes were hollow and, i f
stared into, could be described as bottomless pits. He started
to fret and shift uneasily in his seat, and the others started
towards him. As they approached, their top lips drew back
to reveal slathering gums full of small, sharp needles where
their teeth had once beet truly this was the end,..
...Or just another day in the Your Commodore ofﬁce.
We arrive at another issue, and what an issue. Some
computer magazines may be heralding exclusives this
month, but none will have Nightbreed.
This new Clive Barker ﬁlm has been delayed until April
1990 (and so has the computer game from Ocean), but
that doesn't stop us giving you a taste of what is to come
- thanks to Steve Jones of Sparkline and, of course, Clive
Barker himself.
But this is not the only meaty morsel in your FUN
FILLED SENSATIONAL SOAR AWAY Y C  We  also
have our pullout programming section, a feature on Role-
Playing Games (\with an exclusive Hound of the Shadow
preview). A Lifestyles 2000 report, and no less than 15 pages
of games reviews. As well a s t  your favourite regulars;
surely we are the only complete Commodore magazine on
the market.
I must dash now but if you're at the PC show on 27th
September-1st October, drop by and well have a chat...
..4
Rik Henderson
Deputy Editor: Richard
'Freddy Krueger'
Henderson
Technical Editor: Paul
'Cenobite' Eves
Group Editor: Stuart
'Creature from the Black
Lagoon' Cooke
Advertisement Manager:
Paul The Blob' Kavanagh
Sales Executives: Maria
The contents of this publication
including all articles, designs,
drawings and pr ogr ain
copyright and other i n t t u a l
property rights therein belong
to Argus  Specialist Publi-
cations. A l l  r i g h t s  c o n •
ferred by the Law of Copyright
and other intellectual properly
rights and by virtue of inter-
national copyright conventions
are speciﬁcally reserved to
Argus Specialist Publications
and a n y  r epr oduc t ion
requires the prior written con-
sent of the Company. 1 9 8 9 .
'Distribution SM Distribution, 6
Leighham Court Road, London
SW16 2PG. Printed by Chase
Webb, Plymouth, Opinions
expressed in reviews are the
opinions of the reviewers and
not necessarily those of the
magazine. While every effort is
made to thoroughly check pro-
grams published for errors we
cannot be held responsible for
any errors that do occur.
Medusa' Wade, Jayne
'Bride of Dracula' Heigold
Ad-Copy Control:
Karen 'Carrie' Bash ford
Artist: Alan 'Werewolf'
Batchelor
Designer: Mark The Thing
Newton
Origination: Ebony
Printers: Chase Webb
Your Commodore incorporating
Your 64 is a monthly magazine
appearing on the ﬁrst Friday of
each month. Argus Specialist
Publications Editorial
and Advertisement ofﬁce, Your
Commodore, Argus House,
Boundary Way, Hemel
Hempstead HP2 7ST.
Telephone: (0442) 66551.
Subscription rates upon
application to Your Commodore
Subscriptions Department,
Infonet Ltd, 5 River Park Estate,
Berkhamsted, Hefts HP4 1HL.
Subscrpition Agent: Wise
Owl Worldwide Publications,
14 West 2381h Street,
a t
ISSN 0269-8277
ABC I
Mal ION  •  
t
 
0
.
0
•••••• a,. L o • s . • •
Quickon the draw
D
OM  ARK, the com-
pany renowned for
its license of Trivial
Pursuit, the computer game,
has done it again. The license
grabbing team at Domark
headquarters a re  set t o
launch the computer version
of the hit game Pictionary.
If yo u  haven't come
across Pictionary where on
Earth have you been living?
It bears a  certain resemb-
lence to charades, but you
are expected to  draw the
word f o r  y o u r  t e a m
members rather than act it.
Micro Illusions - on
their own
US based Micro Illusions is
set to go on their own in the
UK following a recent split
from i ts U K  distributor
Activision.
After a couple of months
uncertainty as to iust who
Budget Blast-em
DONCASTER based Blue
Ribbon is set to  get your
trigger ﬁnger twitching with
its latest 2.99 CM release --
Syntax.
Armed with the latest
cassette inlay sqwaking on
about you having to handle
the latest impulse drive ﬁgh-
ter you can't go far wrong.
'1 1
Above: Syntax -
surely an error?
Domark claims that i t
has an "innovative graphics
package" that allows the
drawer to produce lines of
varying thicknesses, circles,
rectangles, solids, etc., with
ease.
Pictionary, the compuer
game, allows teams to either
draw the words fo r  their
team members, or, i f  they
don't feel up to it the com-
puter can draw the words.
Pictionary should be out
in September for the C64,
PC and Amiga. Contact
Domark on 01-780 2222 for
more information.
was going to publish which
product, Micro Illusions has
announced that all o f  its
products will be distributed
in the UK by itself. Watch
out for new titles with the
Mirco Illusions label in the
near future.
Micro Illusations can be
contacted on (0480) 496497
If you're the sort o f
person who prefers some-
thing that challenges your
brain cells rather than your
trigger ﬁnger then Hi Q Quiz
may he right up your street.
Also priced at 2.99, the game
features questions on Sport,
Entertainment and Geo-
graphy.
Blue Ribbon can be con-
tacted on (0302) 321134.
Below: The Telal men
are coming...
Six 
Y
O
U
R
 COMMODORE

It's a joystick -
honest!
WHEN the picture of Spec-
travideo's latest joystick fell
out o f the envelope it was
greeted with cries of "What
on Earth's that". Wi th  a
styling that looks as though
it would be more at home
on the bridge o f the new
Starship Enterprise than the
living room ﬂoor the QS-118
Wizmaster appears to offer
everything that the profes-
sional gamester requires.
The QS-I 18 features 3
different control mecha-
nisms, push button ﬁnger
and thumb control or two
different sized levers, 2 ﬁre
buttons, auto ﬁre and a
computer system select
switch.
Three versions o f  the
Wizmaster are available, the
QS-I I8F priced at El 1.95 is
the one that works with the
CM and Amiga. Contact
Spectravideo o n  (0235)
555455 for details.
New show for
Capital
A NEW computer show is
set for launch in London in
November. The Computer
Shopper
place at Alexandra Palace
from November 24 to 26.
Well k nown companies
already pledging to appear
at the show include Eve-
sham, Postronix, Trilogic
and Tynesoft. Commodore
UK will be taking a major
role with the "Wonderful
World Of Commodore" des-
cribed by the organisers as
a "major exhibition in its
own right within the Com-
puter Shopper Show".
So if  you're after pre-
Christmas bargains get to
Ally Pally in November.
Super Wonderboy is
Dynamite
SOME game titles have
obviously had hours spent
on deciding on a title, Acti-
vision can't be blamed for
the exciting title o f Super
Wonderboy, one of its latest
coin-op conversions. Super
Wonderboy is the second of
Activision's w o n d e r b y
arcade licences. The hero of
the original game, launched
way back in 1987, has now
grown up and is called upon
to defend the people o f
wonderland fro m a  ﬁre-
breathing dragon.
YOUR COMMODORE
Super Wonderboy fea-
tures 11 levels, 10 different
weapons, winged boots, var-
ious types of armour, differ-
ent shields -  everything a
young hero could want.
Activision's second coin-
up release is Dynamite Dux.
Activision claims that we are
in for a treat with the cutest
game around featuring car-
toon style graphics, six lev-
els, two bonus levels with
extra baddies on the 16 bit
versions.
Watch o u t f o r  these
releases in September. Con-
tact Activision o n  (0734)
311666 for more info.
Above: Mystery of the Mummy - Rainbow Arts
.••„e
i
Worth Tab
Above: Crossbow - The Legend of William Tell - Screen 7
M E

W
hen thinking about what to write in this column, it just crossed my
mind that I haven't so far touched the more astonishing things the
Amiga can do, like its amazing graphics and sound capabilities. Maybe
people would like in a column like this to hear more about how to get into
programming these. (By the way, as I  said in the ﬁrst o f this column, let
me know about your interests and opinions!)
On the Amiga you have basically two ways of accessing the more powerful
features of the machine: The ﬁrst involves programming the hardware directly.
If you are a machine code programmer, this is less difﬁcult than you might
think.
The second way, and the much better one to start with, is by making
use of the many facilities the operating system offers you. That is, by using
the library functions of the Amiga.
The libraries give you access to nearly all the advanced features o f the
Amiga, especially when it comes to graphics. You get most of what you want
from the graphic library which includes some 97 functions. These allow you
to draw lines, ﬁll in spaces, animate objects and much more.
The graphics library also includes some text printing routines.
On the Amiga text is created just like any other graphics. The advantage
of this is that text and graphics can be intermixed freely.
If you program in Basic, most o f the advanced facilities of the Amiga
are available to you in form of Basic commands. Amiga Basic from Microsoft
is quite good in this way, once you get to know it. The only apalling thing
about it is the editor. In my book the Amiga Basic editor ranks tops in the
list of the worst programs ever written.
But the word is, that Microsoft is developing a new version of their Basic
which will be bundled with Workbench 1.4., expected to get onto the market
sometime next year.
Anything has to be an improvement on the appalling present editor. I
only hope that Microsoft will indeed spend some considerable time on improving
the editor and not concentrate all their time on developing fancy new Basic
commands and then do the editor again on the quick!
Amiga Basic also allows you to use the Amiga libraries. This is one of
its strongest features, even though I would advise you to consider changing
to C or assembler if you want to use the libraries extensively and do serious
programming.
Eight
More from ihE
Anig
By Burgharc
Lehma

:he world of
iniga
Ird-Henry
lann
GA
ENCH
A M I G A W O R K B E N C H  •
This brings me to my pet-hate, which is C.
C is supposed to be the language of the Amiga. Most of the examples
given in the Amiga References Manuals, published by Addison Wesley, are
given in C.
Unfortunately, C is expensive, and, considering the time it takes to compile
and link a program in C, I can't see for the life of mine what the supposed
time advantage in program development over assembler is to be!
I program in assembler, using the GenAm assembler by H i Soft. Most
programs I can execute almost immediately after I have written them and
inspect the results of my efforts. Even i f I break a large program down into
modules and have to link them, I can look at the fruits o f my labour far
sooner than with C!
At this point a spot o f advice to assembler programmers: Even i f you
have an assembler that can use the Amiga Include ﬁles, don't use them! It
takes far too long for the assembler to assemble all the Include ﬁles which
are needed from disk. Sometimes your source needs only one or two variables
out of hundreds in a complete Include ﬁle.
Instead, type the library offsets and other systems equals your source needs
at the beginning of the source ﬁle in yourself. This is initially a bit more
work, but once you have done this, you can use most o f it over and over
again by just merging them into any new source ﬁle you are writing - that
is, if your assembler has got a merging facility, which it surely has, if it allows
you to use Include ﬁles_ This additional work pays off handsomely in having
your source ﬁles assembled in next to no time.
If you program in C, you have no other choice but to use the Include
ﬁles. This is why compiling a C program can be such a long drawn out process.
At this point some of you might inquire, what on earth Include ﬁles are.
Include ﬁles are simply lists of system variables compiled by Commodore
in order to make life supposingly easier for C and assembler programmers.
On other machines you have to compile these offsets and variables yourself
from books and manuals. The Include ﬁles, which come with every C-compiler
and with most assemblers, make it unnecessary for you to type these things
in yourself. And, as I've said, C-compilers depend upon Include ﬁles.
There are two types o f Include ﬁles: The i-Include ﬁles for C-compilers
and the h-Include ﬁles for assemblers. All Include ﬁles are categorized by
the Amiga libraries. E.g. there is an Include ﬁle for the Exec library, one
for the Intuition library and so on.
If you want to have a look at an Include ﬁle, simply use the "type" command
from CIA or load the Include ﬁle into Ed, the CIA editor, or any wordprocessor.
Amiga Basic also requires Include ﬁles i f you want to use libraries and
devices from it. Unfortunately, Amiga Basic can't do with either the i-Include
ﬁles nor the h-Include ﬁles. It needs special Include ﬁles, called "bmaps". There
is a program on the Extras disk which converts any Include ﬁle into a bmap-
ﬁle which can be used by Amiga Basic.
Finally, programming the Amiga hardware directly is, as I said, easier than
you might think. What you do here simply is you write certain values into
certain ﬁxed locations. These are the registers of the special chips of the Amiga.
This is very similar to programming, let's say, the SID sound chip on the
Commodore 64.
Most o f the information youll need for that you'll ﬁnd in the Amiga
Hardware Reference Manual published by Addison Wesley. For people who
are into machine code programming, this is the easiest to digest of the four
massive reference manuals.
Even better, especially if you want lots of example programs in assembler,
is the Amiga System Programmer:5 Guide published by Abacus. And then,
I may tell you, there will very soon be a book on this subject on the market,
written by yours truly and published by Dabs Press in England.
If you ever want to attempt to program the Amiga hardware directly, you
have to be aware that the Amiga is a multitasking machine. Therefore, you
can't program the Amiga as i f you've got the whole machine to yourself.
Whatever memory your program needs you have to allocate using the functions
provided by Exec. I f  you program the hardware directly, very often it is a
good idea to brieﬂy suspend multitasking by using the Exec Forbid library
function.
Always rememeber to switch multitasking on again with the Permit function
and, when you are done, to free the memory you have allocated for your
program! Otherwise it isn't fair to other programs!
Nine

•  F E AT U R E
Above: The Probe V. I want one!
Ten
YOUR COMMODORE
FUTURE •Sill(

Rik Henderson visits
The Daily Express Lifes-
tyles 2000, and is thrust
forward in time to sam-
ple a taste of the future.
Photography by Frane
Maroevic
1DCK
YOUR COMMODORE
F E AT U R E  •
A
I really did not know what sort of show to expect. I knew that there
would be many companies jostling to grab the punters' attention, but
how much were they going to express the idea of life in the year 2000? Not
much was the answer 1 came up with. But does that stop one from enjoying
oneself, not bloody likely.
There were many stands, the majority of which being larger than an average
one bedroom ﬁat, although whoever came up with the idea of placing Sky
TV next to BSB had better think a little for the next show -  and a  next
show there will undoubtedly be.
We (my photographer pal, Franc, and myself) meandered into Olympia
with our knees knocking (well, gently pressing the doorbell) with anticipation,
when our eyes popped out and our tongues rolled to the ﬂoor; for there in
front of us was the bar.
Once our palates had been christened with the beer of the year 2000, we
set about to unearth some world shattering exclusives. Our ﬁrst stop was the
rather splendid Ford stand, with its car of the future the Probe V. A  very
sleek car indeed and one to be seen in. It has actually been heralded as more
aerodynamically efﬁcient than a super-sonic F15 military jet ﬁghter. I'd swap
it for my Raleigh Winner anytime.
We then strolled o ff to the Network Southeast carbuncle of a stand -
after we'd broken Out of the trance that the Probe V had placed us in - which
was a lot better inside than out. It presented an accurate representation o f
what commuters - myself included - will be travelling on in the early nineties.
It was very nice too, with digitised displays presenting time, destination, and
current stop (this is in the ﬁrst class section), as well as individual light switches
for each passenger. The only problem I  have with this is that the ﬁrst line
these trains will be installed on will be the Chiltern line. For those who don't
know, Wembley Stadium is on the Chiltern line; I wonder how long the 77
vehicles planned for delivery in late 1990 will last?
On our way to more fun and future frolics we passed the Kaliber stand,
and on a hot day, such as it was, the prospect of a free drink was a pleasant
one to say the least. "But it's got no alcohol in it!" exclaimed Frane, oh what
a chortle we had.
The BSB stand was far more extravagant than the one accommodating
SKY, but then it had to be because of BSBs failure to release a satellite dish
that works. They were even giving away free badges of yourself, digitised on
a normal video camera. Naturally I went back a second time, there's nothing
better than having something (or two) to remember the show with, even if
they make you look a complete dipstick. But again, I do not see how this
links into the theme of the year 2000.
The most impressive stand of all must go to Tomorrows World, their stand
was so large that they had constructed a complete studio in the centre. Around
the studio were lots of small exhibits, featuring inventions and gadgetry that
had been displayed on the show at one point. An honourable mention must
go to the light drums, this provided hours o f endless laughter (or at least
a few minutes) watching people trying to hit objects that they could not see.
Practical? Not on your nelly; not for drums anyway. We watched an episode
of TW being made with the public controlling all aspets of the production,
one could hardly tell the difference between this and the real version.
The ultimate part o f the show, for me, was the fashion show. To mull
you into the mood of actually looking at the clothes and not the pretty girls
parading them, the escapade had a theme. "Its the year 2000. the ozone layer
has been destroyed, the green house effect is total" was the scenario, but honestly
Above: Biggles
Henderson in a
rather percullar
aircraft.
Eleven

F E AT U R E
Below: it that's a
model, I wouldn't
mind sticking it
together!
Twelve
I don't really see how a pair of cycling shorts and a rather ﬂimsy top will
stop you being fried to a crisp. Oh well, the girls were pretty.
They must o f been dying in the boiler suits that they had to  wear for
part of it, the whole exhibition was baking hot, and Frane and myself welcomed
every chance we could get to have a rest. Fortunately we had plenty of chances,
and therefore experienced a wonderful time.
Maybe Lifestyles 2000 wasn't quite the right title for such an exhibition
- I would have liked to have seen a little more futuristic equipment, in preference
to a bubbly spa bath - but for ail out enjoyment you cannot fault it. Franc
had a great time too, and even walked away with a radio cap as a prize
(photographers nowadays, pah).
Also missing was an indepth look at the essential environmental issues
far more important for the year 2000 than satellite television -  although
Friends of the Earth were there, just not in force.
"I don't really see
how a pair of cycling
shorts and a rather
ﬂimsy top will stop
you being fried to a
crisp."
YOUR COMMODORE

YOUR COMMODORE
INTER VIEW •
GETTING
Rik Henderson not so
much grills Tony
Crowther, but bases him
slowly on gas mark 4.
Well marinated of
course.
Al*
0
 n Monday 17th July I was bundled in the back of the new Cookemobile
with the sole intention of interviewing a certain Tony Crowther. But
to my surprise , after I was let out of the sack of course -  Shefﬁeld
had far more to offer than anticipated.
I
His life revolves around programming and now that he seems to be ﬂavour
- ' of the month at Mirrorsoft, his future is looking very bright indeed. However,
his past hasn't exactly been a failure. If one was to list all of his published
games, that would take up pages alone, but everyone would recognise at least
-
conversions o f Phobia (92% in last issue and a YC SURESHOT), he is to
embark on an enormous project which is to last eight to nine months.
The new game is currently carrying the working title of Federation War,
although Tony mentions that this is very likely to change. It is unlike any
other Crowther game in the respect that it has a Role Playing theme - although
not in the mould of Bards Tale, Alternative Reality etc, - and it will be fairly
complex in gameplay.
Thirteen

I N T E R V I E W  •
Based very loosely on the plot of Star Wars, you play the part of an evil
commander (not unlike Darth Vader) and you must clear a planet from rebels
who do not wish to comply with the Federation. Once this task has been
completed you can turn on your superiors and try to take over the Federation
base (not unlike the Death Star).
All this is done using a rather new graphical style. The map on which
the action takes place is seen in a top down view, although everything is heavily
3D. Columns, walls and other landscape features (such as a waterfall) rise
out o f the darkness below towards the screen, and you can zoom down to
see the ﬂoor. All the graphics are very well drawn, which is not surprising
as Tony is at heart an artist, and he has recently programmed himself an
easy to use Amiga Sprite Designer.
PERSONALITY
PROFILE
Name: Tony 'Ran' Crowther
Age: About 24
Favourite Computer: Amiga
Favourite Software Company: Mirrorsoft (naturally)
Favourite Films: Robocop, Pink Floyd's The Wall, The Last Starﬁghter, Any
Schwarzeneggar movie
Favourite TV Show: LA Law
Favourite Books: 68000 Manual, Most Art Books
Favourite Food: Lisa 's Cooking (grovel!)
Favourite Records: Anything by Iron Maiden
Favourite Sports: Cycling, Snooker on TV
Favourite Paper: The Trader because it comes free through the post
Favourite Magazines: Any with good reviews of Crowther games
Worse Computer: Spectrum
Worst Computer Games: Any games that rip off an existing one
Worst TV Show: Neighbours
Likes: Programming
Dislikes: Lisa in a had mood, Crap games, Not being able to drive
Other Hobbies: Painting (Art)
"All the graphics are
very well drawn,
which is not
surprising as Tony is
at heart an artist..."
YOUR COMMODORE

Desert Islan
Disks
/
and a gigantie power supply whilst stranded on a desert island, but was
only allowed to brin l o n g  ten pieces of software, what would he take?
This is his list...
)'''
•o-
4
An Assembler -. ,  
\
,.."
'01
D t m l
' A  
\
.
,
 
A
"I was so engrossed in D M  that when I faced the tzard, and couldn't
get past him, I phoned FTL in America and asked the o r  help. Since then
I've completed Chaos Strikes Back -  o rki n g  for Miritrsoft does have its
advantages."
Nebulus
"A v e r y
copy."
Emerald Mines I + 2
Giana Sisters
"A silly little game, but fun none-the-less."
YOUR COMMODORE
Shadowgate
"Although this was my least favourite of the Mindscape games, deserves
a mention because I completed it in a day. David Bishop and I communicated
over the phone, proving the old adage 'Two heads are better than one'"
Shanghai
"I often play this with Lisa (the w I t  is one of the few ganss.-s
enjoys."
"I'll count these as one game, because I've got them both on one disk.
I can't remember if they are called Emerald Mines or not, but I think they're
better than Boulderdash, although almost clones."
Bombuzal
"Okay, so it's my own game. I  still play it often, i t reminds me of all
the hours I spent designing the screens. A lot of thought went into the later
ones."
Surgeon
"A sick game and very enjoyable. It's a shame though, my disk has gone
corrupt."
Any Infocom Adventure
"I have completed Zork One, but the Infocom adventures are easily my
favourite games of all time. I prefer games that require a lot of thought."
And so we departed the Crowther household and visited my favourite part
of Shefﬁeld. The Pub. Congratulations must also go to the Crowthers as only
three days after the interview Mrs Crowther gave birth to a bouncing baby
girl, Sarah Anne Crowther.
•
Fifteen

•  PC C O R N E R
Dear PC Corner,
I am writing to profess my thanks for the recent inclusion in your magazine
of the Commodore PC's feature; and to inquire as to whether you may possibly
be able to assist me with a few queries I have.
I recently decided to pursue a series of studies with the Open University.
Armed with my trusty CM I set about enquiring about the O.U. Information
Technology course. Unfortunately I found that my C64 was not suitable for
the course as it is not IBM compatible. The OW. stipulate that the machine
Used for the course should use MS-DOS and have a minimum 5I2K RAM.
I therefore began to check out my local vendors. I soon discovered that
I could get hold o f a Commodore PC1, which I did. Okay, so I now have
a machine matching the O.U.'s criteria, albeit a very basic one. Some time
in the future I  would dearly like to beef it up. I  want back to the vendor
and asked my questions o f a blank-faced branch manager, and more than
2 weeks later I am still awaiting some form of written reply!
As I purchased a very basic PC, I am aware that I can increase memory
on the motherboard up to 640K, however, with some commercially available
software requiring upwards of I Meg, obviously 640K is insufﬁcient, I would
like to add more. I  asked therefore, with the present conﬁguration o f my'
machine, is i t possible to add a hard card, and i f so, how would I go about
it? In the fullness of time, and as funds become available. I would also like
to add other facilities such as a modem card and a fax card, Again I was
met with a blank stare and "Give me your name and address, I'll consult
our technical people and come back to you". Some two weeks later, I again
visited the shop "No answers yet", and the same blank stare. Then I asked
if I could upgrade the CGA card from the PC1 and replace it with an EGA
card, or even a VGA card. I'm currently awaiting an answer from their "Technical
People" on that too!
As the PC1 is an IBM clone, I assumed that there'd be very little or no
problem with what I want to do, but I would like an authoritive yes or no
before I commit my precious ﬁnances.
I bought Your Commodore whilst I was using my C64, and in all honesty;
have been earnestly looking for a PC magazine with a Commodore bias. In
fact, I purchased the August 89 edition of the magazine because I still own
my C64, and I  wanted to study the listings to see i f I needed to  use any
of them, when I  stumbled across your PC feature. As I now have a
PCI and a CM; I now have twice the reason to continue purchasing your
publication. When I purchased the PC1, I got Concept DATA's
ABLE I  software and GW Basic that was bundled with it but I
am curious as to wheter or not, as with the CM, the Plus/4 and
the Cl28, you provide listings in the magazine; are there any
plans to include a similar facility for the PC's either in
GW Basic or in any of the other languages available with
these machines?
Alistair Ian McCall, Thornaby-on-Tees.
Dear Alistair,
The problem of trying to get information about a computer from a sales man
is an old, old story. You don't say exactly where you purchased your PCI
but hn betting that it was from a main stream high street dealer. In my opinion
the after sales help/service provided by many larger shops is simply atrocious,
once they've got your money they simply want to give you •
Sixteen
YOUR COMMODORE
Got a ﬂoppy
hard drivel°
PC Specialist
your PC Pr'

011111111111.11110•111.111111IN
)py disk? A
Our resident
ist can nurse
problems
•
PC C O R N E R  •
package and watch you disappear into the distance. I  have found that you
can get much better help i f you purchase computers, peripherals ect. i f  you
go to a local computer dealer. O K  so they may not be able to offer you
all of those wonderful deals that you get on the high street hut they are far
more likely to be willing to offer you advice in the long term.
That's enough o f me griping on, now for your queries. A hard card can
be ﬁtted to your PC!. Addons in Southampton produce one that is suitable.
Addons can be contacted on (0703)620202.
Any PC standard modem and fax card can be plugged into the expansion
box as necessary.
Now for the video cards, replacing the CGA card involves disabling the
onboard video by switching on switch 4 as detailed in the user manual, page
115. Your new video card will need to he placed in the expansion box also.
Unfortunately you only have three available so it's your decision which
boards you choose to use.
Your Commodore has prided itself on the quality o f its listings for many
years. As Commodore venture into new computers it is the magazines intention
to move with them. Thus, yes we do intend to produce PC programming
features and listings. However, while we have a large number o f C64, Plus!
4 and C128 programs arriving on our doorstep eac day we have never had
any for the PC. So come on out there i f you are into the PC and would
like to write programming features or have produced a program that you
think will he of interest to other readers of Your Commodore, get in touch!
p
PC's. If you have any opinions that you would like to share, questions
that you would •Iike to see answered, or simply ideas for articles then
do write to us. Without your help we can't make this column work.
Due to the pressures of getting a magazine out each month we can only answer
queries through this column and cannot answer them on an individual basis.
YOUR COMMODORE 
S
e
v
e
n
t
e
e
n

•  FEATURE
0
Intergalactic layabout
Alex Bardy explores the
enormous world of Role
Playing Games.
E
'man in the street' and opinions tend to be varied, some are plain mystiﬁed
("a boardgame without a board?"), while others ﬁnd it quite fascinating
("the best thing since sliced bread and...erm...monopoly'). Truth be told, R PGs
have been around for well nigh 13 years now, and probably an awful lot
more if people had 'only recogniscd it in times long passed: originally considered
a direct descendant of the wargame, these past two or three years have seen
the role-playing game become something of an artform among certain 'factions'.
'The Hobby' has grown immensely in popularity in recent years, commensurate
with the comic and computer games industries actually - and the key to all
this growth? Quite simply, creativity and leisure. And nowhere are these two
factors more in evidence (or indeed, more important) than in a role-playing
game...
The very idea of taking on the role of somebody else (much like an actor
or actress in an award-winning oojamaﬂip) opens up a world of possibilities
for the individual, but when that role can be anything from an alien to a
superhero, a cowboy to a 19th century explorer, or a human to a fantastic
creature of myth, that world o f possibilities becomes all the more inviting,
and there are usually three or four o f you all playing such varied roles -
that's what makes an RPG that little bit extra speciall.
Given a competent Gamesmaster (GM) -  the person who 'runs' the game
a role-playing session can literally last for hours and hours (all fun ones
at that!). The major difference between your everyday comic or computer
adventure game and a role-playing session lies in the ﬂexibility of the game
even the largest computer running the largest adventure game has a ﬁnite
number of branches and or endings. Not so with a role-playing game, which
can (theoretically) run forever, while still continuously varying: the 'limits' of
an RPG are classically deﬁned as "the GM's imagination and leisure time",
and that's about as accurate as you can get without doing a wobbler over
the philosophical/ metaphysical possibilities, etc.
Some of the more popular R PGs currently available include:
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS (D&D)fADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAG-
ONS (AD&D) - the grandfather of them all, D&D is still very popular even
today, not lest because of the huge amount of support material available for
the system. For those who don't know (and haven't guessed), D&D is a fantasy-
orientated game with elves, fairies, ores, and yes, dragons too -  all making
up a colourful and dangerous backdrop for adventure.
TRAVELLER/MEGATRAVELLER - another 'oldie' although this time the
backdrop is a huge universe of galaxy-hopping travellers. Laser riﬂes, giant
spacesports, and loads o f technological marvels abound in this game, and
support material (sourcebooks, scenarios, etc.) is extensive to say the least.
CALL OF CTHULHU (C o g  -  the ﬁrst of the new breed o f RPGs, CoC
is an R PG tied not so much to a particular genre as to a particular world
(or more accurately, to the 'worlds' of a particular author). The gentleman
in question is one Howard Phillips Lovecraft, a nihilistic author of early 20th
Above: Book him
Dano!
"The very idea of
taking on the role of
somebody else
(much like an actor
or actress in an
award-winning
oojamaﬂip) opens up
a world of
possibilities..."
Eighteen 
Y
O
U
R
 COMMODORE

BOAR
Above: I wasn't even born yet, actually!
F E AT U R E  •
century, his stories tell of some of the nastiest beasties you could never wish
to meet, and he linked together two mythical worlds of such creatures (The
Dunsanian Tales and The Cthulhu Mythos respectively).
The Call o f Cithulhu RPG was originally based on Loveeraft's Mythos
tales, but the game system has since been expanded to cover nearly all his
works. Support material, once again, is generous. Recommended.
TWILIGHT: 2000 and 2300AD -  two R PGs (loosely) set around our own
Mother Earth, the former is one of the very few post-holocaust RPGs currently
available, while the latter is set in -  surprise, surprise -  the year 2300 -  a
time when several powers (notably French, American, and Chinese) have
achieved space travel, and colonised planets abound the galaxy. Both these
games are well supported, and as an ardent fan of 2300AD, the latter comes
highly recommended.
MARVEL SUPERHEROES and DC HEROES - both of these games (licensed
by Marvel and DC Comics respectively) allow prospective players the chance
to don fancy dress, mask, and all-important tights, and to go around leaping
tall buildings and levelling blocks with single blows, etc. Great fun for all,
and support material isn't thin on the ground for either game...
JORUNE -  a truly different R PG this, it's a sort o f science-fantasy game
set in a world where magic and science become one and the same. The game
has been around for quite some time, and has something of a token following
at present, it seems to be becoming increasingly popular though.
Set in its own world, Jorune has an awful lot going for it, the complete
'alien-ness' of the world it's set in is just the ﬁrst of many plusses. Unfortunately,
there's very little support material for the game, and it looks set to stay something
of a cult game rather than anything else.
BATTLETECH -  this 'RPG' started life as a wargame and, after almost 5
years, has recently become extremely popular with the masses. The game revolves
around huge metallic beasts (much like those Transformers you see in the
TV ads) beating the hell out of each other across all kinds of terrain. Fun
while it lasts, the game has been given tremendous support (indeed, over the
last few years no other game has matched it for the sheer volume of material
that's become available).
GURPS -  GURPS (Generic Universal Role-Playing System) is an attempt
to cash in on every genreof roleplaying - the game system has been designed
in such a manner that you can use it for all settings, be they fantasy, SF,
cartoons, espionage, o r  whatever. It's an experiment that's proven very
successful, and currently available are sourcebooks (with extra rules, etc.) for
all types of RPG, and even particular authors -  there are books speciﬁcally
covering Andre Norton's WITCH WORLD thingy and Alan Dean Foster's
books for example.
SPACE; 1889 (1889) -  one o f the newest RPGs to be released, it covers a
kind o f pseudo-historical 19th century where a guy called Thomas Edison
has discovered space travel, and people like G  Wells and Jules Verne are
most certainly not crazy. Venus, Mars, and the Moon are also inhabited (by
lizardmen, martians, and selenites respectively). Oh, and lasers, the atom, fusion/
ﬁssion, etc. haven't been discovered yet -  if it all sounds a bit unreal, that's
because it is, for it's a marvel o f game design, sand plays extremely well to
boot! And all the Victorian 'dressing' does nothing but enhance the game's
overall effect on the players. Support material is limited at the moment, but
things seem to be picking up in this direction now. 1889 is my personal fave
of the bunch at the moment but I'm sure I'll get over it soon, promise..
YOUR COMMODORE 
N
i
n
e
t
e
e
n

•  F E AT U R E
HOUND OF THE
SHADOW
Right: It's
not nice
being
grabbed by
the
ghoulies.
T
the theme behind Electronic Arts latest computerised role-playing
adventure. Having a distinct Cthulhu Mythos ﬂavour, i t is based in
London in the rip-roaring 1920s a n d  we can be assured that there is more
than a tad of horror involved.
The ﬁrst task to be performed, as in the RPG, is to create a character.
This is done very impressively, using mood graphics to the maximum effect.
You can be male or female -  this is your ﬁrst choice -  American or British,
and you can choose from numerous professions. N o t only are there
characteristics involved (you do not get to see them, only sentences on what
sort of person you are) the skill system is enormous.
There are many skills which you possess, but they are all set at an average
level. Once you have determined how experienced your character is to be -
via age, etc -  you get to raise some skills a little, in order to be more adept
at certain tasks.
The gameplay itself is rather like a text adventure, although graphics are
well distributed throughout. The difference between this and, say an Infocom
adventure, is that The Hound o f  the Shadow is completely interactive.
Depending on how proﬁcient you are at certain skills, different text will come
up at some sections. Every little feature that your character has, which makes
him her an individual, has an affect on the play, although it is possible to
complete the game with any sort of character.
The parser is not enormous, nor is it overly complex, but this is not a
programming error, it is in fact a feature. The parser is very simple to use
indeed. This saves you the hassle of having to ﬁnd the correct words to key
into the computer in order to complete a simple logic problem.
Unlike most other adventures (which describes The Hound of the Shadow
perfectly), this game goes not rely on objects to build a complex clue pattern.
Instead people are the order of the day, provoking you to take more active
role in what goes on around you, and allows you to slip into your character
easily.
Every action undertaken saps away time, which is important to the plot
The timeline is a very important feature. This is to be stringently adhered
to otherwise the Hound, for it is after you or your friend, will rip you to
shreds in typical H. P. Lovecraft tradition.
The graphics are very moody, painted in a duo-tone style in a crumbly
colour of beige brown -much like those older photographs found in everybody's
attic. The game text changes every time it is played with another character,
and there are many, many small features added which make the game seem
a little more personal to the particular character involved.
Although The Hound o f the Shadow is not in the Bard's Tale mould,
it is in every way as much an RPG, i f not more so. The interaction level
is superb, and rumour has it that if this is a success, more will follow with
the ability to use your previous character(s). 
R
i
k
 Henderson
IIm
-2,,, 01 to
'I7  Irt
m l i t  
a
l
l
 Left: What's this
,::;;; I n i  
,
 e
6-1!:ror
'''
 pub. i t ' s  a
-
Twenty 
Y
O
U
R
 COMMODORE

Win a sword, care of
those wonderful people
at Audiogenic, in our
Lone Wolf competition.
Maim your neighbour,
Slice a friend...
y
Hemel Hempstead; as muscu-
lar as Rik Henderson, with a
Live Role-Playing sword made from
foam (we don't want you hurting
anybody now, do we. Do we?) This
is the ﬁrst prize in our Lone Wolf
competition.
Also included as ﬁrst prize are the
two new Lone Wolf novels (signed of
course). Four second prize winners
receive the two signed books.
What you have to do is study the
photograph to the right and think of
some speech bubbles for what you
think may have been said -  the sillier
the better.
Write them o n  the back o f  a
postcard, or sealed envelope, and send
them to:
Silly Buggars Compo, Your Commo-
dore, Argus House, Boundary Way.
Hemel Hempstead, HP2 7ST.
Closing date: 31st September 1989.
The Rules
Entries will n o t be accepted fro m
employees of Argus Specialist Publi-
cations, or Audiogenic. This restric-
tion also applies to employees families
and agents of the companies.
The entry restrictions form part of
the rules and the Editor's decision is
ﬁnal. N o  correspondence will be
entered into. In the event of a postal
strike, we reserve the right to extend
the closing date.
BIG W O B B LY  C O M P O
A SHEEP IN
WOLF'S
CLOTHING
BIG WOBBLY C O M P O
BIG WOBBLY C O M P O
BIG W O B B LY C O M P O
BIG WOBBLY C O M P O
BIG WOBBLY C O M P O
BIG WOBBLY C O M P O
BIG WOBBLY C O M P O
BI G  WOBBLY COMPO
BI G  WOBBLY COMPO
YOUR COMMODORE 
T
w
e
n
t
y
 One


Clive Barker's new ﬁlm
has a dark fantasy
theme. Dave Hughes
and Alex Blair talk to
him on a very frantic,
very elaborate, Pine-
wood set.
Photography by Murray
Close
YOUR COMMODORE
F E AT U R E  •
c
playwrite, critic and general man-of-the-moment among horror fans,
it is without a doubt the ﬁlm HELLRAISER for which he has earned
himself mot notoriety. A  brilliant, stylish, complex collage of ideas, images,
brutality, secuality and death, HELLRAISER was Clive's directorial debut,
a ﬁlm made on a shoestring budget which has become the horror movie of
the Eighties, establishing its central bad-guys, the Cenobites. as the new Freddy
Kreugers, Michael Myers and Jason Voorhees. A  sequel has already been
released in the UK, although Clive himself merely oversaw the making o f
the movie, and there are plans for a third. Now Clive is working with a big
budget, at a big studio, with big names and big ideas. As he told me on
the set of the new picture, NIGHTBREED, "HELLRAISER was a little horror
movie; this is a  big fantasy movie. HELLRAISER was one house i n
Cricklewood; this is ﬁve sound stages at Pinewood Studios."
NIGHTBRE ED is based on one of Clive's own novels, CABAL. It follows
the story of Boone, an innocent but mixed-up man convinced by his psychotic
psychiatrist, Decker, that he is a multiple murderer. Fleeing the authorities,
Boone discovers a lost city wherein reside all the rejected horrors of the earth
and, having unintentionally lead his pursuers to the city, ﬁghts to save it from
those who would destroy that which they don't understand... It is written by
Clive Barker and stars THE FLY, VIDEODROME and DEAD RINGERS
director David Cronenberg and H IL L  STREET BLUES star Charlie Haid.
Clive says it is "much more than a horror movie", describing it as having
"more heart, less red meat" than his earlier ﬁlms. A dark fantasy movie, then?
"Absolutely," says Clive. "There is a large action element to it, and no movie
that stars David Cronenberg can be entirely safe for minors."
The set itself is a mixed bag, placed as it is between the famous 007 sound
stange and the top secret BATMAN set. Canadian police cars and trucks litter
the exterior locations, where Clive delightedly points out the exact spot of
waste ground where one of Decker's more heinous crimes is committed (sorry,
this is a family magazine). Impressive enough is the unfeasibly high wall o f
the city, Midian, which has been breached by the Sherriff (Charles Haid) and
his men as I arrive. Talk is of a major scene involving a crashing juggernaut,
which involves some testing special effects, and Clive's air is of excited anxiety.
Inside, elsewhere in the sprawling Buckinghamshire studios, the place is infested
with every grotesquerie imaginable: NIGHTBREED is said to contain over
two hundred separate monsters, with HELLRAISER special effects team Image
Animation once more providing some astounding visuals and, working closely
with Clive, ideas for the monsters themselves. I  am asked i f I am available
to be another monster (they are either short on extras or make-up...) -  in
fact, Ocean Software's Gary Bracey has already been roped in to play one
of them during his research for the forthcoming computer game - but I decline
and watch instead as Clive goes through the motions for another scene, before
wrapping and sparing me some time over lunch for a chat.
His attitude is very clearly different to this ﬁlm: he knows his ﬁnanciers
will be watching closely, and it is important that the ﬁlm does good business
both here and in the States. Recent box-ofﬁce successes in the fantasy genre
(including INDIANA JONES AND THE LAST CRUSADE, BATMAN (see
my article last isue) and GHOSTBUSTERS IIS suggest that he hasn't too
many worries. Two minutes of sheer bloodlust were cut from HELLRAISER
II, and Clive seems subconsciously aware that his movie-making must mature,
or at least change. "I've never thought i t was that important to advance,"
he says, "but it is important to change, to do something different all the time."
Emphasis this time around is very much on characterisation, particularly
of the four lead roles: Boone, his girlfriend Lori, Decker and the Sherriff.
"It is scary, but its major scares come from genuinely caring about the pepole
who are involved in that situation. I don't think the audience is gonna come
out of this movie feeling detached about the characters, in the same way that
they were detached from the HELLRAISER characters. H ELLRAISER was
a very cold picture: you couldn't really care for the characters." I ask him
if working with David Cronenberg fed Clive's own vision of the movie, but
he demurs. NIGHTBREED, he says is not Cronenberg's style. "His vision
is much grimmer than anything in this picture,, and although this is a dark
picture in some respects, it is dark in a completely different way to the way
he is dark. But it was wonderful to have him in the picture', partly because
he is a hero of mine and partly because it was his ﬁrst chance to do this.
It's a massive role, and I think it comes across on the screen."
Twenty Three

•  F E AT U R E
Twenty Four
The latest news on the movie is that another six weeks' of ﬁlming is to
begin at Pinewood, with Ralph McQuarrie (who designed much of the alien
fauna of the STAR WARS movies) overseeing the ranks of the NIGHTBREED.
More monsters are lined up, although a rumoured three-hour rough-cut has
yet to be edited down to a more manageable two hours' worth, and although
scheduled for release at Christmas of this year, the UK release is now to be
nearer next Summer. In the meantime, Barker addicts can read his new bestseller
THE GREAT AND SECRET SHOW (the ﬁrst of The Art trilogy) and look
forward to the sequel to CABAL, which, Cive says, will probably be turned
into the NIGHTBREED sequel. HELLRAISER II screenwriter Peter Atkins'
script for HEILRAISER HI has been accepted, and Clive is already looking
at a screenplay for another of his stories, this time SON OF CELLULOID,
which appeared in both the BOOKS OF BLOOD and my own magazine,
SKELETON CREW.
For Clive Barker, obviously, darkness is not an obstacle, but big business,
the tapping of which is clearly his Art.
C
ﬁlm Nightbreed is to
be pixelised by ﬁlm
license supremos. Ocean
Software. This can only be
judged as another brilliant
marketing move by the com-
pany responsible fo r  the
Batman m o v i e  g a m e
(another superb license
deal).
The game is to follow the
plot of the ﬁlm very closely
(as contacts have told us) of
NIGHTBREED - THE GAME
which Ocean i s a  world
expert. due to the fact that
its Public Relations manager
was asked to make his screen
debut a s  o n e  o f  t h e
Nightbreed.
Apparently, C l i v e
Barker himself had a reas-
onable input into the game
design, thus making it very
accurate on the detail side.
We have also been informed
that it is to be more of an
arcade game than anything
else.
As already explained in
the main feature (what do
you mean you haven't read
it yet?), the plot of the ﬁlm
involves a character named
Boone, w h o  h a s  b e e n
wrongly adjudged to  have
murdered somebody. Thus
he goes on the run.
Unfortunately he runs
too far, into the city o f
Midian a
 land fu l l  o f
various nasties; the Night-
breed. Here he starts t o
change himself, into one of
the said creatures, and then
it gets juicy.
Now that the movie has
been rescheduled fo r  an
February release, the game
has followed suit. It will be
available on the Amiga and
CM, and you can bet that
it'll be every bit as horriﬁc
as its cellular counterpart.
Rik Henderson.
YOUR COMMODORE

“Ocean software's
Gary Bracey has
already been roped
in to play one of
them (the
Nightbreed)...”
F E AT U R E  •
YOUR COMMODORE 
T
w
e
n
t
y
 Five

•  128 C O R N E R
Dear 128 Corner,
Congratulations on the new C128 Corner. The article is a great idea, I hope
it is a success. Here are a few hints and tips for you.
For a secret message from your 128 enter: SYS32800, 123, 45,6
P0KE4784, 9: POKE54785, 230 will increase the size of characters on 80
col. screen (may not work on all versions of 128).
1581 partitions can be accessed from Fontmaster 128 by sending the disk
command: /:partition name.
When using Micro Clerk 128, pop-up menus can be moved around the
screen using the TAB key.
Graphics created on C AD PAK 128's second screen can be used with
Fontmaster by loading them into the convertor as a hi-res picture.
I hope that these will be of some use to you.
P. Traynor, Warrington, Cheshire.
Dear 128 Corner
I am looking forward to reading articles about the C128 in the new 128 Corner.
The following questions may be o f interest to other readers, in addition to
myself.
What Viza Software is available for the C128 for Word Processing, Database
and Spreadsheets.
What ofﬁcially does CP/ M stand for. And what range of software can
one used and is available.
Is is possible to switch from the C64 mode to the C128 mode and vice
versa with a cartridge installed without damaging your computer.
I look forward to your reply in the pages of NT.
J. Bradley, Lanarkshire, Scotland.
computers.
_ —
There is a large-anfolitFof s o f t w a r e  available - mostly professional/
business applications, unfortunately there is too much to list here.
If you want to investigate CPI Al software further we suggest you take
a look at the CPI M Kit and the CPI M Users guide. Both of these are available
from Financial Systems Software.
You could also try contacting the CP/ M Users Group at: 72 Mill Road,
Dartford DA2 7R.Z.
Most cartridges are designed for the _Commodore 64 c
not allow you to access the C128 while they are plugged w
i
l
l
 start
up the computer in C64. The ohly cartridge___Lhat-we are aware works in Cl28
mode is the Warp Speed this, l i k e . j u s t
Financial Systems Software. Switching between C64 and _C128• ?Node while
a cartridge is plugged in, i f the cartridge allows it,Aa
Dear 128 Corner
,
- 
•
- ,
I like the C128 pages in YC. Could Yotkmention in them that the. C 1 - 2 8
of Supersoft's World Style, formerly called Word Perfect, has ﬂow been modiﬁe4
to correctly underline when used with Colutmodlire's own d a i syw h e e l
DPS1101. I  solved the problem for trite , and they sent r n
in return. Word Style works in' either 40 !z_ tr_ 4 0 -
areas, between which text can be translefﬁa. An easy to 
r
y
 basic word
processor, it's good value for E20. Anyone with C64 or Plus/4 Word Perfect
ﬁles can load them straight in to Word Style 128.
P. Simmonds, Skelmanthorpe, Huddersﬁeld.
Thanks for you letter, and the free plug for yourself Hope that your comments
will prove beneﬁcial to some users out there.
Twenty Six
Two Viza products were launched for the C128. The ﬁrst o f these was Viza
Classic, a very powerful wordprocessor and a favourite in the ofﬁce. The second
program is Viza Star. This program offers both database and spreadsheet
functions, while not as pretty or friendly as Viza Classic it is still a very powerful
program. Try Financial Systems Software if you are trying to trackthese 
d
c
o
t
_
CP/ M stands for Control Programfor-Microcoln
the fore runner- t o
compatibles  
f
 
1
:
4
"
Put pen to paper and tell
us your news, views and
groans
YOUR COMMODORE

Binders
COMSOFT
(Coldstream) Ltd.
w
0 4 -  1
„ ,/'
ii,,,....._
lab-
- i •  1 I
' n
'
"
I  
;
'
. •
SUPPLIERS OF HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE FOR THE
AMSTRAD PC-PPC-CPC PCW, COMMODORE
SPECTRUM, ATARI, ATARI ST. MSX,
ELECTRON APPLE SERIES 2. APPLE MACI NTOSH
COMPUTERS
WE STOCK A VARIED SELECTION OF WORD
PROCESSORS DATA BASES, SPREAD SHEETS &
ACCOUNTANCY PACKAGES AND MANY OTHER ITEMS
OF BUSINESS & LEISURE SOFTWARE ALL AT DI SCOUNT
PRICES
48 Duke Street,
Coldstream, Scotland, TD12 4LF
Suppliers of Software and Hardware to government and Local
Authorities
TELEPHONE No. 0890 3232
FAX No. 0890 2927
SEND FOR OUR FREE CATALOGUE
Organise and protect your disk with
Commodore Disk User disk binders and
data disks.
Why not keep your Commodore Disk User program
collection alongside your magazines in a stylish Disk User disk
binder? The binder comes complete with 10 disk sleeves to
organise and protect your program disks. Why not buy a disk
binder to house all of your data disks? We can even supply
Commodore Disk User data disks. The Commodore Disk
User logo immediately idendﬁes your disks and there
to title them and document the disks details.
Send for your disks and binders now
Prices are as follows:
Commodore Disk User Binder £4.95, including
10 sleeves. Order code BDYUI
Commodore Disk User Binder with 10 sleeves and
10 disks, 0.95 Order code B M W
10 sleeves for insertion in binder, MO. Order code
BDSIO
20 sleeves for inclusion in binder, £2.75. Order code
BDS20
10 Commodore Disk User data disks, 8.95. Order
code BDDIO
All orders should be sent to: YOUR COMMODORE, READERS SERVICES,
ARGUS SPECIALIST PUBLICATIONS, ARGUS HOUSE, BOUNDARY WAY,
HEMEL HEMPSTEAD HP2 7ST. Please allow 28 days for delivery.
I N
I• C•P•U•G
the Independent
Commodore Products Users Group
is the largest and most friendly
computer club in the country
Back issues o f  1988 available t o  non-members  as  we l l  as
members, at £2.00 each, postage pafd.
•  M a n y  local groups with regular meetings
•  New s magazine included in membership - 100
plus pages of reviews, news and information
every two months.
•  W e  support all Commodore Machines old and
new; PET, VIC20, 64,16, 4-4, PC, 128 and all
AMIGA&
•  F r e e  Software Library of public domain
programs for all the above machines available
to members on supply of blank disk or tape and
payment of p&p. New members, do not send for
this until membership number is received.
•  H e l p  and Advice
•  Di s c ount scheme
•  Subscription only i13 per year (UK) plus El
joining fee (overseas rates on application)
It you are seriously interested in using or programming
any Commodore computer, then joining ICPUG is a must!
For full details, send a stamped. addressed envelope to:
I C I T )  ICPUG Membership Secretary. Jack C. Cohen,
u
g
Ilford, Essex, IG2 7EP
PRODUCT NAME
ORDER CODE
QUANTITY
Overseas postage add E1.00
PRICE
TOTAL

R
C64 computing than blasting aliens and solving adventures. In the next
few pages we'll explore exactly what your C64 can do and what hardware
and software is available to help you. First we'll look at the Soft Options
of the programs you can run and then at the Hard Facts, which is the extra
hardware you'll need to buy to get the most out of Commodore computing.
Soft Options
W
the CM has its fair share. These range from the cheap and cheerful
to the multi featured. A t the top end o f the scale World Writer
3, available through F.S.S.L., costs E39.95 but includes an 100,000 word spell-
checker, a Thesaurus to ensure you always choose the right word and an outliner
utility to plan your writing through a series o f nested headings before you
begin. The cheapest word processor is probably Logotron's Writer 1295 that
logically costs only E12.95 but includes a spell checker even though its operation
is strange and slow. Before you buy a word processor think about what you're
going to use it for as common uses range from letter writing to magazine
articles (even books), and buy one suited to your needs.
Other word processors worth considering are Super Script and PaperClip.
If you're thinking of producing a club newsletter, or report including graphics
and charts, then a DTP system will help considerably. For the C64 there-
are-three-main contenders: GeoPublish, PaperClip Publisher and Stop Press.
As with many packages each has its own strengths and weaknesses. Stop Press,
from Database, is supplied complete with a three button mouse and is controlled
by icons, but has a very limited selection of typestyles. PaperClip Publisher
is very good but only supports the PaperClip word processor which reduces
i f s
you can incorporate text ﬁles from any word processor into your pages, and
can also use any GEOS font and graphics from programs such as Print Shop
and Newsroom.
Tony Hetherington gets
serious as he looks into
the business side of the
C64
Twenty Eight
SER
GEOS -  a disk operating system devised by California based Berkeley
Softworks h a s  developed into a comprehensive system; GeoPublish is only
part of a range that includes the Geo Write word processor, Geol'ile database.
GeoCalc spreadsheet and GeoChart graphing utility. The whole system uses
windows, icons, pull down menus and a joystick or mouse controlled cursor.
If you want to store and retrieve data then Superbase is still one of the
best C64 databzses. The Precision Software package can store and sort your
data, perform calculations based on it and store the answers. One function
of a database is to provide a list o f names and addresses that can be used
with a mailmerge utility, supplied with most word processors, in order to send
out a letter to everyone on your mailing list.
They say a picture is worth 1000 words and if you want to create masterpieces
using your C64 screen as a canvas thee is a wide range of packages to help
you. Perhaps the best is the OCP Art Studio which was published by Rainbird.
However, now Microprose has bought Rainbird, OCP bought its package back
and then sold it to Datel Electronics. Luckily the program isn't as confusing
and it now represents excellent value for money. The new Datel Art Studio
offer bundles the package with a 1351 mouse, mouse mat and mouse holder
for only E29_99.
With the addition of a modem, your C64 can become a gateway into the
worlds of bulletin boards and online services, such as Compunet, that offers
its users pages and pages o f sample art, programs, and information at the
press of a few keys and a BT phone socket.
Finally, you can add a teletext adapter to your CM to view, store and
read pages of information from Ceefax and Oracle services. These not only
contain daily TV listings, weather and travel details, jokes and recipes but
Above: And there's a heavy
depression in Hemel
Hempstead. Right: Make sure
you've got the right word with
Word Writes.1ous
_ efr1;_- 1(F
c'lld color ri•-
•
CEO; E
a 1.
••.=
(4-06.-416_ (+6n-bk 0 E ;
•
YOUR COMMODORE
•
••

SOFTWARE
YOUR COMMODORE
also the latest news, sports results and stock market prices. This becomes
particularly useful if you're planning on using programs such as pools predictors,
as a utility is supplied to read the screen buffer and will allow you to use
the information in your own programs.
Hard Facts
Disk drives
Unless you're a glutton for punishment, or you actually enjoy long loading
times, you'll need to invest in a disk drive. There are a number on the market,
including Commodore's own. One of the best buys is Evesham Micros Oceanic
drive which is a slimline drive, is fully compatible with Commodore's and
comes free with CEOS. Expect to pay about £150 for a drive but look out
for special offers.
Printer
A good printer is essential i f you want to get the most out of applications
such as word processing and desktop publishing. These range from low cost
Epson, Star and Mannesman Tally dot matrix printers to laser technology.
The Star LC-10 C is particularly fun as it is not only a good black and white
work horse it can also print out full colour images created by art packages.
Graphics tablet
If you're really serious about C M graphics and you've tried and dismissed
joysticks and mice as electronic paintbrushes then why not invest in a graphics
tablet. These are ideal for tracing in outlines of objects and pictures into a
package and also make working with ﬁne detail a lot easier. I f  you want
the best then lookout for the Koala Pad as it's supported by most art packages.
Teletext Adapter
Microtext prodcue a very reasonable teletext adapter that can either use a
video recorder or tuner (supplied extra) and plugs into the C64's user prot.
It has a cable that connects to the video out socket o f the video recorder
and can even be in a different room.
Above and left: GEOS, a system for
every use.
"Stop Press, from
Database, is supplied
complete with a three
button mouse..."
numtiwo
ood• v p *
S I L .
W
O
N
,
 
E
 L i S H
k4Aq.'111 hit4
• -  
•
Twenty Nine

•  F E AT U R E
Thirty
YOUR COMMODORE

YOUR
PROGRAMMER
CONTENTS
32 Give it Some Stick
The ins and outs of a joystick
34 Reasoning on the 128
Turn your 128 into an expert
system
38 Plus Four Utilities
Three utilities for your Plus
Four.
42 Fib o Stacks
The proper use of a processor
stack.
44 Extending Basic
Part seven.
47 Flash Load
You too can have colourful
loading borders.
48 Dosman
Yet more DOS utilities,
54 Reset Circuit
No longer do you need to stick
a spoon in the back of your
Commodore.
YOUR COMMODORE
Thirty One

Give it some
s ti
Just how does a joystick work? How do you use it in
your own programs? Read on and ﬁnd out
Top
Printed circuit board
Auto ﬁre button
FEATURE
Joystick plug
Rockable in all directions
Stick
Rase
Part of base that
pushes microswitches
Four micros witches
T
he enthusiastic games player
would have an extremely tough
time indeed if it wasn't for the
good old joystick. Okay sure there are
games that do not require control from
such a device, but, for the shoot-em-
up game there is just no substitute. But
how do they work?
We all know what a joystick looks
like: basically it will have a stick with
a ﬁre button or buttons, a base, a lead
and maybe an auto-ﬁre switch.
Inside the joystick beneath the stick
there are four switches for up, down,
left and right directions. The better
joysticks use microswitches which
make a deﬁnite click when you move
the stick. The cheaper ones use a four
pointed star made out of thin tensile
steel. Moving the stick causes a point
of the star to come into contact with
a pad on the printed circuit board
inside the joystick. The trouble with
these is that after prolonged use the
star begins to show -signs o f fatigue
and eventually a point of the star will
break off making it impossible to move
in one of the directions.
If we take a look at the schematic
in diagram I o f our typical joystick,
we can see how the components are
electrically connected to make up such
a device.
As you can see there are seven
connections to the joystick plug. These
are up, down, right, left, ﬁre, ground
and +5 volts dc.
Each position switch will be acti-
vated by moving the stick in one of
four directions. You can also trigger
two switches b y  moving the stick
diagonally, for example in a northwest
direction.
Now the computer program will be
trying to determine the status of these
latter switches and hence the position
into which you have pushed the stick,
but you can't just plug the joystick in
any old where. It needs to be plugged
into special interfacing circuitry via a
joystick port.
Most computers have a  joystick
port appearing a t some convenient
position on its case. Some require a
joystick interface that plugs into the
computer's edge connector which has
the processor's data and address bus
running to it. This interface will do
the decoding necessary to convert the
movement of the joystick into the data
signals that the program will need in
order to work out which position the
joystick is in. I f  the joystick port is
built in to the computer, then it will
have such an interface already inside
it.
The interface or circuitry inside the
computer will look something like
YOUR COMMODORE

diagram 2 . We  have the address
decoding chip and a data bus buffer.
The address decoder is needed to read
the status of the switches in the joystick
at speciﬁc times, that is, when a speciﬁc
unique address exists on the address
bus and at no other time. I f  we did
not do this then we would have all
sorts of unwelcome data on the data
bus, which would cause the computer
to lock up.
When this unique address comes
along it will force the decoder to issue
an enable signal to the data buffer.
This buffer will then put the status of
the joystick switches onto the data bus
of the computer circuitry ready for the
program to read and act upon.
Let us imagine that you have
moved the stick to the up position.
This will cause the signal on the up
line to go low (to ground). When the
data buffer is enabled this will cause
the output on DO to go low, or in other
words to be set to zero. The data bus
would then have a binary value o f
11111110 (decimal 254). The program
would look at this value and know that
the u p  position has been selected.
Similarly i f we push the stick to the
right then we would have a binary
value o f  11111011. I f  we select a
northeast position, this means that
switches up and right will be active
which will put a  binary value o f
11111010 on the data bus. Likewise
pressing the ﬁre button will cause D4
to go low thus obtaining 11101111. Get
the idea?
The program will then, a t very
frequent intervals possibly during an
interrupt routine, be working out the
status of all the joystick switches and
taking the appropriate action upon its
data bus ﬁndings.
As mentioned earlier, some joys-
ticks have an auto ﬁre switch. This
brings in to play a simple multivibrator
circuit which issues a continuous series
of pulses at about 10 per second (each
pulse mimicking the ﬁre button). This
is basically a luxury for those people
Pius4kind C128
C64
Value
Direciion
Value
Direction
0
Norte
0
None
I
Up
I
Up
2
Up RigM
2
DO V o n
3
Right -
3
4
Down Right
4
Left
5
Down
5
Up Left
6
Down.Ldt
6
Do wn ix f t
7
Left
7
It
I J p L f t
g
g
Right
Up Right
10
DO WI E  R i g h t
FEATURE
A W i l l o o k a t a
C l  c v
•  
•
W a s t u c k  s a t f c h a r
f
uD
Down
A I S A t
Au t o  I L I
Ad O l t a f t  D a d a d a r
•••1
Ad O P O l a  4 1 0 4 1  M O  t a  A l t
D a t a  D u m  S u l a m ,
0 7  D A  D A  0 4  0 3 0 2  D e  D e
t  
t
 
t
 
t
0 a 4 m  L a n . "
playing a game that requires a lot of
ﬁring, thus saving your ﬁngers from
having to press the ﬁre button all the
time. The multivibrator uses the +5Vdc
line for its power.
Well that's about all there is on
A
dore family of computers each
have tw o  controller ports,
numbered one and two. Normally,
these controller ports are used fo r
reading the joystick or mouse when
playing games. With a little imagina-
tion on your part, you can use these
ports for gaining input from the user,
instead o f  the normal keyboard
method.
Each joystick has ﬁve switches, one
for the ﬁre button, and fo u r fo r
direction. These switches correspond
to the lower 5 bits of data held in the
joystick location. B y  peeking these
locations, we can decide what action
to take, depending o n  the values
returned. Always remember, a value
of 1 signiﬁes that either a direction was
NOT chosen, or the tire button was
NOT pressed.
The tabl e  shows th e  values
returned for each direction. A  value
of more than 128 indicates that the
ﬁre button was pressed at the same
time.
Reading the ports is a simple job,
and on the P1us/4 and C128 it is made
even easier by the use o f the JOY
command. C64 users however, have to
do a  little more work (Don't they
always!)
Below you will see two BASIC
listings for determinating the state of
the joystick. I have purposely kept the
listings on a very simple level. The
point of this text is not to show you
programming skills or techniques, i t
is simply to show you how to read
joystick information.
The ﬁrst listing can be used by both
Plus/ 4 and C128 users. The second is
for C64 users.
joysticks. Once you've seen one you've
basically seen them all, except that
some are designed better for prolonged
use and comfort and some are designed
better for fast action. It really is a
personal choice, so try before you buy.
7
•
-
r
i
"
,7
••
—str
-
. ! E T " .  
”
P
T
r
.
s
,
P LLL'
• - P E ﬂ R17;
2:3 R E M  2 2 Y
n  RE M J C Y ' : '
•  1 F J ﬂY . : P . -
JO 1 F Z 2 Y • 2
•  T r i ﬂ
Y 2
▪ ! F " . 1 2 Y P
EC : FJ OYr. 2
n n 7 n
•  I F J C V P ' .
EC I F J 3 7 :
•
! EJ Ci. . 2 •
-
P/ FI PE"
9 C  
I
F
=
r
?
T pr.
DE I FS CW2
7,ml—r!Rr-
•  : F . T ﬂY r 2
P 7 "
I FS C Y ( 2
1
ICC •FJ E3?(T.
I CS : F J C Y
r " r I R E "
O CO TC2 7
7 = !
I . . . T C Y S T I E K
PPC:3R1
1 ! S  E D P  P CRT1
: S F C R  P C R 7 2
O T H E N P R I ! ! T = T H I U S "
l v :
- 1 7 7 . 1 i
m i r t T r p r :  
E
.
1
=
. E T H E ! : P P : 7 : T
P R : t I T " L 2 F T "
- E
: 2 T 7 n E
=131THEnPRTNT"P! GHT: F
- 1 3 2 T H E ! T P ! ! ! T
- 1 2 2 7 X F N P P 1 7 1 T
- : 3 9 T H E N P R : N T
' = 1 3 E THE NFR7 NT"
YOUR COMMODORE 
T
h
i
r
t
y
 Three

This is the ﬁnal part of
our series for turning
your C128 into an
expert system
1111Nk,_ .
By Paul Schoﬁeld
C128 P R O G R A M M I N G
0
 ver the last two months, we have been providing you with the means
for turning your Cl28 into a mini expert system. The ﬁrst two sections
dealt with the knowledge base and language generator.
INQUIRE is the last of the three programs making up our expert system
shell. Once your expert system has been fully tested, INQUIRE is the only.M
N
program needed to  interogate the knowledge base and evaluate the user
responses. The operation is fairly self explanatory, but some knowledge of
the programs operation is useful for designing and tuning your applications.
On starting the program you are ﬁrst required to identify the knowledge
ase to be used. Once this has been done the target texts, condition texts,
relation rules and implication rules are loaded into a set of arrays. The master
array is the relation rules array, which deﬁnes the operations to be performed
and includes the necessar _refere 
o
nces lot' extracting information from the other
p r i l l i t i  A  
,
data structures. .
Before questioning h
the knowledge base giving background information on the topic o f the
owledge base etc. If this is longer than a single page, it is displayed a page
at a time and the user indicates when then next page i to  be displayed.
After this a standard help text on answering questions is displayed. For
each condition, it is permissible to answer (t)rue, (f)alse or (d)on't know.
11V T h e  program then examines the relation rules array-starting at the entry
for target I. It scans each condition for the target and unless the condition
is irrelevant for this rule, the user is asked to answer the condition question.
The answer is saved and evaluated to determine whether it is the required result
for the target. I f  it is, the program continues with this target, otherwise it
marks the reason for abandoning the target and continues with the next target.
There are two reasons why a target may be abandoned, either it is rejected,
because a part of a condition has the wrong value or it is simply abandoned
because of a don't know response. It is important to note that a don't know
does not rule out a target, it is simply ignored during the ﬁrst part, as there
.
I
I
.
conditions set. This means that as the inference engine proceeds through the
scan o f targets and conditions, i t ﬁnds i t already has the answers to  an
increasingly large number of conditions and so does not have to ask the user.
Hopefully, i f Don't Know answers have not been given, a relation rule
for a target will be satisﬁed. At this stage a subroutine is called, which displays
the possible solution and gives the user the option to exit from the program
or continue searching for further soltens. A further option -  (W)hy, is also
pro\ kied_
Why?
The why option allows you to request a justiﬁcation for the solution. What
it does is back track through the targets .
to date and explain the actions it took. This is extremely useful for debugging
a knowledge base and is also useful to the end user who wishes to examine
the reasoning used to reach the solution. Where the expert system is used
for categorizing and a new category has to be introduced this can give a useful
clue to the new condition required and which targets are affected.
No (More) Solutions
Alternatively, a More response after a solution or a number of Don't Know
response can cause the inference engine to exhaust the list of targets. At this
stage the user is informed that no or no more solutions could be found, The
option to try again is given if any don't know answers were given. This causes
a complete reassessment o f the data to be p e r f o
know response only affects the current rule, so that i f the same unknown
condition exists in several rules and no clear answer is given it will be asked
repeatedly. This means that the retry is very tedious and there is no point
Thirty Four 
Y
O
U
R
 COMMODORE

C128 P R O G R A M M I N G
in requesting this unless at least some don't know conditions are going to
be answered.
Applications
Having already typed in threep ? '
what use is our expert system shell. For the home user, however, expert system
applications are far from obvious, so it is quite useful to consider a few areas
of potential use and also some considerations fo r constructing a  useful
knowledge base.
One very obvious application for the home computer user is a program
design aid, indeed I originally developed the forerunner of the reason program
to assist in devekving my Cribbage Master program. Good cribbage players,
who have used-the program will no doubt have noticed a slight ﬂaw in the
pegging strategy with certain types o f hand. This is a result o f posing the
question 'what card maximises the scoring possibilities?'. A  more correct
approach would have been to ask 'which is the least disadvantageous card
to play?' In most cases the answer is the same and once the algorithms were
coded and problem noticed, it would have required a major rewrite to correct
a minor short coming.
Presenting the strategy in RAL format is very much simpler and quickly
highlights oversights.
General categorisation applications are also easily handled, as are guides
to procedures, such as an extended version of the chemical analysis example
or the enevitable car maintenance. Some care is required in the latter of these
uses as the order of both the targets and conditions can be quite critical to
the usefulness of the system produced. The reason program can be quite helpful
in sorting out some o f these problems. In  some specialised applications, i t
could prove to be a problem, that both targets and conditions have to be expressed
in terms o f text strings. A  typical example is a solution, that is built up as
a result of several rules being true. This tends to be a problem of many general
purpose expert system shells, as what is really required is for a satisﬁed rule
to trigger an action, which contributes to the general solution. This is, however,
a disadvantage, i f a single unique solution is sought. Such applications can,
however, be handled by planning for multiple solutions and noting each target
solution found and always continuing to look for further solutions.
One ﬁnal application area that should be mentioned is education. The
question and answer technique is quite a good way of illustrating to children
how to approach various types of problem.
Figure 4 illustrates a simple knowledge base for identifying mathematical
shapes. This also demonstrates how to use implies to reduce the numbers of
questions asked and also shows how multiple solutions can be useful. In this
case Idoldng for additional solutions will demonstrate, that a square is also
a rhombus, a rectangle and a parallelogram.
otse. I s  our expert system shell intelligent?
It is still a subject of great debate as to what constitutes Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
Some would argue that all programs are intelligent, whilst others would claim
that to qualify, a program must mimic human intelligence. It is primarily the
function of an expert system shell to provide a sensible strategy for evaluating
the rules o f the users system. It's the presentation of the rules by the user,
that will determine how intelligently the particular system will respond. With
INQUIRE I have deliberately left as much control as possible to be convenient
for the applictions in which I use it. This means that the order in which both
targets and conditions are deﬁned is critical to the performance of the ﬁnished
system. In most applications, however, it is only the order in which the targets
are examined, that is of any concern to the user and it would be preferable
if the conditions where examined in the most efﬁcient order. In other words
the inference engine includes the intelligence to decide the best order to evaluate
the conditions. One such strategy can easily be incorporated within INQUIRE.
After displaying the help texts, call a subroutine, which scans the relations
YOUR COMMODORE
*ma& 11111111•1110.111111111111111111111=111111111111111111111
Thirty Five

C128 P R O G R A M M I N G
array r% by condition number and computes counts of the number of targets
affected by each condition. These counts are then sorted to produce an array
p%, such that p%(1) is the number of the most used condition and p%(cn)
is the least used condition. The following changes are then needed in the main
program:
1340 p=1: y=0
1350 do while p = c n  and y=0
1355 c=p70(p)
1550 p=p+1
The only slight complication with doing this is that in computing the counts,
implied conditions should also be taken into account. Otherwise it is possible
that the revised evaluation strategy may prove less efﬁcient than the original
one, and that's not intelligent.
HELP 8  
4
 T H E SH APE H AS 4  SI D ES 
1
0
 •  1  5  1 0
• POL YGONS KNOWLEDGE R ASE 
•
 
5
 T H E SH APE H AS 5  SI D ES 
1
0
 -  e
• I D E N T I F I E S  SI M PL E POLYGONS FROM  A  
•
 
6
 T H E SH APE H AS MORE TH AN  8  SI D ES 
1
1
 +  1  5
• D ESC R I PTI ON  O F  T H EI R  CHARACTERI STI CS •  
7
 T H E SH APE H AS 8  SI D ES 
1
1
 -  2
END H EL P 
8
 T H E SH APE H AS 7  SI D ES 
l
a
 •  1  2  7  1 0
S T H E SH APE H AS 8  SI D ES 
l
e
 -  5
IAPGETS 2 0  
1
0
 T H E SI D ES AR E A L L  T H E SAm E LENGTH 
1
3
 +  I  e  7
I A N  EOU I L ATER AL  TR I AN GL E 
1
1
 TWO SI D ES AR E T H E SAM E L ENGTH 
1
3
 -  G
2 A N  I SOSC EL ES TR I AN GL E 
1
2
 A L L  AN GL ES AR E R I GH T  AN GL ES ( S O  
1
4
 •  1  2  8  1 0
3 A  TR I AN GL E 
D
E
G
R
E
E
S
)
 
1
4
 -  6
4 A  SQUARE 
1
3
 T H E OPPOSI TE SI D ES AR E A L L  PAR AL L EL  
1
5
 •  1  2  8
5 A  RHOMBUS 
1
4
 TWO SI D ES AR E PAR AL L EL  
1
5
 -  G
6 A  RECTANGLE 
E
N
O
 CONDI TI ONS 
1
6
 •  1  e  9  1 0
7 A  P A R A LLE LOGR A M  
;
 
1
6
 -  6
1 2  9
8 A  TR APESI U M  
R
E
L
A
T
I
O
N
S
 
1
7
 •
-
9 A  OUADRI L ATERAL  
1
 +  1  3  1 0  
1
7
10 A  REGUL AR PENTAGON 
.
1
 -  2
11 A  PENTAGON 
2
 +  1  3  1 1
12 A  REGUL AR HEXAGON 
2
 -  z
13 A  HEXAGON 
3
1
3
 14 A  REGUL AR HEPTAGON 
3
 -  2  
1
8
 •  1  2  8
15 A  HEPTAGON 
1
9
 -  1
16 A  REGUL AR OCTAGON 
E
N
D
 R EL ATI ON S
17 A N  OCTAGON
16 SOR R Y -  1  D O W T  KNOW T H E NAm ES O F  
4
 •  1  9  1 0  l e  
I
M
P
L
I
E
S
POLYGONS w I T H  MORE T H AN  8  S I D E S . 
-
 2  
•
2
 >  - 3  - 4  - S
5 •  1  4  1 0  1 3  
-
E
 >  - 6
5 -  2  
+
3
 >  - 4  - 8
5 +  1  4  1 2  
+
4
 >  - 5
19 SOR R Y -  T H E  SH APE I S  N OT A  POL YGON.
5 -  e  
+
6
 >  - 7  - 8  - 5
END TAR GETS 
7
 +  1  4  1 3  
.
7
 >  -
7 -  2  
.
8
 ,  - 9
CONDITIONS 2 0
8 +  1  9  1 4  
.
1
0
 >  . 1 1
1 T H E SH APE H AS ON L Y STR AI GH T S I D E S  
8
 -  2  
.
1
2
 >  • 1 3  . 1 4
2 T H E SH APE H AS MORE T H AN  5  SI D ES 
9
 *  1  4  
+
1
3
 }  • 3 4
3 T H E SH APE H AS 3  SI D ES 
9
 -  ?  
E
N
D
 I M PL I ES
Thirty Six
YOUR COMMODORE

10 FAST:DI M S 2 ( 1 ) . A2 ( 2 )
20 S C2 =CHRS ( 1 4 7 ) : RN2 ( RV S ) ": RFS
(OFF)"; CDS =CHR2 ( 1 7 ) : I I =0 : 5 2 ( 0 )
"1 5 2 ( 1 ) 7 " MORE ": A2 ( 0 ) ="DO N' T
KNOW":A2(1)"TRUE 
"
:
A
2
(
2
) ' F A L S E
30 GOTO l ooe
100 N=N+1;PRI NT:PRI NT"A POSSIBLE
SOLUTION I S .  P R I N T
110 PRI NT 1
120 PRI NT "(RVS)(BLKI C(OFF)(BLU)
ONTINUE, (RVs)(Buow(oFF)(bLu)Hy
OR ( RV S ) ( BLK) E ( O FF) ( BLU) X I T". : 1
NPUT LS:LS7LEFTS(L2. 1):PRI NT
130 I F  1.2="W" OR L 2 " 0 "  THEN GOS
UB 200:PRI NT:GOTO 1 2 0
140 I F  L S E "  OR L 2 7 "
150 RETURN
200 FOR I  -  1  TO T
210 PRI NT CDS:° (BRN)TRI ED ( D E W "
;RNS. TS(I );RFS:PRI NT"(BRN)CHECKE
D: ( BLU[
L:20
230 DO WHILE J < C N  AND YE1
240 I F  R% ( I . J ) =0  THEN GOTO 2 9 0 . E
L S E
250 PRI NT(BEN)ANSWERED OR I MPLI
ED(BLU) -  " : AS ( R% ( 0 , J ) ) ,
260 I F  R % ( I . 0 ) J  THEN PRI NT "( RV
S)(RED) ABORTED ( O FF) ( BLU) ": Y =I
270 I F  R t ( I , 0 ) - J  THEN PRI NT " ( R
VS)(BLK) REJECTED ( O F F ) ( B L U ) " Y .
1
280 I F  Y=0 THEN PRI NT "(RVS)
(OFF1"
290 J - J i l
300 LOOP:I F I < T  THEN I NFUT"(BLK)
PRESS RETURN C O N T I N U E  ( BLU) " ;
L$
310 NEXT
320 P RI NT -
TS(T1
-4'
J10 P RI NT 
L
E
 SOLUTIO
N. . (BLU)"
•40 REP.
1000 WI NDI r t 7
:COLOR 5 , 7  '
R
E
A
S
O
N
 E INTEROGATOR (I NQUI RE/
. "
", 1: PRI NT CHRS(1421;CUS
1010 WINDOW 2 , 1 , 7 7 ,  t i l t
1020 PRI NT SCS;RNS;C
LECT KNOWLEDGE BASE
DS
1030 PRI NT "CURRENT
1K)";CDS:SLOW:CATALOG:
1040 PRI NT "(DOWN)(BLU)I NSERT K
OWLEDGE BASE DI SK AND PRESS ANY
KEY TO CONTINUE. P R I N T
1050 GETXEY VS
1060 FS--"". 114=
YO
C128 PROGRAMMING
K DIRECTORY :  (BLX)":PRI NT:SLOW:
CATALOG:FAST:PRI NT"(BLU)":I NPUT"
NAME OF KNOWLEDGE BASE FI LE  [ 1 2
CHARS MAX) " ; F S
1070 I F  LEN(FS)>12 THEN Ft - LE FT2
(F$. 12)
1060 FS-F2+". RKI I "
1090 SLOW;DOPEN*1,""-I-FS,D0.1J8,R:
I F DS<>0 THEN PRI NT"(DOWN)(RED)"
;DOS;" ( RV S )  PROGRAM ABORTED. ( 0
FT)(BLU)":DCLOSE21:END
1100 I NPUT21, HN:I NPUT21. CN:I NPUT
21, TN:I NPUT21. 11:FAST
1110 PRI NT SCS. CDS;"(BLK)":
1120 REM DISPLAY HELP INFORMATIO
1130 DO WHI LE HN>0
1140 DD- 0 1 I F HN>I 6 THEN 1 1 6 : 1 ) D
1:HN-HN• 16:ELSE I =I I NJI W•0
1150 FOR J=1 TO I ; I NP UT8 I J I S : P RI
NT HS:NEXT
1160 I F  I DDI  THEN PRI NT CDS;"PRE
SO ANY KEY FOR MORE. ";:GETKEY Y$
1170 LOOP
1100 REM DIMENSIO 
R
AD I N DATA
1100 DI M CS T N ) , I n ( T N . 1
: I F 
%
(
4
,
'
N
.
1
,
3
)
1200 F  
N P 1 J T 2 1 .
C S (
JIEX
OR 1 =0  T
21 
F
 I41
XT 
F O R  I = O
E
0 TO 1, FOR K
I . J . K ) ; t M  ' X T ; N E X
lE*11PRINT"(11 
=
0
:
D
REM MOD 7  I N I T I A L  SE
, •
NO *441.111 F O R
AS
NCOMP LET
122
1230
FOR
UT-21,
1240
ARC
12 0  PRI NT"YoJ WI LL BE ASKED
CRIES OF(:)1/EgP ONS
FIND A. SOLUTI O
1260 PRI NT"FACH QUE
HE ANUWERED:":PRINT
70 PRI NT" 
I
T
1
O
N
g O
.
f t  PRI NT"AVOI D DON 
O
W
 ANSW
AG THI S  MAKES I T  F I C U L T
IND SOLUTI ONS. ":PRI NT
1044EM THI S I S  THE INFERENCE E
-
DO WHI LE' T N  AND X 0
_=1:Y70
A n,
ID
CON ITION
1350 DO WI ULE C<-CN AND Y=0
1360 I F  R%(T. C)70 GOTT) 1550
1370 I F  11%40, C1
1300 I F  M- 0  AND R%(0. C)•-0 THEN Y
. - - 1 : 1
1390 P R I N T
T/ F/ DI  " : : I N P U T  13:1-2-LEFTS(L2, 1
1400 I F  LS="T" OR 1. 27"1" THEN i n
(0, C)-1:GOTO 1440
1110 I F  1 . 2 ”
(0, C)-2tGOTO 1 4 4 0
1420 I F  LS="D" OR L S = "
1
( ( ) = 0 . D = 1 : Y = 1 : 1 ( T . 0 ) - 1
-560
1430 GOTO 1390
1440 I F  R%(T, C)<0 GOTO 1 4 7 0
1450 I F  R%(0. C)-•2 THEN Y- 1: R%( T,
0)--C;GOTO 1 4 8 0
1460 GOTO 1480
1470 I F  R % ( 0 , C ) 1  THEN Y = 1 : Rt ( T,
0 ) =- C
1480 I F  I I = 0  GOTO 1 5 5 0
1490 NI % - I % ( C. R% ( 0 . C1 - 1 , 0 )
1500 DO WHI LE NI %>0
VI %=I %(C, R%(0, C)-1, NI %): V S
%KO THEN VI %--VI 96:VS9-2
1520 R% V I % ) = V S %
1530 NI %= % - 1
1540 LOOP
1550 C=C
1560 LOO
1570 TF
158
159
1 0  I F
(1001
1620
163
1 GOTO 2 0 0 0
Rf t a  S CS : CDS : "NT; S S ( S ) ; "1 '
OLUTIONS FOUND, "
F D- 0  GOTO 1 7 0 0
CDS. "DON'T KNOW AWWE
YOU WANT TO TRY AGA
NPUT Y2:Y2. -LEFTS(Y$
640
200
1650
1660 F
1670 I N
1660 NET
1690 GOTO P3242
1700 I F  5 ) 0
1710 P RI NT
DATA -  KNOW
E ! ! ! ( B L U ) "
1720 GOTO 2 0
1800 I F  N= I
1810 P RI NT
o FOUND(RG
2000 END
0 TH E N  GOSUB l o v
GOT()
0 )
SOLUTION
! ( B L 0 ) "
lily Seven

Plus/4 Utilities
We present three basic
but very useful utilities
for the Plus/4 and C16.
0
 ne thing that every Plus/4 owner knows, is that we are constantly
being ignored by software companies and magazines. Between them,
these pillars of the computer industry, are trying to squeeze us out,
just as they did with poor old VIC:20 users. But, thanks to magazines like
Your Commodore, we shall overcome. I  have deckled to present you with
3 simple, but nevertheless, useful routines for our humble machine. The routines
are Seciread, 1551 hew' dean and 1551 device.
Segread
This handy little routine is particularly useful to those without Script! Plus.
The routine will read sequential ASCII ﬁles made by Script! Plus. Super Script,
Superbase and should read ﬁles from most word processors (including 3+1,
but with strange results) As it is written in M /C  it can handle the speed
of a 1551 disk drive and will display 'pages' very quickly.
How it Works
We start at address $1001 so that the program can be run from Basic, after
setting up the screen display by changing colours and using the LINES routine
at $1122 to draw two lines across the top o f the screen and by using the
MULTI-WRITE sub routine at $110B to write LISTA, the program now waits
for the ﬁle name to be input. As the name is entered, it is stored in the tape
buffer ($0333) until a carriage return is entered. ",S,R," is then added to the
ﬁle name. The program will try to open the ﬁle and checks the STATUS
WORD. If no ﬁle is found then the program will jump to the no ﬁle routine
at $10B8 and carry through to the end routine at SIOBF.
If the ﬁle is found, then the NEXT routine ($1093) is used to output the
ﬁle contents to the screen, as i t does so i t will check to see i f screen line
20 is empty, i f not then a jump to the PAUSE routine at S10CD is made.
This will ﬁnish the current word by looking for a space and pause the program
until an option is selected. Pausing is done by using UNTALK and LISTB
is output to the screen. Once a key is pressed the program will either jump
to the end routine at S1OBF or clear the screen, send TA L K  to the drive
and return to the NEXT routine at $1093, so continuing to read the ﬁle until
the screen ﬁlls again or the ﬁle ends.
If end is selected the program can be re-run to read another ﬁle.
Instructions
By D. Glass
P L U S / 4  P R O G R A M
Run the program from Basic. The program will then ask for the ﬁle you
wish to read, type this in (you can use wild-cards and pattern matching.) You
need not add the usual sequential codes at the end of the ﬁle name as the
program will do this for you. Press return and the program will look for
your ﬁle, i f it does not exist then the program will inform you of this and
ﬁnish, check the spelling of your ﬁle using the directory and then re-run the
program. When the ﬁle is found then the contents will be displayed on the
screen until the screen is nearly full, the program will then pause to allow
you to ﬁnish reading the screen. Press "y" to continue or "q" to quite this
ﬁle, i f "y" is pressed then the screen is cleared and the program will carry
on until the screen is full again or the ﬁle ﬁnishes.
Re-run the program to read another ﬁle.
Thirty Eight
!2 
•
 ! . " E . P
".7:.e)7'73 •
• -,- o'r•-.
-101 r r ,
•••10
• r •
• 
-
•
o r .  •
T h i n  
_7
1 , ° 2 K r  9
. - „ - ,
-
PF77 j r  PL.1
- 
n
r E
=p
47:74
, n ,
-r, n c
r :  1
9- 7 1 .  
7
_
7
-  
r
•
-
•
-  
,
"
2 1
7 e
"7
7 "  nes.To
n - ,
'
r 7 ,
r
r
, 
,
:
 F
' A C CM7'
eCC"
1
 YOUR COM
ODORE

-  , 6 1 - a
-  '
"OT
r i
-
'301
EC/7
50
•
2n7n
ATM
RE7
DATA
CATA
,
7 , 7 ; 7 , '
1
,  
1
1
1 ! , 3 7 , 9 ' i
•
1TL"
_
• 
•
" = L E R  
•
FE!! "  
V
 C . :
7i7 7 ! ' . "
• 
•
rt;! 
•
FE!! "  
•
E.7. F E "
FE!!
: I C R E "  POKE 1 1 , 7 7 !  P O K E 1 A , : ; r 0 K E  8
l ' C  S '
l ' C  FE Y  L E P T : I N O  E A Tr
11:  PE! !  7V:!W 
T H I
L i  r r 5  0NE:
la c  FE ! !  E r =  ! I C I T C P  A =
REN
:TC FE N PPOGPO!! CA N NOW E E
EASIC
; ! : •1 : : . ' E
A‘-1C97 TO  1 4 7 1
2CC PE A2 E
210 1 F E ! - - 1  THE N E 5 0
F20 FO K FA , E
F:
E i 0
Ei?C. FE ! HT"NO  C A 1 P  ;  C; 11:
TY.E%e2C
EGO P 8 i N r
E l: S THE N 3 1 C
=r
Pc2,
P R I T
E
F P : N :
E%2
PR1N5"EATA ERROR"
RE!!
D
A
T
A
rn 1 :
C . C , D , : 5 8 , 1 1 7 , 3 , 2 1 C , 2 8 S
: C 2 , 2 8 , 1 1 1 , 2 S
3 2 , 1 0 2 , 1 3 , 1 6 2 , 4 , = , C , P 4
3 2
3 , 1 U C , 2 , 2 1 , 3 2 , 2 4 0 , ? : 5
P L U S / 4  P R O G R A M
Getting It In
Basic needs to be moved to $2000 before loading the Basic loader.
Type the following exactly as shown, check before pressing return.
POKE 44,32:POKE43,1:P0KE8192,0:NEW (RETURN)
This will raise BASIC, giving space for the M/C. Load and run the Basic
loader.
If all is well then the program will say so. If it is, then enter the MONITOR
and type the following:-
S"SEQREAD",D,1001,1178
Where D=8 for disk or I for tape.
The new program SEQREAD will be saved.
Reset the computer or i f you have more than one of my routines then
type F 1000 1FFT 00 (RETURN) to clear the work space then type X  to
return to Basic, type NEW (RETURN) and you are ready to load the next
BASIC loader.
1551 Head Cleaner
This is an essential program for the 1551 user.
When the drive head is too dirty to read a disk, cleaning usually requires
keeping a cleaning disk spinning for about thirty seconds. This program (held
on tape for obvious reasons!) will spin your disk for you.
How It Works
The program is in M f C to keep loading time to a minimum. We start at
address $1001 so that the program can be run from Basic, after setting up
the screen display by changing colours and using the LINES routine (SI0B9)
to draw two lines across the top o f the screen and by using the MULTI-
WRITE sub routine at $ 10C9 to write LISTA. The section at V W - V W
will set the top o f a screen window just under the two lines, the program
now waits for the user to insert a cleaning disk and conﬁrm that fact using
the keypress routine at $1056.
When ready the program will set up a  count o f seven, and send an
INITIA LIZE command to the disk drive, resetting the drive and therefore
spinning the disk, after resetting has occurred the program will decrement
the on-screen counter, checking that "0" has not been reached, and send another
10 etc. until "0" is reached. This takes about thirty seconds. A  sub-routine
will check to see if the letter N has been pressed, if so the program will branch
to NO ($109F) which will close the channels and return to Basic. If the count
reaches 0 without interruption then the channels will be closed and the program
stopped.
Instructions
Run the program from Basic. The program will pause for you to insert a
cleaning disk. Press "y" then you are ready and the count down will begin.
If for any reason you need to stop the cleaning then press "n" and the program
will stop, close the channels to the disk drive and return to Basic.
Type RUN to restart.
Getting It In
Basic needs to be moved to $2000 before loading the basic loader.
Type the following exactly as shown, check before pressing return.
POKE 44,32:POKE43,1:POKE8192:NEW (RETURN)
This will raise Basic, giving space for the M C .  Load and run the Basic
loader.
If all is well then the program will say so. If it is, then enter the MONITOR
and type the following:
YOUR COMMODORE 
T
h
i
r
t
y
 Nine

5E3 DATA 5 5 , I 5 E , 2 , : 6 9 , 1 5 2 , 2 5 4 , 4 0 , 5
10
511 DATA
2 5 5 , 1 3 3 . 3 , 2 0 1 , 5 5 1 , 5 4 0 , 7 , 2 C
55q DATA
7 , 3 2 , 2 1 0 , 2 5 5 , 2 3 2 , 7 5 , 1 8 1 , 1
A C
5
-z.cm 2 n : n
512 DATA
513 DATA
5 7 . 2 4 0 . 2 3 , 7 6 , 8 6 , 1 5 , 1 5 5 , 2
1 5 2 , 1 9 0 , 1 5 0 , 1 6 , 3 2 , 1 D 5 . 2 5 5
525
525
DATA
DATA
S E 1 , 1 3 1 , 5 , 1 3 5 . 5 , 1 5 C, C, 1 7 7
5,240-1a,32,210,25=,20,5
514 DATA
SS
1 6 9 , 1 5 , 1 6 2 , 5 , 1 6 6 , 3 2 , 1 5 6 , 3
527
C P O
DATA
n p I p
2 0 9 . 2 . 2 2 0 , S . ' S . 2 0 4 , 1 E , S S
515 DATA
EC
7 6 , 1 3 5 , 1 5 , 1 6 5 , 2 , 1 6 2 , 1 7 8 , 1
5 0
opr A
515 DATA
1 5 , 3 2 , 1 8 5 , 2 5 5 , 1 5 5 , 1 5 , 1 5 2
22
RE:1
•
5 / 7  DATA
1 3 , . . 1 5 5 , 3 2 , 1 5 6 , 5 5 5 , 2 E , I S 2 , 2
532
DATA
. 9 2 , 3 2 , 4 . 2 , 6 7 , 4 1 , 3 2 , E 9 , 4 6 , 7
•
:L.EANER
1
=ATP' 2 . . . :
52
515 DATA
1 5 5 , I 5 . 3 2 , 2 5 5 , 1 C 5 , l i
S
DATA
5 , 7
515 Z:ATA
cmP no7p
52C DATA
3 2 , 2 4 2 . 2 5 . 5 , 1 5 2 , 8 3 , 1 5 1 0 , 1 7
RS71
•-
Z. Z . : 1
SE. C A : A 2z,125,15,165,2,32.,21c,a5
s "
ma
522 opTm
0.61
Iss-. -HEAD =LEA%
E:.Z C A T ;
ZATA
A C
-z.cm 2 n : n
E Z
12
Rc
2 c A
SC't = A : A  3 2 , 1 5 5 , 1 5 , 1 5 2 , 1 , 1 5 0 , 2 , 2 L I
22
RE:1
•
:7351. %EAC
•
525. =A:A 32.24c,255,32,1es,:a,:s2
•
:L.EANER
•
=ATP' 2 . . . :
52
:77.1
•
•
5 , 7
S.;
•
-
RS71
•-
Z. Z . : 1
•
5
22
7..271
503 DATA 2 5 5 , 1 5 5 , 8 4 , 3 2 , 2 1 0 , 2 5 5 , : 5 3
SI C DATA Li , 1 . 5 0 , 1 7 , 3 2 , 2 0 1 , 1 5 , 3 2 , 2 2 5
5 1 :  DA TA  2 5 S , 2 0 1 . E 9 , 2 4 0 . 7 , 2 0 1 , 7 S , 2
40
512 DATA 5 2 , 7 5 , 5 6 , 1 5 . 1 5 5 . 1 4 7 , 3 2 , 2 1
0
5 3  DATA 2 5 5 . I . 9 e , 7 8 , 1 5 0 , 1 7 , 2 2 , 2 1
514 DATA 1E , 1E 2. . S . S . 141, 2313, 13, 15
515 2 ATA 2 , 1 5 2 ,
mm
515 DATA 1 5 . 5 , 1 5 , 1 5 2 , 5 , 2 5 5 . 3 2 , 1 5 5 , 2
Sc'
Lt
F9"
-
aua
n&T0
" A 7
cATA
DP.To
"
DATA A , 7 . 3 4 , , c , ' " , , : 5 2 , 2 , : 7 '
DATA 5 , 4 0 , 1 2 , 3 ' A e 5
DATA 2 2 2 , 2 , 2 3 0 , 5 , 7 5 , 2 2 7 , 1 E , S 5
7 0 , 7 0
DATA 5 3 , 5 2 , 4 ° , 3 A . . " , c . 1 , = , 6 9 , '
4
-
P
5S2 DATA E q , 7 3 ,
ST.: DA TA  ' 3 . 4 8 , 3 4 . , 1 3 , 1 3 , 1 3 , 1 1 : n
SSP 2 A TA  1 3 , 3 ? , 3 2 , 2 2 , 3 2 , 3 2 , 3 2 , 6 0 , 2
GS1 PrI TA 7 9 , 7 1 , e 2 , S S . 7 7 , 3 2 , 8 q , E 2 , 8
554 nriTri / 7 ,
C.
A C
n&T0
" A 7
cATA
DP.To
"
DATA A , 7 . 3 4 , , c , ' " , , : 5 2 , 2 , : 7 '
DATA 5 , 4 0 , 1 2 , 3 ' A e 5
DATA 2 2 2 , 2 , 2 3 0 , 5 , 7 5 , 2 2 7 , 1 E , S 5
7 0 , 7 0
DATA 5 3 , 5 2 , 4 ° , 3 A . . " , c . 1 , = , 6 9 , '
4
-
P
5S2 DATA E q , 7 3 ,
ST.: DA TA  ' 3 . 4 8 , 3 4 . , 1 3 , 1 3 , 1 3 , 1 1 : n
SSP 2 A TA  1 3 , 3 ? , 3 2 , 2 2 , 3 2 , 3 2 , 3 2 , 6 0 , 2
GS1 PrI TA 7 9 , 7 1 , e 2 , S S . 7 7 , 3 2 , 8 q , E 2 , 8
554 nriTri / 7 ,
C.
THE
JC
LcAn:Nc zA7A
251 NC
FEr: E7j :ER
FRZZRA
F=F. 1 .
=
5. . -1 :X E %  2 5 2
2=.2 P CKE A, e
: • " 1 ; X • X ' . . 9
Z: 0  n : % T "
" 2  F R : :
.
-
i n o
C .
'1 2  P R : % :
oct.
P L U S / 4  P R O G R A M
cnm
=mo r 4 7 4  -
59:  , ,
mm : n - c
595. CATA - 1
5 2 1 r z T a
n f r r p
cmm
' , A w e  e n , 0 4 . 3 = , P 7 , 7 C , M C , C . 7 7 M . 7
cmc. n a TA
=ma n a 7 a
5 9  17:nTo q q
n a
n A 7 p
p p : A
0 A -0  7  
u
a
 u a  u r  u a  u a
1 0
,
Forty 
Y
O
U
R
 COMMODORE

1
fL._
.:
PLUS/4 PROGRAM
S"1551 HEAD CLEAN",D,1001,11C9
here D=8 for disk or 1 for tap.
he new program 1551 HEAD CLEAN will be saved.
Reset the computer or i f you have more than one o f my routines then
type F 1000 M T  00 (RETURN) to clear the work space then type X  to
return to Basic, type NEW (RETURN) and you are ready to load the next
Basic loader.
1551 Device
Do you have more than one Disk Drive'?
Many people do not like opening up their drives and cutting jumpers etc.
in order to access the second drive.
A short, quick MC program will do this for you. It was especially written
for the 1551.
How it Works
The start is at address $1001 so that the program can be run from Basic,
after setting up the screen display by changing colours and using the -
routine ($1086) to draw two lines across the top of the screen and by using
the MU L TI -WRITE sub routine ($1106) to write LLSTA, the program now
uses the keypress routine ($1056) to ask for the device number required and
will compare the input to "8" and "9". If neither then a loop is made. The
routine will jump to one of two routines, EIGH T ($1066) NINE (107A) to
select the number before passing to OVER ($108B) to send the command
to the drive, closing the command channels before printing LLSTC ($1153)
to the screen, telling you that the number has been changed.
Instructions
Run the program from Basic. The program will pause and tell you to switch
of all of the drives that you do NOT require changing.
Switch off and conﬁrm this by pressing either "8" or "9" as required.
The drive will now be changed and the program will returned to Basic.
Getting It In
Basic needs to be moved to $2000 before loading the Basic loader.
Type the following exactly as shown, check before pressing return.
POKE 44,32:POKE43,1:POKE8192,0:NEW (RETURN)
This will raise Basic, giving space for the M / C  Load and run the Basic
loader.
If all is well then the program will say so. If it is, then enter the MONITOR
and type the following:
S"1551 DEVICE NUM",D,1001,1178
Where D=8 for disk or I for tape.
The new program 1551 DEVICE NUM will be saved.
Reset the computer or i f you have more than one of my routines then
type F 1000 M T  00 (RETURN) to clearn the work space then type X to
return to Basic, type NEW (RETURN) and you are ready to carry on working.
YOUR COMMODORE
1
Forty One

A
simply by using an analogy, if
you have a tower of building
blocks, a stack of building blocks, you
can only take blocks off the top and
you can only put blocks on the top,
if you try to take a block from the
bottom of the pile (stack) then it will
fall down, i t is impossible to put a
block o n  the bottom o f  this pile
without ﬁrst lifting it. The same rules
apply to stacks in computers, data can
only be put on the top of a stack and
taken from the top. The acronym
FILO, describes this, it stands for First
In Last Out. The ﬁrst item to be put
on is the last to be taken off, and the
last item to be put on is the ﬁrst to
be taken off.
CONTENTS
LOCATION
1021
1
4938
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
SP
Pk-
CONTENTS
LOCATION
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
100
101
102
103
STACK POINTER -  0
Forty Two
DIAGRAM 1.0
SP
C64 PROGRAM
Fib o Stacks
Get to grips with the First In Last Out format of the
Stack
By Steven Burgess
Stacks are used extensively i n
machine language programs and are
also used b y  BASIC , whenever
GOSUB is encountered, the return
address is stored on a stack, so that
the computer can return to the correct
place when the RETURN statement
appears. Stacks are also used during
FOR... N EXT loops. Machine lan-
guage programmers use stacks to store
the values of registers which may be
corrupted by a  routine, which they
wish to use.
Pushing!!
T
a stack is called pushing, you
push a piece of data onto the
stack. The actual programming of this
is very simple. In order to push data
onto a stack you must have a number
of things:
1..A stack. (can use an array i n
BASIC)
2..A stack pointer.
CONTENTS
1021
LOCATION
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
100
101
102
103
104
STACK POINTER =1
DIAGRAM 1.1
3-Data to push.
When you enter the data which you
want to  push the stack pointer is
increased b y one, the data is then
PUSHED onto the location indicated
by the stack pointer and you have
ﬁnished. The same process is executed
every time you push to a stack.
Let's pretend we have set up an
array, in BASIC, as a stack, there is,
currently no data stored therein. The
stack pointer is pointing at location
0 (see diagram 1.0), let's enter a value,
1021, we increase the stack pointer by
I and store 1021 i n  location I  (see
diagram I ) .  Entering another value,
4938, causes the same process to occur,
except the stack pointer now becomes
2. (see diagram 1,2),
Popping!!
T
you pop it. Popping an item
from the stack causes the item
which the stack pointer is pointing at,
SP
1*-
100
101
102
103
104
STACK POINTER = 2
DIAGRAM 12
YOUR COMMODORE

1
1
PROGRAM:STACK DEMO
66 I D  D I M S V 2 0 )
FE 2 0  P R I N T C H R S 1 4 7 ) • C D O W N 2 J  E C
0 : 5 " S
FC 3 0  F U R L - 1  T O  2 0 A r T I N T "  E S
P C S , 5
DS 4 0  P R I N T" C H O M E 1
CA S O  A S
I D 6 0  P R I N TTA E ( 2 0 — L E N U A S ) / 2 ) A S
6 7  7 0  P RI NTTA B c 2 0 )"E DE I W NS )ME NU"
As B O  P R I N TTA B C 2 0 ) "C O O W N 2 3 1 . . P 0
P
50 S O  P R I N T T A 8 2 0 ) " E D D W N 2 ) 2 . - P U
S H
OF 1 0 0  P R / N T T A 6 ( 2 0 ) " E D O W N 2 2 3 . , E
ND"
e n  1 1 0  5 / : ". 0 P RI NT"CHO M E 1 1 "; ! FO RL
" 0  T O  S P
14 1 2 0  S E T A S , I F A S T H E N 1 2 0
8 9  1 3 0  I F  A S < " 1 " D R A S > " 3 " T H E N 1 2 0
AA 1 4 0  I F  A $ . . . . I : A N D  5 P - 0  TH E N  E
.
1 0 1 2 0 2 0
OS 1 5 0  I F  P $
E " 1
GOT° l e o
13 1 6 0  I F  A E • 3
1 " ; : E N D
04 1 7 0  I F  A $ . . " 1 "  TH E N  0 0 S U 8 3 2 0 '
POP
65 I B C  I F  A S -
PUSH
AB I S O  G O TO  1 2 0
51 2 0 0  P E M
EP 2 1 0  R E M "  ERRO R
2 0  2 2 0  RE M
E19 2 3 0  D S " "
CA 2 4 0
72 2 5 0  I F  E - 1  T H E N  E $ " S T A C K  F U
LL :  C A N ' T  P U S H "
AB 2 6 0  / r  E '
P r y  :  C A N ' T  P O P
5 3  2 7 0  P R I N T " C H O M E D " T A E ( 1 5 E D O
W N2 2 1 "; FS
AS E E C  F O R L I  T O  2 0 0 C : N E X T
F4 2 2 0  F O R L I  T O  L E N ( E S ) : D S O S *
": NE X T
DB 3 0 0  P R I N T " E H O M E T ' T A B ( 1 S ) " C D O
W N2 2 ] ": O S
ES 3 1 0  RE TURN
54 3 2 0  RE M
AS 3 2 0  R E M "  P O P
EC 3 4 0  RE M
65 3 5 0
04 3 6 0  P R I N T " t H 0 M E J " T A B 1 5 ) " E D O
WN222POPPED I T E M " : S S ( S P ) S P
— S — i
BO 3
CS 2 8 0  F O R L - 1  T O  2 0 0 0 . NE Y T
ES 3 5 0  P R I N T " C H O M E 1 " T A B ( 1 5 ) " E D O
W N 2 2 : 5 P 0 1 7 3 "
OE 4 0 0  RE M
CC 4 1 0  R E M "  P US H
SA 4 2 0  RE M
25 4 3 0
SO 4 4 0  P P I N T " E H O M " T A B ( 1 2 ) • C D O
UN223ENTER I T E M : " :
PE 4 5 0  I NP UTO S
10 4 6 0  P P I N T " E H O M E J " T A B 1 2 )
W N2 2 , 5 R0 3 2 3 "
35 4 7 0  E S
07 4 8 0  5 P 5 P * 1 : 5 5 C 5 P ) . . D 5
e e  4 2 0  G O S U E S I O
75 S C O  RE TURN
7 0  5 1 0  P E r
SO 5 2 0  R E r •  UP DA TE  S TA CK  •
7E 5 3 0  RE M
FC 5 4 0  P R I N T" E H 0 M E , D D U N 2 J "
E l S S D  F O R L • 1  T O  2 0
1 2 1 " S S C L ) : N E X T
2E 5 6 0  P P I N T " E H O M E )
30 5 7 0  F O R L - 1  T O  2 0 + 3 ; P R I N T "
NEXT
6C 5 2 0  I F  A S " 2
07 6 0 0  R R I N T
" : N E X T : P R I N T "
1P E l a  P R I N T " f H C M E . 1 " T A B C 2 0 ?
WN535TACK P O I N TE R :  E L E F T 2 ] "
;SF
EC 6 2 0  RE TURN
the last item to be pushed, to be taken
off the stack (popped!) the stack
pointer is then decreased, pointing at
the item which was pushed before the
previous one.
We shall now pop an item from
the stack described above (see diag
1.2), to pop we simply read the item
which is stored in the location indi-
cated by the stack pointer. The stack
pointer contains 2 so the item we pop
is stored in location 2. The item is 4938,
we then decrease the stack pointer by
I so it becomes I. Popping again gives
us 1021 and empties the stack. The
stack is empty when the stack pointer
is O. The stack is full when the stack
pointer is equal to  the number o f
elements deﬁned in the array.
The program ''STACK D EMO"
demonstrates popping &  pushing to
the full. Type in the program using
the syntax checker. Save it to DISK/
TAPE and type RUN (RETURN).
On execution you will be presented
with a  graphical represenation o f a
stack on the left hand side o f  the
screen, the stack has room fo r 20
elements, on the right hand side of the
screen is a menu. The options are as
follows:
'.*POP
2..PUSH
3..END
On selecting option I you will be
told what the value o f the POPped
item is, if the stack is empty you will
be informed.
Selecting 2, you will be asked to
YOUR COMMODORE
C64 PROGRAM
enter a value, numeric or string, the
value will then be added to the stack
and you will be returned to the menu.
End is self explanatory.
Well I  hope you can ﬁnd some use
for stacks and, although, the program
given is not really useful i t should
demonstrate how stacks operate, and
the routines can be adapted for use
in your own programs should you ﬁnd
the need.

The Linkpointer
Commodore starts each Basic line with a pointer to the next line. In  this
way a Basic textﬁle is chained. To ﬁnd a speciﬁc line you don't have to sift
through the whole o f the textiﬂe. Instead you just jump from line pointer
to line pointer, each time looking at the actual line number which follows
directly afterwards. The rest of the line you can ignore.
The linkpointer contains the address of the start of the next line, expressed
in the usual low byte/high fashion.
The end of the textile has been reached when the two linkpointer locations
contain zero.
Renumbering a  textﬁle involves simply jumping from linkpointer to
linkpointer, each time changing the line number that follows in the next two
locations.
W
the line numbers become quite messy. In one part of your program
you have oodles of space between line numbers, while in other parts
it's impossble to insert a single new line.
The only answer is to renumber the textﬁle.
This is what the tool kit routine does which we want to develop this month.
Again, once you understand how Basic deals with lines and line numbers,
this is quite straightforward to do. And here Commodore Basic makes, for
once, life easier for us, by having structured a textﬁle in quite a special way.
Renumbering Options
C64 P R O G R A M M I N G
But in order to make our renumbering routine as useful as posssible i t is
a good idea to include some options into the command.
First, we want to be able to determine in what step the textﬁle will be
renumbered. "Step" means the distance between each line number. For example,
most programmers number a textﬁle in steps of ten.
Secondly, we want to  be able to  determine where in the textﬁle the
renumbering starts and where it ends. This is useful if you have a large textﬁle
where you have memorized (or noted down) with which line number certain
important routines start. You may not want to 'upset this basic layout, but
you, nevertheless, need some local renumbering to be done, in order to be
able to insert some new lines.
For renumbering I have chosen the extended Basic command RENUMBER.
Renumbering is, of course, only done as a direct command. The command
wouldn't make any sense as part of a program.
You can use the command without any parameters, in which case the whole
of the textﬁle will be renumbered in steps of ten.
The ﬁrst parameter is the step value.
After this comes a comma, and then the second parameter follows. This
gives the start line of the renumbering process. You may ommit this parameter
too, in which case the whole of the textﬁle will be renumbered in the steps
given in the ﬁrst parameter.
After another comma follows the ﬁnal parameter which gives the last line
to be renumbered. (Actually, the way the routine works out, the last line to
be renumbered is one line before the line given.) This last parameter can be
ommited too, in which case the textﬁle will be renumbered from the starting
line given to the end of the textﬁle.
The line number given as the start o f the renumbering process will not
be changed. The renumbering starts after that line. Also, the renumbering
will stop one line before the line given as the end, as already mentioned.
How it is Done
First, we gather the parameters after the RENUMBER command (lines 1860-
2300). I f  there are no further parameters (or none at all), we will ﬁnd the
usual zero which terminates the line. BEQ, therefore, tells us if no parameter
or no further parameter is there.
Extem
Bas
Renumbering your
textﬁle is easier than
you may think
By Burghard-Henry
Lehmann
nO
70
DO
100
110
120
1 10
140
i n )
160
170
100
(
200
210
220
4 1
0
440
t'o
4/,;
470
400
!:11
520
ti 10
7.4;1
550
570
500
"7.70
1 -
610
6'20
:;t
640
6;7
1,60
670
14(10
6
700
E N r
I t it t
EON
FON
FUN
E (II
NU
:TURN EX1 EN D ED H A 5 I I  O N
1 0
E X 1DASUN
I SAVE
1
NIX
S I
L Il A
S I
R15
1111
t NY 1111111‘ t1t111 t ,
;L4W 1. t U  NORMAL 1$11,1,41
x I tw.SUUF 1.4JA
n i A
I OA
S FA
R IR
251
253
$14
te'31
$63
C6111
It t  •1.,11t-IT AR!
•:•17
4 1
X111VIr_l
V< / F - 4
it ' I A  i t 4
1
: . $ 4  M A I N  U R ON I t M  U N I R Y
i I DOK F U R  E  X 1ENDE D H A5 1 r  CUMNANDD
;
M O S  i Ak 1 M A  CHAMOF T
'M IR F .
J mP L A 7 A E
; I F 1-1AS111 T O KI N  M t  NORMAL_ -
:
E XECE1111 I M F  111111
DC15 N1RNA1 I
$7A/711.
LOY <  t 7A
s l y  ( 2 5 1
LOY t ; s
51Y Z 5 1
CM 1 1
DUE N EXT
311P U F  F R  1
Forty Four 
Y
O
U
R
 COMMODORE

nding
•
710
7•:;0
740
7S0
71A
1 .)
7 0 0
I  an
ROO
1110
.7a)
S 4 0
Cri
64:1
1170
Pito
8 9 0
9 0 0
'710
grj0
q t .')
9 4 0
9 5
960
9 1 0
9 E
990
Liti
1 0 1 0
;
; IN) N (  
R
O
M
 -Pt It I I I NF
t•IIIRtslAt
NORMAL 1 J I 4 P  11A7ED
;
KEW !  F •  CUL OP C O M I AN D :
1
; RE
L I M O N .
EWE
t:tIP
ONE
JSP
Cril•
1,1•11
J!111
t:rte
DEO
I 
R
E I • E  t i t  ' M t n .
(14A1iBE
c
LINE R I  lErli'd
J SP C F I ' M
N
LINE N1tti1'Idt1
,C,;P l e d • a ;F T
CPU
PRE N O  WA'
J c i  olid3F
l! 
"
EINE 1
,
cmr • I I
EWE N I  lIiF'Iﬂ
Jlit'•: C l  I t t l
t2tII • •
PtiF N OP tInt
C H A R M
11+1
BUJ PER I  1111.
J C l i f I R L I E  I
JSR 1:11)HP
JSR t 1 :7 1  /
NI. C O I
▪ Y  4.,46
p r p r  P 
r
:
N; x  I1
CI ic,PC;FT
rJE
•13
CI IAI kI;E
•
• Y.1
inkuET
oI
 -
•  (  
T
▪ C l I A ; i 1 4 - 1
JSR
JSR S1171- 7
CAPFP C PI  I t  IP_
rtivErl
C64 P R O G R A M M I N G
If a parameter is given we gather it into the appropriate variable by calling
on two ROM-routines; SAD8A gets the value itself and places it in the ﬂoating
point accumulator 1. $137F7 gets the value from the ﬂoating point accumulator
and puts i t into zero page $14/ 15, and also into the Y-register (low byte)
and the accumulator (high byte).
After each parameter the next character is tested to see if it is a comma.
If it isn't, the routine exits by giving a syntax error report. This syntax error
report is forced simply by jumping to the normal routine (lines 1100-1150)
instead of returning from the subroutine, since the whole of the renumbering
routine is a subroutine.
In the case o f no step parameter, we enter 10 into the variable, called
STEP (lines 2350-2380). This will result in the textﬁle being renumbered in
steps of ten.
In the ease of no start parameter, we enter zero into the variable, called
START (lines 2420-2440).
In the case of no end parameter, we enter the highest possible line number
into the variable, called END (lines 2480-2500). This is, of course, 65536, or
SFF in the low byte and UT' in the high byte.
Renumbering a Textﬁle
First, we get the beginning of the textﬁle from the system variables $213/ 2C
and copy it into our variables, called LINKPOINT (lines 2680-2710). The
beginning of the textﬁle means also the ﬁrst linkpointer in the chain of all
the linkpointers.
Next, we test i f the start parameter had been given (lines 2750-2780). I f
it hadn't we jump straight to beginning of the renumbering routine proper.
Otherwise we have to ﬁnd the line where renumbering starts.
As I've said, with the help of the linkpointer, this is pretty easy.
We enter a loop which jumps from one linkpointer to the next (lines 2830--
3050). That is, the address contained in the linkpointer is gathered and becomes
the next linkpointer, and so on.
At the beginning a test is made, if the end of the textﬁle has been reached
(lines 2850-2900). If the end of the textﬁle has been reached, this means, that
the start line given does not exist. In this case the routine exits with a syntax
error.
Lines 2980-3050 perform the chaining action itself.
Before we enter the renumbering loop itself, we gather the line number
after the linkpointer where we start into a variable, called CUR RUNE (lines
3110-3160). This variable always contains the line number to which the step
value is added, performing the renumbering itself,
At the beginning of the renumbering loop itself, we test ﬁrst of all i f the
end of the textﬁle has been reached (lines 3250-3290), That is, if the low byte
of the linkpointer contains not zero, the loop continues as normal, If it contains
zero, the high byte of the linkpointer is tested for zero. If that too contains
zero, the end of the textﬁle has been reached. The routine exits.
Next, the next linkpointer is put instead of the former one in the variable
LINKPOINT (lines 3310-3360).
Then we test if the line given in the end parameter has been reached (lines
3400-3520).
For this I am using a special way of comparing two 16-bit values (lines
3460-3520).
As you know, on the 6510 dealing with I 6-bit numbers can be quite involved.
To compare two 16-bit numbers, we subtract the two numbers from each
other and place the result in a variable, called TEMPS TORE. This variable
has no other purpose but to set the zero and carry ﬂag.
If the ﬁrst value equals the second, the zero ﬂag will be set. I f  the ﬁrst
value is less than the second, carry will be clear. And i f the ﬁrst value is
larger than the second, carry will be set.
In our routine, i f carry is set, it means that the end parameter has been
reached and the routine exits.
Finally, the renumbering itself is done b y adding the step value to
CURRLINE (lines 3560-3620) and then writing the new line number into its
proper place (lines 3660-3710).
YOUR COMMODORE 
F
o
r
t
y
 Five

Forty Six
C64 P R O G R A M M I N G
r H A
1 4 0 ./ 
5
 I V' 5 .:..A .II
I 4  1 A 
;
 
1
 • Ma •
1411 ( A l i t  am 
i
 NY
I 4 2
( 4 1
,-:,") ;1.
H 
1
1
.
1
1
.
C
H
I
N
I
1 4 4  
.
I
S
I
F
 C I  lial".1.il I
:'
115.1 
,
I
S
I
I
 I A D :  IA 
-
.IrA3 1,3 ifIN( 41 I 
:
7
-
0
5
0
...:,,L1,:71(1.-.' 
S
. 1 1 4  I l l (  Ni
t Ir .' .
1
5
1
4
 & D i !  7  
;
,i SR -
I 4 •,', 
;
 
.
.
'
1
.
.
•
 / 0  
J
M
I
F
•
 I
I 411(1 
;
 C H N
A L I E  B O R D E R  C O L  D V
I
.
 
"
.
.
I 4
s l y  5 7 . 7 0  
L
I
M
E
'
 S  I Aht A I I(1-1"4
1 ..
1 5 1 A  
;
 
Z
1
1
0
 S I A l k  
V
U
U
N
 I (
 I I . '
1 Y
t . R T I N E .  . .
H
71 2.3 
1
,
1
1
A
 I L  INI.C11 IN T I ,  •V
I r•lo r o . r o l t u r  1 L-
11..40 
R
I
S
 
;
 
3
1
 4(p 
I
N
V
'
11111 'ARAM'S L I M  I I  L.
1•55.-p 
i
 
3
1
5
0
 
L
 DA I L  ' M I 1' 01 1.11 ) .,
1.5.' 0 ) .  
7
;
 •••1',0 
5
1
A
 • S
 I ) C I I R R
m v r
1 D A  4..1 
3
1
6
0
A 
I
.
•
 I HE
157.1 %  
•
•
.
.
.
:
L
"
.
 ) 9
11'4:0 
t
 : P S I  I
1• , ,
-.'. 
I
 
'
.
.
.
 a".P, a 
I
 
L
'
i
,
i t  . 111 
3
5
k
 I l l 111iﬁl. I  
7
 4
I•Ak:FLI'll I  I l i :  S  I A R 1 E  R1111 0  -
. .  
1
'  '  I
I 
1
1
1
1
••••.!0•1 W O E
,  1 X 1 1 . 1
1 
1
.1141' 1•41 II .:Mra • 
-
1 .. ,, i. :1, O F T  . R I 1 . 1 5 R  C H A R 5 E  l• 
7
4
4
‘ tt!;t'l 
I
 Ill • •  t
1 t.f.
D
L
O
 I I I  I . 1 , 1  
i
i
'
4
t
.
.
_
I.1(1 I  MI) I
1
I D A  I F -  I 
1
 .. ,-. . :,'. . .'. ' :": !.. .: .
0  
,
I
M
I
 ' N OR M A L  
I
 1.
11- ' 
,
.
'
t
1 .
), ; I L  1 L I.1 D 
L
I
L
O
 A L I_ D OtIE
11-.11.1 
I
5  IA  " .  EMI)
I 691.1 
;
 E X FCLE IE  •  C I F  '  ( 7 :  R IM IN I) . 
D
E
V
1 7.•,... 
;
•..'51
s t A  . ; E N D  
A
o
 
L
. !. ,', 1 0  C 1 1 1 4  II (111P 
I
 'I IA
I .: 1,.. D I  I  .  I,". I '7 J
S
k
 I
I 7 ',., 
J
r
I
P
 S I  N U  RI: N 
I
N
V
1 7  ' .,, 
:
 III
I ,
I .1'..0 
i
 
2
5
5
0
 , 
;
I t  A
1 7 6.,..), _  
•
I
5
1
1
 C I  ! M C C  I 
7
t
S TA  ' . I •  I 1
I .'7 A 
I
R
I
S
 
2
5
7
0
 : R E P O R T  AN D  E X  1 I .
; 
2
5
8
0
 
:
.
 ; 1
!:.:, 
:
 1 E 5 1  , I F  E N D  H A S  B E E N  R E A C H E D .
; 
2
5
'
1
0
 F R R L I k  
.
I
M
P
 NORM A 'L.
1 R. lit 
:
s
E
r
 I 
:
7
.
.
"
.
:
1
•
I
I
:
l
'
a
 
L
 DV  I I :
1 I I I  , 
1
., 
;
 I. P
t a1.:'.:, 
:
 
2
6
2
0
 
I
/
I p:T1 
;
 p r  I 5  I E r t ;  r - TaA • m r  I  FR : I F  7 E  
O
 - IiI, N 2 6 3 ( 1  1  R1 m u 
E
R
mr:Ep kott
-
I :II...
[ l i e  ( L  II.4 1 • P OIN I )  ,' :'
I II I.,,  
:
 
7
6
5
j 
.
RCA F : t  N I 1111
1:17
5 DC " • t•  III)
11-11i0 
:
 
'
-
'
1
7 6 9 0  S T A R T  11EN I  D A  ' :. 1:11 
.
.
.
.
t
o
.
,
 
l
i
 I l l  1 E 1 1 1 5 1 0 k t :
I P..- RI 
d
 
.
9
 
7
7
t
p
r
p
 
1
0
,
 tm
 t1 ./ s , 1  
2
.
.
1 , , . , 
k
k
(
•
 I  LID
•.' I ", 
:
 
'
7
:
 /A  ) 1 . I t i t : P O I N  I 
T
.
!
.
.
• 
I
 1 I '.' ,  
2
7
.
.
.
1
,
,.
I I I I I •
..; I A ....To L l, 
-
S
 AL  I DONE
1. -., , •  : 
:
A
7  7 ••••• 1 
;
 SE I  , I F  S  I A1( I k A l t A k I r  i l  k  c ; i v i - N  
.
 , ,
_ 
,
 
I
.._ ,
• 1
: k l i x 1  o c , : :  i o  P T  A  L OM M A I I F  N O I  
2
/
1
5
0
 
1
1
M
 , S I A N T
I r '
; 
2
7
7
.
7
.
1
.
 
I
P
A
 :, SI AT , I  
.
.
-
.
 
L
V
A
 ,
i l l y  I . )  
2
7
:
1
1
1
 
T
I
C
O
 SI AR I F o o m  
A
D
C
 • . S t r V
.
L
' .
I
. 1 , . . ,  I I I  
o
 5 ,  I  I N D  ! A A R  I l e ,  . i t  Ir y  1 tit t 
-
-
t
,
t
,
.
 
s
 I A  ,.: CI IRIII_ I NE
I I I A  .4 .1 1 1 ( R IIN I,
2
EINE 1  RHO
"..!I1 ' .0 I '  IN D S  I A R I 1  DV' I I ?  
-
.
.
'
,
 .
..!, P4.1 
:
 Ii1 I  I I  I A11 I ( I I  R E t a l  1111(1- R I N G  P t u t A r t .  • • • • • • • • 1 4 ., 
I
 D A  ( t  11•11.11111.1F) 0 '  
:
 A ND C H A N GE  I .  ! N U  M U N N  I .
; 
r
 v t
J S R C I  (ARISE I 
•
.
!
:
 l'•.i..P
:•tiiT1
.“ ..,,, a  
,
2 8  ?kl 
I
T
/
 'f' 
I
 11V ':' (L I 1.1 1"1 I.I I I , v ,:,•, I I : Z
1_. DA ' ,  l',1 IRRI. 11
•/"..H.:j 
O
S
P
 IA L ITIA  
2
1
4
1
1
0
 
P
E
1
1
 E R R O R
D I 'f• 
N
5 1 A  1 1 . I N I . E
J S II $ S  
I
I
9
/1
7
L DA (1 _  INLI'D INF) ,  y
y 1 1,  t 
s
 1 Y .
! H A  :5 1 4 1 1 3 1  
7
.
..' t
A :
-•.' : 4... 
:
 111 X• I 1 1 0 .5  1 1
2 7 4 .1
• • 1!.' i : F  X I  I' W I  I I I  S ' i N I A K  Elk1111M• 
2
7
5
1
)
 I
M I
•:',./.5!•,F.: 
:
 Id  TR ItiPTI•4 IN G D U N I  :  L  X 1 I .
-
I D v N .)  
f
4
1...1 
1
7
I 
I
 PA C l  :e ll ,  y 
2
9
8
0
 I
III I?  1•1111 Nip 
2
9
4
0
 
I
L
I
A
 ( I ,  I N I . P I I I N  r I •
YOUR COMMODORE

C64 P R O G R A M M I N G
Flash Load
Create your own ﬂashing bands whilst loading and
saving your creations
By Clive Horner
F
program which creates the
ﬂashing bands while loading a
normal program from cassette, just
like commercial software.
To use the routine, type in the Basic
loader and save it. Once you are happy
with it you may run it. You should
now see t h e  message F L A S H
ENABLED. 4  _
1 Th e re  are I  . couple o f  ways to
control the program. For example in
direct mode you can type:
POKE1,53 -
computer.
Also whenwsaving programs the
ﬂashing bands will also appear.
IC F
a
:S R E A C I
IF-T.10e A N T " .
\ \  . •  ,END
SYEEZ17it•
 L A S H  E C
40 OnTA163.2elt. 4 , 1 5 2 ,  1 2 3 , 2 5 1
r ' ' ' '
50 o w l
50 awrniss.ase,eel,2ss,4(2,s42.7.0,ese
P
coTn76.1.30,2o7,172,2cop 201,191
55
70 0 P T A 2 4 0 , 1 2 , 1 5 0 0 5 0 . 1 3 1 ( * . : 5 9 , ! e :
75 CP TA : 4 1 . 2 0 0 . 2 4 . 7 5 .  1  , 8 0 7 . 1 6 9 , 2 4
0
80 O nTAl22, 88. 2, 158. 83 . 14. 1, 192, 248, 1E 2
85 OATA32:141,8 . 1 6 3 . 2 0 8 , 1 4 1 , 2 C 1
SO DATA2't8.1SS , 1
85 OATA207,25
7
Forty Seven
This will reset the
computer back t o
Inormal.
This enables FLASH
LOAD. This is nec-
ssaary after a reset
Or after resetting the

C64 P R O G R A M
Get the most from your
disk drive with this
enhanced DOS utility
By M. Holmes
T
admitted, getting a bit long in the tooth and does tend to show its
age even when compared with some other contemporary makes, and
more than every by modern day expectations. For instance, the way in which
the operating system with which it is provided leans in favour of tape based
data storage, to such a degree that when ﬂoppy disk drives became more
affordable, the unwieldy nature in which the 64 was made to converse with
them was guaranteed to frustrate in double quick time. The nice consequence
of this though is that said drives have to take care of the large part of disk
management themselves, which leaves the computer free of these activities.
There is the, to put it politely, crude simplicity of the Basic provided, when
you consider what wonderful and useful keywords other machines have. It
didn't take me too long to discover that really it's a good thing that the 64's
Basic should be so, er, basic. Whilst it is still possible to do what most other
Basics do, with a bit o f application, any listings are easily transportable to
another machine, since bog standard Microsoft based keywords are used. Have
you ever tried converting for example a BBC program for a Commodore to
use? Forget it.
In order to extend the Commodore's repertoire, or speed things up a bit,
one usually has to resort to machine code. This isn't necessarily all that difﬁcult
(it depends on what you want n o t all that can be done in machine code
is worth doing, and not all that is worth doing can be done), because there
are a whole host of valuable and easily used routines in both the Basic and
KERNAL ROMs available to help perform the necessary function. You may
have already seen and used by L IN E INPUT routine (in a previous issue)
which uses this concept to effectively give the C64 what amounts to a new
Basic keyword.
Of course there are now a number of after-market products which can
give you what you need, especially in the area o f disk management, some
of which are cartridges or alternative ROMs, and some of which are software
packages. But, i f you want to keep your CM as standard as possible, for
whatever it is you want to do, you need something that leaves the memory
virtually untouched, is there when you need it, and remains unobtrusive and
out of the way at all other times.
This is DOSMAN (Disk Operating System Manager), originally written
to provide the CM with the ability to recognise that disk drives exist, but
not alter it so much that I  cannot use my little machine code or modiﬁed
Basic routines. In essence it is similar to something once provided on a utilities
disk supplied with a new 1541 disk drive (are they still?), and is primarily
meant to be an aid for the Basic programmer.
Isn't the CM a wonderful machine? Writing DOSMAN was so much easier
than expected that I spent the extra time and effort adding some extra utilities
that I was sure would prove very useful while editing Basic text and developing
a program. Okay, so I've been spoilt having got used to using an 111,11 PC,
but I didn't see why my Commodore couldn't do the same sort o f things.
Consequently DOSMAN is now accompanied by a group of useful utilities
which don't actually have anything to do with disk management, but which
make editing Basic a whole lot easier and quicker. These include a eutomised
Non-Maskable Interrupt (NMI), programmed function keys for implementing
the most o f ten repeated Basic commands used during editing/de-bugging,
and an OLD routine. For convenience many of these have similar syntax to
the old DOS 5.1 on the 1541 utilities disk, and The Final Cartridge.
YOUR COMMODORE

Commands Available
The six primary DOS commands
Direct mode only, ignored in program mode:
The three secondary DOS commands
C64 P R O G R A M
Installing Dosman
Type in and save the program DOSLOAD. Once run, this will create the
M/C program -  DOSMAN. To  activate DOSMAN, type SYS52224 after
loading.
The program and its satellites sit at 51781 (SCA45) onwards, leaving the
lower 'free RAM' area free for you or your programs to use.
SYS 52224 - This enables/re-enables DOSMAN, the custom N MI and the
function keys.
(c
keys intact.
[RUN,STOPIRESTORE] -  This disables the custom NMI and the function
keys, but leaves DOSMAN intact. A  BRK instruction executed in machine
code has the same effect.
Having got it in and enabled, you have access to the following:
@ (on its own) - get and print disk drive error message.
@ <  command > - Send co mma n d  t o  current disk drive i f it isn't one
of the three secondary commands below. You do not enclose it in quotes.
The command is any o f the conventional DOS commands such as @ I to
initialise; (a
@ <  number›- Change the current device to n u m b e r  > for all further
operations. e.g., @ 9  results in all further DOS activities to be carried out
with device 9. @ 8  changes the current device back to 8.
@)$ < optional mask> - Get and display disk directory from the current device.
Basic memory remains untouched. Wildcards and ﬁletype identiﬁers can be
used in <  optional mask > to  select ﬁles to view lexically or according to
ﬁletype, e.g. @ $DOS* lists only ﬁles beginning with the ﬁrst three characters
DOS; @ $ "
lists ﬁles of type PRG.
@X -  Disables DOSMAN. DOS commands will no longer be recognised,
but will produce SNYTAX ERROR.
/ L O A D
/ < ﬁlename -  Load ﬁlename f r o m  current device into Basic memory,
replaces program already existing i f any. If there was a problem during the
load there will be LOAD ERROR displayed. You must then use @ to interrogate
the drive to ﬁnd out what went wrong, which will return e.g. FIL E  NOT
FOUND or DRIVE NOT READY. If the load was successful there will be
no message after LOADING and before READY.
ICC REM 2 c s L 3 n o
290 S 5 1 7 8 1
150 F 0 F 1 C ' 7
2E0 0 - 0 - F O R C . . C
170 P E
PCKEE. L* 1S4C, AWEXT
90 1 8 0  R E A C I : I F 0 ( 7
ECK5Url ERROR I N  L I NE  " . 2 0 0 . L
* 1CSTOP
190 NEWT
195 SOTO50002
O A T A 1 S 9 , 1 . 1 4 1 , 2 5
1
8 . 2 4 0 . 2 8 . 1 9 9 1
1? 2 1 0  DA TA 1 7 3 , 1 1 9 , 2 . 5 6 , 2 0 1 , 1 3 2
, 1 4 4 , 2 0 , ? 0 1 . 1 4 1 , 1 7 6 , 1 5 . 5 6 . 2 i
3 . 1 3 3 . 1 0 , 1 9 1 4
OP 2 7 0  O A T A 1 5 8 . 1 9 c : ; , :
1 8 5 , 1
2 , 2 3 4 , 2 5 5 , 1 E 5 , 2 7 5 3
9F
230 n i t c r o
0
. 7 2 . 2 0
F3 2
. 2 3 0 , 2 0 ' , 1 3 3 , 2 0 8 , 3 2 , 3 5 , 2 3 4 , 1
7 , 2 9 3 . 1 9 1 , 2 2 5 5
1F 2 5 0  OATI 135, 2, 179. 134. 2, 15' 7, ,
2 0 5 . 7 3 , 1 2 8 , 2 2 , 2 8 . 2 3 4 , 1 6 5 , 1 , 9
1 , 1 6 , 1 5 3 5
23 2 6 0  D A T A 2 4 0 , 1 2 , 1 6 0 ,
, / 6 5 . 1 , 9 , 3 2 , 2 0 8 , 8 , 1 8 5 . 1 9 2 . 2 0
IA 2 7 0  0 A TA 1 E 5 , 1 , 4 1 , 3 1 , 1 3 3 , 1 , 1 7
3 , 1 3 . 2 2 0 , 1 0 4 , 1 E 8 , 1 0 4 . 1 7 0 , 1 0 4
, 6 9 , 1 3 4 , 1 6 2 5
AS E E C  O A TA 2 5 1 , 1 3 2 . 2 5 2 , 1 6 C, C, 1 7
7
, 2 0 2 , 2 0 2 , 2 4 2 4
07 2 9 0  DA TA 2 0 0 , 1 3 2 , 1 9 8 . 9 5 , 5 3 , 9 9
. 8 3 , 5 3 . 4 9 , 5 7 , 5 3 , 4 9 , 1 3 . 0 , 9 3 , 8
9. 1327
OD 3 0 0  O A TA 8 3 . 5 3 , 4 9 5 7 , 5 3 . 5 2 , 1 3
, 0 . 0 . 0 . 7 6 , 2 4 . 2 0 3 . 7 5 , 4 8 . 2 0 3 . 9
90
IF 3 1 0  DA TA 7 8 , 2 2 8 , 1 5 7 , 7 6 , 9 0 , 2 0 3
: 7 6 , 1 . 2 0 3 . 7 6 , 1 2 , 2 0 3 , 9 1 , 8 9 , 1 3 2
. 65, 1733
FA 3 2 0  O A TA S 7 , 5 9 . 3 2 , 7 9 , 7 8 , 9 3 , 0 ,
8 1 . 8 4 , 8 2 , S 9 . 5 7 , 6 9 . 3 2 , 7 9 . 7 0 . 1
057
40 3 3 0  0 A 1 A 7 0 , 9 3 . 0 , 1 7 3 , 2 9 5 , 2 0 2 ,
1 4 1 . 8 , 3 . 1 7 3 , 2 5 0 , 2 0 2 . 1 4 1 , 9 , 3 ,
174, 1891
49 3 4 0  O A TA 2 5 2 , 2 0 2 , 1 7 2 . 2 5 3 , 2 0 2 ,
3 2 . 7 2 , 2 0 3 , 9 5 , 2 3 4 . 2 3 4 , 1 7 3 , 2 4 6
. 2 0 2 , 1 4 1 , 5 , 2 7 2 2
F3 3 5 0  DA TA 3 . 1 7 3 . 2 9 7 , 2 0 2 , 1 4 1 , 9 ,
3 , 1 7 9 , 2 5 5 , 2 0 2 , 1 7 2 . 0 , 2 0 3 . 3 2 , 7
2. 203. 2051
SC 3 6 0  O A TA 9 6 , 2 3 4 . 2 3 4 , 1 3 4 , 2 5 1 , 1
3 2 , 2 5 2 . 1 E 0 , 0 . 1 7 7 , 2 5 1 . 2 4 0 . 7 , 3
-
OF 3 7 0  DA TA 2 0 0 , 7 6 . 7 8 , 2 0 3 . 5 5 , 1 6 5
, 5 7 , 1 8 9 , 9 1 , 3 2 , 2 1 0 , 2 5 5 , 1 6 5 . 5 1 3
. 3 2 , 2 0 5 , 2 0 9 3
OF 3 8 0  O A TA l 2 9 , 1 6 9 , 9 3 , 3 2 , 2 1 0 , 2 5
5 , 7 5 , 2 2 8 , 1 E 7 . 0 , 0 , 7 2 , 1 3 8 . 7 2 , 1
5 2 .
l E  3 9 0  CA TA 1 6 9 . 1 2 7 , 1 4 1 . 1 3 , 2 2 1 . 1
1 3 . 2 2 1 , 4 8 , 1 1 , 3 2 , 1 8 8 . 2 4 6 , 3
2 , 2 2 5 . 2 5 5 , 2 1 1 4
00 4 0 0  DA TA 2 0 8 . 6 , 7 6 . 1 0 2 , 2 5 4 . 7 5 ,
1 1 9 . 2 5 4 , 3 2 , 2 3 1 , 2 5 5 , 1 5 9 , 1 1 2 , 1
4 1 , 2 4 . 3 , 2 0 5 7
45 4 1 0  O A TA I S 9 , 2 0 3 . 1 4 1 , 2 5 , 3 , 1 6 3
, 1 2 4 , 1 4 1 . 9 , 3 , 1 6 9 , 1 6 5 , 1 4 1 5 , 3
, 169, 1634
54 4 2 0
5 , 2 0 3 , 2 C4 , 2 4 0 . 7 . 3 2 , 2 1 0 . 2 5 5 , 2
0 0 , 7 5 , 2 0 5 6
E2 4 3 0  OATA171. 203, 159, 13. 32. 21
0 . 2 5 5 , 1 5 9 . 1 , 1 9 1 , 1 3 4 , 2 , 2 3 9 . 2 3
9 , : 2 0 . 1 6 9 , 2 2 5 7
n r
r- D
OS
1 7
YOUR COMMODORE 
F
o
r
t
y
 Nine

BA 4 9 0  0 A T A 3 1 . 1 4 1 , 1 3 , 2 2 0 , 1 4 1 . 1 3
, 2 2 1 , 1 7 3 , 1 3 , 2 2 0 , 1 7 3 , 1 3 , 2 2 1 , 1
6 9 , 6 9 , 1 9 1 , 1 9 7 2
CO 4 5 0  O A T A 2 0 . 3 , 1 6 9 . 2 0 2 , 1 4 1 , 2 1 ,
3 , 1 6 9 , 1 , 1 4 1 , 2 6 , 2 0 8 , 8 8 , 7 8 , 1 1 6
. 1 E 4 , 1 5 4 8
98 4 6 0  O A T A 1 5 9
, 3 2 , 5 1 , 1 e 5 , 1 6 5 . 3 4 , 2 9 , 2 1 6 , 1 0 5
, 2 , 1 1 3 , 1
F l  9 7 0  D A T A 9 5 , 1 0 5 , 3 5 , 1 0 5 , 0 , 1 3 3 ,
9 6 , 7 6 . . 9 9 , 1 5 6 , 0 , 7 6 . 2 2 5 , 2 0 4 , 5 2
, 2 0 5 , 1 5 2 7
2 9  8 9 0  D A T A 2 0 6 , 2 2 1 , 1 6 9 , 1 3 . 3 2 2 1
0 , 2 5 5 , 1 6 0 , 2 , 7 6 , 2 5 5 , 2 0 5 , 3 2 , 5 5
. 2 9 6 , 1 6 9 , 2 3 1 9
OA 8 5 0  O A T A 1 3 , 3 2 , 2 1 0 , 2 5 5 , 7 6 , 1 2 1
t
, 1 1 5 , 1 5 6 0
9E 8 8 0  O A T A 2 0 4 . 7 6 , 1 1 8 , 2 0 5 , 1 6 9 , 2
, 1 4 1 , 1 1 5 , 2 0 4 , 7 6 , 1 1 8 , 2 0 8 , 1 6 9 ,
1 , 1 4 1 , 1 1 5 , 2 0 6 1
AA 8 7 0  D A T A 2 0 4 , 3 2 . 1 1 5 , 0 , 3 2 , 1 1 0 ,
2 0 5 , 1 7 4 , 9 5 , 2 0 6 , 1 3 9 , 1 8 7 , 1 7 2 . 9
6 , 2 0 5 , 1 3 2 , 2 1 0 0
ED 8 8 0  nArn168,1s9,0,133,186,17
3 , 1 1 5 , 2 0 4 , 9 1 , 1 . 1 6 6 , 9 3 . 1 6 4 , 9 9
, 3 2 , 2 1 3 , 1 B 7 1
9C 8 9 0  D A 1 A 2 5 5 , 1 3 9 , 4 5 , 1 3 2 , 9 6 , 3 2
, 8 9 , 1 6 6 , 3 2 , 5 1 , 1 6 5 , 3 2 , 1 8 3 , 2 5 5
, 4 1 , 1 9 1 , 1 8 4 9
E l  9 0 0  D A 1 A 2 4 0 , 1 9 , 9 0 1 , 1 6 , 2 4 0 , 5 ,
1 E 2 . 2 9 , 7 6 , 1 3 6 , 2 2 7 , 1 6 2 , 2 8 , 7 6 ,
1 3 6 . 2 2 7 , 1 9 7 5
BB 9 1 0  O A T A 1 7 3 , 1 1 5 , 2 0 4 , 2 0 1 , 2 , 2 4
0 , 3 , 7 6 , 1 3 4 , 2 2 7 , 1 6 9 , 0 , 3 2 , 1 9 4 .
2 5 5 , 3 2 , 2 0 0 7
00 9 2 0  O A T A 1 9 2 , 1 6 6 , 7 6 , 1 7 9 , 1 8 7 . 3
2 , 1 1 5 . 0 , 3 2 , 1 1 0 , 2 0 5 , 1 7 4 . 2 9 9 , 2
0 6 , 1 3 9 . 1 8 7 , 2 1 6 9
AO 9 3 0  O A T A 1 7 2 , 2 5 0 . 2 0 6 , 1 3 2 . 1 8 8 ,
1 E 9 , 0 , 1 3 3 , 1 9 5 , 1 4 1 , 1 1 5 , 2 0 4 , 1 8
2 , 2 , 2 1 6 . 5 6 , 2 3 3 1
29 9 9 0  O A T A 1 9 8 , 4 5 , 1 7 6 . 2 , 1 9 8 , 9 6 ,
2 0 2 , 2 0 9 , 2 9 6 , 1 7 3 , 1 1 5 , 2 0 4 , 1 6 6 ,
4 5 , 1 6 4 , 9 6 , 2 2 3 9
CE 9 9 0  O A T A 7 8 , 1 4 7 , 2 0 6 , 7 6 , 2 7 , 2 0 9
, 0 , 3 2 , 1 1 5 , 0 , 3 2 . 1 1 0 , 2 0 5 , 1 7 9 , 2
9 , 2 0 7 , 1 6 4 0
85 9 8 0  0 A
3 2 , 1 8 9 , 1 6 9 , 1 . 1 3 3 , 1 9 5 . 1 6 9 , 9 3 .
1 6 6 , 4 5 , 1 6 4 , 2 1 2 5
9E 9 7 0  L A 1
2 0 5 , 7 6 , 2 7 , 2 0 4 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 1 1
9 8
BC 6 0 0 0 0  5 A . '. 5 1 7 9 1
E2 6 0 0 0 5  E A - 5 3 0 2 3
88 6 0 0 0 7  6 Y 3 5 7 8 1 2 " 0 0 S M A N " , 8 . 1
BC 6 0 0 0 8  P O K E 1 9 4 , ( 5 A / 2 5 6 ) : P O K E 1
9 3 . 5 A - C P E E ( ( 1 9 4 ) • 2 5 6 )
OE 6 0 0 0 3  P O K E 1 7 5 , CE A / 2 5 6 ) : P O K E 1
7 9 , E A - CP E E K ( 1 7 5 ) ° 2 5 6 )
BO 8 0 0 1 1  5 ' 1 5 8 2 9 5 7
81 4 9 0  O A T A S E , 2 0 5 , 1 0 4 , 2 0 5 , 1 1 2 , 2
DC , 3 D
4 , 4 7 , 1 5 0 5
0O 9 9 0  O A T A 9 9 , 3 7 , 3 3 , 3 5 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 ,
0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 2 5 9
• 6  5 0 0  O A T A 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , • , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 ,
0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0
Ac 5 1 0  O A T A 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 ,
0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 . 0 , 0
89 5 2 0  O A T A 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 ,
0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0
0 7  5 3 0  O A T A 0 , 0 , 0 . 0 . 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 .
0 , 0 . 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0
CO 5 4 0  nnrnn,o,o,c,o,o,c,o,o,c.
0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0
DO 5 5 0  P A T A 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 7 6 , 7 3 , 8 3
, 8 9 , 1 3 , 0
C64 P R O G R A M
- LOAD & RUN
ﬁlename> -  Load ﬁlename f r o m  current device into Basic memory
and RUN it immediately afterward. If a LODAD ERROR occurs it will not
be RUN_ See above if in error.
% - VERIFY
% < ﬁlename > Ve ri fy that program currently in Basic memory is the same
as < ﬁlename > on disk in current dirve, l i the  verify is successful (they are
the same), no message appears between VERIFYING and READY. I f  they
are not the same you will get VERIFY ERROR,
- APPEND
< ﬁlename > -  Since the KERNAL load routine is capable of LOADing
to anywhere in memory, there's no reason why we can't include this very powerful
utility. Armed with the ! command i t is now easier to create a library o f
Basic program modules, or to write a program in pieces, each tested and
debugged individually, as this saves time and is more convenient, and is less
confusing. It also encourages structured programming, writing each piece of
a program as a  subroutine. The important thing to  remember about
APPENDing though is that you must ensure that the next block of Basic
text appended has higher line number than that already in memory. It won't
prevent it being loaded but the interpreter can't access the lines above the
point where lower numbers are found. If a LOAD ERROR occurs, then you've
got a slight problem -  the append process starts by decrementing the Basic
variables pointer VARIAB by two, to bring it in line with the true end o f
the program in memory and to use it as a starting address. If the load failed
and APPEND is re-attempted, VARTAB is further decremented by two. I f
at the second attempt the load was successful, the the new date will crash
over the end of the already existing program. To prevent this re-deﬁne VARIAB
with the OLD routine, before re-attempting APPEND.
SAVE
< ﬁlename > - Save program in memory as ﬁlename t o  current drive.
The DOS error message follows automatically. If the save failed it could well
be FILE EXISTS for example. Note VARTAB is used to indicate where the
end is. If its value has alterend for any reason (actually a surprisingly common
occurrence, and not just through using non-standard methods like programmed
APPEND) then either not all of the program will be saved (VARTAB fails
short) or some of the variable storage area will be saved with it. Ever loaded
a program, RUN it and have it crash? On LISTing it's found to have turned
into gibberish? This is the kiddie at fault. The OLD routine will make it toe
the line through.
Warning
All of the LOAD, LOAD & RUN, VERIFY and APPEND functions have
the effect of redeﬁning VARTAB. This is done correctly unless an error occurs.
If for example a verify fails, VARTAB will end up reﬂecting the point where
the end of the program veriﬁed on disk would have been if it had been loaded,
and not where the program in memory is now. I f  a LOAD failed then i t
will have a stupid value, like an address in zero page memory (eek!). But
good old OLD will come to the rescue. Also all LOAD, VERIFY and APPEND
processes rechain BASIC lines and perform an automatic CLR on completion.
The Function Keys
Fifty 
Y
O
U
R
 COMMODORE

C64 PROGRAM
Ignored in program mode after RUN (normal ASCII value intact for program),
but not after [STOP] and CONT have been used, nor if GOTO used instead
of RUN.
Fl prints LIST[RETURN]
LIST all of program in memory from start.
F2 prints LIST[SPC]
Prints LIST and waits for line number(s) to be added..
F3 prints RUN[RETURN]
RUN program in memory from start.
F4 prints GOTO[SPC]
Prints GOTO and waits for line number to be added.
F5 prints CONT [RETURN]
Since a single press of the [STOP] key causes the interpreter to break
out of the program to direct mode while running, why not also have a single
'key press to make it CONTinue where it left off'?
F Prints SYS52197[RETURN]
Run the OLD routine.
F7 Prints SYS5195I[RETURN]
Switch TRACE ON. This powerful debugging aid has the effect that
whenever the interpreter comes upon the beginning of a fresh Basic line to
be processed (not one it's doing already) the Basic line number will be printed
on the screen and enclosed in square brackets. While running the program
the screen will pretty soon ﬁll up with numbers, displayed across the screen
continuously (not on separate lines). The process can be slowed using [CTRL]
or stopped with the [STOP] key, such that the line numbers can be examined
to see which bits of the program are being executed, including those which
are but shouldn't be, and those which should be but aren't will be conspicuous
by their absence. It will show you where the program is getting stuck in an
endless loop, for example.
TRACE ON is also active in direct mode, and any Basic commands used
in direct mode will be preceded by a rubbish number, but this doesn't matter,
it doesn't prevent normal use.
F8 Prints SYS51954[RETURN]
The line TRACE utility is switched off.
The Custom NMI
You may know that the [RUN,/ STOPIRESTORE] keys cause a Non-Maskable
Interrupt and produces a warm start to Basic. They usually have to be used
where [STOP] alone won't work, like where the MPU has got lost in a machine
code routine, or if a peripheral has hung up (thus also hanging up the CM),
and even for getting out o f a Basic INPUT loop to direct mode.The 'warm
start' includes restoring certain vectors and resetting the memory map to ensure
both ROMs are accessible, which is fair enough, but it also clears the screen
and resets it to its default blue colours, which is a nuisance if you still want
to see the text that was on it and if the colours have been re-deﬁned by your
51 5 6 0  0 A 1
1 , 7 9 , 8 4 , 7 9 , 3 2 , 0 , 6 7 , 7 9 , 7 9 , 8 5 9
As 6 7 0  0 0 7 n 8 4 , 1 3 . 0 , 8 3 , 8 9 , 9 3 , 6 3 ,
5 0 , 4 9 , 5 7 , 5 5 , 1 3 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 6 2 9
15 5 9 0  O A TA 0 , 0 , 0 . 3 2 , 1 3 8 , 1 7 3 . 7 6 . ,
2 4 7 , 1 8 3 , 0 , 0 , 1 2 3 , 2 0 4 , 1 3 6 , 2 0 • ,
146, 1661
PE 5 9 0  1 A TA 2 0 4 , 2 1 7 , 2 0 2 . 1 2 2 , 2 0 4 ,
1 4 0 , 2 0 4 , 1 5 2 , 2 0 4 , 2 2 7 , 2 0 2 , 0 , 0 ,
0, 0, 0, 20E15
04 6 0 0  DATAa,c,o,c,o,o,13,73,78
, 8 4 , 6 9 . 8 2 , 8 2 , 6 5 . 8 0 , 8 4 , 7 3 0
4E 6 1 0  0 A TA 5 9 , 6 8 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 ,
7
19 0 2 0  DA TA 2 0 4 , 1 4 9 , 1 2 4 , 2 0 2 , 1 6 , 2
4 8 , 1 6 5 , 1 8 6 , 1 4 1 . 1 1 9 , 2 0 4 , 7 6 , 1 1
2 , 2 0 3 , 1 9 3 , 1 6 6 , 2 4 4 8
F3 6 3 0  DA TA 1 3 4 , 1 6 7 , 1 8 6 , 1 8 9 , 1 , 1 ,
2 0 1 , 2 3 0 , 2 4 0 , 4 , 2 0 1 , 1 4 0 , 2 0 8 . 2 3
, 1 8 9 , 2 , 2 1 1 6
01 6 4 0  O A TA 1 , 2 0 1 , 1 6 7 , 2 4 0 , 4 , 2 0 1 ,
1 6 4 , 2 0 6 , 1 2 , 1 6 6 , 1 6 6 , 1 6 2 , 5 , 2 2 1
, 1 9 , 2 0 4 , 2 1 4 0
4E 6 5 0  O A TA 2 4 0 , 1 7 , 2 0 2 , 1 6 . 2 4 8 , 1 6
5 . 1 6 6 , 1 6 6 , 1 6 7 , 2 0 1 . 5 8 , 1 7 6 , 3 , 7
6 , 1 2 8 , 0 , 2 0 2 9
72 6 6 0  O n TA 7 5 , 1 3 8 , 0 , 1 3 8 , 2 4 , 4 2 , 1
7 0 , 1 8 9 , 4 , 2 0 4 , 7 2 , 1 8 9 , 3 , 2 0 4 . 7 2
. 96, 1621
56 6 7 0  DA 1 A 3 2 , 1 1 5 , 0 , 2 4 0 . 3 , 7 6 , 9 2
, 2 0 5 , 1 7 3 , 1 1 9 , 2 0 4 , 1 3 3 , 1 8 6 , 3 2 ,
180, 265, 2045
02 6 8 0  DA TA 1 6 9 , 1 1 1 , 1 3 3 . 1 8 5 , 3 2 , 1
5 0 , 2 6 6 , 3 2 , 1 6 5 , 2 5 5 , 3 2 , 2 1 0 , 2 5 5
, 2 0 1 , 1 3 , 2 0 8 , 2 4 0 5
CB 6 9 0  0 A TA 2 4 6 , 3 2 . 1 7 1 , 2 6 9 . 7 6 , 1 2
1 , 0 , 2 0 1 , 3 6 , 2 4 0 , 8 8 , 2 0 1 , 3 6 , 2 4 0
, 118, 201, 2261
43 7 0 0  DA TA 8 8 , 2 4 0 , 9 6 , 3 2 , 1 1 0 , 2 0 6
, 7 6 , 1 3 3 , 2 0 5 , 1 6 0 , 0 , 3 2 , 1 2 1 , 0 , 7
6 , 1 2 1 , 1 6 9 5
86 7 1 0  DA TA 2 0 5 , 3 2 , 1 6 5 . 2 0 5 . 2 4 0 , 7
, 1 5 3 , 2 7 , 2 0 4 . 2 0 0 , 7 6 , 1 1 8 , 2 0 5 , 1
3 2 , 1 8 3 , 9 6 , 2 2 4 9
LB 7 2 0  DA TA 1 6 5 . 1 8 6 , 3 2 , 1 7 7 , 2 5 6 . 1
5 9 , 1 1 1 . 1 3 3 , 1 8 5 , 3 2 , 1 4 7 , 2 9 5 , 1 6
0,0,1e5,27,e219
24 7 2 0  O P TA 2 0 4 , 3 2 , 1 6 8 . 2 5 5 , 2 0 0 , 5
6 , 1 9 6 , 1 8 3 , 1 4 4 , 2 4 4 , 3 2 , 1 7 4 , 2 5 5
, 7 6 , 1 2 1 , 0 , 2 3 4 0
1C 7 4 0  DA TP 2 3 0 , 1 2 2 , 2 0 8 , 2 , 2 3 0 , 1 2
3 , 1 6 2 , 0 , 1 6 1 , 1 2 2 , 6 6 , 2 3 3 . 4 8 , 5 6
. 233, 208, 2194
SA 7 6 0  O A TA 9 6 , 2 3 4 , 2 3 4 , 3 2 , 1 1 6 , 0 ,
3 2 , 1 6 8 . 2 0 4 , 1 6 5 , 2 0 , 1 4 1 , 1 1 9 , 2 0
4 , 1 3 3 , 1 8 6 , 2 0 8 3
E8 7 6 0  0 A T4 7 6 , 1 2 1 , 0 , 1 6 9 , 2 0 1 , 1 3 3
, 1 2 4 , 1 6 9 , 5 8 , 1 3 3 , 1 2 5 . 1 6 6 , 1 7 6 ,
1 3 3 , 1 2 6 , 7 6 , 1 6 6 9
04 7 7 0  O A TA 1 1 6 , 1 6 4 , 7 6 , 2 7 , 2 0 4 , 9 2
. 1 1 0 , 2 0 6 , 1 7 4 , 2 1 6 , 2 0 5 , 1 3 4 , 1 8 7
, 1 7 2 , 2 1 7 , 2 0 5 , 2 4 4 4
SC 7 8 0  O A TA 1 3 2 , 1 8 8 , 1 6 9 . 9 6 , 1 3 3 , 1
8 5 , 9 2 , 2 1 3 , 2 4 3 , 1 7 3 . 1 1 9 , 2 0 4 , 3 2
, 1 8 0 , 2 5 5 , 1 6 5 , 2 5 1 9
90 7 9 0  DA TA 1 8 5 , 3 2 . 1 5 0 , 2 9 5 . 1 6 9 , 0
. 1 3 3 , 1 4 4 , 1 6 0 , 3 . 1 3 2 , 1 8 3 , 3 2 , 1 6
5 , 2 5 5 , 1 4 1 , 2 1 3 9
24 8 3 0  DA TA l 2 1 , 2 0 4 . 3 2 , 1 6 5 , 2 6 9 , 1
4 1 , 1 2 2 , 2 0 4 , 1 6 4 , 1 4 4 , 2 0 8 , 6 4 , 1 6
4 , 1 6 3 , 1 3 6 , 2 0 8 , 2 5 1 5
OC 8 1 0  CATA233, 174, 121, 204, 173,
1 2 2 , 2 0 4 , 3 2 , 2 0 5 , 1 8 9 , 1 6 6 . 3 2 , 3 2
. 2 1 0 . 2 5 5 , 3 2 , 2 3 8 7
BB 8 2 0  CATA166, 265, 166, 144, 208,
3 9 , 2 0 1 , 0 . 2 4 0 , 2 4 , 3 2 , 2 1 0 , 2 5 5 , 9
2 , 2 2 5 , 2 6 5 . 2 4 5 0
E2 8 3 0  9 A TA 2 4 0 , 2 5 , 3 2 , 2 2 8 , 2 5 5 , 2 4
0 , 2 2 2 , 2 0 1 , 3 2 , 2 0 8 , 2 2 6 , 3 2 . 2 2 8 ,
2 5 6 , 2 4 0 , 2 5 1 . 2 9 2 8
YOUR COMMODORE 
F
i
f
t
y
 One

C64 PROGRAM
program. It would be nice i f it were possible to simply force the machine
to direct mode Basic and leave the screen alone, so that we can still read
our printed variables, etc.
Did you know that the [RESTORE] key alone is the thing that generates
the NMI? Normally nothing apparently happens, because the KERNAL routine
handling the N MI ﬁrst examines the keyboard to see i f the [STOP] key is
down. If it is, then the warm start is performed. If it's not, then no changes
are made and the C64 carries on as though nothing had happened.
The ﬁrst part of the custom N MI routine is a duplicate o f that o f the
KERNAL N MI Handler, with the difference that i f the [STOP] key check
is false then our custom interrupt is performed. I f  the [STOP] key is down
then the resets are carried out by the KERNAL exactly as standard.
If the [STOP] key is not down then we get instead:
INTERRUPTED
READY.
INTERRUPTED is printed in yellow, READY, and all further text typed.
in white. The screen remains intact and no drastic memory changes are made,
other than the the custom NMI vector is refreshed (this isn't actually necessary,
but the routine is also used to instal itself).
Try this.
POKE 49168,76:POKE 49169,16: POKE 49170,192.
Now SYS 49168.
•
code loop. Tap [RESTORE] to bring it back. Note your POKEs are still
on screen.
The OLD Routine
Of all the keywords the C64 hasn't got, the one i t could really do with is
OLD. OLD is the opposite of NEW, but as hinted beforehand, it's not just
a means of recovering a listing that has been NEWed by mistake. Whether
NEWed or not, it effectively cleans up a Basic program in memory by re-
chaining it and redeﬁning its pointers. It doesn't seem likely that these should
be corrupted but it can happen in the process of constant test running and
re-editing, and particularly where lines are added or deleted without typing
CI,R ﬁrst. In  these circumstances it is possible for poor old VARTAB to
get a bit confused, resulting in the interpreter trying to make sense out of
something which is actually a variable, or a large chuck of rubbish appearing
between the end o f the program (actually terminated properly so it RUNs
OK) and the variables, and which is SAVEd with the program! It's happened
to me several times.
If NEWed, the listing hasn't actually disappeared. All that's happened is
the ﬁrst two bytes o f its storage have been zeroed, and two zero bytes in
a position where a pointer to next BASIC line should be mean end of program.
The "OLD " routine inserts a  dummy value in these, which doesn't matter
as the BASIC rechain routine is then called to sort it out.
It gets better. Try this — load a program with /  ﬁlename a n d  press
the reset button i f you have one, or else type SYS 64738 (ensuring that the
machine will reset in standard form). Either of these actions simulate a 'cold
start', what you get when you switch on the C64. I bet you think everything
has been wiped out,-don't you? Not so. It's true that one of the functions
of the 'cold start' is to perform a memory test, but this is of a non-destructive
nature and in any case is only used to  ﬁnd Out where the Basic ROM is
so that the top of Basic memory can be deﬁned. In actual fact the only way
to erase the memory completely is to switch the machine off.
Now type SYS 52197.
Look, you didn't get a 'warm start' (like [RUN/STOP][RESTORED so
the OLD routine is still there. Now LIST. Hey presto, the Basic program
is still there too! Now you can get out of major problem with the reset button
and not lose everything.
So that's DOSMAN et al. It's highly probably that you may quickly feel
helpless without it. I know I am.
DOSMAN Memory Map
$CA45 5 1 7 8 1  D O F U N C
$CAC4 5 1 9 0 8  P U T K E Y
$CADA 5 1 9 3 0  F L I S T 2
SCAEF 5 1 9 5 1  T R A C O N
$CAF2 5 1 9 5 4  T R A C O F
SCB01 5 1 9 6 9  O N M S G
$CBOC 5 1 9 8 0  O F T M S G
SCB48 5 2 0 4 0  O U T M S G
$CB5A 5 2 0 5 8  T E N T R Y
SCB70 5 2 0 8 0  N M I C U S
$CBE5 5 2 1 9 7  
O
L
D
$CCOO 5 2 2 2 4  D O S M A N
$CCO3 5 2 2 2 7  V E C T A B
$CC13 5 2 2 4  C O M T A B
Fifty Two 
Y
O
U
R
 COMMODORE 
I

Entry for custom IRQ. Test if func-
tion key down, and process as
necessary. If not service IRQ as
normal.
SCC I B
52251
BUFFER
DOSMAN input buffer.
$CC73
52339
FLAG
Mode ﬂag for LOAD/ LOAD &
RUN/VERIFY APPEND.
SCC77
52343
DEVICE
Copy of current device number.
$CC79
52345
Temporary
storage of
disk directory
sector count.
SCC7B
52347
BASTAB
"LIST[RETURN]"0; "LIST" 0;
"RUN[RETURN]"0;
"GOTO" 0;
"CONT[RETURN]"0;
SC,CA8
52392
• GETVAL
"SYS52917[R ETURN]"0,
Get numeric value from BASIC line
into $14 - $15 hex.
SCCB0
52400
FLIST
Table of BASTAB address pointers.
SCCCB
52427
NW1WRD
"INTERRUPTED"0.
SCCDE
52446
CODE
Storage of code to wedge
CHRGET.
SCCEI
52449
INSTAL
Wedge CHRGET and instal
DOSMAN.
SCCF3
52467
ENTRY
CHRGET jumps here to test for
DOS commands.
$CD35
52533
COMM
Process recognised primary DOS
command.
SCD3D
52541
GETERR
Get and display current device error
message
SCD68
52584
SENDCM
Send command string in buffer to
current device.
$CD6E
52590
READ
Input BASIC line into buffer.
$CDA5
$CDBA
52645
52666
GETCHR
CHADEU
Just like CHRGET, but doesn't
ignore colons,
Change current device number in
memory.
SCDCA
52682
RESTOR
Restore CHRGET to normal, dis-
ables DOSMAN.
SCDDC
52700
GETDIR
Get and display disk directory from
current device.
SCE61
52833
LOADL
Load BASIC pro&
SCE69
52841
LOADR
Load and run BASIC pro&
SCE7I
52849
LOADU
Verify BASIC pro&
KEA()
52896
LOAD/
LOAD &
RUN/
VERIFY/
APPEND
error
handling.
SCECA
52938
APPEND
Append BASIC pro& to memory.
$CEFC
SAVE
Save BASIC pro& in memory to
current device.
Copy string pointed to by x, y into
keyboard buffer until closing '0'.
"SYS51951[RETURNrO%
"SYS51951[RETURNr0'.
SYS here for [TRACE ON].
SYS here for [TRACE OFF].
"[TRACE ON]"X).
"[TRACE OFF]"0.
Print string pointed to by x, y till
closing '0'.
Display BASIC line No. while
"[TRACE ON]".
Instal/ refreshIperform custom NMI.
SCBC3 5 2 1 6 3  I R Q C U S
Instal/refresh custom IRQ for
function keys.
SYS here for "OLD" routine.
SYS here for install DOSMAN,
custom NMI and function keys.
Primary DOS command jump
table.
List of primary DOS commands.
C64 PROGRAM
YOUR COMMODORE 
F
i
f
t
y
 Three

RESET CIRCUIT
+5V 0
Fifty Four
R41
The theory
Installation
R50
1 MO
to be removed
M
R R1 
A
 D
22k 1 N 4 1 4 8
C64 FEATURE
Make your own reset
circuit easily and
cheaply
By B. Leerkotte
0
 ne of the most infuriating design faults of the C64 is that Commodore
omitted a reset button. I f  you do not own a suitable cartridge, you
are constantly at the mercy of power surges and power lapses. How
many times have you 'lost' that all important program (the one that you have
not bothered saving yet)? If you are one of these unfortunates, then this article
is for you. I will show you how, with a little effort, you can build your own.
The reset is achieved by pressing the restore key for approximately 5 seconds.
The circuit must be installed in the RE-circuit which normally triggers
the reset-timer 1.120. The circuit replaces the resistor R50 (Imhz).
The moment that the Restore key is pressed, capacitor CR I is charged by
way of resistor R R3, The voltage on the trigger-input 8 of U20 will fall. When
that voltage reaches the trigger voltage of I ,5V, the timer U20 gives a reset
pulse.
If the Restore key is released before U20 triggers, capacitor CR I will be
discharged rapidly in approximately 0.5 seconds. Therefore, i t is impossible
to reset the C64 by repeatedly pressing the Restore key; the Run/Stop-Restore
Non Maskable Interrupt will function as before.
The circuit is reliable and is easy to build on a square-pad board. It is also
easy to install into the C64.
Remove resistor R50 (1Mhz) and connect wire A to the left solderpoint
which came free. Wire B is connected with the right solderpoint, (see diagram).
Point C must be connected with the right side of resistor R4I. Now point
C is connected the Restore key.
You should now have a functional and reliable reset source.
RR2
220k
RR3
Add this circuit
CONNECTED WITH JUNCTION
0 OF 1341/C38A NDRESTORE—
WIRE FROM THE KEYBOARD
2
U20
NE556
CV T H R
DIS
TR
7
3
YOUR COMMODORE

WHIPCRACKAiitAY
Commodore Crusader
Kevin Crosby dons his
hat and bullwhip to
report on the latest
installment in the
Indiana Jones saga
Left: Indy (Harrison Ford) prepares himself
for action_ Life as an archaeologist is not
all digging.
Above: Things hot up for messers Jones
and Jones.
"Somehow the
audience always
seem to be able to go
'ugghh yukky-poos
whilst still keeping a
smile on their faces."
Above: "Last one to the pub is a rotton
turnip!"
YOUR COMMODORE
F E AT U R E  •
p h e w !  I've just come back from my local (cinema, not pub - this time!)
and what a ﬁlm!
I am, of course, referring to the third and reportedly the ﬁnal ﬁlm
in the Raiders series - Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade.
Once again Harrison Ford plays the slightly unorthodox Archaeologist
cum Grave Robber who stops at nothing to claim the ancient treasures he
seeks. This time though we have a second Dr Jones to deal with in the form
of Sean Connery, who plays Indy's Father Henry.
'Crusade' ﬁts in around the previous two ﬁlms Raiders of the Lost Ark
and Indiana Jones and the Temple o f Doom. The ﬁrst part is set in 1912
where a Boy Scout sized Indy (played by River Phoenix) has one of the ﬁrst
adventures in his career. These scenes do an excellent job in tying together
some of the mysteries in Jones' past like his choice of bullwhip as his main
weapon, his fear of snakes and the curious scar on his chin, etc. Nice touch
that I thought.
The action soon works its way up to 1938 where the Harrison Ford-aged
Indy reclaims the cruciﬁx which was denied him 26 years previous, not for
personal gain but for the good of the Institute that he teaches (how noble!).
However events take a turn for the worse when Indy receives his father's
notebook on the whereabouts of the Holy Grail - the famed chalice that gives
the holder a prize even better than a year's subscription to Your Commodore
- the gift of eternal life.
As this quest was his life's obsession Indy is understandably puzzled as
to why his Father has sent it to him. Things soon fall into place when an
American Art Collector by the name of Walter Donovan (played by English
actor Julian Glover) informs Indy of his Father's disappearance and asks for
his help in ﬁnding him by tracing the route mapped out in the notebook.
There are, o f course, some vital pieces o f information missing which Indy
must ﬁnd out before he has a chance of ﬁnding his Father.
This initially takes Indy and his Curator Marcus Brody (played once again
by Denholm Elliott) to the town of Venice where they meet up with Elsa,
the token female in the ﬁlm (played by the stunningly attractive Alison Doody)
who once helped Jones the Elder on the same journey before his kidnap. And,
as is customary in an Indy ﬁlm, gruesome scenes involving creatures which
many would not exactly trade their Care Bears for (in this case Rats) are
used, but somehow the audience always seem to be able to go "Uggh Yukky-
Poo" whilst still keeping a smile on their faces. A  quality present in little
other that Spielberg ﬁlms.
Anyway, one thing leads swiftly to another and Jones the Younger is off
to the mountains of Austria to rescue dear old Dad and to help him fulﬁll
his life long ambition - To ﬁnd the Holy Grail.
Once father and Son are reunited they very quickly become one o f the
silver screen's most endearing family teams. You could certainly tell that both
Sean Connery and Harrison Ford were really enjoying themselves whilst making
this ﬁlm. I expect to see more ﬁlms, not necessarily in this series, with Ford
and connery teamed up as they certainl work well together on screen.
Excellent performances too from Denholm Elliott and John Rhys Davies
who both recreate their characters from the ﬁrst ﬁlm. Nice to see them back.
No prizes for working Out that good triumphs over evil but in this sort
of ﬁlm you don't sit there wondering who will win just how they win.
As is to be expected the stunt work and set pieces are just as good, i f
not better, than their predecessor's although I have to admit that the special
effects were more noticeable in this particular installment especially during
the scenes involving the Zeppelin and the aerial dogﬁghts.
However, that gripe aside, a positive thumbs up for Indiana Jones and
the Last Crusade. It has succeeded to capture .
the ﬁrst ﬁlm whilst not forgetting the humour that was much more prevailent
in the second.
Messrs. Spielberg and Lucas deserve several dozen Brownie points plus
a free subscription to Your Commodore (what each! -  Ed) for their stiﬂing
efforts.
Fifty Five

El
NOW
THE ULTIMATE UTILITY CARTRIDGE COMES OF AGE!
1
°
PLAY
1
LOAD
A 2 0 0  BLO CK
P RO G RAM
IN UNDE R 6
SECON
1988 C OL
ﬂeirl Ekerronies neither r enam es °
reproduellain
The hark tip farihties of this paw • •
software m alt a. public il0/Win
vs.rr where prrnabsion In
Is Infaia to make unpick even to, •
without the mpresated pronistunri
•i•e 
m
i
l
,
. n o rt  it .  1
1
, been clearin ewes
• cope rista
nr their tirenrer
TH M O S T  PO R F U L
UTILITY CARTRIDGE• N C E I V E D !
LOADER
's
I L o a d  2 0 2  block
disk se ria l lo a d ,
loading spec
.trio
,rtt
71 /OCCV
t a l t r e S r
1. b l e l ,
Ve ry e a sy to use, we t
.ser knowledge reqUilt-L
PROF
M ACHI NE
OPE M NTR
I P u l l  8 4 K Freezer M
sta ck. I / O  urea and r•
t
mine %LI, me mory. in4
the ,
n•
SPRI TE
CONTROL
Freeze the  a ction Cr
custom it-
the op,
- ti m e s
h the  a niM a ti.
Now you can ma ke  y m
l  slow loading programs load fres•
Sim ply freeze the  a t • •  and save to tape or d isk to reload
superfast speed • no more  wa iting for progra ms to load
D I SK C OPY
er tha n con,  entiOnal
Easy to use d isk/ ﬁle  copie r. M
methods, I d e a l for back, • . p  da ta disks.
..0 ' m  &twine d. amazed
and tota lly impre sse d.
This is e a sily the  be st
value for mone y
ca rtridge . T h e  Ca rtridge
Kin g ! '
ik  U s e r ,
•-•
e
e
5
de'd,optio4fod
/  f v e
reo(0
JAA•0 r so'
. e d A t
CENTRONI CS]
I NTERFACE
•
pa ra lle l printe rs,  Sta r. E r
graphic cha ra cte rs e tc. ( C s  i
£12
11
pa ra lle l port
Now you can e dit the  e nt
change na me
EXTENDED
TOOLKI T
I M a r t y  single  strafgalt
range of extra o w n s&
. A
rt..,A n
,
-o
•-r, Old . De le te . M e i
24hr Cre dit
Card Line
Send che que s/ P0 *  made
payable to ''Datel
Ele ctronics"
A "  IDRDERS
ViTrIIIN H R S
DESPATrillt D
FAX
0782 744282
UK ORDERS POST FR EE
EUROPE ADD L I
OVERSEAS ADD £3
PRICES AND SPECI FI CATI ONS CORRECT AT TI M E OF PRESS
AND SU BJEC T TO CHANGE WI THOUT NOTICE
DATEL ELECTRONICS L T D ,
PENTON INDUSTRIAL
ESTATE
0 0 VAN  ROAD, FENTON.
orrolut-oN-Turprr.
ENGLAND.
T E C H N I C A L I
0782 744324
M O M ,  LINN 
•
1. PHI CS. SUPPORT •
TI LI TI ES DI SK
SH OW. v hew your fat ourile
tkreens ia a slide slow type display.
UP. I. nique wilily allows you to
take any pan of et a picture A 'blow
tip' loran screen
i
Willie kelps you to create or edit sprites.
M ESSAGE M AKER . Am screen
captured with Action Repia, or created
with a graphics package can be turned
taloa srmili rug wrten nwssage will
intuit.
ONLY £9. 99

iPub
occer in the states is mostly played
indoors by six-a-side teams. Here's
your chance to play, manage and
coach in the American indoor league.
T
league is the only way
to play soccer in the
US but that doesn't mean
that it lacks any of the skill
or excitement o f the 11-a- ,
side game. In fact, it's faster
and more tiring on the play-
ers, so it's just as well you
can substitute at will to keep
the action fast and furious.
However, selecting subs is
the only job for your in this
game. You can also act as
centre forward, goalkeeper,
centre midﬁeld and general
manager.
At the start (ii your cam-
paign the role o f  general
manager is the most impor-
tant as your squad is by far
the weakest in your six team
group and the twelve team
league. I f  you're going to
have any chance of reaching
YOUR COMMODORE
lc- s
the end o season play-offs
you must trade fo r  n •
players. As you begin the
game you have 250 trading
points to either train your
team or trade for a better
\ layer with a  skill level
earer 80 o r  100 which
would be a lot better than
your present average o f 15
to 20.
On the ﬁeld you must
drible, tackle and shoot-, as
you would i n  any other
football game, except that
your forwards can head the
ball and show off with over-
head kicks although the play
can be broken up by entirely
random penalties, foiling
even the best laid match
plans.
Whenever there is a free
kick o r  when the keeper
gathers the ball, the coaches'
AM RICAN
0011
I L L V b  U 1 1 /
tz P: / 5
OF r i - I S E
DEF E tME
PENAL TV
: C E  KS:E
: E H S E
0 : 0 0  0  :  PURAI. I Y
Mindsca • e 
"
E14.99 Dis
s. p p e a r s  which allows
yo m a k e  substitutions
an e c i d e  a tta ck a n d
defen tactics, ranging from
passing to shooting for the
forwards and all out defence
or support the attack f r  the
defence.
The game shows •
omise but it may all sound
‘rery familiar to you. Partic-
ularly i f  you've played
Gremlin:s Gary Lineker's
Superstar Soccer, i t  uses
itn exactly th e  same game
Nmechanics. The only differ-
ence being the number o f
players on the pitch. This is
because the game authors
SportTime produced both
games.i,.It's a  shame they
didn't write two different
games
Tony Hetherington
GAMES U P D AT E  •
ortTime, the games devel-
opers, also wrote Indoor
Sports a n d  Clubhouse
S r t s .
I N F O
G a n
Graphics:46%
Sconics:35%
Lastibility: 40%
Chvendh
0
4 3 %
LEEDS UTO 
0
0
 1 1
-  A P :  1 4 4
OFFENSE: P A S S
DEFENSE: DE F NDA
— P E NALTY : •  0 : 0 0
ATEATIM
POGO
n I x  
a
l
k
SHOOT
inamerra
ui V  0 1 1 A P  t : AP
PASC : O r r E N A r
D t r A i n  :DE F E NS E
• : 0 0  0  :P E N A L T Y
= O M R
NO
allinthlrAgt
Fifty Seven

i i N I
THE LAST
The man in the hat is back again and
this time he's brought his dad! That's
how they trailed the latest adventure
of Indiana Jones. Now it's a computer
game.
Lucasﬁlm (US Gold) - E24.99
Below: The cross of Coronado? Is that the same as the Maltese
Cross?
T H E  C R O S S  CIF
111 C O R O T
y
now play the game,
that's the message
from L u ca sﬁl m a s  i t
launches a  platform style
arcade game for the Amiga,
with other versions to follow
Fifty Eight
shortly. This is, in fact, just
one of two games that will
be based on the ﬁlm, the
other being an arcade adven-
ture produced by Lucasﬁlm.
The arcade game is based
on ﬁve sequences from the
I N F O
Gameplay: 65%
Graphics: 60%
Sonics: 45%
Lastibility: 55%
Overall:
56%
ﬁlm and plots Indy's pro-
gress from a scout through
to his ﬁnal crusade for the
Holy Grail. A s  the game
opens he has just entered the
mine complex i n  which
thieves are stealing the silver
cross o f  Coronado. While
their backs are turned Indy
grabs the cross and runs. On
screen the caves are full of
platforms, ropes t o  climb
and bad guys armed with
guns. I f  you're going t o
survive you'll need torches
so you can see where you're
going and whips to  battle
your way through to the exit.
Then the chase continues on
top of a circus train packed
with really wild animals.
This is where Indy learns to
use a whip for the ﬁrst time.
It is now 1938 and Indi-
ana Jones is racing the Nazis
to ﬁnd the Holy Grail. His
only clue is his father's Grail
diary that leads them both
underground into the ra t
infested crypt of a Venician
church where they hope to
ﬁnd the grave o f a Grail
knight. Afte r storming a
castle to rescue his dad, and
escaping in a Zeppelin, Indy
arrives at the ﬁnal and best
part of the game as he enters
YOUR COMMODORE
•••
! .
illierw!lir.,,,,*!:,,,,.!, . •T11,!!,
.4i,i'z ,! ,i;••••
 i" , , , A
t'''_•-,,,..,;
, ...,romr '  !alt4rdir
..„ •  :1
' -Igtiiii; •  •  
•
 
I
,

GAMES U P D AT E
ONES AND
CRUSADE
the Grail Temple. Here he
must pass three challenges
called the Breath of God, the
Word of God and ﬁnally the
Path o f God. These chal-
lenges become puzzles that
must be solved with your
joystick i f you are to reach
the Grail.
Lucastilm hasn't taken
any chances by using the
tried and tested platform
style o f game but with the
whip cracking action i t
seems to suit the style of the
ﬁlm. Add a reasonable ren-
dition of the Indiana Jones
theme and you've got a game
that's a lot of fun to play.
Tony Hetherington
Lueasﬁlm is the software
production part of the com-
pany owned b y  George
Lucas, who is one of the the
movie mogules behind the
ﬁlm.
YOUR COMMODORE
Above: Indy In his
Scout kecks.
Below: Underneath the arches!
Above: Everybody's got skeletons in the closet.
Below: What an athletic fellow Indy really is.
Fifty Nine

Cartoon Capers
and animation antics
abound with this latest
release from Magic Bytes
A
read more than a few
of my reviews will
know that I have little time
for licensed games. All too
often, money th a t could
usefully have been used in
developing the product i s
spent on acquiring the rights
to a ﬁlm, television series or
whatever. And the amounts
that we are talking about are
not peanuts.
The latest licensed title to
come my way is Tom and
Jerry fr o m  th e  German
Company Magic Bytes and
I am afraid that it does little
to improve my above men-
tioned view, Just the oppo-
site in fact.
The idea behind th e
game follows that o f  the
cartoons reasonably well.
Mouse goes looking fo r
food. Cat sees mouse. Cat
chases mouse. Cat catches
mouse. Mouse escapes. Cat
gets his comeuppance.
Here, Jerry is out look-
ing for lumps of his favourite
cheese, scattered around ﬁve
different rooms. He has to
collect as much as possible
in the allotted time, bounc-
ing of items of furniture in
the manner of the platform
days of old. The rooms are
connected via a  series o f
Sixty
tunnels where you can gain
or lose extra time by picking
up e i t h e r  cheese o r
explosives,
Tom on the other hand
is doing his best to stop Jerry
by grabbing him whenever
he can causing Jerry to lose
30 seconds of his time allo-
wance. Jerry can drop things
on Tom's head to keep him
quiet fo r a  while o r  can
distract him by, for example,
turning on the television.
Jerry's favourite cheese is
full of holes. Unfortunately,
the gameplay suffers from a
similar problem. T o  start
with, there i s n o  scoring
system in the game. Apart
from there being no incen-
tive to play, you have no idea
as to how well or badly you
are doing. Th i s i n  tu rn
affects other elements of the
gameplay. For example, i t
now becomes pointless to try
to stop Tom. The time spent
in setting up an 'accident'
could better be spent trying
to pick up more cheese.
The tunnel sequence
does not work at well at all.
The dynamite explodes as
soon as you look at it, let
alone touch i t. Trying to
jump past the furniture is a
lottery. Identical pieces may
make you climb over them
or allow you to walk under-
neath them. When To m
catches you, you get repo-
sitioned randomly o n  the
screen that you are on. It is
Above: But Jerry you can't drive, you're only a mouse
quite possible that you will
be put in a dead end and
have to  wait fo r Tom to
come and kill you again -
a wonderful b i t o f  game
design I don't think.
The manual has been
translated from the German
by someone who can't speak
English. I t  is littered with
spelling mistakes (so is the
game) and two of the pages
are printed out of order.
I can't write any more
mainly because I don't know
that many bad words. All I
can say is don't waste your
money.
Magic Bytes -
E9.99 Tape,
E14.99 Disk
. 1 1 1 4 1 1 E M
Gameplay: 15%
Graphics: 55%
Sonics: 40%
Lastability: 20%
Overall:
V A I  
•
3 3 %
• • • • • • • • • w
YOUR COMMODORE

I.
kv
•
kike
• • --v. •X
X
I
V
,
*
 3•7 ' 7r7 • ;;.
. / X : 1  
:
1
••••
• r
Above: You shall have a ﬁshy...
T
had come to  Amity
island and thousands
ﬂocked to its beaches una-
ware of the terror that swam
just below the calm seas. A
great white shark was now
feeding in these waters and
it-was feeding on people.
At ﬁrst they thought the
victim's wounds were caused
by boating accidents b u t
now you, Brody - Chief of
Police, the job of ridding the
island o f  th i s  menace.
Together with Quint, a shark
ﬁsherman, Hooper, a shark
expert, and three expert
divers you set off to kill jaws.
Unfortunately, the special
gun and its bullets that will
kill the monster shark were
on a boat that struck the reef
and sank, so your ﬁrst task
is to  dive down into the
dangerous waters and ﬁnd
them. To add to your trou-
bles Ma yo r Vaughn has
refused to close the beaches
and hopes to cover it up until
you kill the shark, but you
Gameplay: 65%
Graphics: 43%
Sonies: 38%
Lastibility: 64%
Overall:
SI
53%
YOUR COMMODORE
must h u r r y ,  i f  se ve n
swimmers a r e  chomped
you'll b e  sacked and the
game will be lost.
One b y one, your six
divers climb into the diving
bell and dive down into the
depths of the reef to search
for the four parts of the gun
and the four super bullets
that will kill Jaws. This isn't
easy as the waters are team-
ing with hostile plants and
ﬁsh out to eat you, i f you
think they're trouble just
wait until you see Jaws.
Luckily you'll also ﬁnd use-
ful objects to help you, such
as extra air to top up your
dwindling supplies, mines
and bombs to clear caverns,
bullets fo r your gun and
treasure to add to your score
and collection.
Eventually you'll gather
all the gun bits and ammo
you need but your challenge
is far from over as you have
score three hits on the great
white shark or start all over
again.
The game is quite fun to
play but there's one thing I
can't understand; why has
Screen 7 gone to trouble of
getting the rights to a ﬁlm
and then produce a  game
that has little to do with it?
Tony Hetherington
Above: No, its not Kaleiclascope simulator!
At last, the cult ﬁlm of the seventies
that terrorised countless cinema
audiences has now appeared on the
computer screen.
Screen 7 - E9.99
GAMES UPDATE
Jaws is the debut game fror,
new software house Scree
7.

•  G A M E S  U P D AT E
Has the NHS fallen so low that they'd
let a complete lunatic like Duncan
Evans into the wards? Oh no, they
have.
T
be afraid dear, this
won't hurt a t a l l _
Aaaaarrrgghhhh! Oops, did
I forget to turn the gas on.
My mistake, still, she was
getting on, and we did need
the beds.
Every fer you ever had
about going into hospital is
going to  be realised when
you play Life and Death by
Software T o o l w o r k s .
Thankfully in this game you
are that mad eyed surgeon,
and it's the other patients
who are there to suffer. And
suffer th e y d o , a s  y o u
blunder through medical
training, leaving the wards
empty a n d  th e  morgue
packed.
Life and Death is all
about survery, progressing
from being a naive scalpel
apprentice, to mastering the
appendectomy before as-
saulting th a t greatest o f
organs, the heart. Still, it'll
take you some time, and
loads of patients, before you
get that far.
It all starts with you
signing i n  a t  reception,
under the watchful eye o f
Monica, before heading to
the staff room to  pick up
your accomplices fo r the
Sixty Two
FE AND DE
room o f  doom, aka the
operating theatre. There are
six persons on hand in total,
each represented by a  ﬁle
and digitised pic, o f which
you must pick two.
Then you're o ff to the
classroom for an introduc-
tory speech, and a few hints
and tips on general surgical
practices.
After answering a phone
Mindscape - E.29.95 Disc
call, which doubles as the
copy protection scheme, you
get your ﬁrst patient. 'rime
to don the rubber gloves and
face mask that come with the
game! Fi rst examine the
poor thing by prodding them
in every section o f  their
midrif and abdomen -  i f
there's a n y pain then a
sampled squeal testiﬁes to it.
Have a  look a t their
record chart and look up the
symptoms, a n d  d e ci d e
whether to operate, admin-
ister antiobitocs, refer them
YOUR COMMODORE

to another doctor, go to X-
ray, observe or use the ultra
scan. For the ﬁrst half of a
dozen patients you'll prob-
ably make the wrong choice
and end u p  back i n  the
classroom being told so. At
On SheOherd
I Ale*. Zardiologist
pecialtkf. tardiologl
YOUR COMMODORE
least you'll know better next
time, alas your victims never
get a second opportunity.
Eventually you'll get a
case where you have to
operate, and this is where the
real fun starts, as it involves
injecting drugs to  counter
blood pressure loss and
heart wobblies, setting up
ghicose and blood drips, and
using all manner of ﬁendish
implements to  peel back
layers of ﬂesh as you head
for the appendix.
The trouble is in ﬁnding
the damn thing, and avoid-
ing cutting into the Colon,
which is messy. If you have
a mouse connected to your
PC i s makes f o r  easier
surgery, as you often have
to react very quickly.
There is a kind o f per-
verse fascination i n  this
game, this slice and dice epic,
Proﬁle of Dr, (en SteOberd'.
Sbenherd's area of
expertise is cardiologl. During aR
operation, be %All Veep an e4e on
the patient's Ea llhen the M
hecones ahnortal, he vill inforn
the surgeon and recotnend a course
Oi attiOn.
Personal'. Dr SheOherd gets alo
.n
g
uith cost of the other staff
tethers. uorlts particularlki
uell Uith Oher14 Breuer .
GAMES U P D AT E  •
where the demise of a patient
is simply irritating, and the
pleasure comes from seeing
how far in you can get before
cocking it all up.
The C GA four colour
graphics are excellent, and
are wonderfully comple-
mented b y  th e  sampled
screams, and the best news
is that the Amiga version
should be ready about now.
u  A s a
Gameplay: 87%
Graphics: 85%
Sonics: 73%
Lastibility: 80%
Overall:
86%
Software Toolworks is best
known for its Chessmaster
2000 and 2100 programs,
and is promising a  brain
Surgery sequel to  Life &
Death.
Left: Slice, maim and chop. All in the name of medicine, of course.
Now, where did I place that kidney?
Sixty Three

-
_
tInnir CIITTTliIt D
. .  
.
 ' M k  M a i n e  U M  
•
 M N  0  O m  
m
i
 a
M I S O  a  M I  =  M E  =  
a
 I I I I M I S U I N I  a  m i n a
M I L 
a
l
 n i  
e
n
 M O  
M
O
 I N  
M
I
 I n !  
.
 a .  u '
l i r  m
i l m
 e n  am e m oim s e n  m
e
.11p
N NW g o  m i  
I
m
o
 e l  
w
 1 1 . p l
THE ULTIMATE POOLS PREDICTION PROGRAM
. Th-
•  M ASSI VE DATABASE P o o l s
precbcoon aid. It comes complete with the largest database
available - 22000 matches over 10 years.
•  PREDICTS N o t  just SCOREDRAWS, but AWAYS, HOMES
and NO SCORES.
•  SUCCESSFUL SELEC  guarantee Ow Poolswinner performs
sigruﬁcantly better than chance.
•  AD APTABLE Probabilities are given on every future
choose as many selections as you need for your bet. The
precise prediction formula can be set by the user yo u  can , . . . ..--, .""' a•
develop and test your own tanKrthe method. 
,
-
.
.
,
.
,
.
.
.
•  SI M PLE DATA ENTRY A l l  team names are in the program. Simply type in the reference
numbers from the screen. Or use EMMEN to produce ﬁxture list automatically (see below).
•  LEAGU E AND NON-LEAGUE A l l  English and Scottish League teams are supported.
and also the non-league sides often used on pools coupons.
•  PRENTER SUPPORT F u ll hard copy printout of data if you have a printer.
PRICE E24.00 (all inclusive)
-
A 
h r
e list in
F I X G E N  8 9 / 9 0  ﬁxture 'ouLASTr  N
ﬁxtures for 198R30. Simply type or the date, and the hill furtive hat is generated
in seconds. Puny compatible with Poolswinner Yearly updates available
POOLSWINNER with ITIEGEN E26.50 (fox both)
ma r MST A TIPSTER
C
O
U
R
S
E
W
I
N
N
E
R
 v
V3 can be used by experts
T EE PUNTERS C OM PU TER  PR O G R AM  and occasional punters alike
You can develop and test your own uroque winning system by adjusting the
analysis formula, or use the program in simple mode. Courserrinner V3 uses
statistical analysis of major factors including past form. speed ratings, course
statistics, prise money. weight, going. trainer and jockey form etc. etc. It
outputs MOE likely winners, good long odds bets, forecasts, tricasts etc. The
database includes vital course statistics for all British courses. You can update
the database - never goes out of date. FULL PRINTER SUPPORT.
PR I C E £ 2 4 .0 0 (a ll inclusive ) laded.. Flat AND National thati nonionic
AMSTRAD CFCs AMSTRAD POW Pl ease state tape or disc
AVAILABLE BBC.  
[
B
M
 Format
F O R  C O M M O D O R E  64•1213 COMMODORE AMIGA ( a d d  E2 .0 0  f o r d isc) .
SPECTRUM A T
A R
I
 ST
250
Send ChequesPOs for 
S
I
C
 
7
1
1
7
return of s e r v i c e  to.
4
post
M ﬂ-TMARI. 
p
h
o
n
e
 24 hrs
62 ALTRDICHAM ED, GAMEY, CHEADLE, CHESHIRE SK8 4DP. 2 061-428 7425
iSenct Co., fu).! L I ,irotIr ,r,vdrH:•
3
ENVELOPES * LIFETIME GUARANTEE
ON CERTIFIED PRODUCT
31/2inch BULK DISKS 
*
 Certiﬁed ERROR FREE
3inch *  PREFORMATTED
Quantity
10
500
250
100
50
Quantity
10
500
250
100
OS,D11 uncertiﬁed
E5.50
.45
.
.54
.50
• CH
E17.25
1.30
1.40
1.45
• DS 'DO 72011 certiﬁed
E7.00
.51
.
.50
.55
* CF200
E26.25
2.20
2.30
2.40
* DS/DB 1M8 reformatted to 720k
EOM
.
.56
•
.68
uniert cf2
E23.00
1.84
1.94
2.00
* OSIDO 1180 performatted to 810k
E9.50
.55
.50
•
11
umiak art
E23.00
1.84
1.94
2.00
K I M 2MB certiﬁed
E15.00
1.32
1.38
1.43
MS
man Cn
E18.50
1.40
1.50
1.60
5
VIDEO TAPES - HIGHEST QUALITY
Quantity
10
500
250
100
50
Quantify
10
500
250
100
• 0SII0 4tpi certiﬁed
.25
E100
E1.95
1.62
1.72
1.62
• DI M 95tpi certiﬁed
.27
E240
£2.75
2.32
2.42
2.52
• MI D  1.6MB codiﬁed
E7.50
.52
.55
.66
.
[180*
E2.35
1.92
UM
2.22
CLEANING KITS FOR ALL DRIVES
BRANDED DISKS
3
31
we 311 M I  1/301 
m
u
sw nem KIM MI 
H
e
m
sw seer NAM ZN1 
M
I
S
six maw Otell Illpi 
E
s
m
P e  IITSAII ISM • ili* 
m
u
sur sena N M  1.601
P e  311 RIM 1.011 
I
I
I
I
NM A I
DISK BOXES
DP021) 20x3" £ 8 . 9 5
DPO40 48x31/2" E 4 . 9 5
0P080 0063%" E 5 . 9 5
0P050 50E51/4" E 4 . 9 5
DP1X 100151/4" E 8 • 9 5
DM40140"51/4" E 7 . 9 5
OR
Llfts_A_I
Quantity
1
50
25
10
r
E 4.95
3.00
3.50
4.00
31/2"
E 1.99
1.25
1.50
1.75
5
E 1.99
1.25
1.50
1.75
I '
E12.50
8.00
9.00
11.00
Cassette
E 1.99
1.25
1.50
1.75
-Partyline - your instant chat facility
-
-Views, reviews, humour and telepublishing
lion •unil
-I (lige software library
Littport;intly i
-Thousands of updates every week
?
-Play by electronic mail e.g. Chess, US football
mak.
•All this available with a local phone call
cl
Sixty Four
Make new friends trading
in outer space: Federation II
The friendly Compunet
Club's deﬁnitive
multi-user space game
(
Middx, UB6 7,1B. For enquines and Access/Visa orders ring: Tracy on 01497 2591.
_ Please send me the Componet Information Pack with details of your modem offers,
_ I  already have a suitable modem for my ST or Amiga (i.e. Linnet, Linnet 1200, any
Hayes compatible and must "dumb" modems). Please forward the Comptinet termi-
nal software, regisitation and Free month wets% for E24-95.
_ Please send me the Comm/let modem for C64/128 plus software, registratieo arid Free
month access for E39-95.
Name
Addit-cs
P o
EVER PLAYED A
MULTI-USER GAME?
o rip tine
Telepliceie Number
11 Mundells Court, Welwyn Garden City, Herts AL7 lEN
Tel: (0707) 334460 Fax: (0707) 331064
L O O K  N O  F U R T H E R ! ! !
DISKS DISKS AND MORE DISKS * TRADE PRICES DIRECT TO THE PUBLIC *  COMPLETE WITH USER BETS AND
New SOFTWARE SECURITY &
DUPLICATMG
SERVICE available now
ORDERS WELCOME FROM GOVERNMENT. LOCAL AUTHORITY,
EDUCATIONAL, AND CORPORATES
PRICES * Ja u n t POSTAGE, PACKING AND VAT
THESE PRICES ARE FOR PAYMENT WITH ORDER ONLY FOR NEXT DAY DELIVERY
ADD £6 PLEASE MINIMUM ORDER VALUE LID
Pease send to me
NAME
ADDRESS
Access/Visa No
Signature
QtY
X
PAP
Total ....
YOUR COMMODORE

I N F O
timbolommomill
67%
Gameplay: 88%
Graphics: 72%
Sonics: 32%
Lastibility: 75%
Overall:
YOUR COMMODORE
-
Above: Blast him, Maim him, Murder him. Hang on a sec, that's
a hostage! Ah, shoot him anyway...
S
puts you in charge of
a six man assault team
containing three comman-
dos and three marksmen.
Your targets are terrorists
that have seized an Embassy
and it's your job to rescue
any hostages.
In a two stage game you
must set up your marksmen
before sending in the com-
mandos. However, the ter-
-
Ever since the SAS stormed the
Iranian Embassy in 1980 we have
waited for a game that captured the
atmosphere of such a raid. Here it is.
Below: Well have no cigarette
adverts in this msg.
ElleASSY
GAMES U P D AT E  •
wrists have the surrounding
streets covered with search-
lights so your marksmen
must run, crawl and dive in
and out of any terrorists that
come to the windows. How-
ever, you must be sure that
they're terrorists and n o t
hostages before you open
ﬁre. Once the immediate
area is cleared you can send
in the heavy mob.
The commandos enter
the building b y abseiling
from the roof and smashing
through the windows. They
must then clear the rooms of
terrorists. Inside, the screen
changes to show a 3D view
of the room o r  corridor
you're currently i n  and a
map that plots the terrorists
movement. Now you have to
think quickly to gun down
terrorists while avoiding any
injury to the hostages. When
you ﬁnd a hostage you must
escort him to a safe room
on the third ﬂoor and pro-
tect them fro m terrorist
attack by moving in more of
your team. A s  i n  a  real
assault good tactics and the
speed and skill of your team
will decide the outcome.
Perhaps the toughest chat-
lenge is when a terrorist is
hiding behind his hostages.
There you have to  make
your shots count and that
will take some practice.
Several levels o f  difﬁ-
culty and the ability to play.
either half ()I
ately will ensure you'll keep
coming back for more.
Tony Hetherington
Hostages is the latest game
from Infogrames, the com-
pany that brought you the
wierd and wonderful Cap-
tain Blood.
Infogames E9.95
Tape, E14.95 Disk.
Sixty Five

Pinball games are few and far
between, so any new ones will be wel-
comed by digital pinball wizards.
Unfortunately, this one is way off
target.SCANNER
By Electric Dreams -
E9.95 tape
IMESCANNER i s
the long awaited con-
version of the success-
ful coin-op based on pinball.
In the game you have inex-
plicably fallen into a  time
warp and the only way out
is to complete four pinball
tables. To add to your prob-
lems you have to complete
three of them before you get
a chance to play the fourth.
Each table has a theme
and an objective. For exam-
ple, on the Volcano table
you must light up the letters
in the word Volcano b y
hitting a  transparent chute
until ﬁnally the volcano
erupts. Unfortunately, this
makes the other targets,
bumpers and rollovers quite
redundant. The same is also
true of the Ruins and Saq-
qarah (Egyptian) tables.
Another problem is that
the tables are in two halfs
of a scrolling screen and it's
almost impossible to get the
ball from the bottom hall
back to the top. This can be
important since the targets
you must hit in the Saqqarah
table are all in the top half
of the table; so are the two
chutes that transport you to
the other tables.
Unfortunately, things get
worse as the game's graphics
and speed are more in line
with a 16K Spectrum game
than a  64K C64 and the
suspicion must be that all 8
bit versions have been deve-
Sixty Six
loped with the Spectrum in
mind.
The reward for ﬁnally,
slowly and painfully com-
pleting a level is the release
of two other balls so you can
play with three a t once
(which slows th e  game
down, i f that's possible) so
that it takes several seconds
for a ball to hit the top of
the screen and bounce back
to the ﬂippers.
Tony Hetherington
Below: Do you think that this screen is, perchance, the Volcano Screen?
ME
Gameplay: 32%
Graphics: 22%
Sonics: 42%
Lastibility: 28%
Overall:
2
A division has enjoyed con-
siderable success recently
with a string o f  hits. This
isn't one of them.
YOUR COMMODORE

US Gold - E9.99
As part of the Dungeons and Dragons
deal, US Gold has created a game to
bring role playing to the masses.
C
game based on Dun-
geons and Dragons
that will appeal to  arcade
players. That was the chal-
lenge put to US Gold as its
part o f the three cornered
deal with SSI and D & D
authors TSR. This is the
result and it's a game that's
played entirely w i t h  a
joystick.
Unlike the other D &D
games that are based on the
Forgotten Realms, Heroes
of the Lance is based on the
Dragonlance series of books
and game modules that came
about because players of the
role playing game demanded
more dragons in Dungeons
and Dragons. This game
features an ancient black
dragon called Khisanth who
guards the platinum disks of
Mishakal. These disks are
your only hope of restoring
faith in the old Gods and
foiling the evil Queen o f
Darkness' plan to rule the
world.
The Disks lie deep in the
ruins of the Temple of Xak
Tsaroth which is now rife
with Gully Dwarfs, giant
spiders, undead and Draco-
nians (a human dragon half
breed created b y  the evil
Queen). You control eight
brave adventurers although
only one appears o n  the
screen at anyone time. Your
party has the usual mix of
ﬁghters and spell casters
which, i n  this game, are
given th e i r spell power
through two staffs. Raistlin
is the magic user and holds
the staff of Magius which
has 100 charges and can cast
spells such as sleep, magic
missile and charm (sapping
one charge) and web (for
two). Goldmoon carries the
clerical blue moon staff that
YOUR COMMODORE
r  fp_ F
 f  
r
 9 .  l i r  9   
9
, 
r
.
 
r
•
t
r r  - 
-
 
e
,
 
e
,
 
e
,
3.4,6
1 R o i s t L i n  Ma je qe
Min
• regtetz190"
I
x f o n i f v
, C  s t i t u t i o n
is na
Ceve m u
H it  p o i n t s
a /  8
-AMES
S t 011-3" m o o l u s
1
a
has 200 charges and can cast
spells ranging from the ubiq-
uitous cure light wounds (1)
to Raise Dead (5) and the
useful deﬂect dragon breath
(5).
The action takes place on
a sideways scrolling screen
with a compass that lights up
when you reach a junction.
This can be a little confusing,
but since the game's in real
time you haven't time to
draw accurate maps. Com-
bat is fast and furious, with
joystick movements decid-
ing whether you cut, slash or
parry, o r  ﬁre an arrow/
crossbolt in a distance att-
ach. Should you resort to
magic then the space bar
freezes the game and pres-
ents a series of menus from
which you can cast spells,
pick up, drop and use objects
and examine and select
heroes.
Tony Hetherington
F E AT U R E  •
HEROES
OF THE
LANCE
Left: I wonder if the staff
of Magius is as rowdy as
the staff of Argus.
Below: Your Commodore -
full of interesting columns.
Garneplay: 67%
Graphip: 55%
Stoics: 4?%
Lastiblitty:I48%
Dvefratt:
3
Sixty Seven

C
ﬁrst title to come our
way is Treble Chal-
lenge, a  football manage-
ment game that see
expand the found at
by Football Man
more recently,
Director II. The latte
is a hard act to folio
the only way to do so
be to better it
play,.
ceedettnis with a few fea-
tures to increase the realistic
aspect of games of this ilk.
The g o a l  ( n o  p u n
intended) in Treble Cham-
pions is a very familiar one;
win the leage division one,
the FA Cup and the League
Cup (hopefully all i n  the
same season) and thus prove
what an outstanding man-
ager you are. This is done
by manipulating players,
entering the transfer market
the g r
make two
ing a mat
computer
Penalty'
not ofte4240
s tr*?
legs
Sixty Eight
-
bane
And so the foolfseasorl arts aga
To coincide with this momen
occasion, Chal 
w
a
r
e
 d
us a dose of soccerT nageme
test even Kenny Darish hims
improve the
.
ores performed b y
managers.
a h a v e  sk
age, ﬂtne4and p
S.
nt o
that a team
show which player score
and in what minute.
The most unique feature
of the game is the fact that
you, as manager, only have
a set number o f hours to
perform a weekly task. Dif-
ferent actions take different
amounts of time, and once
you have run out the more
important decisions n o t
undertaken that week will
S'
Y-clock
• a table
Can appt
of purchasing, bu
done before
"•••••01n0AVI , S•044,
•••••••
.
••••:
I  10 
•
 
•
resentation
ante is o v e r t
I
Also new to /
fact yo
ituti„ •
9
d seigear4
nept
_
, ,
in
are
'co
pia
o f 20: ••,,„.
-league '-',
ams. You
any o f three
and start in
divisions.
ms have
h you
he hope
must
ansf
is a  total
nd, but on
this sort 
t
h
a
t
 i s
common. The ga i s  enor-
mous and there are a ple-
thora of options waiting to
be explored.
Treble Champions i s
possibly the most complete
football strategy game to
date - which is no mean feat,
I assure you. I t  is large,
complex and, most impor-
4
,
. 1
which today's socder games
need to  have. Until some-
body produces
game b
large a
apability
human
nge Soft-
is •situnL'on the best
maﬂagTen1 game,
•-•1t
a
Henderson
T7101111rS eft ware is a label
Software, a corn-
party' h  a very high pedi-
gree _f g o o d  qua/in
te y  ) t s m e s .  T r e b l e
m a letftis its ﬁrst retail
Cameplay: 50%
Graphics: 40%
Sonics: 30%
Lastibility: 40%
Overall:
1
YOUR COMMODORE

Electric Dreams - E29.99
The predictions were right. The aste-
roid did collide with the Earth killing
all life on the planet. As commander
of the moonbase only you can save
mankind.
',11
f•-•1•1 
r
 
C
Pm' n
• ' .
7
 
d
o
g
,
•
O O O O O
. . . . .  . . . . . . .
•
•• 
•
•
• 
•
•
• •  • •  • . . . . .  • • •
•
••
•••
••
• 
,
,
•• "
• “ . "
M
small research sta-
tion with limited
production a n d  mi n i n g
capabilities, a single Mark I
energy unit and a population
of only 100. Through careful
management y o u  m u s t
ensure
race by ﬁrst establishing the
moonbase and then setting
up colonies on other worlds.
By clicking on the games
icons you should soon be
able to startup the colonies
resource plant that mines
raw materials these can be
used by the production sec-
tion to  build new energy
cells, probes t o  explore
space, nodules to  support
more people (100 each),
ﬁghters to protect the base
and bigger and better ships
for the exodus into space.
Just when things seem to
be going well, you receive a
message from Mars claiming
dominance in the galaxy and
hostility against any moves
you m a k e  t o  expand.
Undaunted, you send o u t
probes to  search the solar
system for a moon or planet
to colonise as, b y  now,
Moonbase is overcrowded.
Sooner or later the Martians
will attach and i f  you've
researched and built ﬁghters
or orbital lasers you can try
and stop them but you'll
probably lose some mate-
rials and people in the raid.
Although Millennium
GAMES U P D AT E  •
MILLENNIUM
Left: Left: Look mum, little
white blobs on my
computer screen.
2.2 looks like i f  strategy
game it plays like an adven-
ture and has a  series o f
puzzles that must be solved
before you progress. These
include the need fo r raw
materials, such as copper,
that can't be mined from the
moon, the increasing mar-
tian attacks and the risk of
mutation and alien diseases
that can spread rapidly
through cargo ships to your
other colonies giving you a
desperate race against time
to research and produce an
antidote.
Although this PC ver-
sion lacks the graphic appeal
of others it still captures the
feeling o f  exploring the
unknown and the challenge
SIRIUS
LIFE SUPPORT:
POKER oupuT.
OEFEOCES:
RESOURCES:
RESERRCH:
PROOUCTIOD:
Above: It takes a Millenium to play the game.
of ensuring the survival of
the race.
Tony Hetherington
I N F O
Gameplay: 68%
Graphics: N/A
Sonics: N/A
Lastibility: 70%
Overall:
69%
YOUR COMMODORE 
S
i
x
t
y
 Nine

Ocean - E24.95
Part ﬁlm character, part arcade game,
all cop. It's the man in a can, and he's
gunning for you. If you've been
naughty that is.
i
the wonderfully violent
ﬁlm, Robocop, and i f
you haven't then you should
jolly well do so. Well, this
game isn't quite based on the
ﬁlm as one might expect, but
rather on the arcade game
that followed.
After seeing the disap-
pointing S T version (the
Amiga one should be out
now), I was dreading seeing
what Ocean could do on a
PC. Surprisingly, the P C
version is miles better than
the s
cally simulates the arcade
game.
You p l a y Patrolman
Murphy, once ﬂesh and
blood, horribly blown to
pieces by gangsters, who are
secretly led by one o f the
senior ofﬁcers a t  OC P.
Murphy was scraped up,
canned, and reprogrammed
for law enforcement. Fortu-
Seventy
RO
nately, what remains of his
mind throws up images of
the gang, and he sets out for
revenge.
Robocop is a  game o f
many parts and levels (nine
in all), and starts by scrolling
from ri g h t t o  left, w i th
hoodlums leaping onto the
screen, all intent on render-
ing Murphy into a  tin o f
paste. Armed Nvith a stand-
ard pistol, three lives, and an
ever decreasing energy level,
you must ﬁght your way
through, picking up ammo
along the way. I-ater in the
game you get to  pick up
other weapons, which you'll
certainly need considering
what you're up against.
At the end o f the ﬁrst
patrol there's an almost 3-
D section where you have to
nail a criminal who is hiding
behind a  woman hostage.
This is a pleasant break after
the ﬁrst round and a chance
to concentrate before the
really offensive criminals on
level two, some of whom ride
motorbikes.
Level four is a  photoﬁt
against the time test, with
information as to Murphy's
killer being the reward. After
that it's killing all the way,
taking out a drug factory,
the giant robot ED209, and
a ﬁnal encounter with the
mastermind Dick Jones in
the Presidents Ofﬁce.
Robocop isn't an easy
game, because poor old
Murphy ﬂinches every time
a bullet hits him, and while
he's doing so he can't ﬁre
back. Needless to say there
are killing zones at certain
points along the way where
you are caught in a murder-
ous crossﬁre, and have great
difﬁculty in getting out with
one lift left.
The graphics and anima-
tion are pretty good which
makes up for the dire sound
effects, and with those bonus
style sections thrown in to
break up the action, this is
one patrol worth going on
Duncan Evans
•111111111111111
s
Cameplay: 87%
Grahics: 80%
Sonics: 20%
Lastibility: 81%
Overall:
o
84%
Above: Metallic massacre in tin opener city.
With titles like WEC  L e
Mans, Op Wolf, Robocop
and numerous compilations,
that has been Oceans year
so far.
-
,
M A W *  Immo am Fp 
•
•
•
 w e
 mom umovaiff
a n e a ra m MO W WM *  •••• 
w
a
n .
 •A• 1 . 1 . 1 . 0 2 m 1
- -
• • • • • •
- . 1 . 0 . 0 1 r
m e m  0.MUMMI-
olle 0 1 .  V E .
f t .  V kia
Of W O W &
mmematom
InAm mom
YOUR COMMODORE

As the sun sets Gordon Hamlett gets
funky with his remote-controlled
robot.
R
ﬁed from graduate
school as a  robo-
ironies engineer, you have
just started your ﬁrst job.
You are working i n  the
cybernetic control centre
involved i n  p l a n e ta ry
exploration.
As a beginner, you can-
not expect to be let loose on
the latest technology from
day one. So you are given
control o f  a  second rate
robot to do your dirty work.
The planet to is explore not
what it seems. Real planets
being a touch expensive, the
company has leased an arti-
ﬁcial one consisting of some
ten different platforms. The
idea is that you guide your
robot over the surface trying
to ﬁnd the exit to the next
level. Succeed on the ﬁrst
ﬁve platforms and you are
given control of the latest in
robot technology fo r  the
next live.
The platforms consist of
a series of small mazes with
different areas only access-
ible when yo u  have the
appropriate colour coded
key. There are creatures that
shoot a t you and hidden
mines, all o f which is bad
news. A t  the start o f the
game, you have no defences
at all. You must ﬁnd your
laser and mine detector ﬁrst.
There are also one way
escalators and transporter
pads to be negotiated.
There is nothing original
about Nightdawn. Wander-
ing round mazes looking for
different keys has been seen
many times before and there
is nothing extra in this game
to make you sit up and take
notice.
The graphics are poor
fuzzy, blurred and small.
Indeed, the Amiga version
was similarly disappointing
YOUR COMMODORE
-looking m o r e  l i k e  I
imagined this C64 version
should look.
There is nothing partic-
ularly wrong with Night-
dawn, it just doesn't generate
any degree o f  excitement
whatever. Lasting appeal is
limited too. Once you have
learned t h e  b e s t p a t h
through a particular level -
where the traps are and so
on, there is nothing to stop
you completing that partic-
ular level again with great
ease, every time you play.
Above: Ooon, what a large metallic sprite!
Above: Wot no large metallic sprite!
Magic Bytes -
E9.99 Tape, £14.99 Disk.
Gameplay: 50%
Graphics: 40%
Sonics: 30%
Lastibility: 40%
Overall:
4 0 %
Seventy One

GAMES U P D AT E
THE STORY
SO FAR
C
nothing new, and
you might say noth-
ing exciting. I f  you wanted
to be really cruel you might
also say they were cynical
marketing exercises d e -
signed to tempt the 'present
shopper' into buying what
young Johnny already had
anyway.
Compilations can b e
value for money, but looking
at this one from Elite i t
appears that The Story So
Far is a  pretty short one.
, ._.
Four games is rather stingy,
especially as it doesn't con-
tain one o f  Elite's better
games Overlander, or even
Live and Let Die which the
8-bit packages get.
What yo u  d o  get are
Buggy Boy, Ikari Warriors,
Battleships and Beyond the
Ice Palace. Buggy Boy was
a 3-D racing game, with ﬁve
tracks, and loads of obsta-
cles rather than competing
cars.
With bonus points, time
gates and the ability to drive
on two wheels, and then ﬂy
through the air, you can see
this isn't exactly Monaco. It
is good fun though, because
the tracks are graded in
difﬁculty and even the fad-
ing reactions of this old hack
are good enough to complete
the ﬁrst three.
Ikari Warriors is one of
my favourites, being the ﬁrst
arcade Commando style
game to feature simultane-
ous two player action. It isn't
stunning on the Amiga, in
fact it looks just like the ST
version, but it is very play-
able and features tanks with
which you run the gooks
over, as well as shooting and
grenading them.
There's a lot o f surface
gloss on Battleships, but that
doesn't cover up for the fact
Seventy Two
that this is a very standard
conversion o f the pen and
paper game. I  suppose it'll
save a few trees, and you can
play against the computer
should you be so bored.
And ﬁnally off we go into
arcade adventure land with
vertical and horizontal scrol-
ling, three types of weapon,
dreadful so u n d  effects,
decent graphics and very
rough gameplay. Just get-
ting through the ﬁrst level of
Beyond the Ice Palace is a
major achievement, and
when you encounter the even
harder guardians o f  level
two you'll realise that this
game has never been prop-
erly playtested.
Normally compilations
can stand a  couple o f the
games being naff, or if you
already own one or two, but
with The Story So Far there
isn't really any margin for
error, and whichever way
you look, you're not exactly
getting the bargain o f  a
Duncan Evans
I N F O
Gameplay: 82%
Graphics: 80%
Sonics: 72%
Lastabilit): 84%
Overall:
8
Elite Systems hit the head-
lines after running ads com-
paring Overlander to  U S
Gold's Roadblasters, a n d
hasn't released anything
more since.
Only a compilation, or a potted his-
tory of Elite Systems work on the
Amiga? Duncan Evans gives you the
real story.
Above: Ikari Warriors.
,
Above: Buggy Boy
Above: Beyond the Ice Palace,
Elite - E19.99
•
.1t
ligyvy
Olt 
I
t
ob . 4 9
• '
t
amt t4Pr)
ov, elk lost go
istt ott i m i t  4o
YOUR COMMODORE

COMMODORE
UK:
f  15 .60
EUROPE:
£23.25
MIDDLE EAST:
£23.50
FAR EAST:
£26.40
REST OF THE WORLD:
f24.00
or USA:
$42.00
Send this form with
yo u r remittance to:
INFONET LTD.
5 River Park Estate,
Billet Lane,
BERKHAMSTED,
Herts. HP4 tHL,
United Kingdom
YOUR COMMODORE
delivered to your
door FREE !*
That's right, if you take out a
year's subscription to Your
Commodore we will make
sure that it is delivered to
your door each month at no
extra charge*. Just ﬁll in the
coupon below and send it to
the address given with a
cheque, money order or
credit card instructions
to cover the cost of the
subscription. We'll do
the rest.
*Overseas subscription rates include postage.
Airmail Rates on Request.
1
Please commence my subscription to Your Commodore with the   
i
s
s
u
e
.
I enclose my cheque/money order for   
m
a
d
e
 payable to
ARGUS SPECIALIST PUBLICATIONS
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 [ 1 1 1 1 1 1
Or Debit my Access/Visa number
Valid from   
t
o
  
S
i
g
n
a
t
u
r
e
Name 
A
d
d
r
e
s
s
P
o
s
t
c
o
d
e
New subscriber S u b s c r i p t i o n  renewal/extension (delete as applicable)
Seventy Three

1st C
•  R E V I E W
Can the ageing
Commodore 64 keep up
with the brash young
upstarts of the 16-bit
world. Maybe it can,
with this CD interface
from Rainbow Arts.
EDITION
I

R E V I E W  •
T
do for the computer and entertainment industry. Gigabytes o f code,
ﬁlm like animation sequences stored on CD, with stirring musical scores
to accompany the action.
Even now we are seeing the emergence o f the new technology, witness
Mirrorsoft releasing Defender of the Crown on CD for connecting up to PC's.
There's the PC Engine, with its CD software, and who knows that is around
the corner.
Well like you I can only guess, but I'd never have guessed what Rainbow
Arts was going to do. In a seemingly bizarre marketing move, the company
has released the 1st CD-Edition. This package contains an interface which
plugs into the cassette port, a CD and an instruction manual.
The interface which translates the audio output of a CD player into the
audio format of the cassette port is small and fragile looking. It isn't even
boxed and gives the impression that a moment's carelessness would result in
it being snapped in half.
The only catch with this package is the CD player. Unless the game's on
the CD, for this is a compilation, were of such brilliance that it was worth
laying out 12150 or so for the CD player, or you already had one, then i t
isn't going to be of much use.
Setting everything up is a minor hassle, simply because o f the need to
have all the equipment in close proximity. It says in the manual that you
can use a portable CD unit just as easily, and as this is far easier to set up
I gave that a go.
Plug in the interface, connect a  phono plug lead from the interface to
the Line out on the CD player, turn on your CM and insert your disc and
you're ready to roll. Easy enough, you then just type LOAD and set the CD
player in action. After about 45 seconds you should be into the main menu,
and the CD player can be stopped or paused now. Alas the portable CD
unit didn't like working with the interface so i t was necessary to haul the
big unit out. Take note, if you only have a portable, it might not work.
My main unit worked ﬁne though, and the menu offered a choice of ten
games for my delectation. After making a selection, the menu informs you
to jump to a speciﬁc track number where the game is stored, then press space.
After anything between 30 and 50 seconds later, the decompacked program
is running happily and you can turn the CD player off.
This is all good and well, but let's look at what you're getting a bit closer.
For one thing the loading time isn't particularly fast. In fact it's quite slow
when you realise how little data is being loaded, but is comparable with today's
fast loaders on the CM disk drive.
How much room on the CD does all this take up? About I I  minutes
worth, and that's padded out. To try and ﬁll up the rest o f this very empty
disc, the programs are recorded twice, simply add 20 to the track number
to access them, and there is a selection of 10 music tracks by Chris Hulsbeck
(who?) to listen to through your ampliﬁer. These music tracks are nothing
special, and not worth buying the CD-Edition for.
The actual games, almost an oversight in this strange project are not your
state of the art games. Some of them are older than my pother, but for the
record, this is what you get: David's Midnight Magic (pinball), Leaderboard,
Mission Elevator, Impossible Mission, Dropzone, Loderunner, Solomon's Key,
Jinks, M.U.L.E, and Fist II.
Although Rainbow Arts has been quite brave in testing the water with
this package, it has cut corners as far as paying for new games and the production
standards of the interface are concerned.
If you don't have a CD Player then forget it. If you already do, and you
can lug it close enough to your computer then all you have to worry about
is whether you really want the beneﬁt of having ten very old games and some
forgettable music on a compact disc. This isn't the technology of tomorrow,
this is Rainbow Arts trying to cash in on a current fashion.
Duncan Evans
Seventy Five

T H I N K I N G  OF BUYING
A N E W  CAR?
DON'T!
w i t h o u t consultingt h e
"Ha ndy  Li ttl e Bookl et" is the essential r efer ence
book  for  ever yone buyi ng a ne w  car.
It lists the mai n car manufactur er s al phabeti cal l y,
together  wi th each car's cur r ent retail price,
i nsur ance gr oup,  engi ne size, ur ban mpg,  unl eaded
compati bi l i ty,  Ser vi ce/ Mai ntenance/ Repai r  costs -
based on 50, 000 mi l eage - and t a x  br acket - for
company car drivers.
So befor e you i nvest thousands of  pounds in a ne w
car i nvest j ust E2 in the "Handy Li ttl e Bookl et" to
help you m a k e  the r i ght choice.
To get your  copy send E2 plus 25 pence (for  postage
and packagi ng) to: Ki m Cleary, Com pa ny  Car,
I nter nati onal  Tr ade Publ i cati ons Ltd. ,  Q ue e ns w a y
House,  2 Queensvvay,  Redhill, Sur r ey RH
tel ephone her on ( 0 7 3 7 )  768611 f or  fur ther  details.
Registered no: 224695r
Editor's Note
Apologies must go to Mr. M. Carroll for an
error published in the August issue of Your
Commodore. On page 54, we accredited Mr.
Carroll's program, Disk Scrambler to ST.
Burke. Apologies all round for this error.
Seventy Six
It's easy to
complain about
advertisements.
But which ones?
Every week millions of advertisements
appear in print, on posters or in the cinema.
Most of them comply with the rules
contained in the British Code of Advertising
Practice.
But some of them break the rules and
warrant your complaints.
If you're not sure about which ones they
are, however, drop us a line and we'll send you
an abridged copy of the Advertising Code.
Then, if an advertisement bothers
you, you'll be justiﬁed in bothering us.
The Advertising Standards Authority
If an advertisement is wrong,wire here to put it right.
ASA Ltd. Dept 2 Brook House.Torrington Place. London WC1E 7HN
This space is donated in the interests of high standards of advertising,
YOUR COMMODORE
1

PRINT ENHANCER Plus/4 disk E 1 9 . 9 9
Plus/4 desktop publishing: Proportionally spaced, high quality printouts
from BASIC, 3+1 and script/plus. Supplied with 15 fonts and font designer
program MP S  8 0 1
RS232 INTERFACE 64, 128 or Plus/4*  E34.99
Measuring only  12x69x57mm, the smallest and neatest unit available
Conforms t o Commodore 1011A user-port standard Compat ible wit h
BASIC. Easyscript, Superscript. Superbase, Mini Ofﬁce Script Plus etc.
Connect t o RS232 printers, modems and other devices. Supplied with
1 metre of cable (add 75p extra metre*) terminated with a male (temale•)
25-way D-connector, or a custom cable made to your requirements. Our
after sales service f or unusual printers guarantees to get y ou up and
running. Supplied with a terminal emulator program, ﬁle transfer and
other utilities on tape/disk'
IBM PC File Transfer Utility  
E
9
.
9
9
Captures text or binary  ﬁles via the COMI RS232 port: Supplied on a
360k IBM format 5./., disk. Simple instructions provided by on-line help.
VIEWDATA TERMINAL 64 or Plus/4 ....E14.99
Access Prestel, Micronet, CityService etc. Works with any user-port RS232
interface a n d  1200/75 modem.
CENTRONICS CABLE 64, 128  E 1 8 . 9 9
Use with Easyscript, Superscript etc. Driver for BASIC on disk or tape •
6502 ASSEMBLER 64 or Plus/4* tape/disk E12.99
A sophisticated two-pass s y mbolic  assembler and tex t editor whic h
supports tape and disk ﬁling. The assembler, editor, source and object
code may all be resident in memory simutaneously, facilitating rapid and
interactive code development Very last editiAssembler/lest cycles.
Z80 EMULATOR/ASSEMBLER 64 disk E12.99
A unique integrated Z80 development package. The emulator compiles
Z80 source code into optimised 6502 which runs on the 64 at about one
sixth the speed of  a 2MHz Z80. The cross-assembler generates hex or
binary Z80 object tiles. The disk contains a powerful editor and example
programs.
Please specify options. Send cheque/PO. or order by eccess.
Prices include VAT and PAP Overseas orders add f2.50.
Allow up to I  week for delivery.
YORK ELECTRONIC RESEARCH
The Paddocks, Jockey Lane, Huntington, York. Y03 9NE.
Tel (0904) 610722
COMPUTERS
Amiga 62000 - 1084S -  XT B'Board •  20Mb PC Drive
1329,00
Amiga 62000 only
699.00
Amiga B2000 - 10848 Stereo Col Mon
899_00
Amiga 2088 PCna Bridgeboard r 5.25' Drive
299.00
Amiga 500 - Modulator
359.00
Amiga 500 - Super Software Pack
389.00
Amiga 500 • 10845 Stereo Col Mon
589.00
Amiga 500 • Philips 8833 Stereo Col Mon
589.00
Commodore PCIO Dual Drive Mono
631.35
Commodore PC10i30/40/50/60
PHONE
Commodore 1280 Desktop
379.00
Commodore 64C Pack (64C, Cassette. J/stick. Games)
139.99
PRINTERS
Citizen 120D Parallel or Commodore
129,95
Star LC-10 Parallel
189.00
Star LC-10 Commodore inc lead
215.00
Star LC-10 Colour Par or Comm
245.00
Stet LC24-10 24 pin Multi-font 170/57cps
329.00
All Okimate 20 consumables normally in stock
PHONE
MONITORS
Commodore 1084S Colour Monitor inc leads
259.00
Philips 8833 Stereo Colour Monitor
239.00
Pailips 7502 Green Screen Monitor
75.00
MISCELLANEOUS
Amiga 2092 20Mb PC Hard Drive
209,00
Amiga M501 Microbotics 512K TAM/Clock Lap
119.95
Amiga 500 AMDRIVE 30Mb Hard Disk Drive
399.00
Amiga 590 20Mb Autoboot Disk Drive 2Mb RAM Expandable
395.00
miniGEN Geniock for Amiga
113.85
Pace Modem • Siware for Amiga V21/23 Prestel, BBS etc.
239.00
Commodore 1541-il Disk Drive
139.00
Commodore C2N Data Recorder
29.95
Cumana CAX354 Amiga Disk Drive
95.00
Power Supply for CM
26.45
Super-G Cent 1./F 4 Graphics C64/1213
34.95
Surge Protector 13A Plug
12.95
Surge Protector 3-Way Adapter/4-Way Dist Unit
19.95/15.95
C128 Ofﬁcial Prog's Ref Guide
p&p 2 2 4 .9 5
SOFTWARE
VizaWrite 128 - Spellcheck
49.95
VrzaStar 128 Spreadsheet & Database
Superbase 64/128
24.95/2 95
Superscript 64/128
24.95/29.95
Tasword 64 40/80 Col WP - Tape/Disk
24.95/29.95
8 Ruswarp Lane, WH runt', N, Yorks. VO2 iND.
m = i i
A
Tel: 0947 600065 (gam-7pm)
VISA
7
3 7
%7 1  -t \  7  % 7  \  7  % 7  'L 7  ''. 7
% 7  _I 7  ..I 'T 3
A,
7
.1
-
7
_)
7
.1
7
'T
7
"7
7
'T
7
7
7
7  
7
 3 
3
 7  3  7  3 7 , 3  -
OFFICIAL COMMODORE/AMIGA DEALER
*  ALL PRICES ARE INCLUSIVE OF VAT AT 15%
*  CARRIAGE £5 (EXPRESS El 0). Software and small
* Price s subrect to change without not'ce 
F
&
O
E
7  3 7  3
7
3•
7
'T
7
-
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7 
.
1
4 Vete/ SolitoweeZed 3
7
Pe
.1 
7
YOUR COMMODORE
7
chNnplo/w
A STUNNINGLY REALISTIC
FOOTBALL STRATEGY GAME
is
4:11mommil
• 4  Divisions ot 20 'Items
• Non-League DitelVOn Of 20 Teams
• Full Home and Away League Programme -
38 Matches
•  Results of ALL games for ALL S Drvmans
•  League tables for ALL 5 DIVISiOnS
•  FA. Cup including Non.teague Teams
•  League Cup (In, and Round and Semi-
ﬁnal over 2 Legs)
•  Promarions and Relegations
•  Only 1 'Item Promoted from Non-League
Division
•  Squad of 20 Players and Reserves
•  Squad of 15 Players for ALL Other Teams
•  Details °love r 1500 Players
•  Mellster Marker - Offer for any Player in
any Division
• Transfer Deadline
• Long and Short Term Injuries
El
El
TREBLE CHAMPIONS -
Can YOU Win the League Championship,
The FA, Cup and the League Cup?
An Amazing range of Realistic Features
and Superb Gameplay combine to create
all the Tension, Drama and Excitement
of Football Management as you
compete for Soccer Glory and -
THE TREBLE.
AN OUTSTANDING RANGE OF FEATURES
SPECTHUM SCREEN . 5
AVAILABLE NOW FROM RETAIL OUTLETS
AND BY MAIL ORDER FROM: •
CHALLENGE SOFTWARE, 37 Westmoor Road,
Enheld Middlesex, EN3 7LE
Please make your Cheque or Postal Order payable to
Challenge Software and srate wh)ch maehlne, Orders re3irft
K add El Add El 50 for Air Mall outside Europe
•  Time management System lim it e d  time
for Club management each week
•  2  M-Match Substitutes
•  Opposition use Substitutes
•  Fitness Training Ke e p  your Squad at
maximum ﬁtness
• Coaching - Improve the Ability of your
younger Players and Reserves
• Midweek Matches
• Cup Replays
• Penalty Shoot-Outs
• Player Retirements
• Change Player/Them Names
• Season ticket, Wages, Bank Loans, Interest,
Attendance
• SAVE GAME
• 3 Mall Levels
•  Stan in any Division
•  PLUS MUCH MUCH MORE
ALL VERSIONS INCLUDE COMPLETE INSTRUCTIONS
SPECTRUM 48:128K Tape .E995. Disk £13.95 COMMODORE 64;128K: Tape £9.95
AMSTRAD CPC 464: Tape .f9.95 CPC66416128 Disk £13.95.
ATARI ST £19.95 *COMING SOON* AMIGA: .E19 95 • COMING SOON*
TRADE ENQUIRIES WELCOME ON 01 443 1936.
CHALEINGE
/SOFTWARE \
Seventy Seven

•  READERS SERVICES
If you think that one of our programs looks very interesting, but you can't
afford the time to type it in, then our Software service will help you out
I
keyboard having just ﬁnished a marathon typing session
entering one o f  the superb programs from Your
Commodore, Your ﬁngers reach for the keyboard and press
the letters R, U and N. You press RETURN, sit back and
nothing happens.
- --- Everyone has probably faced this problem. When it does
happen it's a matter of spending hours searching through
the program for any typing mistakes. No matter how long
you look or how many people help you, you can usually
guarantee that at least one little but slips through unnoticed.
The Your Commodore Software Service makes available
all of the programs from each issue on both cassette and
disk at a price o f E6.00 for disk and E4,00 for cassette.
None of the documentation for the programs is supplied
with the software since it is all available in the relevant
magazine. Should you not have the magazine then back
issues are available from the following address:
IN FON ET LTD, 5 River Park Estate, Berkahmsted, Herts,
HP4 IH L.
Tel: (04427) 76661
Please contact this address for prices and availability.
The Disk
Programs on the disk will also be supplied as totally working
versions, i.e. when possible we will not use Basic Loaders
thus making use of the programs much easier. Unfortunately
at the moment we cannot duplicate CI6 and Plus/ 4 cassettes.
However programs for these machines will be available on
the disk.
What programs are available?
At the top of each article you will ﬁnd a strap containing
the article type, C M Program etc. So that you can see
which programs are available on which format, you will
also ﬁnd a couple of symbols after this strap. The symbols
have the following meaning:
OLD
This symbol means that the program is available on cassette.
These programs are available on disk.
Software
for Sale
Please Note
Since the programs supplied on cassette are total working
versions of the program, we do not put disk-only programs
on tape. There is no sense in placing a program that expects
to be reading from disk on to tape.
MAY 1989
ANTI-FREEZE P r o t e c t  your C64 programs fro m
cartridge-based freezers.
MULTI-COLOURED LIST - Brighten up your C64 Basic
listings by adding on-screen colour.
PRINIFX - A suite of powerful screen printing commands
to add to your Plus/ 4's Basic. (disk only).
BANKER 128 - Money Management for Cl28 disk users.
TURBO TOUCH -  A superb typing trainer for C64 disk
users,
ORDER CODE
DISK YDMAY89 E6_00
TAPE YCMAY89 &IMO
JUNE 1989
RETURNER -  A  handy routine that allows your C64
programs to re-load a disk based menu. (disk only)
LINE INPUT - Improve your C64's INPUT routine
PROGRAM ANALYSER -  A suite of programs to help
you examine your C64 Basic programs in depth.
ASM ASSEMBLER - A powerful 6510 assembler for the
CM
ORDER CODE
DISK YDJUN89 E6.00
TAPE YCJUN89 £4.00
Seventy Eight 
Y
O
U
R
 COMMODORE

JULY 1989
NAME
()TY
TAPE/DISK
ORDER CODE
PRICE
OCT 1989
TAPE (E4.00)
YCOCT89
OCT 1989
DISK (E6.00)
YDOCT89
OVERSEAS POST El
TOTAL
MOUSE 80 -  Use a 1351 mouse in 80 column mode on
the C128.
QUICK SEARCH - Add a FIND option to CM Basic.
SPRITE LIBRARY -  Add a collection of circles to your
growing sprite library (C64)
HEAD FOR HOME -  An update on our popular CI6
and Plus/4 game. Available on disk only.
WINDOWS ON THE 64 - Powerful windowing commands
for the CM.
SPRITZ SPRITE -  Give your Plus/4 or expanded C16
sprites j u s t like a C64. Available on disk only.
ORDER CODE
DISK YDJUL89 E6.00
TAPE YCJUL89 LIAO
AUGUST 1989
rORDER FORM — PLEASE COMPLETE IN BLOCK CAPITALS
YOUR COMMODORE
READERS SERVICES •
ADDRESS BOOK -  A cassette based address book for
CM users
DISK SCRAMBLER - Protect your disk data from prying
eyes (C64 disk).
ORDER CODE
DISK YDAUG89 £6.00
TAPE YCAUG89 E4.00
SEPTEMBER 1989
BASES AND SQUARES -  Tutorial into mathematical
formulae.
REASONING ON  TH E 128 -  Continuation o f expert
system.
DOS 6.1 - Enhanced DOS commands for disk users.
ORDER CODE YDSEP 89
DISK YDOCT 89 E6.00
REASONING ON THE 128 - Programs for the ﬁrst part
of our expert system series (128 Disk only).
THESAURUS B u i l d  up your own C64 thesaurus with
this program for disk or tape.
WINDOW ON A MAZE - Generating mazes on your C64
Cassettes or disks are available from March 1986. Please
ring the editorial ofﬁce (0442-66551) for details of these.
NAME
ADDRESS
POSTCODE
I enclose a cheque/postal order for E m a d e  payable to ARGUS SPECIALIST
PUBLICATIONS LTD.
All orders should be sent to: YOUR COMMODORE,
READERS SERVICES, ARGUS HOUSE, BOUNDARY WAY, HEMEL HEMPSTEAD, HERTS. HP2 7ST
Please allow 28 days for deliver.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Seventy Nine

Lineage: 53p per word.
(+ VAT)
Semi display: 01.50 plus VAT per single column
centimetre minimum 2cm. Ring for information on
series bookings/discounts.
All advertisements in this section must be prepaid
Advertisements are accepted subject to the terms and conditions
printed on the advertisement rate card (available on request)
CLASSIFIED COUPON
ALL CLASSIFIED ADVERTISEMENTS MUST BE PRE-PAID.
THERE ARE NO REI MBURSEMENTS FOR CANCELLATI ONS.
CLASSIFIED DEPT. ARGUS HOUSE, BOUNDARY WAY,
HEMEL HEMPSTEAD HP2 77ST.
RATES: Lineage 58p per word (VAT inc) Semi-display: E10.95 - VAT per
single column cm minimum size 2cm. Series discounts available.
I enclose my Cheque/Postal Order for E  
f
o
r
insertions, made payable to Angus Specialist Publications.
(Delete as necessary)
PLEASE DEBIT MY ACCESS/BARCLAYCARD NO
1 1  I  
I
I
I
 1  
1
1
1
1
1
1
E
1
1
EXP. DATE
E 
F
O
R
 
I
N
S
E
R
T
I
O
N
S
Name  
.
P
o
s
t
Code
Daytime Tel No
Signature  
D
a
t
e
L I  FOR SALE S O F T W A R E  L I  SPECIAL OFFERS L I O THE R
YOUR COMMODORE
IC21
0442 66551
Send your requirements to:
CLASSIFIED DEPARTMENT
ASP LTD. ARGUS HOUSE,
BOUNDARY WAY,
HEM EL HEMPSTEAD HP2 7ST.
SOFTWARE
ONLY POOLS AND HORSES
FOOTBALL BOXFORM £14.95 (+ E2 for 3" disC)
*  The ONLY pools program wrtten by a GENUINE EXPERT who has been professionally
employed as such by the leading pools company
*  The ONLY program dealing with toolball lOrm that has its team merit ralmos published in
a national sporting magazine.
* Th e  ONLY program that uses machine code end advanced statistical methods to analyse
football form. Lists homes aways and draws in order of merit and gives true odds for every
match. Covers league & non-league clubs
*  The ONLY programm to claim 50% MORE DRAWS than obtained by chance
BOXFORM & HANDICAP WINNER E14.95 (+ E2 for 3" disc)
Two pr ogr am s  fr o the price of one. E a s y o  use and they  never go Out Of date. All y ou need is
a few minutes with a daily paper BOXFORM weighs up a race by considering the many
facets of form. Easily amended to soil the user's ideas. HANDICAP WINNER shows the u o
for m oney  bets. OVER 650 WINNE RS  in handic aps  this year at prices up to 25/I
SPECIAL PRICE of E24.95 ( • E2 for 3' disc)  tor a llot the above programs
RACING TOOL KIT .E49•95 (with FOOTBALL BOXFORM E59_90) tape Or disc
A package Of 7 programs for the racing enthusiast. BOXFORM & HANDICAP WINNER plus
programs to produce ratings and time ﬁgures, update private handicaps or form your own
keep records, work out almost any bet etc etc.
Why pay inﬂated prices'? BoXolt CLEVER and get the BEST
„ Mailable on tape or disc for SPECTRUM, CMD 054/128. AMS CPC's. ABC B. from
BOXOFT (VC), 65 Allans Meadow, Neston, South Wirral. L64 9S0
=
 C r e d i t  card holders may phone 051-336-2668 (24 hrs)
ADVERTISERS
Eighty
PUBLIC DOMAIN SOFTWARE
for the C641128.
We have 150 disks full o f all types or
Programs
All disks are E2 95 each
NOW FOR THE  • 1
from E3.75 per disk.
Send SAE or phone for tree catalogue
(state model)
Kingsvoty Computer Services
Dept 15 led Rushdele Road, Shefﬁeld
$e 90E 
T
e
l
:
 (0742) 588429
SAM DALE
COMPUTERS LTD
'Baiter than the bes t
of the rest
R
742617
THE LATEST SOFTWARE FOR
COMMODORE C64/C128JAMIGA
Ring now far a free price hS1 DO 0621
742617.
Or send slating name and address amn
mach•ne lype
SAMDALE COMPUTERS LTD
is Austral Way, Hightield Rise.
el=1, Allborne ,  Essex CM3
SPECIAL
OFFERS
64/128 USERS.
SPECIAL OFFER. ONLY E40 VAT Inc.
MODEM/DATACOMS CARD,
ASCII terminal facilities Aulormetic marling
astoansweriog. spooling and printing Mee In
Viewdata mode terminal becomes hint
computer downloading text with iocai
graphics editing. Answer mode baud rare
recognition. Telekiktaii dumping to disk
Cheques la. •
AEI . Barclays Bank Chambers,
Keswick C Al2  5BJ Visa or Access
Tel, 076E7 74439 P o s  r
"Yon better believe
O UR P RI CE S "
Crofton M kro Suppliek
FREEPOST, London. SE4 2EIR
Telephone 014149.3246
E•z Cvnpailbe Onto Ascurcer
Corernodore 1351 064,01213 Mouse
Ct34 Cninpntible P0wer Supply
C64 &Irwin(' Replacement Case
Konis Speedking Joystick
KOrtia Novigatcq Joystock
3 5' Disks a 10
525 Disks a 10
Disk Boa 80 a 3,5' rLockablO
Disk Boa 60 a 5 26
ALL PRICES INCLUDE VAT
E1.50 SMALL ITEMS. E3.50 FOR
HARDwARE
E24.50
ale. 95
r ite S
E20.00
£1.75
E12•7S
t e l e
£4.50
M e e
ES_Se
YOUR COMMODORE
SPECIALS
TECH D R A W 6 4  -  A
c omprehens iv e t e c h n i c a l
illustration a i d  f o r  C 6 4
owners f o r  b o t h  dis k  a n d
tape. Co mma n d s  av ailable
include LINE DRAW,  RAYS,
B O X ,  C I R C L E ,  A R C ,
ELLIPSE, FREEHAND,  FILL.
HATCH & TEXT. Wipe copy,
move and rotate, save and
load or print your drawing all
for E8.95 tape or disk. Order
Codes TD64T (tape) TD64D
(disk)
Fu l l  d e t a i l s  i n  Y o u r
Commodore July 1987.
SPEEDY ASSEMBLER
Your Commodore's very own
Assembler, a 100% memory
resident program for loading
from tape or disk, featured in
t he Y o u r  C o m m o d o r e
Machine Co d e  Series  a n d
now t h e  Y . C .  s t a n d a r d
assembler only E9.95 Tape or
Disk. Order Codes
YSPASSD (dis k ) YSPASSR
(tape)
Order f r o m Y o u r  C o m m -
odore Readers Services at 9.
Hall Road,  May lands  Wood
Estate, He me l ,  Hemps t ead
Herts HP2 7BH. Please make
cheques pay able t o  A.S.P.
Ltd., o r  t e l e p h o n e  y o u r
Access/Visa order on
0442 41221
SERVICES
COMMODORE SUPPLIES
C64 Power Supply 
E
1
9
.
9
5
CAM Plus 4 Power Supply E 2 9 . 9 6
C-16 Power Supply
1530 DelaSette 
E
2
7
.
9
5
1531 datasefte 
£
2
1
.
9
5
Simons Basic Extension E 9 . 9 5
Serial Lead OW clictriveiprintell
E5.95
C54 reset Switch 
E
4
.
9
5
Dust Cover (please state co m p u
=
 
E
3
.
6
0
" Prices include VAT & P&P. Allo w up
to 14 days tar delivery. C h q .
0 mnidiale Lid (Y.C.) 23 Curzon Street,
Derby, DE1 2ES. Tel 0332 291219.
YOUR COMMODORE

1
906114
E9.30
901227 
E
l
 2.95
6510
E9.95
8501 
E
8
.
9
5
6526
E11.50
C64 Power Pack E22.00
6581
£11.25
C64 Cassette Unit E22•00
6569
E21.50
C128 Power Pack E69 95
Inc Vat & PP
C64
E24.95
C16
E19.95
PLUS4
E24.95
AMIGA A.500
E29.95
1541
E29.95
1571
E31.95
C2N etc
E12.95
COMMODORE
REPAIR
REPAIR
SERVICES
TELEPHONE BOOKINGS WELCOME
TO ADVERTISE YOUR COMMODORE REPAIR
SERVICES CALL: JAYNE HEIGOLD ON
0442 66551
RATE: 01.50 (+ VAT) PER SINGLE COLUMN CM
STANDARD SIZE 4cm x 1 col - E46.00 (+VAT)
M.C.E. SERVICES
33, Albert Street, Mansﬁeld, Notts
NO113 lEA 
T
e
l
:
 0623 653512
FIXED PRICE COMMODORE REPAIRS
All prices Inc. VAT, Labour. Parts etc.
NO MORE TO PAK Please ring for details.
TO ADVERTISE IN
YOUR COMMODORE
CALL JAYNE
HEIGOLD 0442 66551
E XT. 368
NEXT MONTH
A NIGHTMARE ON
ELM STREET
Freddy Krueger the  man with the designer cooking utensils
strapped to his ﬁngers - is ﬁnally to make it to the home
computer.
NEON ZONE
The man with many columns (ooer!), John Cook, deals
us a dose of arcade action, and explores many coin-op
licenses.
COMIC WATCH
A look at the wonderful world of men in tights, and their
related computer games.
Plus Play By Mail Games (honest), More Wobbly Compos,
Loadsareviews. and Your Programmer...
I
COMMODORE SPARES
& REPAIRS
REPAIRS
C64, C+4 
E
2
5
 inc.
C128, 1541  
E
3
2
 Inc.
Three month warranty, 1 week turnround
SPARES
OASIS COMPUTER SERVICES
Dept 4C, 14 Ridgeway Road,
Salisbury, Wiltshire, SP1 3B11
Tel (0722) 335061
COMPUTER SYSTEMS
*  REPAIRS *  SPARES
*  SALES & SUPPLIES
dB
ELECTRONIC SERVICES
CHELMSFORD 260874
TO PROMOTE
YOUR SERVICE
JOIN THE
COMMODORE
REPAIR SERVICE
GUIDE
0442 66551, Ex 368
Eighty One

•  B A C K  PA G E
THE EN
Landscape Gardening
A
PPARENTLY, according to a
press release sitting in front of
me, there i s t o  be a  new
landscape for the immensely popular
Populous (so popular in fact, that the
ST and Amiga versions rose to 3rd
spot in the 8-bit chart in Computer
Trade Weekly). Originally plans were
to have it based on Samurai legend,
but wild and wacky Electronic Arts
has a far better idea in mind.
The new landscape is now titled
'The Bit Plains', with computer print-
out paper as the land, computers as
the settlements (from the ZX81 to  a
Cray) and cigarette stubs and pencils
as landscape features. To be honest,
I think there's a  little limb tugging
going on here.
Eighty Two
Earwig '0'
O
Grandslam charity football
match (which the journos lost
abysmally last year) is to go ahead,
and certain companies are taking it
very seriously indeed.
The charity in question is the Hills-
borough disaster appeal a  charity
close to my own heart due to my sup-
port fo r Liverpool Football Club.
Some companies are taking the game
so seriously that they aim to ﬁeld very
strong sides. One company (who shall
remain nameless) have even an-
nounced that Kenny Swain (ex-Man-
chester City player) will be in their
squad.
Let's just hope that the reason for
playing is not washed over by inter-
company rivalry.
IS NIGH I
Gang Bang
p
announced the fact that they
have lost a large consignment
of copies of Blood Money in a hijack
of a British Lorry bound for Paris.
Although the lorry contained valuable
clocks and lighters, the French gang
involved only stole the Amiga version
of the recent game.
If you're stopped whilst strolling
through the streets of Paris, and asked
by a dirty French man in a brown coat
smoking Gaullois, i f you would like
to purchase a piece of software, don't
worry, he's not trying to sell you a
dodgy sex aid.
I'll see ya next month..,
Rik Henderson
YOUR COMMODORE

FREE! Iftegg*A5
A500 Computer
099.99
1084S Colour Monitor
E299.99
Photon Paint
E69.95
TenStar Pack
E229.50
TOTAL RRP:
099.43
LESS DISCOUNT:
050.43
PACK PRICE
f_649
*
ki
FREE! - AMEGAS - by Players
AR!
•
MERCENARY:
FREE! MERCENARY COMP b  Nova
r i N a ' s
FREE! - WIZBALL - cy Ocean
FREE! - TERRORPOOS - by Ps nosiS
-
FREE!- ART OF CHESS - by SPA
•-• 
•
-
•
a r m  rim mv, •
FREE! - BARBARIAN, ULT WARRIOR - by  Palace
4
FREE! - BUGGY BOY by  Elite
-
et you already own an Amiga computer and wooed bee to be regasiered on our mailing liat as an
Amig a u se r. le l ale kn o w W e  wi l l  b e  p le ase d  tO t e rd  yo u  co p ie s o r o u r o n ce  lielS e n d  n e wsle tte rs
FRFE O f  CHARGE as they become avalable Corneeete ir e coupon and return it lo our Srdeup
o ran ch  an d  b o o
SILICA SHOP:
S I D C I J P  (4k M a i l  O r d e r )  
0
1
-
3
0
9
 1111
1-4 T h e  M e w s. H a t h e rie y Road. So lcu p ,  Ke n t ,  D A M  4 D X
OP E N: M O N  S A T 9arn - 5•30pro L A T E  N I G H T  FR ID A Y  9drrt
LO NTE )  O N  
0
1
-
5
8
0
 4 0 0 0
52 To t t e n h a m  C o u rt  Road, L o n d o n . W11> O BA
OP E N: M O N  S A T 9.30arn - 6 0 0 pm  L A T E  o w o H r  N O N E
L O N D O N
Se lf rid g e s (  lst  ﬂo o r). O xf o r d  Street L o n d o n . W i A  l A B
OP E N' M O N - 5 A T  .9arry - 6  i9Clom L A T E  N I G H T  r fﬁ, R S /
'
FREE! - INSANITY FIGHT - by Microdeal
r  T r  T I ﬂ
T T
,
WHY SILICA SHOP?
Ilato re  yo u  d e cid e  wh e t
wn  Su g g e st yo u  co n si d e r e e ry care fu l l y WH E R E  yo u  b u y i t  T h e re  a
MANN' companies who can alter you a comp.der a rew peripheralS arc
tt
wide range ol products tor your corno_iter as well ssruicwri achoce ar c
help we e ,  yo u  n e e d  1  T h e re  i s O NL Y  O NE  co m p an y wh o  can  p riyn cle
Me  larg e st r g n c 4  Am i g a re tale d  e r
Sb e Cialitt l e ch n  cat n o th i n g  an d  in -d e p le  afte r s ae s  su p p o rt. i n cl u d i n a
tree n e wae l l e rs ard  n rate u re S d e live re d  to  yo u r d o o r' fo r as lo n g  as ycr.,
re q o ire  al te r yo u  p u rch ase  yo u r co m p ri e r T ri al  L .
5110e W e  h ave  b e e n  ealerniab011 ﬂ lb@ h o me  co m p i l e r b e le  1or te n  ye ars
and car, Obw C
end underStandmg which is second to none Here are 1.1 %mtw or the
Inin9S we car Oiler you
THE FULL STOCK RANGE The largest range of Amiga
related ;peripherals anCe5•Scir
AFTER SALES SUPPORT: The stall at Silica Shop are
to hipp you to get the best from your Amiga.
FR EE N EWSL ET T ER S: M a n e d  direct t o  yo u r home an.
r or  as  we in ir t Weir ,, featur ing otter s  and lates t releaSes.
FREE OVERNIGHT DELIVERY: On all hardware orders
5 9; pped to Silica Shop customers within the UK mainland.
PR I C E M AT C H  PR OM I SE: W e  will normally match our
competitors o'lets on a same prOdJci same price basis
FREE TECHNIC'AL HELPLINE Full time team Of Amiga
technical eyperIS to neip you with your technical queries.
But cion I i1,s1 take our word fo r ,t Complete and return me
c oupon b e l o w  f o r  Our  .atsrat A m i g a  liter atur e a n d  b e g  n t o
experience the Silica Shop specialist Amiga service
PHOTON PAINT PACK
A500 Computer 0 9 9 . 9 9
TV Modulator 
E
2
4
.
9
9
Photon Paint 
£
6
9
.
9
5
TenStar Pack E 2 2 9 . 5 0
TOTAL RRP: 0 2 4 . 4 3
LESS DISCOUNT 0 2 5 . 4 3
PACK PRICE :  1399
1084$ MONITOR PACK
FREE FROM SILICA
When you buy the Amiga 500 t o m  Silica Shop. you kieil not only
gel a high power, value for money computer, we will also give
yd,J some spectacular free gifts. First of all, we are now including
a TV modulator with every A500 Stand alone keyboard. so  you
can p l u g  y o u r  A m apa s tr a i g h t i n t o  y o u r  T V  a t  h o m e  Ogle
modulator us not .
required For' use with monitorst Secondly w e  have added a true
copy o f  Photon Paint, an advanced graphics package with an
ARP of 09.95. Last 1and by nO means least.), so that you can be
up and running straight away, we are giving away the sensationa'
TENSTAR GA M E S  P A CK  w i th  ev er y  A 500 pur c has ed a t S ilic a
Shop Thus p a ck features ten lo p  Amiga Mies which haue a
•:oribined ARP 01 neahy E2,30. Return the coupon for detaiis
FREE TEEM PACK
When you buy your Amiga 50J
From Silica Shop, we want to
make sure you get the best
d e al p OSSib le  T h a t  i s  wh y  w e
are giving away the TENSTAR
GAMES P A CK  wor th near ly
(230. abs olutely  FRE E  w i th
emery A500 purchased from IA
' he TenStar Games Pack Inc-
boas ten lilies tor t h e A500,
each individually packaged in
is Own C*Irng with insm.ctions
Amegas
Art Of Chess
Barbarian, Ull Warrior
Buggy Boy
Man Warriors
Insanity Fight
Mercenary Comp
Terrorpods
Thundercats
Wizball
E14.95
24.95
09.95
£24.95
124.95
E24.95
E19.95
E24_95
E24.95
E24_95
TOTAL RRP: E229.501r1:
0 YO O W N
-95
+VAT
E399
INCLUDES
FREE UK
DELIVERY
The A miga 500 is  one o f  a  n e w breed o f  technologically
advanced computers. whic h are n o w emerging as  t h e  n e w
standard for home computing, based -around the new Motorola
68000 chip. Th e  A500 has 512K RA M and a  1Mbyte double
sided disk drive built-in I t  can be connected directly to a wide
range o f  monitors, o r  t o  a  domestic TV  set through a  TV
modulator. Designed with the user in mind, the A500 features a
user friendly WIMP environment and comes supplied with a free
mouse. And, when you buy  y our Amiga from Silica Shop, the
UK's Not  Amiga specialists, you will experience an alter sales
service that is  second t o none, including a  technical support
helpline and free newsletters and price Ws . Return the coupon
below for our current information pack, which will give details of
the Silica service and the very latest Silica Amiga offers E & O F
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 • • •
P
Mr/Mrs/Ms:
Address:
Initials
Do you already Own a computer
11 so wh ich  one do yOu own?
Surname..
Postcode
_J
.
.
.

IF 0
IABMIO
DISK 114
I
?MN 1
14
tm AG
I ON S
Nc W•
r o l a &  
5
 M I  V.
P A C O '  $'•1 1  "
A.S1 °6  0 0 0 , 1 1
TIVE P
DUO  s t
1
M O
SV* Ci
• C
COO PAINT
DEVAID
OPCODE SCANNER
DOMINOES
BAZAIR
AR:4101HE
dOVEMBER ISSUE
ON SALE
OCTOBER 20TH
C O M M O  O R E  vm...,toowbel
0 Anse *glow Nroc
cs4 ewmn-LAIIIU
L
l
SOFTWARE WORTH
AT LEAST M U
150
COMMODORE DISK USER
ow /tool, •00-1, et/t* tnatEopy
Ii

