o et 988
ARE
I
COMPLETE
GUIDE TO
COMMODORE
HARDWARE
INCLUDING
DISK DRIVES
CARTRIDGES
,PRINTERS
GRAPHICS
SOUND
COMMUNICATIONS
AND LOTS MORE
—•
 7 .
mi 
z
t
r
t
ni;;
P
- e e l  ag : 1 ;  c
I .50
FROM THE PUBLISHERS OF YOUR COMMODORE

4
TM COMPUTERS
Dealers for Commodore, Atari, Amstrad, Roland,
Xerox, Epson, Brother, Philips, Star, NEC,
Canon, Kyocera, Mannesmann, Citizen, Toshiba,
Oki, Panasonic, Cherry, Polaroid Pallette, Acco,
Elliot James, Rexel, and Hantarex monitors. We
also supply a full range of computer system
consumables: from disks to desks.
We combine system support,
with a friendly service and
helpful staff.
Tri Computers
161-169 Lliblidge Road Ealing London W13
9AU
01 840 6136
1 0 %  D I S C O U N T  VOUCHER
Present this voucher at our showrooms before 31st December 1987 and get 10% off of your
purchase.
;

COMMODORE
HARDWARE
BUYERS GUIDE
CONTENTS
The Commodore 64
Is this the computer of the decade?
Precision Printing
Precision prove that four heads are better than one
Printer Printout
Sixteen popular printers under scrutiny
Machine Mania
A Who's Who of Commodore computers
Of Mice & Pens
The alternatives to keyboard control
A La Cart
The cartridge revolution has arrived!
1988
Art Gallery 
8
Some hardware needs great software to put you in the picture
Printer Buyers' Guide 
1
4
Which features do you really need?
A Change Of Face 
1
9
The lowdown on upgrading your 803 printer - Avon calling
Facing Up To Printers
A look at the range of interfaces and their special features
20
24
26
37
41
44
Editor: Stuart Cooke
Assistant Editor: Sue Joyce
Editorial Assistant: Kirk Rutter
Advertisement Manager: Stuart
'Thy
Advertisement Copy Control: Laura
Champion
Typesetting: Project 3
Design: ASP Art Studio
Argus Specialist Publications Limited Editorial
& Advertisement Ofﬁce, Your Commodore, No
1 Golden Square, London WM 3AB.
11-lephone; 01437 0626_ R i m  8811896.
4 Fi xtu re s And Fittings 
4
8
What can you give the computer buff who has everything?
Heavy Metal Hardware
SID has a good voice but MIDI means more music
Life In The Fast Lane 
5
8
A new DOS can make your disk drive really motor
On-line Line-up 
6
2
Choose a modem to broaden your horizons
Fresh Chips 
6
7
Getting down to descenders on the 801 printer
Net Beneﬁts 
6
8
What do the networks offer modem users?
Interfacing With The RS232 
7
2
A do•it•yourself interface for the Commodore 64
Talking Through Your RS232
Off the peg interfaces from York Electronic Research
RS232 On The Plus 4
No need to search the shops, make your own
Commodore — Past And Present
Who is Commodore? CBM proﬁled
TEL:
K12 741
684289
RESET P R G  O N  OF E S N I
• R t s t o r e  
t .
• ,  , E c A t  
•
.
A 
!
T
i
e
1
TRUDGE
7
C
7
 ORADF0 1 1 1 0
the/expert
4111111MMIEIR 1 1 , 1 1 1 MI E RI nom
T AP E  T O  o i s c  T O  M S C  T O  T AP E
, 
r
Red Boxes
Let your computer do the working
Spanner In The Works
What can you do with a dead computer?
Contacts
Addresses for your ﬁle of facts
Printed by:
Garnet Print, Rotherham
Distributed bys
5,11 Distribution Lid, 16-18 Trinity Gardens. London 5W9
53
82
84
91
92
94
96

COMPUTERS
The Commodore
Few computers can approach the success
that the CM has enjoyed. Why has is it
remained so success/hi Thr so long?
by Norman Doyle
T
maintained a high proﬁle in the market since it was ﬁrst launched
in August 1982. Despite the better sales perthrmance of the
Sinclair Spectrum (now under Amstrad
tar superior machine with a 40 column, 16 colour display.
provision fur eight sprites and probably the best sound chip in
any home computer_
Really. 1 should refer to the C64 by the name of its latest
incarnation, the 64C, because the production line in Germany
has been turned oxer to the production o f  this handsome
restyling. However, the C64 by any other name still smells as
sweet.
In the early days most of the programs written thr the C64
were upgrades from earlier VIC 20 programs. With the passage
of time more and more programming tricks have been exploited.
graphic designers have gone to town with animation effects and
a new breed of musician has appeared to transform the sound
chip into a voice simulator one minute and a high class
synthesiser the next. For the most part, the net result is that
games today bear little resemblance to their predecessors and
this has had a knock on effect to serious software.
What do the programmers play with?
There are essentially four modes of operation tiff the screen
display:
Normal text mode.
This is the power up mode which only allows three colours
to be used simultaneously. The screen comprises 40 columns
by 25 rows giving a total of ItXX) character squares on the screen.
Each character square comprises of an eight by eight pixel matrix
and all characters can he redeﬁned.
The three colours are border, background and foreground
(character). All sixteen colours can be used on one screen but
each character square can only exhibit two of these colours:
background and threground _
Multicolour text mode
A Pew deft pokes and the character square can exhibit a total
of four colours, including the background colour. This is subject
to the swings and roundabouts syndrome. what you gain in
colourfulness you lose in horizontal resolution. Each multicolour
character square is thrilled by a matrix of thur by eight pixels.
Once again the character set is redelinable and this mode
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
4
has been heavily exploited by games programmers.
Hi-res mode
This is the Commodore's graphics mode giving a screen
resolution of 320 by 2(X) pixels. This is similar to the normal
text mode and frees the user from ﬁxed character positions
allowing hi-res pictures to be drawn_
Ili-res multicolour mode
Once again this mode gives a blockier appearance because
the horizontal resolution is halved to 160 pixels.
In addition to these modes there is the extended colour mode
which splits the character set into groups which can have
differently coloured backgrounds. Because of the subsequent
reduction to only 64 characters in the set. it limits what can
effectively he done but some nice effects can result.
In addition to these displays there is  provision lin
maximum of eight sprites to he displayed at the same time. Each
sprite can he switched t o  normal o r  multicolour mode
independently of one another and totally free from the screen
mode selection.
The advantage of sprites is that they don't have a transparent
background colour. This gives them an appearance as though
they were painted on a transparent sheet and anything they pass

6
4
over can be seen through the spaces between the sprite design.
They are moved independently of the screen and are an absolute
boon to game writers.
For the beneﬁt of programmers the screen can he relocated
to any part of the 64s memory. This means that two or more
screens can be used at once to allow special effects by switching
from one to another in quick succession.
The sprite limitation can also be overcome by expert
programmers using split screen techniques_
Sound Technology
The audio capabilities of the C64 are provided by the Sit) 4 Sound
Interlace Device) chip which gives three independent sound
channels. With each channel you get full ADSR envelope shaping
and a choice of three waveforms or white noise plus limited ring
modulation, ﬁltering and resonance.
This means that three part harmonies are easily achievable
hut careful programming can make this seem like a small group.
The sound from a well tempered C64 can beat many synthesisers
for range and colour.
Peripherals abound !Or the C64 and every oriﬁce can spew
COMPUTERS
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
5
cable to a wide assortment of printer interfaces. cartridges.
modems, disk drives and a host of other add-ons. Ranged along
the back from left to right you'll ﬁnd a cartridge socket. TV
output. composite monitor socket, serial port. cassette interlace
and an RS232—type user port. These are supplemented by two
ports for j()ysticks. paddles. graphics pads. light petis. track balls
or mouses (mice?).
Internally the whole juggling act is held together by a 6510
microprocessor which is essentially a modiﬁed 6502, When it
is not accessed directly through a machine co(le program it is
driven by the Basic ROM containing the necessary coding to
execute Basic V2.
After much had been made about the 64K RAM. it came
as a great disappointment and source of confusion to early buyers
when the power up screen declared only 38K of Basic RAM.
Far from being a commercial con trick there is 64K of RAM.
all of which is available to the user hut at the cost of the full
operating svstein.
Parts of the memory are overlaid by the OS chips in a
piggyback fashion which means that access can only he gained
to the extra RAM by bank selection, This has been exploited
to the 11,111 by commercial machine code programmers. vastly
improving the quality of software.
The real Achilles heel o f  the system is  the Basic
implementation w  hich is  archaic and contains no direct
commands (Or sound or graphics control. The bad news is that
this makes sophisticated programming a pig hut the good news
is that all the PEEKs and POKEs form a good introduction to
machine coding and there are not so many Basic keywords and
structures to memorise!
The apocryphal story of C64 Basic is that Commodore
commissioned a fully comprehensive implementation hut it didn't
see the light ()I' day. Instead we got Simon's Basic in the form
of a plug-in cartridge at extra cost. David Simon was only 16
years old when he devised the program with its 114 extra
comnumds and_ despite the desirability of a comprehensive
Basic, it never really set the C64 world on ﬁre.
Other companies have produced add-on Basics and the
apparent weakness of the 64 can be turned into a strength because
the machine can he converted into a dedicated computer with
the correct handling routines.
Another area of criticism has centred around the slow
operation of cassette and disk loading. Much has been done in
software modiﬁcation to overcome the deﬁciencies of the loading
systems and users often wonder why the operating system didn't
do this in the ﬁrst place. There are two answers to this question.
Conmiodore claim that the slow load is more reliable and it
certainly does appear to have a higher success rate than most
fast loaders. The second and more plausible reason is that
Conmu)dore just didn't realise what could he achieved!
On the outside the machine doesn't seem to have changed
at all prior to the 64C redesign but internal changes have been
goinu on all of the time and the latest version of the component
board is the slickest yot.
In computer history there has never been a machine to equal
the Commodore 64 in popularity, price and style, If this model
doesn't see its tenth birthday Ell hang up mv pen and inkpot for
,  •

A DOZEN GOOD REASONS IN
C64 CONNOISSEUR PACK
02N MCUSE ANL CHEESE PAINT ART
SOFTWARE', LLEDO MONOPOLY SCRABBLE. CHESS
RENAISSANCE. TYPING TUTOR, PLUS 2 JOYSTICKS.
5 BOOKS la BLANK DATA
CASSETTES AND 10 PIECES E l  o r k  a r k
OF EYTRA SOCTIVARE 
1
J
U
N
 7 U  A
2 128 COMPENDIUM PACK
COMMODORE '28. C2N MUSIC MAKER. INTERNA I
SOCCER JACK ATTACK, SPIRIT OF
THE STONES. PLUS 2
JOYSTICKS AND
In 1 AND 2 
E
2
2
0
.
0
0
A
3 PLUS 4 PRESENTATION
PACK
PLUS 4. C2Pv DATASSETTE la  CASSETTE GAMES. 3
CARTRIDGE GAMES. SCRIPT PLUS
WORCPROCESSOR. BUILT IN
SPREADSHEET AND DATABASE E  T e l
PLUS JOYSTICKi
 
•
 
A
4 COMPLETE MUSIC PACK
CAC COMPUTER. C2N DATASSETTE. S CCIAVE
KEYBOARD. SOUND STUDIO CASSETTE, SOUND
EXPANDER CASSETTE PLUS 3 PLAYALONG
ALBUM CASSETTES A
PROFESSANAI-
SYNTHESISER
IN YOUR OWN HOME 
E
2
1
5
.
0
0
5 MUSIC EXPANSION
SYSTEM
FOR USE WITH CEA, CEAC, C128
INCLUDES 5 OCTAVE KEYBOARD SOUND STUDIO
CASSETTE. SOUND EXPANDER CASSETTE. 3 KAYAK:AG
ALBUMS CASSETTE OR DISC. PLAYALONG
ALBUMS AVAILABLE
SEPARATELY AT E5.99 EACH E 7 5 . 0 0 A
6 SEIKOSHA PRINTER
COMPATIBLE WITH MOST MAKES OF COMMODORE
COMPUTERS FEATURES VARIETY OF FONTS INCLUDING
GRAPHICS AND NEAP LETTER DUALITY. REVERSE
PRINTING. ITALICS TRACTOR FEED AND PAPER
SEPARATOR. COMES COMPLETE
wrrH SERIAL CABLE AND FREE
EASY SCRIPT WORD
PROCESSOR PACKAGE. 
E
l
 6 9 . 9 9 A
7 COMMODORE 64C AND
C2N DATASETTE
1.0AI ASETIES ME AYkLABLE
KPMtAlllY FOR
ORLY C2T99 
E
l
 4 9 . 9 9 A
8 COMMODORE 1901
COLOUR MONITOR
COMPATIBLE WITH MOST CCMMCOORE HIE
COMPUTERS HIGH DUALITY RESOLUTION AND SOUND
ROB AND PAL SWITCH
ALLOWS FCC 80 
E
2
7
5
.
0
0
A
ooLumN MODE
1

VIMY You S
0
THE NEW
AMIGA 500
WITH OVER
C200.00 WORTH
OF FREE
SOFTWARE &
ACCESSORIES
- • •
•  •  —
• ﬁ,6
a
‘
. .
S
p
E
i
•
'
•
•
•
•
: C
.
--
ALL THIS
FOR
JUST E
OFFER INCLUDES: AMIGA 500 COMPUTER - MOUSE • DISC STORAGE
BOX - 10 BLANK DISCS 2 JOY STICKS • DE LUXE PAINT • SHANGHAI •
HACKER II • MUSIC STUDIO
Offer applies to ti K Mainland only. All products guaranteed for 12 months
OULD READ THIS
..... . . . . .  
.
.
,
 ,
....., 
.
.
.
 
.
,
. . .
Privileged Purchase Card
When you pancipaie ow this unique utter
horn POSfrOn. y ou M I also receive a
prwleged purchaser card enabling you lo
add to you collecion o Arniga sohfroare,
acoessones and hardware plus many
other products ayalable irorn Postronix,
all at mcreclible rUscount
micas
I P / I l ﬁ
1 5
A b r
• • • 1
9 COMMODORE 1541c
DISK DRIVE
THIS NEW STYLE' 541 DISK CAVE COMES TH20
BLANK DISKS LOCKABLE DISKETTE STORAGE BOX
AND 5 PIECES OF DISK BASED SOFTWARE AA
INCLUDED
IN THE OFFER
El 89.99
10 EVESHAM EXCELERATO
PLUS DISK DRIVE
COMPATIBLE WITH COMMODCﬂE HOME OD/APLITEPS
COMES WITH 20 BLANK MKS. LOCKAEIE DisvErrE
STORAGE BOX PLUS 5 PIECES OF
DISK BASED SOFTWARE 
e
l
 E n  ( k g %
AS FEATURED 
U
s
 7 7
11 XSL PHASER COMMAND
THE INFRARED GAME
SYSTEM
Ks_ PHASER GLN sE,:xxs SAFE INWSZLE LIGHT
BEAMS 151 FEET AND MORE AUTOMATIC LASERTAG
TARGET SENSOR ACCELERATED SOUND AND LIGHT
SYSTEM ELECTRONICALLY INDICATES HITS SENSOR
CAN ALSO BE CLIPPED ONTO BELTS. SHIRTS. AND HUN
ON THE WALL. AS WELL AS WORN ON THE BOON
HARNESS SUPPLIED SINGLE PACK INCLUDES:1 XSL
PHARR GUN. HEAVY DUTY
BODY HARNESS. I HOLSTER 1
TARGET UNIT. 
E
2
9
.
9
9
SPECIAL OFFER 2 PACKS ONLYC50.00
fta
In•
= J o
MEM
•misimmE
lommem
o
ommom
olommin
mmmmm
mai
lom
V) ki•  11 .
C a t : 0 '
( o l
X, MI
:••••••• Z '
0  CI  t
0  •••••
a D
oo
A  TO AU PRas AOD f500 POST ,4 PACKAa
OR VC FOR bi,EXT DAY ORNERY
I

Art
Gallery
GRAPIIICS SOFT1N \RE
Mice, pens and joysticks are useless without the soft ware
to drive them.
by Norman Doyle
/
The range seems so bewildering. The starting point should he
the facilities on offer but, though most people know what they
want from a graphics package. few people know what they really
need.
For the best results the package shoukt use the multicolour_
bit-mapped mode. Although this does impose a halving of the
horizontal resolution. the beneﬁts gained in colour use mean
that highly polished results can be achieved.
A pixel (picture cell) is the smallest element, or building
block. from which the image is created and the resolution is
the number of pixels which make up the total image. The rule
is therefore, the greater the number of pixels_ the higher the
resolution.
On a normal screen there is a matrix measuring 40 columns
by 25 lines. Each matrix square consists of a block which is
eight pixels square giving a screen size of 320 pixels wide by
2(X) pixels high. This degree of resolution would permit a
highly detailed image to be produced but hardware restrictions
imposed by the system means that colour use is strictly limited.
Using the multicolour mode permits all the colours to be used
but reduces the horizontal resolution from 320 to 160 pixels.
Another imposed problem is  that colour ﬂexibility is
impeded by the limits of only having three ink colours in each
cell measuring 4x8 pixels.
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
8
A good graphics package will have an on-screen menu so
that you can always see your picture when selecting the next
drawing option. This may seem like a prohletu because part of
the screen is obscured by the menu hut most menus can he moved
around the screen or even switched off to display the full image.
The main consideration is. of course, the contents of the
menu. Facilities must be made Ibr loading and saving images:
tOr changing printer parameters to tailor the output to suit the
printer and intcrface that you are using: and an Undo option.
which erases your last action, is better than having it) rely on
EniSe for correcting mistakes which may occur when you're
completing a complex image. A full range of drawing options
should allow freehand drawing and a wide ranee of shape
creators such as elastic line drawing. polygon, circle and elipse
functions. and triancles, squares and rays are also useful
facilities. Brush size selection and colour ﬁll are also essential
and the ability to add text to the image can ease the problems
of creating letters pixel by pixel.
Desirable though not absolutely essential are tacilities for
creating texture patterns for the Fill option_ and for designing
brush textures. A Zoom Option is also offered by some packages
which is ideal for adding complex details. Zoom allows the
selection of an area of the screen, which is then blown up to
show the pixels in greater detail. Apart from relic\ ine eyestrain.
this facility is essential if  you are using a lightpen unless you

have a very steady hand!
Filially. there has to be a palleue from which the brush
colours can be selected.
Cadmaster
Trojan offer a free lightpen with each of their three versions
of this package for the C64_ Plus4 and C16. It has a wide range
of facilities allowing live pen thicknesses and three quill sites
which can he used in freehand, line. circle. triangle, ray and
box modes.
Taking into account special ﬁll functions. active banding
and wash lacilities, and the price of just C19•9.5, it would be
reasonable to sa% that the lightpen is a free offer and that Trojan
are offering a bargain to anyone who needs a quality graphics
package hut has reservations about using a lightpen,
The Image System
In the light kw the ultimate graphics package. CRI, are offerin
a heavyweight package which they
hi-res loading screens featured in their games, The on-screen
menu display
working area to help with adding the ﬁne detail_
Where this packag,e really scores is in the area of screen
manipulation. While the screen is being created, areas can be
THE ULTIMATE COMPUTE R A P H I C  SYSTEM
GRAN IICS SOF'DATARE
ithyved. copied. taken up and down in scale. rotated and even
101ded to create 3D effects.
The Advanced OCP Art Studio
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
9
Although the t24.95 price tag may seem a little high, this
package is %Myth every penny. It contains facilities which would
normally he associated w ith Electronic Art's excellent Deluxe
Paint graphics package for the Amiga. which is no mean trick
on the C64!
P r i nt i f t i e l k
Ri ndow s pl i .
i nti l Li scl undo . 1 1 1 1 4 1
W Textifthames 44E31
It has all the expected lacilities for creating images. including
an excellent Zoom facility which allows the user to select the
degree of enlargement. What really sets it apart is the ability
to create and save picture elements, shapes which mav be saved
and loaded for use in later projects.
The image can he created using either a joystick or a mouse.
Rainbird Software have also included the facility to display the
Zoomed image alongside the actual normal resolution picture
so that vou can see the micro effect of our  macro changes.

Blazing Paddles
This is the package which Date! are championing and they will
supply it with a matching lightpen if you wish. though it also
supports graphic tablets. mice and joysticks.
The main menu is displayed around the four edges of the
screen. From this the many functions can be selected including
a pattern ﬁll and cuen'paste. This last facility enables the loading
of special. pre—designed characters which are provided as part
of the package. Animals, vehicles. various shapes and tacial
features can all be used to create pictures. making this a fun
package for young children as well as adults.
Blazing Paddles costs.E12.99. or £24.99 with the lightpen.
Cadpack
if you require an art program tailored towards making technical
draw ings, w here dimension?, anti scaling are of great importance.
then Abacus Soft ware have the answer. Cadpak is an extremely
ﬂexible program which has 22 functions on the main menu. each
leading to many further lunctions. Drawings. layouts and
renderings are easily produced using the keyboard or a lightpen.
For the architect the ability to save often used devices and
shapes should prove a boon. The scaling and dimensioning
facilities are particularly impressive, as you would expect from
a package costing f24.95 on the CM or 1:34.95 in 128. The
nptional lightpen adds an extra f.:12.95 to the cost.
Artist 64
This package supports joystick or mouse operation and has to
be seen to be believed. Although it is easy to operate. the
permutations and combinations o f  functions seem almost
limitless. Admittedly it's one of the most expensive packages
on the market but it's also a highly polished vehicle for the artist.
Wignaore are justiﬁably proud of their art package which
is impossible to describe in the limited space available here, lb
give you a taste of the range. images Can be copied to any area
of the screen, cycled through various colours. magniﬁed. drawn
from a ﬁxed locus with a brush of your own choosing and design.
texture ﬁlled, ﬂipped. mirrored. screens max he partiall> cleared
and so the list goes on and on.
Ultrabasic 64
Along with its sister program. Viticohask-64, this shows a
different approach t o graphics on the Commodore. It's  a
LOGO-like language hut Abacus Software's fOrm of Turtle
graphics is far taster and can easily be linked in to Basic
programs. Apart from permitting the use of hi-res graphics. there
are also limited sound controls and a sprite designer.
3D Graphics Drawing Board
Vei another approach to graphic art is provided by (iento')
Publishers. As the name suggests. this produces images which
can he twisted and turned this way and that to give a true 31) feel.
The images are wire frame graphics produced from three
basic shapes: a cube, a pyramid and a cylinder. From these core
GRAPHICS SOFTWARE
Vidcom 64
YOUI? COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
shapes other shapes can be created including spheres. When the
ﬁnished object is rotated, you can opt !Or showing or hiding
hidden lines Ibr claritv
As an introduction to Computer Aided Design principles.
this is an ideal package at a relatively low cost. 1:14.95.
The arrival of The Image System eclipsed CRUs earlier graphic
pack. thicom 64. The strength of which was the bargain price
of only £4.95. If CRL have any left or if your retailer has. buy
it immediately!
The package allows two modes of operation: multicolour
or standard hit-map. With multicolour you get the halving of
the horizontal resolution but up to 'bur colours within a character
area. In standard bit-map mode the horizontal resolution is high
but the character squares al
As the forertumer to The Image System. Vridcom has many
advanced features such as pattern ﬁll, area copying and reversing
imt of selected screen areas.
The problem w ill mit be using this program fOr your graphic
designs. it will be ﬁnding a copy that hasn't been snapped up vet
Picasso's Revenge
This is the program which accompanies Precision's lightpen.
It is an honest. workmanlike program w hi ich gives you all the
tools you need but doesn't go overboard on special facilities.
For the beginner, this approach means that getting the full beneﬁt
from a lightpen drken program will not mean hours of reading
and experinientation betOre you're able to tackle sour ﬁrst major
artwork.
Drawing To A Close
If I was asked to place my hand on mv heart and recommend
the best computer graphics program. I think it would easily be
Wigmore's Artist M. Apart from a good art program, you also
get little touches like being able to record your movements so
that >ou can replay the creation of >our image at a later date.

3
.1
No more waiting around for printouts!
The Precision 4010 multi-head line printer delivers your reports at a lightning 252 lines per minute in draft mode or 55 lines per minute in Near Letter
Quality. Width is130 characters in normal mode and 138 condensed_ The Precision 4010 supports Epson mode graphics at a resolution from
480 to 1920 dots per line. The Precision 4010: it leaves other printers standing!
at9ER
• Pirellis! Printer Interface
• keyboard Graphics
• Fast Graphics Dumps
• Compatible with M ost S oltwa r •  end
Printers
• High-Scowi Grephics Buller
• Plugs onto Sertelllus
' True 100% Compatibility with. Wide
Selection at Printers
• Dip Switch Control of the Following,
Cornmodor•  E muletlon
Text• Only M ode
Trensperent M ode
Hex M o d .
Command M ode
The SuPer-G Is a high-speed
centroniC3 parellei printer in telteCe for
Commodore computers. I t features
the ability to print the lull Commodore
Character set, Including all graphics,
reversed test, and reversed graphics
characters. I ts built-In buffer allows it
to print screen graphics faster than
most Other Commodore Interfaces
avel !able today
The Super-G features software and
elP•Switch control Over many of its
advanced features, including its 100%
true emulation of the Commodore
1525 printer. This allows the Su per•G
to be compatible with more SOlterare
and printer. than other interlaces.
r %
Ring for our New Catalogue of Commodore products i r
Available horn you: local dealer or directly from
Precision Software Ltd. 6 Park Terrace,
Worcester Park, Surrey KT4 7j7.
Telex 8955021 Precis G
± - 1
hut
s.liwitiv 01-330 7166
• ,,,
• 
, • • I
480 cps 4 Head Dot Matrix Printer
PRECISION 4010
* 4  print heads for ultra high speed
* Tractor and friction
* Centronics parallel interface
* EPSON-compatible
* Full 12 month warranty
Precision model 4010 dot matrix printer
ORDER BEFORE DECEMBER 31ST 1987 AND RECEIVE
YOUR PRINTER CARRIAGE FREE WITH A FREE SUPER-G
INTELLIGENT INTERFACE! OFFER WORTH OVER £40!
• • "
CILUI lieS119.1111
HOLUM
E M M A
GRAPHICS LIBRARY
HOLIDAY EDITION
Celebrate your favourite
holiday occasions with The
Prmt Shop!
Customize your holiday
signs, cards, letterhead and
banners with 10 new fonts,
70 graphic elements, 14
borders plus 12 all new full
panel designs.
Celebrate Mothers' Day, Fathers' Day, Valentine's Day, Easter and
23 other family and holiday occasions with a creative ﬂourish!
Commodore disk
Requires The Print Shop
Other Print Shop products for
The Print Shop
Print Shop Companion
Graphics Library Disk 1
Graphics Library Disk 2
Graphics Library Disk 3
4
E424.35 incl. VAT
£19.95
Prilit Shop
the Commodore 64'
139.95
£29.95
£19.95
£19.95
£19.95

- LALCLCICri I 11'
r e l l 1 =
COMPUTERS
Ne w  L O W  P r
,
spar e
r i bbons FRE E F
C13, 90)
SPECIAL OFFER: PRICE NOW INCLUDES DOLPHIN COPY
Best Hardware
ut,i.ty  o f yew
c)ivie 4z)P T H E
•LOAO speed 25x normal (PRO)
SAVE speed 12x norms' (PRO)
•L,OAD speed 12x normal (SECi)
•SAVE speed 8x normal (SE0)
•LOAD/SAVE 3x norms' (REL)
•Easy h i s t  DOS Commands
•Format 40 tracks (749 blocks)
•Monhor built In
•LOADs 202 blocks In 5 secs
•Enhanced screen editor
•Drives oentronics printer
Extra SASiC commands
-•Can be *witched out
-
•\ 1 ery qui et
com patible
• Ul tr a c
•
* E x te r na l  8. 9 switch
• Di r e c t drive Motor
• l i  andles disk tur bos
• D oe s n't  over heat
• C om pa c t  size
•S u p e r  reliable
. ' Y
One re v ie we
- G r e a t  value 
•
sticker was on crooked".
7 he es tablis hed s tandar d parallel opt• ar o
w "11 rros7 ol 7ne :op so'Ir r ar e l'OuSeS n c l  A i r p  Girelkdid, S o ftw a r e  P r ois c is , Thalam us , 0141.
M itigate, S u p e r i o r  s i c  s i c  a s  wel a s  m any  of The lop nelependaM  s oltwar e O r 0 g
The soeed and el'icency is inc r edible, who would bet.e,,e that V
blocks in lass than 5 secs I t ts compatible w lh the majorly olcorornercal SOITaare aro : •• •
••wrched o .t when necessary O n e  o th e  te a  p  easures Cl using ills  system .s to us e
Aes 01 Easysutpt & Superbase to speed up Coln the normal loading and Ole suquent tat has
I!, tm pentant to point our. that It' s  s  ach.eved using eta ndard COM d.sK formal and not a spec,a
system. Ihere'rve yOu Ca- si u s e  ynor Cr Sting disks
Don't buy  a 1541C when y ou
can buy this compact, reliable
& modern drive for less money!
Es.1 -
I M O R E  c ompat ible t han 1541C
SEE RA V E  RE V I E W S
IN ALL THE  M AG S
This is the class printer in it's price
ategory. The perfec t c hoic e for
Commodore owners because the
interface is changeable S o  buy
with the 64.12
you cha nge  co m p u t e r at a  la te r
• d a l e  just buy a new cartridge!
In a group lest with other popular
printers in the price category such as
Epson, Citiz en & OKI What Micro decor.
ibed the L - 1 0  as T H E  RO LLS RO YCE
OF THIS GROUP". W h y  settle for less'?
(Amiga users order with parallel cartridge,
price  in clu d e s ca ble ).
INSTALLATION
Fo r " ; involves ﬂi n g  two sub assemby boards. one ii, Ihe
6 4
some 'Sas need a small a m o "  01 solder ng
-
Use" por t ex par s iOn Cat d  
.
.
.
.
.
 
E
 14.95
Kerne, lot "1218 in •126 mode  . . . . . . .  . . E 9 . 9 5
Second drive assembly 
E
 44.95
Dolphin Copy [selection CI capers includes very powerful
nibbler, extra qtst unprotected and selective Ne)_  E  7.95
• GEOS FREE OF CHARGE
IHRP 
I
L
S P E CIA L C H R IS TM A S  OFFE R
E X CE LE RA TOR
E159.95
-Auto single sheet
food
-Trac tor & Fric tion
feed
-
-
mode selection
.Interc hangeable
Place cartridges
•Double & Quad
height characters
•L o w cost cut
shoot food
-Suni-th "NLQ''
C OM B IN A TION  OFFE R
E X CE LE RA TOR
FREEZE M A C H IN E
E179.95
GE OS  FRE E  O F  C H A R GE
iFIRP t 49 9 1
I=R r
DISK NOTCHER. Double your
disk ca oa ciry. a llows you to
e a sily &  a ccu ra t e ly cu t  a
second write protect notch...—.
E4.95
POWER PAC K Reptacement
power pack to S.AI '64 .  ...... E  2 4 .9 5
AZI M ATE 3 0 0 0  C h e ck and
adjust CBM cassette head alig-
nment Ea sy to Jse  ........... ........
M OTHERBOARD. 4 slot With
either a ll upright or with one
straight thros for modem use,
p le a se  st a t e  t yp e  w h e n
X%cleTnEnt 
E
 28.00
 SUPERGRAPHIX
The best centronics td face for
6 4
fonts etc  v e r y  good... ........... 
E
 6 9 _  9 5
D AT A R E C O R D E R . C BM
C O m p v, b  e  t y p e .  S a m e
per for m anc e etc . as  C 2 M 1 5 3 1
but ch e e r  and with pause„ C  2  4 .9  5
1541C DISK DRIVE We will
Sell you one but why not buy an
Excelerally, ess money and_
many advantages 
0
8
9
.
9
5
W e  h a v e  a  g o o d  s t o c k  o f
Commodore related equipment. If
you don't  s e e  w he t y ou w a nt
please give us $ coN
E6.95
AMIGA 500
In stock h e -  pore, C  469.00
lam . include' Delwo Paint, Silent Seniice Or e
on One Ira simibri S  cisk• lull ol demos etc
Philips CM8833 (STEREO)
Monitor to suit A500___.E 279_00
( P r ic • lryc ludo'  c able to  s uit )
3uy b a th  together  fo r    
,
 7 3 8  0 0
25 b u lk pa ce d OS•tDO dskS.
Wan sleeves, nip tabs and
l a b e l s . G o o d  q u a l i t y  &  f u l l y
guar anteed  
E
 1 3 . 9 5
25 disks •  box Disks as
aoove plus SO capacity locking t 22.95
s to'age box
25 d isks +  b o x. As previous
oiler Outwit?)  100 CapaCiTy lOc k
Ing box  A  v er y  o o p u a r  ofter  
E
 2 4 , 9  5
50 ca pa city box High °wa lly
'ockab e d sk storage Smoke d
oerspes lop   
C
100 capacity box. Larger „ „
capacity ve
In Australia contact: Micro Accessories of S.A., Unit 8, HevAtison Rd, Elizabeth West, S. Australia 5113Tel: (08) 287-0191

• • • •  
-
M E I N f  = N I  
I
M
O
 1 1
= M E
=
M = I I M  
M
M
 M U N I  1 1 1 1 1 1 .
m•p:mr-m
mom
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •  • nonS e• •SSEBOOMMSOO••
FREEZE MACHINE
•
•
•
•
•
•
 8
6
1
1
1
0
6
1
1
• • • • • • • • • •  •
•Freeze...
Totally uostoppable Freeze
facility from the originators.
•Fast Save...
In as little  as 15 sec.
Gelds. N o t h in g  e lse  ca n
match this
•Multiple Save...
Make as many aaaaa as you
wa nt Og e e  f   
•
 I .
different styles if  you wish,
•Ultra Compact...
The most e f ﬁcie n t  corn-
?
O u r te stsin d ica te
this, •  ma ny as 5 .4  gime s
per disk.
•Crame Killer...
Incorp•rates an e ffe e lle it
routine to disable collision
detection.
•Independant...
1:,,en produces stand alone
Later ﬁles that reload In as
little as 10 seconds-
•Ease of u s e
Alwa ys a  strong fe a ture ,
now even more enhanced.
•Multi- Load.—
Standard cartridge handles
many games o f  this type .
With the  u t ilit y disk te e n
more!
•Fast Format_
Formals your disks in about
12 aaaaa (h.
•File Copier...
Built In fast copie r handles
ﬁles up to 1411 blocks le st
and la re a lly easy to use.
•Two Fastioads...
A normal disk turbo at 5-7
lime s n o rm a l P L U S  t h e
astonishiag L a t e r a t 2 0 *
limes nominal—BUILT VC
•Selectaload...
moat use corsoni to scroll to
the program you went and
press a  Neatens key.
'Reset.—
Bu lli ha, so you can e nte r
poke' for more lives etc.
•Tape Turbo...
For quick •a e e tre loa d on
tape.
/  1
This  is the lat es t  and most effective bac k up c artridge from Ev es ham Micros, the originators . ll' s  speed of
operation is the staggering feature I magine being able to SAVE & reLOAD y o u r favourite games in as little as 10
seconds and no more than 18. No other 'dev ic e can remotely match these ﬁgures re me mb e r these lacilities are
but!: irk Buy the "Freez e Machine'' and see it perform, it you don'4.agree that it is the most formidable cartridge
available returit it within your statutory 28 days for lull rotund, we are that conﬁdent.
Now with..
"Single part
save"
Includes..
"Freeze
Frame MkV
& Lazer II"
CHILLS THE REST!
"...far outstrips
the opposition on
both price and
performance ..."
Commodore Review
"
exciting and
lightning fast I
have ever used..."
Commodore Computing International
UPGRADES
Micd, II, 111,111E3 ...E 19,95
MKIV 
E
 7.95
Lazer 
E
 2.00
ClUICA'DISC
Freeze Machine Uhl* Di sk V3.0
Our hignly popular fast load/save DIU5 utility cartridge
has received many favourable reviews
• FAST LOAD (5-7 limes faster)
' FA S T SAVE (5.7 times Easier)
• FAST FILE COPY (up to 248 b lo c k )
• RESET BUTTON (unstoppable)
*DRIVES CENTRONICS PRINTER , , , , , , , , ,
•FAST FORMAT 
o
n
l
Y
• FAST DISK BACKUP
' EASY DOS COMMANDS
*HELP MENU
• 128 COMPATIBLE ('64 mode)
,
,
,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,
/  1541 Quiet Sto s
7
Cures the dreaded 1541 drive -
• EASY TO FIT
' ONE KIT DOES TWO DRIVES es ' c ' ' '
, w  y 
- ,1
• DETAILED INSTRUCTIONS
• HELPS PREVENT 
I
 n  4  9 5  1
-
ALIGNMENT PROBLEMS
Not suitable i r  "turn lever' type drives
Our well established ard extreme y popular
disk backup/utility package. The powerful
nibblers  c ar produc e bac k ups  of mos t
protec ted s oftware. Also includes many
parameters for difﬁcult to copy software This
latest version will handle many titles by
H e w n ,  Ocean. Domark & U S. Gold that
rival products can not Beware of American
% & German copy programs that w II riot handle
, the popular British toles
INCLUDES THE FOLLOWING
• EVESHAM 3 MINUTE NIBBLER
• EVESHAM 8 MINUTE NIBBLER
• MANY PARAMETERS (the vital code
for the protection schemes)
▪ DUAL DRIVE NIBBLER
•ME NU MAKER
• DISK ORDER 
,
,
,
orllY
• DISK R E S C U
• ETC., ETC. 
E
 1 9  - 9  ,
• UNSCRATCH
• DISCMON•
,,,,,,,,,,,
The whole package is easy to use and menu
driven Works with '128 in '64 mode and most
routines 1570/1 compatible Perfect operation
with Excelerator.
Latest v • r s ion ot the  disk tha t complements the  use of the Freez e
Machine. Includes well over 30 routines. Ailows the complete transfer
to disk of many programs tha t loa d eyiro pa r ts  as the game prog-
resses I the ones the standard cartridge cannot handle). Includes many
ol th e  Int• • 1  popula r  title s  lik •  l a s t Nrela A  Guns hip plus  m a ny
"standards" like World Games S u p e r c y c l e .  Avery usetul add- on to
your Freez e Machine.
Upgrades: C 2 0 0
ONLY E 7.95
THE E Tape Backup "device"
many thousands of this popular product have been
sold and still sales ﬂourish Why ? We think because it
i$ the best product of it's type It consists of hardware
and software and uses a unique method, controlled by
the software, that will allow you to make a perfect
backups of your tape software.
• EASY TO USE 
f
-
• USES TWO CBM TYPE 
E
1
2
• 9
• VERY SUCCESSFUL 
5
DATA RECORDERS
1541 Physical Exam
Does your 1541 suffer front.,
ALIGNMENT PROBLEMS
If so you need this package Contains digital alignment
diSk and drive fault diagnosis software that allows you
to both check and correct head alignment & speed
• CHECKS ALIGNMENT
• CHECKS SPEED 
„
e
 o n l Y
a
• CHECKS BELT & CLAMPING f r o  1
'DETAI LED INSTRUCTIONS Z . .  0
• INCLUDES QUIET STOPS
A k i t
p r i c e . =  1
Send c he que :P .0  a s  Accesw Vise details
By phone  with ACcese Visa no.
Government, educational' I  PLC o rd e r...ico r, '
Same day despatch whenever poserbre
Collets nelcome. open 6 days 9 30-5 30
TELEX 3 3 3 2 9 4 EMICRO
I-I cow t co  co roci r
TELEX:333294 EMOCRO
Also 0;1755 Pershore Ad.. CI:Menage, Birmingham 930 3914 Tel; 021 459 4564
e
 % r i p B t l z a rn U V1  c m
o
t
*
6 3  B r i d g e  S t r e e t
E  %M t s h a m
W o c o r i s i _  W I R 1 1  A S V
T
L
.

A Printer
Buyer's
Guide
Buying a printer immerses the novice in a sea of jargon.
Here's your ﬁrst swimming lesson!
by Jon Vogler
A
people still think of them as the noisy part of a typewriter. Far
from just being a platten and a print head, the modern printer
is an intelligent device which can offer a range of options to the
user. Not all machines offer the same facilities and the pitfalls
are numerous.
Prices
You
'recommended retail prices' quoted by the manufacturer. Work
on the assumption that the best printers will be available kw at
least 10% below their RRPs and the older, not—so—hot ones
at 20% lower. Shop around for the best discounts you can get
and remember that RRPs include VAT but not the cost of the
data cables and plugs.
Warranty
Most models offer a IL' month warranty (Citizen give two years).
You'd be advised to get a written statement from the dealer
underwriting your rights even if it's just a scribbled note on the
PRINTERS
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
14
hack of your receipt.
If you opt Mr mail—order, which is often cheaper. check
who pays the carriage costs if the printer fails and has to be sent
14 repair. It will probably be your responsibility and makes
buying nearer home a better prospect.
Speeds
Various suppliers have criticised my
show print speeds to be far lower than the manufacturers' claims.
So why not run your own test on the printer you plan to buy?
Set it running on a slab of text sonic 5000 characters long and
then time it with a watch. Remember to terminate the test timing
when the primer actually ﬁnishes rather than when the computer
ﬁnishes outputting characters. This is because most printers rum
have memory buffers which thankfully reduce the time that the
computer is occupied but mask the actual speed.
When you're ﬁnished you'll have a far better idea of how
long the machine will take to print the kind of things you're likely
to write. The manufacturers' ﬁgures usually tell you how quickly
the machine will print a straight line of spaces: a singularly
useless and deceptive piece of information in my opinion.
-A

STAR N L -1 0  P r i n t  P i t c h  Demo
Pi tch e s a v a i l a b l e  f r o m  f r o n t  p a n e l
C ornmo ci or e
Commodore
Commodore
A d d i ti o n a l  p i t c h e s  a v a i l a b l e
under programme c o n t r o l
Commodore
Commodore
Commodore
Commod or e
c r )  f n  47.1 4 1  077) r —
Commodore
Commodore
C  c  i n  n i  
c
i
 c  r —
Commodore
Commod or  e
Commodore
Commodore
Commodore
C o n
11 P r i n t  P i t c h e s  a n d  1 6  P r i n t  S t y l e s
I v  I: Optional prent xtyles On the Star printer
Memory Buffers
An input buffer is RAM memory built into the printer itself to
stockpile incoming characters fr om the computer. T his
effectively speeds—up printing because the computer can output
characters far faster than the printer can print them. Using a
buffer as a collecting pen means that the computer can spew
out its information at high speed while the printer works at its
own rate, This releases the computer from printer output far
more quickly and the user can move onto other things while the
printer chugs along at its own speed.
PRINTERS
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
15
Buffers are now becoming so common and so large (often
with an option on size) that by taking account of them, printing
speeds would appear very inaccurate. A document of 3000 or
5000 characters respectively would take two or four minutes to
print out on a 20 characters per second daisywheel. With a buffer
of three o r  ﬁve kilobytes, the transfer is  comparatively
instantaneous and you can save all that time on almost every
printout. So, if your main concern is to ﬁnd a printer that doesn't
tie your computer up for a long period, look for one that
combines high—draft speed with a largeinput memory buffer'
or buy a buffer as a seperate unit.
How Matrix Printers Work
Most printers, apart fr om the very expensive ones, are
dot—matrix or daisywheel types. Dot—matrix is based on a
system of pins and hammers. The 'print head' usually has just
a single vertical line of nine pins. hut sometimes it is a rectangle
containing more. Each pin is hit by a hammer causing it to strike
the ribbon and produce a single dot on the paper. A single pin
may be knocked tour or ﬁve times to make one character: for
example, the top pin may he hit ﬁve times to make the cross—bar
of a
In theory, the more pins in the head. the better the quality
of the print; 24—pin printers are becoming more common but
normally cost over E500. Watch out for price cuts, though, as
they try to compete with the falling prices of laser printers.
Interfaces and Compatibility
Printers conic with one o f  two kinds o f  connection to the
computer: serial and parallel. A parallel interface means that
the eight bits (binary signals) needed to make one byte (single
character) travel side by side down eight strands of a ribbon
cable. This means that the computer receives each byte in turn.
whereas the slower serial interface sends each bit down the same
wire in bursts of eight, acting rather like a commissionaire at
the January sales. It's easy to see that this means that the parallel
interlace can be eight times or more taster than serial connection.
Sometimes one or other is offered as standard and the other
as an option for which you will have to pay extra; some printers
have cartridge interfaces built —in.
Some p i
However, most dot—matrix printers are Epson—compatible. This
compatibility is limited now because it was based on the Epson
FX and NIX series printers, both of which have now been
superceded.
These models couldn't do near letter—quality (NLQ) type
so printer manufacturers have chosen their own codes to select
this mode. Though it looked like the Epson standard was being
adopted at one time, it is high time the computer industry set
up a new standard between themselves.
To be on the safe side, select a computer with italic, bold,

elite (compressed) and NEQ typefaces and buy a wordprocessor
which will allow parameters to be set up to access them.
Extra Character Sets
In many machines. the print buffer memory spacecan be used
to hold different sets o f  characters either those for other
languages. such as the accented French alphabet. or user deﬁned
sets. These are often called downloadable characters and are
particularly important for those users who need to printout
nuttheinatical and scientiﬁc equations and symbols. Check how
many different language character sets each prospective machine
has and. if you need to use one in particular on a regular basis.
check that all the required characters arc there.
Controls and Software
A control panel should have switches for mains on/off, going
on—line and for form and line feeds, Form feeds are used with
fanfold paper when you wish to set the print head at the top of
the next sheet of paper and line feeds only advance the paper
one line at a time.
As mo r e  pr inting modes  become available, t h e
manufacturers have realised that many users, and some
wordprocessors. cannot cope with so many software controls.
In the past some of these functions were selectable through the
use of banks of four. eight or ten DIP switches. These are used
to permanently set the printer into particular modes such as NU).
auto linefeed or to select speciﬁc character sets and so on. The
tiny switches have never been popular, frequently requiring the
dismantling of part of the printer before they can be delicately.
manipulated with the point of a ballpoint pen.
A prospective buyer should consider how easily the DIP
switches can be changed, because situations often arise when
the current switch conﬁguration is not really suited to the
circumstances. Sometimes the paper which you normally feed
through the machine is not available, for example. and a ﬂick
of a switch is preferable to reconﬁguring your word processor
or sending out control codes every time you want to print
something out
•Fhe latest breed of printers now include front control panels
which allow the user to select special modes. Normally these
arc reserved for the range of typefaces currently available and
their use often requires the pressing of various combinations of
switches to be pressed and it may prove not to be as user friendly
as you'd thought_
Fonts, Faces, Modes and Pitches
The increasing complexity of printers and the rising use of
desktop publishing systems has meant that the jargon used by
printers is being used by a wider range of people. Terms such
as fonts, founts, faces and modes are thrown tossed back and
forth enough to make a novice's head spin.
A font is a family of letter shapes (British printers often refer
to this as a fount). They revel in  fanciful names such as
Baskerville. Helvetica, Pica and Times.
Within each font you can have variations on the theme
PRINTERS
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
known as faces. Face is short for typeface and printer users soon
become familiar with terms such as italic (sometimes called
oblique). Roman. hold or bold italic.
Within each face you can get further variations known as
modes. In primerspeak these are speciﬁcally called condensed,
expanded, subscript and superscript and all of these can he
combined to give dazzling descriptions such as 'expanded italic
subscripts'!
Condensed type is very handy if you're trying to squeeze
in as much type as possible into a small space such as a label
or a table of data. This mode shortens the letter horizontally
wrhile maintaining the same height, as though the letter was
breathing in. Expanded type is the opposite of condensed and
delivers letters which are stretched out horizontally but maintain
the standard height.
Pnch is a measure of of the number of characters per inch
(cpi). Modern laser and ink jet printers offer a variety of pitches
on all fonts but dot matrix and daisywheel machines normally
have a speciﬁc pitch for  a particular font though you do
occasionally get up to three different pitches fOr the standard
roman characters.
Pitches are given names like pica and elite. Pica (the
standard pitch) typically offers 10 cpi whereas the narrower elite
pitch has 12 cpi.
Fonts and faces are increasing in number as printers and
interlaces become more sophisticated. A typical range, produced
on a Star SG-10 printer is shown in Fig 2_
More Modes
Extra modes which may be available to the user include N M
bold. emphasised and double strike. These are all variations on
the standard •doity'drali mode and describe the way that the dots
are arranged on the paper.
Emphasised and bold are two names for the same effect.
Alter the normal draft character has been printed, the head moves
a tiny bit to the right and prints again so that the horizontal lines
of the character consist of two sets of dots which touch Iiirming
an almost solid line and the vertical components of the letters
are double thickness.
Double strike, on the other hand, is when the printer head
prints a draft character and then the head moves fractionally
down and repeats the character. This means that the horizontal
lines are twice as thick hut still dotty and the vertical lines are
almost continuous.
NU) or High density characters are produced in a similar
way but the second dot positions are more accurately placed so
that the line is continuous, On some printers N U )  is a
combination of double strike and emphasised. In NUJ mode
italics and bold may not be available.
Facing Up To It All
In such a jungle. what do you need on the control panel and
what should be left as software controlled?
In general, you need NLQ, condensed and expanded
characters along with other typefaces such as Pica. Courier or
'Amer Gothic. This is because once they have been selected they

will not be changed kir the rest of the document. Italic. bold.
super — and sub—scripts arc 'spoteffects' and are best turned on
and off where needed through software controls.
Proportional spacing is also desirable as a panel switch.
Most printers support this facility which tidies up the look of
a document by closing up the spaces between thin letters such
as •i• andl
There should also he a tbrm feed and a linefeed button to
help align paper and an ofﬂine toggle to kill the printer without
clearing the internal buffer.
Light Relief
All printers should have LEDs (those small coloured lights) to
indicate that they arc plugged in and turned on, that they are
also on line and to indicate when the paper supply has run out
(though an audio signal is just as useful). Extra lights to indicate
the mode of printing are Ids° desirable.
Fanfold or tractor feed paper is pulled or pushed through
the printer by a tractor which is a cog on each side of the paper
whose sprockets ﬁt into the tear—off hole strips down each side
of the paper. Sheet paper is fed thmugh by being gripped between
the platten and a roller in the same way as on a typewriter.
Just as you can't feed sheet paper through the tractor drive.
it is inadvisable to try to feed fanfold paper through on friction
drive. As the printout continues the slight reverse pull. from the
weight of paper being drawn off the stack, will cause the paper
to' wander' ot.11 of alignment.
When buying a printer make sure that the cost includes a
tractor feed mechanism. Some models only supply them as
optional extras. Also choose your paper carefully because some
fanfold paper has badly or unperliwated edges. Unless you wish
to keep the perforations attached check the quality before buying.
Many machines offer optional cut—sheet feeders hut the
cheaper ones never work very well. I f  you anticipate using a
lot of headed paper for business letters then insist on a sheet
feeder demonstration before you buy.
Ribbon Replacements
Most ribbons come in cassette limn and either travel with the
head or stretch the full width of the paper and allow the head
to pass back and tbrth. There's no difference in pertOrmance
but the shorter, travelling type are easier to load without getting
our ﬁngers black.
In both cases, loading a new ribbon is rarely fraught with
danger. With most printers you simply place the cassette in place
wind the tensioning knob and the ribbon falls into place on the
head between the hammer face and the paper—shield which
prevents ink from scratching off the ribbon and smudging the
text,
Some printers use multistrike carbon ribbon which is a
compromise between the old, ink—impregnated, cloth strip type
tthe ones which gave'ribbons
ribbons which are acetate based and ensure total transfer of the
ink onto the paper. giving sharp—edged. dense printouts.
PRINTERS
The Right Stuff
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
17
Print Quality
The most important criterion is the appearance of the ﬁnal
printout, particularly the standard o f  the NLQ.Judge the
characters not according to your present needs but against what
you may require in the coming years. Are the characters pleasing
to the eye, clean edged and unambiguous? Do the 'descenders'
of the * )
Commodore printers will appreciate how difﬁcult and cheap
these letters can appear without true descenders. Normally there
is room for a descender to drop three dots below the notational
line but some printer manufacturer's only use two and reserve
the bottom line for underlining. This should be avoided because
with only two dots you sacriﬁce the loop on 'y', •g
always looks better if you get a printout which only underscores
the letters without descenders: a broken line looks better than
a confused mess, If you're not sure how the characters are formed
ask to look at the manual. Somewhere in the appendices there
is usually exploded diagrams off all the letters which the printer
can produce.
The true measure of a good NLQ mode is to ask yourself
if it looks like a daisywheel or typewriter printout or just a less
dotty version of draft mode.
If you anticipate doing hi—res screen dumps. check that the
printer has this facility and examine the quality.
One way to cheek how well a printer is made is by it's weight:
lightness often means skimped strengthening and the use of
plastic where metal would have been better. Watch out for thin
plastic protrusions because they will be the ﬁrst parts to go when
you carelessly drop a book or a joystick on the printer.
Check that the print head has a multi—ﬁnned, sturdy
heatsink attached. The movement of the hammers. their contact
with the pins and the pins contact t.c ith the ribbon all dissipate
energ% as heat. If the hcatsink is inefﬁcient you may be able
to print till the cows come home in January but when summer
comes round the printer will probably keep seizing up. You
cannot test the heatsink effectively but you Can examine them
carefully.
Another way of assessing the quality of a machine lies in
the design of the switches. I dislike those ﬂush switches hidden
behind a strip of plastic tape. I much prefer to hear a positive
click indicating that the switch has operated.
The overall ﬁnish is important. too. By this I mean the
quality and permanence ot printed labels on the switches.
whether the surplus on plastic mouldings has been removed and
a general feeling that care has been taken to create a quality
product. My own pet hate in this department are ﬁrms who'll
gladly part you from 0 0 0  but are too tight listed to putt a 50
pence mains plug on for you
How's your MLBF?
MLBF stands for mean ilk. between ﬁllittres or how long, on
average, the machine will operate without breaking down. If this
value is expressed at all it's difﬁcult to judge its signiﬁcance

because there are two methods of assessing MLFB: the number
of hours printing, and the number of lines printed.
As a rough guide I would calculate that since most printers
operate at around 60 characters per second which equates to 45
lines per minute or 2.700 lines per hour, So multiplying an hourIN
MLFB by 2.700 will be a rough guide but not really a satisfactory
guide.
Just to add to the confusion, some manufacturers specify
the life of the print head as millions of characters, Frankly. I'd
be surprised it' the Oki Microline, which quotes two hundred
million characters, is nine times better than the German made
Mannesmann Tally MT - 80 which only claims 30
One thing about MLFB, however it is measured, is that you
can use claimed MLFB if your printer fails after six months and
you have to resort to the small claims court under the Trade
Descriptions Act!
Decibel Level
This is important if you end up doing the books late one night
and the kids are asleep next door, or if your trying to listen to
someone on a long distance call with the printer rattling away
on the next desk.
It's extremely rare to ﬁnd any kind of acoustic padding inside
a printer. Surprising really when you consider that my way of
estimating the noise of a machine is by counting how Many closed
doors have to he in the way before I can't hear it Try something
like this, for example. can you hear it Irina outside the shop?
Ease of Use
Most of the time a printer, with lantbld paper looped through,
will just sit on the table and it will pertOrm faultlessly. There
will come a time when you run out of paper and have to lace
up a new batch. Logic states that a good printer is one that doesn't
call upon the shills of a watchmaker or the agility of a conjourer
to achieve the Utopian state of lace—up.
Printers such as the Star NE.-10 and Panasonic KX —P1081
have a nice feature whereby the printer will help the process
of inserting the lead sheet with a brief autofeed of a few lines.
One day some wretched little piece of paper is going to get
lodged inside the printer. I f  this is going to involve resorting
to a screwdriver and pliers or a crowbar it's not going to do you
or your printer much good. Always ﬁnd out how easily the covers
can be removed so that the paper path can be laid bare.
Buying a Daisywheel
These printers work by spinning the daisywheel so that the'petar
with the relevant character is rotated into position. A  small
han IMO' then presses the petal onto the ribbon and the character
is thereby printed onto the paper. The range of characters and
the style of the tint and quality of print is theretbre determined
by the size and type of daisywheel employed. Some wheels have
more petals than others but. before making your purchase of
PRINTERS
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
18
A good manual should be A5 in size, spirally bound to lie open
on the desk and should have stiff covers.
The contents page should have long and detailed descriptions
of the chapter contents and each subheading should have a page
reference,
There should be a substantial index at the back referencing all
controls and their codes and indicating where the DIP switch
deﬁnitions can be found.
BelOre leaping in at the deep end, the principles of sending
escape codes should be explained clearly.
There should be a summary appendix giving all the generic
escape code syntax.
A list of all optional extras should be given. including alternative
or recommended interfaces.lTX
A full speciﬁcation of the machine detailing all of the features.
.,Nn explanation o f  ASCII codes, decimal and hexadecimal
numbers should be supplied.
A separate or tearout quick reference card should be supplied.
his Opt ional print styles on the Star pruner
Fig 2: The Good Manual Guide
a machine with a comprehensive wheel, check on the availability
and range of extra wheels; a daisywheel is plastic and easily
broken.
Most modern daisywheels are (AMC or Diablo compatible
which means that they adopt the same codes as one of these to
achieve special effects. Most will print hold by double striking
or shadow by offset double striking.
Daisy Strain
Unlike dot matrix printers, the quality of a daisywheel printer
is always excellent and this is why the slow acting but relatively
cheap daisywheel printer has resisted the advances in NLQ dot
nuarix, laser, ink jet and other printing methods.
Manual Labours
The quality of the handbook is every bit as important as the
quality of the machine. What's the good of owning a Rolls Royce
it' you can't get it out of the garage?
Figure 3 lays out some rules for buyers: and for the
handhook writers! I  particularly recommend that you cheek
whether explanations are lucid without being patronisine. I also
suggest that you make sure that all the printers numerous control
codes are detailed anti. preferably, summarised.
Forty pages of explanation are totally useless if the writer
has lOrgotten to explain that sending a control code does not
mean pressing the CTRL key! Diagrams. example printouts and
programs are all an indication of quality and clarity. You'll be
lucky if you ﬁnd an index in any printer manual but if you do
it's probably a cut above other manuals.
A tear out sheet which can be kept under the printer is useful
for a quick refresher course on little—used codes. Otherwise
you could be left thumbing through an un indexed book for
hours on end.

A Change of Face
Y
dumping off listings and the like but it's
not going to impress your bank manager
too much when you use it to write that
grovelling letter to him. To be perfectly
blunt, the typeface looks awful. The lack
of true descenders renders the print
difﬁcult to read; you keep wondering why
a number '9' seems to he primed every
time there ought to be a letter 'g'.
Enter Printkit IV from Avon Printer
Technology. Not only does it give you
proper descenders. but also other features
such as italic and hold typefaces and
underlining.
The package contains two integrated
circuits and two sockets, a resistor, a
switch and some solder mop. As the name
suggests, it comes in kit form and you
must ﬁt it for yourself. To do this you'll
need to strip the printer down. remove the
printed circuit board. ﬁt the components
and then reassemble everything. Tools
required include a small soldering iron.
wire cutters and a couple of screwdrivers.
The whole job could take you a couple
of hours.
The instructions included are clear
and fully explanatory. Your attention is
drawn to the tricky parts and hints and
tips ar e giv en t o  help y ou. T h e
accompanying diagrams are similarly
clear and large.
If y ou don't feel happy about
approaching this job yourself, then you
can send your printer to APT who will
do the conversion for you for a fee of £15.
Once the kit is ﬁtted, you are ready
to try out the new facilities available to
you. Naturally, the descenders are always
there and need no special commands but
underlining, italics and boldface are
switched on and off via special control
codes. When using word processors.
REVIEW
MPS803 printouts are not the prettiest sight you've
seen,, Printkit IV could be the cosmetic surgery you've
been looking for.
by Gordon Hamlett
you'll ﬁnd that most of them will allow
YOU to use these commands in your text.
Included amongst these are the three most
popular word processors for the C.64.
Superscript. Easyscript and Ta sword 64.
Bold is effected by a double strike
which does not slow the printer down in
any way. The descenders make the most
obvious difference to your text and, if you
intend to send out a lot of letters, the
package is worth having for this alone.
The it a lic  s c r ipt look s  a  b i t
disjointed, as if someone has just taken
the ordinary text and stretched it across.
Because of this, it is probably best only
to print the odd word in  italics for
emphasis rather than italicising whole
chunks of text at a time. It does give you
ﬁve new characters though: left and right
curly brackets, a divide sign. a copyright
symbol and a right pointing arrow.
Bold can also be used for  word
emphasis but would be especially useful
'Or those extra special letters to your bank
manager though the extra wear put on
your printer ribbon by using this mode
should he borne in mind.
Underlining is best used in conjunction
with capital letters. Otherwise, it tends to
run into the descenders that have been so
lovingly c reated. Spaces c a n  b e
underlined, or  not, depending on the
effect you wish to create.
The switch allows the original printer
mode to he restored at any time. although
the manufacturers are convinced that you
will not want to do this very often except
as a reminder of the bad old days!
These four additional features will
certainly give your MPS803 a new lease
of life, and at E30. has got to be a lot
cheaper than buying a new printer!
Prinikit IN in all it O n o .
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
19

INTERFACES
Facing Up To
Printers
Interface—phobia is a state of mind which affects many
Commodore users. Broaden your horizons with our
simple guide.
by Norman Doyle
L
world of alternative hardware can he a traumatic prospect. Just
buying a printer is not enough because the Commodore machines
work through the serial port and most commercial printers have
parallel Centronics or RS232C inputs. Many
budget for an interface but without it control is not possible.
The mere mention of parameter setting is enough to cause
panic to set in but interfaces are probably the least complex
peripheral which you could own. A do it yourself interface is
one option and not too difﬁcult to implement if you understand
machine code but the mere tact that you have to load in software
each time makes this awkward to use. The program uses up
memory space and can prove impossible to implement i f
commercial software is being employed.
Centronics links are much more common than RS232C
types and, despite the range of models, they all offer very much
the same kind of functions. The current trend is towards integral
interfaces supplied when the printer is purchased hut many.
particularly in the cheaper and older ranges need an extra unit.
Most Centronics interfaces are actually serial converters
housed in a box with typical measurements of around !Milan
by 90inin. The best units not only have a ribbon cable and a
serial DIN lead but also have a single connector for the cassette
port. This is a power tap to supply the PCB in the interface with
the correct voltage. Some interfaces tap their power from the
printer's 5V line on pin 18 of its socket hut, because this is not
standard, you must check that your printer is of this type before
buying such an interface.
At its simplest. a connection interface simply collects each
bit emanating from the serial port, assembles them back into
a binary bvte and sends this reconstituted information down a
ribbon cable and into the printer as a parallel signal.
Although this is the prime purpose for the interface, there
are always other beneﬁts incorporated in each unit. As a typical
example Eve chosen Precision S u p e r - G  interface,
Most interfaces. including Super—G. are supplied with
integral DIN and ribbon cables which allow plenty of distance
between the printer and the computer. The power supply.. lead
should terminate in a through connector which still allows the
cassette deck to be connected at the same time as the interface.
The Outside...
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
20
The body of the unit sports a row of miniature switches which
are always freely accessible and much easier to operate than the
DIP switches used inside printers. These set the basic mode of
the interface's interaction with the printer and these duplicate
the function of several of the normally inaccessible switches
inside the printer.
The Super -G has a row of eight switches which are of a
type which I've not seen before. Gone are the days of DIPs which
can only be moved by the use of a strong ballpoint pen and a
magnifying glass and these new switches can almost be ﬂicked
with a linger nail. It's only the close banking of the switches
which prevents this halcyon dream from becoming a reality. The
positioning o f  the switches could be further improved by
attaching them to the topside of the PCB and cutting an access
hole through the top of the unit Instead. the Super—G has a
superb table of suggested switch settings for a wide range of
machines but the unit has to be turned over to facilitate the setting
of the desired arrangement.
The top panel could also be further improved by listing the
Functions of  each switch. As  an apparent afterthought the
*manufacturer's, the Supra Corporation. have included a summary
sheet inside the manual but a loose sheet can easily be lost.
The switches on the Super—G are fairly typical and control
functions such as the supply of automatic linefeeds, setting the
printer as device four or ﬁve, and the selection of Connnodore
1525 printer emulation or transparent modes. The other switches
organise the interface output mode to suit the printer to which
it is connected.
It's the ﬁnal category which is probably the most important
of the switches. Commodore has its own form of character coding
based on the ASCII standard. This has come to be known as

PEr s al and causes problems where graphics characters are
concerned. In addition, some of the standard printer conimands
for the Commodore system vary from the equivalent controls
set in other printers. Using the emulate/transparent switch allows
you to use commercial software engineered lOr Commodore
printers with any printer which is compatible with the interlace.
A secondary beneﬁt of the Commodore emulation is that
most interfaces have a special 'quote' mode which substitute the
reverse ﬁeld, graphic control symbols in a PRINT statement into
easily readable mnemonics or CHR codes. For the Super—G
this means that a reversed heart symbol indicating a'clear screen'
command will appear as < C U >  Each interface has its own
system of mnemonics so it would be fruitless to delve further
into the Super—G than this.
Although it may seem strange, there is also a facility to
printout the raw hex codes which the printer is receiving instead
of the actual characters. This is a function which is  only
appreciated on the rare occasions when it is used to debug an
output routine which doesn't behave as expected or when a piece
of commercial software produces strange results. With the ﬂick
of a switch you get a clear sequential printout of the raw code
which may not solve your problem but does clarify the situation.
Daisywheel printers are catered for by a special switch
conﬁguration which sends a text only output.
...Inside
All of the switchable features should be duplicated inside the
interface operating system especially if, like Super—G, the
interface does not possess a reset button. This means that you
don't have to ﬁddle about with switches if a special situation
occurs where you wish to vary printer operations from the
normal set—up.
These codes usually take the form of a secondary address
in the open command, such as OPEN4,4,25. The problem with
this system occurs when commercial wordproeessors are used.
The programs always open their own printer channels and the
addition of a special secondary comtnand is rarely catered kw.
A desirable feature of the Super—G is the ability to lock
the interface so that it ignores any other secondary commands.
Simply by opening a channel using one of the special secondary
commands alters the interface irreversibly unless the power is
switched off. The wordprocessor can then be loaded without
worrying about the interface's state being changed.
Why Worry?
Despite waxing lyrical about the ﬂexibility of interfaces I have
to confess that my own interface was set on the day that I bought
it. according to the manufacturer's recommended settings, and
I haven't touched it since!
I've stressed that there is a wide variety of interfaces and
the best way to buy one is through a local stockist who can set
everything up for you initially. Eve selected a few which I would
personally recommend hut manufacturers are almost alwas
American and suppliers change so regularly that it's not so easy
to keep up to date.
INTERFACES
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
21
Super—G
Pik  is the most recent interface to come under my scrutiny and
I am still very impressed with it. Precision are the suppliers
and the current cost is £34.95 placing it at the lower end of the
price range.
I've already covered most o f  its facilities but the one
criticism I have is that the manual could he better organised.
The inclusion of an index or a few appendices tabling the special
features would help greatly.
Micrograﬁx MW 350
This unit has six DIP switches situated in a recess on its upper
surface, next to a reset switch and a panel which gives details
of the switches' functions and the correct conﬁgurations for the
major printer types.
One useful 'extra' is the ability to print out a status report
detailing the parameters with which the interface is currently
operating. At a glance you can see whether your linefeed is being
generated by the interface and even which printer's conﬁguration
your currently set to. More of a luxury than a facility, this could
be useful with some non—standard software.
The interface is also suitable for daisywheel printers and
has emulate 152.5 and graphic mnemonics modes as well as
transparent.
Two additional features make this an intelligent interface
which makes the whole process of printing easier. Firstly, control
codes can be sent to the printer even in emulation mode by
preceding the command w  ith an extra CHRS(.27) control
character. Secondly. and more importantly, there are a series
of extra commands ﬁr- setting page width, length, perforation
skip and one to make the printer pause at the end of each page
for single sheet feed. With an interface like this who needs a
sophisticated printer'?
Just before you start wondering why I mention any other
interfaces when this one appears to sing. dance and make tea
at the same lime, we come to the cost! The cheapest price I've
seen is f60 in a sale. Versatility at a price.

Device One
The Device One interface is another one at the top end of the
price range but it's the extra facilities which make it really
excellent value for money.
Device One is no dumb add—on, it has I6K of ROM and
16K of RAM! This enables extra facilities such as four internal
character fonts, font customising. plus the ability to prim
pictures, calendars and banners.
To accomodate access to these extra abilities there is a set
of 32 commands, giving the printer another operation mode apart
from emulate and transparent. Semi—transparent mode allows
the interface commands to be executed even though the printer
thinks it is operating in transparent mode.
Pictures can be sent down to the printer and printed out in
hail or full —tone. You could combine this with calendars printed
INTERFACES
out by the interface or even as part of a banner. Banners are
created by causing the printer to print lengthways down the paper
instead of across the width in larger than normal lettering.
With 16K of RAM available you also have an extensive
printer huller.
Software is provided with the interface which allows you
to access the intertiice's facilities more easily and two font editing
programs. One of the font editors even allows you to hunt through
the computer's memory for a character set which may have been
used in a game.
The Connection
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
22
The Connection is a lot simpler to use than most interfaces
because it is printer speciﬁc and has its own command set for
controlling printout formats. There are only two DIP switches
to worry about and even these are hidden underneath the label
as though they weren't really necessary. If you just want to use
your printer as a 1525 then they 3rerir necessary for most
applications.
One switch determines whether the interface i s  in
transparent or emulation mode and this determines the function
of the second switch. This switch determines whether a linefeed
is sent or not in transparent mode. In emulation mode it selects
a secondary mode which is  either 'extended* or  'limited'.
Extended mode enables the interface to respond to secondary
addresses and to use its own special commands. Limited mode
disables the response so that software compatibility can he
maintained.
The commands cover all the printout dimensions. allows
hex dumping. and another which breaks up program listing lines
at suitable points to improve readability.
A special command, the macro, is quite useful for it allows
characters to be reassigned. For example. if you want to print
<CLR > in place of C H R S(
macro command. This means that specially formatted listings
can be made using mnemonics of your own choice.
BI Interface
include this interface because its one that keeps turning up in
various guises. Batteries Included are one of the foremost

Canadian hardware and software producers and this interface
of theirs is reasonably priced around O a
Last I heard. Ariolasoft were marketing this one but, by
now, it may be in someone else's hands, Whatever the case I
have no doubt that on a dusty shelf or up and down the country
there's a RI Interface or two.
The functions offered are fairly basic and no special
functions are included but the interface is a reliable link for your
printer and ideal for those who prefer the utilitarian to the exotic.
Centronics Unseen
There are several interfaces I've yet to see but it's only fair to
give them a mention.
Evesham Micros have the %dee Supergraphix interface
for £69.95. This sounds a little like Device I because it has
downloadable fonts and a large buffer.
Stack Computer Products' interface is compatible with
the full range of Commodore computers and costs £59.95. I f
you also want 8K of buffer space the price is 180.00 but a
Centronics cable which links the user port to the printer will
only cost 1:18.00
An alternative approach to interfacing is  provided by
Microsnips with their Centronics lead and driver software for
119,95.
Delta Pi Software have two interfaces, a basic one at a very
low price of f29.95 and the Super—G at E34.95.
A very neat interlace is available from FCC Systems. The
electronics are contained in a small cartridge on the rear of the
Centronics connector. This looks neat but could cause problems
with some printers by fouling the paper feed. The FCC interface
is priced at E59.99.
In addition to their f;15.00 Centronics printer cable. l & P
Computers also has extension cables which can further increase
the distance between your computer and printer. A one metre
cable costs O M  and a two metre cable is priced at O M .
The RS232C Alternative
Although Centronics links are the most common printer
connection, there are several models which favour RS232C links.
The advantage of an. RS232C printer is that the interface can
also be used tbr linking in a modern. The disadvantage is that
the connection protocols are more complex than Centronics
connections.
If you're a novice, you're strongly reconunended to obtain
a software disk that will help you to set up the parameters. In
most cases a suitable program is supplied with the interface but
always check before buying.
A speciﬁc disadvantage with RS232C connection on the C64
is that opening a channel automatically sets up a buffer at the
top end of Basic memory. Starting at around 9DFF, t h e
position of the buffer can overwrite any variables that the rest
of your program may be using. This is further affected when
the channel is closed and the top of memory restored to its
normal S9EFF position. Now any variables that were set up
during the RS232C communication phase will be wiped out.
Its rather like executing a CLR statement at the start and ﬁnish
INTERFACES
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
23
of RS232C interchange.
RS232C interlaces are not as rare as you might at ﬁrst think.
Most companies who sell Centronics interfaces also stock
RS232C connections.
Brain Boxes and York Electronic Research both produce
respectable RS232C packages but the Brain Boxes' connector
has switches on it to help permanently set up your interface.
The YER unit lacks any switches but has an excellent piece of
comms software along with a port initialisation program and a
transparent printer driver.
The Brain Boxes package costs £49.95 + VAT and the YER
system will set you back by only E29.99.
Other companies producing interfaces are:
Delta Pi Soft sare whose interface and software retails at
1:57.44. Stack Computer Products RS232C connector costs
13100
An intelligent RS232C interface is manufactured by FCC
Systems_ With its own processor and a massive 64K butter high
data transfer rates can be achieved and the computer is tied up
for as little time as possible. The snag is that the system cost
£115.00 but, for those who want a cheaper interface. FCC also
have a low cost interlace for 135.00.
The lowest cost interface is that produced by I M P
Computers. With an )(modem comms program the whole
package costs only £25.00.
Keep Up To Date
The printer interface scene is changing and evolving all the time
with more and more printers including machine matched.
Centronics interfaces. There is often still a chance that an external
control system will enhance a printer's speciﬁcations in the way
that Device I operates. As RAM chips continue to fall in price
there may come a day when interface buffers will free computers
as soon as a high speed download has been completed. The result
for the user will be freedom from the time delays involved while
waiting for the printer to do its stuff giving hours of uninterrupted
word processing and programming.

PRINTERS
Precision
Printing
Are ﬁ)ur heads better than one? Precision Software's
Peripheral Printer sticks its neck out.
by Norman Doyle
T
was its beautiful streamlined appearance but when I looked inside
I thought I was seeing things. Four print heads? Surely this is
some kind of joke? After about ten minutes of using it I was
thinking how come nobody had thought of this before'?
This is the most innovative and exciting peripheral that I've
seen for a very long time. The technology of dot matrix printers
has reached the maximum speed which a single head could
produce hut this machine increases that potential Iburfold. To
say that I'm amazed would be an understatement!
By nature I'm a cynic and even when faced with a printer
such as this I am not the type of reviewer who tvil I gasp at high
printout rates. My  second reaction to the machine was to say
that friur heads mean four times the noise. I was wrong_ Alright.
so it is a little noisier than man' of its single-headed brethren
but the beneﬁts far outweigh this drawback.
Logicallv. this machine oilers over four tillICS the speed hut
also offers four times less wear on the heads per document.
Added to which there are a few more innovatke features which
makes this my peripheral of the decade!
In our article on printers we have laid in heavily on the
deﬁciencies o f  the switch systems employed on printers.
especially the widespread use of DIPs. Hold this printer up for
scrutiny and there's not a DIP switch in sight. Instead a small
cover to the right of the printer hood is removed to reveal twelve.
well-spaced slider switches which even the clumsiest of lingers
could operate with ease.
This bank provides all the usual functions that DIPs usually
offer: Epson/IBM mode selection. linefeed.  paper end detection.
character set selection, ﬁxed lOrm length and line spacing plus
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
24
zero slashed/unslashed tootle. Curiously the twelfth switch serves
no purpose.
In front of this switch well are lbur switches and four LEDs.
Apart front the usual online, form feed and linefeed buttons,
there is an N1.1) button which overcomes the problem of selecting
this mode through software control codes. The switches are
rugged, positive controls and the LEDs leave you in no doubt
about the operating mode. Power, paper out and online are all
indicated by their respective LEDs and the NLQ light comes
on when that mode is in operation.

Fast But F i nn
The use of four heads means tha
...a, ...e izeneral construetion of
the printer is extra rugged to counteract the mechanical shock
of tOur sets of matrices hammering against the platten al the same
time. This solidity riia have resulted in a hard looking exterior
but the sleek lines of this machine belie this possibility.
Enough o f  this eulogising. let's take a  look  at the
The quadruple heads give this printer a print speed of a
staggering 480 characters per second in draft mode and enables
NLQ printing at a rate which beats some printers in draft mode!
80 cps in NLQ is not to be sniffed at.
In bit image graphic mode for h i
printer performs in unidirectional mode which slows it down
a little. Even at that it still beats every printer I've seen because
having fOur heads ranged across the paper's width means that
the carriage does not move the heads more than about Iwo inches.
Apart from N W  and draft modes the printer also offers
condensed and enlarged modes. Elite in normal and enlarged.
italic, super-and sub-script, double strike, emphasised plus
underline. In NLQ mode the Elite. emphasised. double strike
and super/subscript modes cannot be used.
My only real complaint about this machine is the manual
which is presented as a paperback (perfect hound) and liable
brain b o x e s
( c o m m o d o r e  1 2 8
0128/64 IEEE 488 interface £ 6 9 . 9 5
(as reviewed in Juiy 86 PCW)
0128/64 RS232 interface E 4 9 . 9 5
0128/64 Centronics Printer Driver
Software 
E
5
.
9
9
C128/64 Centronics Parallel Printer
C able 
£
1
9
.
9
5
m i .  I E E E - R S 2 3 2  and parallel
box b i d i r e c t i o n  interface
32k buffer
- .
.-=.iTa• PC K
includes software -
Add E1.50 P&Pfﬂrat class recorded delivery)
A pric es  plus VAT at 15',
Unit 3G, Wavertree Technology Park,
Wavertree Boulevard South,
Liverpool. 9 P F
T e l : 0 5 1 - 2 2 0  2 5 0 0
PRINTERS
to split or shed pages as it gets used. . I
to general headings and the lamination is so compacted that
it's difﬁcult to ﬁnd the information that you need quickly. A full
index in the back of the book would have helped enormously.
Interface Inclusion
As standard. the Peripheral Printer has a Centronics interface
ﬁtted but this can be replaced with an RS232 module. For
Commodore owners the Centronics interlace is recommended
because Precision are offering as special price on the Super
interﬁtce module bundled with the printer.
In the article on interlaces I  have already praised the
Super—G for its ease of  use and facilities so. apart front
commending Precision's offer. I will say no more here.
Conclusion
You may have guessed that I'm bowled over by this product. It
produces smart looking NLQ documents but it's a pity that some
oI the draft features are inaccessible. As tar as speed is concerned
this is heads and shoulders above the rest. If speed is a prime
concern then this is the only primer ﬁn- you.
GET THIS
1
Superb graphics software plus a quality
to give you enormous scope for fun and
creativity. Full colour pictures or simple line drawing — the choice
is yours. * Freehand draw • Pixel accuracy • Box, circle, triangle
' Copy' Paintbrush and much much more. Unequalled reliability.
TROJAN light pen C641C128 
£
1
9
.
9
5
TROJAN light pen Plus 4/C16 
£
1
9
.
9
5
Turbo GEOS — quality 2 button mouse for any ).slick or keyboard
5
operated graphics program 
3
9
OCP ART STUDIO (ideal for Geos mouse — C64/C128)
disk £17.95
tape E14.95
S
GEOS Mouse with OCP Art Studio disk
£47.90
tape £44.90
ARTIST graphics program — very powerful mouse or jistick on
C64/C129 disk or tape 
C
2
9
 95
NEOS mouse & Cheese sisiv 
£
2
4
.
9
5
Itif,G_REAT QC:MR up t o p  quality covers with 2 year
guarantee
C64/64C/C128.?Plus 4/C16
Amiga 500
Amiga 1000
Get if from
Please supply
Name
Address
votaG
COMPUTER CUPBOARD
Freepost, LONDON, W5 1BR
Posicode
E4 95
EB 50
El 6 95
Overseas orders add E2 00

Printer
Printout
PRINTERS
Printers come in all shapes, sizes and decibel levels. We
put sixteen different machines under the microscope.
Jon Vogler
P
paper may seem like a fairly mundane
task but there are more makes of printer
than there are types of computer. In fact,
there are s o many different printers
available for your Commodore that it
would take too many pages to describe
them all.
I've limited my comments to some of
the more popular machines that I've met:
twelve dot matrix, three daisy wheel and
one thermal printer_
BROTHER M-1509
This printer is a beauty: a low, stylish,
132 column machine with many desirable
features. Unlike many printers the mains
cable and data cable enter at the side
avoiding the danger of fouling fanfold
paper trains.
With a  s im ila r  thought f o r
accessibility, the power switch is situated
on top of the printer and an array of
membrane switches permit typewriter
standard N L Q  near—letter quality
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
26
selection and paper feed type: continuous
fan—fold paper. single sheet feeding or
automatic sheet feeding using an optional
cut—sheet feeder.
Ribbon changing can be a  very
messy process but the Brother cartridges
include a little, plastic running guide
attached to the ribbon which is easily
clipped into position on the print head,
leaving hands and lingers immaculately
clean. Beneath this ribbon compartment
are found the control dip switches. The
switches have a plastic cover to protect
them which also bears upon i t  a
description of each swutch's function; a
very useful feature.
All panels are removable so that the
printer may be cleaned but some of them
proved could only be freed with difﬁculty.
The unusual tractor—drive attachment for
lanibld paper clips onto the back of the
printer. This  ensures easy loading of
fantOld and cut—sheet paper as well as
allowing easy removal of paper jams.
The printout quality is excellent: a sharp,
N LQ ty pefac e w i t h  curvaceous
descenders in either roman t he standard
style: italic, bold or boldface italic. My
only criticism is a personal dislike of the
slight discontinuity on the knee of the
lower case
The manual is neatly laid out and has
excellent diagrams, but the contents list
is brief and only occupies a single page
with no index to support it. Despite this
unfriendly referencing system, all the

T h i s  i s  t h e  S TA R  N L - 1 0
T h i s  i s  N L Q mo d e
T h i s  i s  i t a l i c s
T h i s  i s  b o l d  f a c e d  t y p e
This i s  b o l d - f a c e d  i t a l i c s
T h i s  i s  u n d e r l i n e  a n d
h e re  a r e  s o m e  d e s c e n d e r s
YYYYY P P P P P  g g g g g
necessary information seems t o  b e
contained alongside a  business—like
summary o f  all o f  the escape code
commands. One slight blemish is  the
omission of a brief description of what
each escape code achieves.
If desk space and bank account will
allow for a wide platten machine, this is
a highly recommended and excellent
printer.
CITIZEN 120- D
UnfOrtunately. the Citizen is not so highly
reconmiendable. I  was not impressed
with this machine's noisy performance
and the sub—standard appearance of the
N W mode printout.
The compact. simple design of the
machine is  not helped by  the ugly.
tractor—drive attachment. When the
covers of the drive sprockets are open
they also obstruct the opening of the top
cover.
Sheet feeding proved hazardous too.
Sheet o r  t r ac t or  f e e d  c a n  b e
lever—selected but the friction feed failed
to grip standard weight paper securely
enough when I tested this facility.
The ov erall ﬁnis h i s  skimpy.
extremely thin metalwork and barely
adequate plastic. The print head looks
particularly: ﬂimsy and delicate and in my
tests only  achieved a  speed o f  6 7
characters per second instead o f  the
speciﬁed 120cps.
The untidy control panel sports just
three switches and three indicator lamps.
The letter quality and auto sheet feed
functions on the panel seem t o  be
afterthoughts hurriedly added t o  a n
existing panel.
The printer does have some good
points including the simple selection of
print face v i a  t h e  c ontrol panel:
PRINTERS
correspondence dr aft quality, italic .
emphasised and reduced. There is also a
replaceable interface cartridge to match
the printer to the computer.
Most printers require an additional
interface to match the Centronics o r
RS232 sockets to the Commodore Output
ports. so allow for this when comparing
the price of  the Citizen against other
makes.
Finally, t h e  handbook  has  a
convenient tear—out card showing all the
necessary codes. My pet hate with this.
and other. manuals is the lack of an index
hut otherwise it is nicely produced.
EPSON I,X- 8 6
This has recently been replaced by the
superior L X —800 which offers a sans
serif typeface in NLQ. a  3K internal
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
27
T h i s  i s  t h e  C I T I Z E N  . 1 2 0 D
T h i s  i s  N L Q  m o d e
T h i 5  i s  i t a l i c s
T h i s  i s  b o l d  f a c e d  t y p e
T h i s  i s  b o l d - f a c e d  i t a l i c s
T h i s  i s  u n d e r l
h e r e  a r e  s o m e  d e s c e n d e r s
Y Y Y Y Y  P P P P P  g g g g g  J J 1 J 1
buffer and six user—deﬁned symbols
which could even he used for personal
logos. The printout speed is  slightly
higher than the LX —86. as is the price
of £275.
In t h e  absence o f  hands o n
experience with the LX-800. I can only
really consider: the very similar LX —86
which should still he around for months
to conic.
In its day. the LX —86 replaced the
LX —80 as Epson's standard workhorse
and included many enhancements lacking
in its  predecessor. T h e  tractor unit
became an easily removable device with
full w idt h adjustment enabling the
printing of address labels and pay—slips.
Unfortunately, the positioning of the
tractor feed spoils the streamlining of the
printer design and also obstructs the feed
selection lever. This means that if lantOld

paper has been loaded and the user then
wishes to knock out a quick enevelope.
the tractor drive has to be removed to
switch to friction feed and then replaced
after the envelope has been completed.
The arrangement also has the effect
of making the tear—off strip inaccessible
with the tractor feed lilted, Just when it's
needed most! The quality of peribrat ions
on f a n f o ld paper  i s  o f  v ar y ing
effectiveness and a tear—off strip is often
greater and therefore desirable.Although
Epson do specify that a tear—off lid is
supplied with their roll paper holder. For
sheet feeding a separate cut sheet feeder
is available as an extra.
Although my printer is only ﬁtted
with a standard parallel interface. Epson
tell me that a whole series of interlaces
are available including one k w  the
Commodore serial port.
The speed claimed for this machine
is 120 characters per second but my tests
produced a slow and noisy 57cpi. I n
addition. the NU) mode does not permit
italics and the appearance of the NU)  is
not quite up to business correspondence
requirements despite the crisp and clear
appearance o f  t h e  w e l l  — fortned
characters.
In standard mode there is a choice
of' eight different typefaces selectable
from software codes o r  through a
somewhat complex system using the
control panel. Neither o f  the printer
modes supports proportional spacing.
BROTHER M-1109
This is a minute machine measuring only
I3x8 inches. making it ideal for those
with limited desk space. Although
Brownie points are awarded fOr the
inclusion o f  both serial and parallel
interfaces as standard, it  immediately
loses them again ten
panel.
Although NIX) mode can be selected
from one of the two membrane switches
on the panel, there is  no facility for
executing a ligni feed.
I often suspect that many printers
have tractor feeds ﬁtted as a  design
afterthought and the ﬁtting of this unit
causes problems on the M —1109. Most of
the problems result from the trade off
between compactness and convenience.
The tractor feed not only inhibits the
STAR NL-10
PRINTERS
Feed control switch but also negates the
use of the tear—off strip on the platten
cover. Similarly, the knurled wheel.
which Bmther have used in preterence to
a paper feed knob, is rendered difﬁcult
to use by the tractor feed attachment.
Apart from using the neat plastic
cover to cut down the noise, the user can
also utilise a special quiet printing mode.
This is  not easily accessed through
commercial products for example, when
planning to make hall a dozen telephone
calls while printing out a trial balance
because it can only be controlled by
software and few products allow for
unique commands such as this.
The printer i s  extremely slow,
clocking in at a tested 43cps against the
claimed It)Ocps but it does have a good
typeface.
The printer package is marred by an
extremely poor manual containing only
the briefest contents list, has no index at
all, no handy reference cards and no
explanations of control codes. In addition.
the diagrams relating t o  dip switch
positions are extremely confusing.
liked this machine immediately. It is
extremely well made and robust with
many delightful features.
The ﬁrst main feature is  that the
tractor feed is  built—in s o that the
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
28
machine maintains a clean, low proﬁle
and all parts of the paper feed path are
accessible in the event of a paper jam. An
intriguing automatic loading sequence
comes into play if the paper feed control
lever is moved back, so loading lantOld
or cut sheet paper is extremely easy on
this machine.
I also liked the ribbon cartridge
which has a removable sub—cassette to
keep r ibbon costs down, and t he
generously large knob attached to the
platten roller.
Another attractive feature is  the
interchangeable interface which is ﬁtted
with a  s ingle screw ensuring that
versatility and utility do not result in poor
electrical connections.
Compared t o  many o f  the other
printers on test the lugs and brackets
holding covers in place were all short and
stout and looked as if they would happily
endure hard wear. It would have been
better it the cartridge could have been
ﬁtted about half an inch nearer the outside
edge of the printer, away from the paper
track. For most applications this problem
can be solved by placing the leftmost
sprocket hard over to the extreme left
where the printer head will still reach the
edge of the paper.
Above all. I  lik ed the generous
control panel with no less than seven
indicator lights and ﬁve switches. From
the panel the user can select NU). bold.

pica. elite and condensed printhices.
Italics can also be accessed in both hold
and NLQ modes_
Another p a n e l  f e a t u r e  i s
micro — feed i ng : moving the paper a
fraction of a linefeed up or down. This
is us eful f o r  p r in t in g  c omplex
mathematical and scientiﬁc fOrmulac or
simply for placing the paper accurately
before a print run. There is also the
facility to reset the left and right margins:
very h a n d y  f o r  t h e  oc c as ional
non—standard document.
The Star is a big machine measuring
frix13 inches hut this space is well used
tiff robustness and convenience. The only
real complaint is with the rather cursory
indices in the instruction manuals one for
the printer and the other for the interface:
However, there is a gaily coloured prompt
card printed on plastic—coated paper hut
it doesn't include a list of the various
control codes.
With the prices now as low as f 248.
the Star NI..-10 gives the best value cif
any of the machines covered here.
OKI MICROLINE-182
The Microline-18.2 is business—like in
appearance: shallow
a tiny. unobtrusive control panel.
The low proﬁle is maintained, even
when fanfold paper is being used. by
mountini2, the tractor sprockets on the
PRINTERS
platten spindle itself. Placed at either end
of the spindle it means that the user is not
only limited to A4 fanfold. hut that the
loading of paper is also slightly trickier
because the sprocket wheels cannot be
adjusted independently. The manual does
show an alternative, more conventional
tractor feed as an optional extra.
The ribbon cartridge is minute and
makes me suspect the veracity o f  its
claimed capacity o f  three m illio n
characters i he Brother cartridge is twice
as large and only claims half a million!:
The interface socket i s  badly .
positioned so that the ribbon cable is
guaranteed t o interfere kk ith the paper
path and the streamlined shape of the
printer is spoiled by a paper—tear device
which engages awkwardly in slots on top
of the machine.
The Microline looks shoddily made
with thin, plastic panels and a paper feed
selection lever which looks particularly
frail. On my sample the colour of the
plastic cover didn't quite match that of the
plinth. one of the plastic lugs had already
broken off, the connector on the hack was
upside dom. n Whether in error or  by
design I know not and the mains cable has
a right angle connector which means the
cable leaves the machine in an awkward,
sideways fashion. There was also an
extremely. fragile looking wire clip whose
function I could not ascertain and the dip
switches could only be reached with the
YOUR COMMODORE IRRDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
29
aid of a screwdriver.
The mac hine i s  s tr ic tly  I B M
compatible whic h means that many
printer serial interfaces would not he able
to use Commodore printer emulation.
Otherwise the facilities are so limited that
the I BM codes should not prove too
difﬁcult to learn. The only faces are pica
and elite in condensed, double width or
with underline and without italics. What
Is classed as an NLQ mode failed to
impress with its poorly shaped characters
arid lack of true descenders on the 'g' and
the
The manual is very poor with ugly
two c o l o u r  p r in t in g  a n d  s la n g
Americanisms such as:
LPRINT "Who you gonna call?"
More importantly, t he index i s
inadequate omitting such important
headings as NLQ. D ip Switches later
found under: Switches, internal circuit
board and Boldfac e round under:
Printing. enhanced .emphasised. but with
nothing under Enhanced or Emphasised:
All in all I was not impressed with
this machine.
KAGA TAXAN KP810
The KP8I0 looks very similar to the
Canon PWI080 but considering its age,
it seems a little overpriced. It runs quietly
apart from a clunk at the end of each pass:
is easy to load and has full compatibility
with Epson codes.
Despite the lack of an indicator mode
it is nice to be able to select NLQ from
the panel of switches on the front of the
printer. NIA) does not support italics or
boldface but there is a wide range of print
modes and fonts giving variations on the
pleasant character set with attractively
curved tails on the decenders.
For those willing to trade off speed
for quietness, there is a special half speed
mode which will please the neighbours
during a nocturnal printing session.
The manual has a  very detailed
contents list, excellent line diagrams and
numerous tables detailing the various
character sets and their dot patterns.
I didn't like the ﬂush switches on the
control panel and found the platten would
not pass paper thicker than an original
with two carbon copies.
Despite my dealers opinion that this
machine is not to be recommended. I'm

afraid I must disagree and say that I was
favourably impressed with its  overall
performance.
SMITH CORONA D200
This model comes from an American
company w ith a  tine reputation f o r
typewriters and printers largely produced
in Japan. The D200 has been around for
some time in this day and age that means
more than a year and they are difﬁcult
to ﬁnd over here hut worth hunting out.
At a signiﬁcantly lower price than
similar models, the D200 offers excellent
ND) with boldface and italics. The print
quality was very good but some of the
lower case letters -have nal tops and
bottoms.
The printer has proper selection
switches on the front panel and the dip
switches are easily accessible at the back
of the printer without having to unscrew
anything. The serial interface is in—built
and a mains plug is  supplied already
ﬁtted.
My only anxiety about this machine
is the noise it  makes: the linefeed is
particularly clattery and though this could
indicate inadequate engineering I couldn't
actually see anything wrong.
In most models the tractor sprockets
are "pushers
tractors actually pull. With this system.
PRINTERS
manually feeding paper backwards for
re—alignment tends to result in a paper
jam. I found that this could be overcome
by switching over to friction feed when
feeding the paper hack, then hack to
tractor feed for printing.
The overall ﬁnish of the printer is
slightly marred by having a piece o f
acoustic padding crudely stuck onto its
base: necessary no doubt, but not very
neat.
1 8
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
30
I ant particularly irritated by the
handbook whic h. though apparently
comprehensive by its thickness, actually
contains a mere 35 pages of English text
with the rest being foreign language
regurgitations of the same indigestible
material. T he contents lis t is  totally
inadequate and descriptions are skimpy
and most unhelpful.
The outcome is a printer whose good
value—for—money rating is marred by' a
very poor manual.
Micro—Peripherals M I
This machine is  extremely small and
compact hut behaves in a t.rery pleasant
manner.
Although I  was pleased to note a
switch and accompanying lamp for NLQ
mode it seems a little ostentatious to
include lamps f o r  both Ready and
On—Line.
One o f  the dip switch banks is
located in a little cave at the hack of the
machine where it is easily accessible to
a pencil but you need a good light or a
pitmans helmet to read what purpose
each switch serves. Access to the other
bank of switches can only he achieved by
unscrewing the cover.
The machine was fairly quiet; in
particular the linefeed made virtually no
noise at all. Even the paper out signal
plays a pleasant little tune rather than the

PRINTERS
vulgar squeals emitted by most of the
other printers.
The various hinged top covers are
rather inconvenient and look  a  little
fragile. however, they have the beneﬁt of
being totally removable in the event of a
paper jam.
The paper tearing edge is attached to
the bail arm (the slim arm which swings
in to holds the paper lightly against the
platten just above the print head). The
tractors do not have locking devices to
hold them in place but rely on friction
instead. Despite my apprehension about
this system, it seemed to work very well.
The printout quality was only fair,
having no loops on the descenders, a
box—like "c" and the bar on the capital
"Q" barely escapes from the circle_
Though the NLQ mode summed italics.
it did not support boldface.
The manual is very good. it' only it
had an index at the back then it would he
excellent. In particular it emphasises the
wide range of character widths and types
that can be obtained.
The printer came less well packed
than any of the other samples so watch
out for damage when you ﬁrst receive it
The manual feed knob was also a bit stiff
with a non—reversible feed. In fact any
attempt t o  reverse teed paper w i l l
invalidate the warranty, according to the
manufacturers.
The MPI65 is a good printer at a
competitive price.
Canon PW1080A
This is a souped up version of the Kagan
Taxan KP810. I t  purports to print at
160cps rather than the KP's 140cps and
to perfOrm twelve carriage returns per
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
31
second, three more than the Kaga Taxan.
NLQ can be selected by a front panel
switch hut in every other respect the two
printers perform identically.
The model I tested suffered from the
same defects as the KP810: a disturbing
clunk at the end of each print line, lack
of italics o r  boldface in  NLQ  mode
(though you can buy a ROM which gives
NLQ italics), absence o f  an N L Q
indicator, and an inability to take more
than two carbons.
Under test it also suffered several
paper jams but I'm prepared to believe
that these were my fault rather than the
printer.
Printing quality was fair; in pica type
the " g '
descender whereas t he " f
gracefully.
Mannesmann Tally 85
Testing this machine after all the Japanese
printers was  rather lik e dr iv ing a
Volkswagen after a series of Datsuns: it
felt solid and reliable.
The speed is accentuated by a large,
selectable buffer. In my test on a 5000
character tex t i n  N L Q  mode, t h e
computer was free for use in 98 seconds
hut the printer chuntered on for a further
105 seconds.
The printer head i s  very quiet
especially in NLQ mode and the control

panel with its four switches and associated
indicator lamps is far more attractive than
those on any of the other printers.
The top cover removes completely to
give open access for freeing paper jams
or for general maintenance hut a hinge
would solve the problem of where to leave
it while wor k  i s  i n  proeress. T he
smoked—ﬁnish window makes it difﬁcult
to see what the printer is doing and I feel
that the temptation would be to leave the
cover off all the time.
The tractor feed pulls the paper
through the printer. This can he irritating
when you have to lose a sheet of paper
each time you teed fantbld paper through.
It's advisable to back feed with friction
feed set on the uncomfortably stumpy
tractor/friction lever selector.
Two excellent features are the slot for
exchangeable font cartridges, cunningly'
hidden behind a hinged door on the front
panel, and the software method o f
overridine the dip switch settings thus
avoiding the problem o f  manipulating
inconveniently placed. minute switches_
The dip settings are standard Epson
printer options and include Epson/IBM
compatibility, line spacing. form length.
zero symbol slash suppression. N ill)
mode, condensed lace. perlOration skip.
linefeed on carriage return and several
international character sets.
The quality of printing is very high
indeed. Boldface and italics are both
available in NU) mode, lower case letters
have properly looped descenders and the
"c
The two—part handbook is extremely
good_ The Operator's Manual has all the
necessary intOrmation tOr using and
maintaining t h e  pr inter  w h ile  t h e
Applications Manual suggest ways in
which your computer and printer can be
used together.
Both booklets are well produced.
detailed and lucid with a meticulous index
and a tear—off prompt card.
It's a  fantastic machine. I  ﬁrst
reviewed it in 1985 and was so impressed
that I  bought one. I t  has served me
faultlessly since then and was sold in'as
new' condition when I recently upgraded
to it  laser printer: a  tribute t o  its
robustness and reliability.
I may be biased but I unhesitatingly
recommend this printer to anyone who
can alliffd its slightly higher price.
PRINTERS
Panasonic KX—P1081
This is another superb value printer with
which great care has been taken t o
achieve ease o f  use. Three different
modes of operation can be controlled
from the main panel: draft. NU). and
condensed.
The dip switches are ingeniously
located in a cut—out in the base under the
print head. Its a pity that the cover is just
a cheap piece o f  cellophane without
which the circuitry would get covered in
YOITR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
32
paper dust.
Lacing u p  paper i s  usually a
hazardous and irritating routine on most
printers. Panasonic seem to have avoided
this and it's as it' an unseen hand grasps
the paper as it is ted into the printer and
then guides it  into position. With a
similarly sympathetic attitude towards the
trials an tribulations of printer ownership.
Panasonic's approach to ribbon changing
makes it an easy and relatively clean job
to load or remove the cassette.
t f nfortunately. I'm not so keen on the

plastic covers. especially the clear plastic
one which proved awkward to remove and
replace.
The print quality was generally good.
especially in NELQ mode. hut the lower
ease•g• lacks a loop. My test rendered a
speed of 96cps compared to its stated
120cps and this was achieved reasonably
quietly.
Panasonic has produced a detailed
handbook with a full index to counteract
the modest contents page. Some care has
been taken to explain the use of control
codes in a detailed and easily understood
way.
All these facilities. plus the relatively
low price, makes the KX —P1081 one of
the hest bargains around.
Triumph Adler RD7020
Triumph Adler are part of the Volkswagen
group. as you might guess just by looking
at the construction of  this daisywheel
machine: i t  i s  w e ll designed and
professionally ﬁn i s h e d .  t h o u g h
conservative in appearance and modestly
priced.
It is also fairly
19cps On its Own self test facility. Often
sound and speed have a  swings and
roundabouts relationship. consequently
this is  unusually quiet and pleasant
sounding for a daisywheel primer.
Writh many a  printer the whole
PR I VFERS
household and sonic of the neighbours are
aware when its in use but the RD7020 can
he rendered noiseless simply by closing
the door to the room it is in. Even making
a phonecall while its working in the same
room would be possible and yet I still feel
that the noise level could be reduced even
further with the use of acoustic wadding!
The metal parts are particularly
robust and all the electronics are protected
within a sturdy, screening. metal box.
This robustness appears to apply to all
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
33
areas of construction: the isolation switch
under the main cover has a substantial.
bright red striker and another sturdy
plastic lever ejects the daisywheel from
its spindle.
It was this daisywheel lever that led
me into trouble. I accidentally released
the daisywheel belOre attempting a
printout and broke i t  as  a  result.
Daisywheels are not inexpensive items
and, though I admit that the fault was my
ox% n_ I think a little bit of idiot—prooﬁng
would not go amiss.
The Triumph Adler daisywheels have
a slightly larger diameter than the Quote
and D iablo wheels b u t  c arry  IOU
characters S'ix more than either of the
others and come in  ten international
character sets.
The paper handling system i s
particularly elegant. A  single lever
operates the automatic feed. neatly
moving the bail arm out of the way at the
same time. and the tear—off edge seemed
to perform better than any  I  have
encountered.
A revolutionary design feature is the
wax that the data cable enters the printer
through a generous slot on the underside.
This arrangement obviates the problem of
the cable tOuling the paper feed.
The front panel sw itches are properly
constructed and there are easy mechanical
selector switches f o r  page length.
daisywheel type and print pitch.

The RD7020 has a lever which allows
the selection o f  single or  multistrike
ribbons. As well as a 60.0(X) character
carbon ribbon, the printer supports a
200.000 character multistrike carbon
ribbon and a million character fabric
ribbon.
Points I didn't like about this machine
are the paper advance knob and the
ribbon selection lever. The manual paper
advance knob is spring—loaded and has
to be pulled outwards before it  w ill
engage. I Ihund this particularly awkward
and i t  seems t o  be an unnecessary
reﬁnement. On the other hand, the ribbon
transport selector is  essential but the
symbol panel which indicates the mode
that has been selected is obscured by the
casing housing the electronics.
I only  have a  draft copy Of the
manual and there appears t o  b e a
reasonable contents lis t, plenty  o f
explanations o f  control codes and
abbreviations hut. inexcusably, no index
and no indication of the availability of
extra daisywheels.
Qume Letterpro 20P
The thing that impressed me most about
this printer was that it was the onlv one
that performed up to its speciﬁcation
when subjected to my speed test.
The Letterpro is constructed to a high
standard w it h a  robust. aluminium.
diecast lower body and no less than 100
different daisywheels available.
My prejudice against membrane
switches was  defeated b y  t he ty pe
included o n the main panel o f  this
machine. They have an extremely positive
reel with a  neat appearance and the
presence of a reverse feed switch was
particularly welcome. Not everyone will
like the awkward way in  which this
reverse teed switch works hut at least
there is a reverse drive facility.
When the switch is pressed once it
advances the paper by an eighth of a line.
To advance by a Mil line the switch must
be pressed eight times. This should not
he the case because the paper ought to
advance by a line at a time simply by
holding the switch down. It does actually'
do this but, after a short delay to allow
kw lingering lingers on a short advance.
the paper shoots through at a surprising
rate. With quick reﬂexes an operator
PRIM ERS
could learn to anticipate the pause hut I
feel most people will do what I did by
resorting to the manual feed knob.
Letterpro does not take too kindly to
carbon copies, with the print intensity
switch set at its middle value it could only
produce one carbori copy o f  suitable
quality.
Despite this, the paper handling
systems are the best features o f  this
machine. The tractor teed and cut—sheet
hopper are cleverly designed t o  be
removed and replaced in seconds but it's
the paper feed mechanism which really
excels.
The tractor feed is truly reversible
arid holds the paper just as securely on
the way in as it does on the way back out
again. Freedom from the worries of paper
jams which are normally caused by
attempting to run the paper back and forth
through the printer can open up new.
creative possibilities. Text can be printed
in several columns to give an appearance
similar t o  these magazine pages by
printing the ﬁrst column, reverse form
feeding, printing the next column by
TABbing past the ﬁrst and so on until the
page is ﬁlled.
The manual caused m e  a  few
problems. I t  states that the printer is
hi—directional but nomatter what I did
the head would pass across the paper on
a printing pass and peribrm a carriage
return h a d  t o  the left margin. A
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
34
bi—directional printer craftily prints out
the next line as it travels back to the left
margin. Speed tests revealed that the
printer was  c los e enough t o  it s
speciﬁcation of 20cps for me to assume
that it is not a hi—directional machine.
Further investigation revealed that
the printer on my table didn't quite match
the pr inter i n  t h e  manual. These
differences were slight such as  the
ten—gang dip switch was in reality only
eight—ganged and t he silencer bar
mentioned in the manual did not appear
on the machine.
The Letterpro pruner is extremely
well made and this reﬂects the years of
experience which Qume have gained.
Perhaps it's also this seniority which
accounts f o r  the lac k  o f  any truly
revolutionary features. Despite this it has
to he said that if you want a solidly made.
reliable machine with top ﬂight paper
handling capabilities, the Letterpro 20P
is the obvious choice.
Juki 6200
This whispering giant appealed to me
immediately because it was so easy to set
up for review and was the quietest of the
printers on trial. In tests it pertOrmed very
close t o  it s  claimed speciﬁcations.
achieving a  speed o f  27 c p i and
comfortably took A3 fanliild paper with
an inch or so to spare. Even taking the

PRINTFRS
large manual feed knob into account, the
width of the machine is still only 60cni
but the lack of an automatic paper loading
system makes lacing up A3 fanfold a
tedious task.
The diecast base and all the other
metal parts look robust but the plastic
used seems rather .
width of the machine_ The back of the
cover has several thin plastic lugs which
I think would break off very early in the
printer's life.
The ribbon and Diablo compatible
daisywheel are extremely quick and easy
to ﬁt and the cables all emerge from the
side of the machine, well away from the
fanfold paper train.
The manual i s  intOrmative and
surprisingly entertaining. Apart from the
detailed instructions and explanations,
there's a section on the history of printing
and typing. It was in this section that I
was amazed to ﬁnd a small sketch, dated
1890. showing a typist using an electric
dictating machine!
The size. silence and simplicity of
this machine shows why it has proved so
popular in ofﬁce environments hut for
home use its price is a disadvantage_
Okimate 20
This is a thermal printer which can take
a three c olour  r ibbon f o r  special
applications. Although thermal paper is
not essential 14 this printer, it exi he used
lin
prove to be more economical as we shall
see.
Any thermal printer has a print head
which contains 24 tiny heating elements
that press against the paper or ribbon. If
thermal paper is used. the localised heat
from each pin discolours the paper but,
on normal paper. ribbons work  by
depositing a small amount of  a waxy
substance fr om their  surface when
touched by a hot pin to fOrm the matrix
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
35
dot—pattern for each character.
Ribbons c an b e  black h u t  the
Okimate allows the use of a tricolour
ribbon whic h gives limited c olour
printing capabilities. The ribbon cassette
looks a little like an audio cassette and
the c olour  r ibbon i s  div ided in t o
alternating lengths of red_ yellow and hlue
sections. each group o f  three being
divided by a clear plastic section. Each
colour segment is about 25cm long (10
inches) and the printer whizzes the ribbon
hack and forth at an alarming rate.
This system has three side—effects.
Firstly. the printer works very slowly
indeed. Secondly, a l l  t h is  r ibbon
movement increases the likelihood of a
ribbon breaking and. ﬁnally, the ribbon
is consumed at an alarming rate. I f  a
colour ribbon is used in monochrome
mode, this will obviously tie used up at
three times the rate of a unicolour ribbon.
With ribbons costing 1:6 each the cost
factor becomes a serious consideration.

Does it work? Rather surprisingly, it
does but paper selection is critical. The
teed mechanism doen't handle thicker
paper happily and for the sharpest image
a thin, high–gloss paper should be used.
The printer can handle expanded,
condensed and italic prints as well as
underlining, superscripts and subscripts.
There is also a NIS„) mode as well as the
Brother M–I/09
MA
73.5
NIP NLQ italics, handbi)i)k p;irticidarh• poiir
Brother Al –L509
MA
495
Excellent, 132 -column printer
Canon PIV/0804
MA
349
NrOiNy ;indeed. no N U )  indicator
Cititen 12.01)
MA
263
Poor NLQ. heavx discounts
Filson I S  – 8 6
MA
1
No friction ked With tractor drive lined
Juki 6200
DIV
579
A3 teed. quiet. expensive
K a  Thxan KPS10
MA
349
C
Mannesmann Tally MT–S5
MA
390
Reliability and quality at a price
MKT( r –Peripherals M1'165
MA
Compact. pleasant, fair quality
Okimatc 20
TH
173
High novelty value, can prikluce overhead pro/et:trim itcetates
Oki MicroIiik-182
269
Business like. IBM standard only. poor manual
Panasiwie KX --PION!
.V1A
245
Good value. easy to use, poor construction
Qrtinc Letterpro 201'
DIV
450
Reliable, t4
Smith COrOthi 1)200
MA
288
I...onk
Star N1,-10
MA
248
Robust. wide ranging Meanies. noisy
Triumph Adler 'IRD7020
DV.
375
A3 feed. robust, good value tbr money
The Verdict
MACHINE
Conclusion
usual draft mode.
The main drawbacks w it h  this
machine is  the appalling paper teed
system. both in design and construction.
The very poor instructions in the manual
compound these failings and the net result
is a frustrating time with the inevitable
paper jams. Because the paper has to be
so thin it is difﬁcult to load and I've found
TYPE PRICE
(E)
PRIM ERS
The Star N L
a very reasonable price. I t  is soundh
cinistrtieted with anew-client paper teed:
the tpclEiccs a
attractive. including both italic and bold
t_% pelaces i n  N L Q :  interchangeable
COMMENT
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
36
that thin acetate works best.
The printer could not be seriously
considered tiv  frequent use but it does
have the potential for providing a lot of
fun for those with a passionate desire to
experiment with colour printing.
The price of  £173 or  less frankl%
reﬂects the poor quality of construction
of this machine.
cartridge intertiices: versatile front panel
c o w l
non–indexed. manual. Ar 124S, in• less.
it ot•rs exceptional value lin money
hi the thisxw heel tango. all printers
%k en constructed but the linter price
and i d e  platten makes the Triumph
R1)1120 the Irina runner

e Machine
to
Mania
N •E
TO the layman, the range of Commodore machines in the
shops can be confusing. What are they and what can
they do?
by Norman Dqvie
•
t the moment Commodore have quite a range 0 1
A
available. You can still buy the Plus4 and the Cl() at bargain
prices, some of the old -style C128s are still around, hut by tar
the greatest numbers are in the Cl28D, MC and Amiga modes.
Commodore's marketing philosophy tOr the ('lb and Plus4
is not easy to understand. When everyone else was shouting about
upward compatibility. Commodore decided to go their own way.
Commodore can't have been too happy with the surge of
apathy which greeted their new machines. The main problem
was not the quality of the machines. in many ways they are
excellent, hut that they lacked any compatibility with the highly
successful C64. lithe Plus4 had been a CM with advanced Basic
and integral ﬁrmware business programs, with a cut down C64
presented as the C16, then the addition of the C128 would have
given Commodore a range without parallel. In short. I belie
expense of Amstrad and Sinclair. Untiriunately. this was not
to he.
Despite this apparent error of judgement, the sales of Clos
and Plus4s has resulted in the development of quite a healthy
user base. This phenomenon is due to heavy discounting and
both machines have subsequently enjoyed a relatively long and
healthy lifespan.
Commodore 16
Based around the 7501 chip. the Cl() has I6K of RAM. though
COMPUTERS
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
37
only I2K is available for Basic programming. The memory is
expandable to M K  to make ii act like a PI us4 without the
in—built ﬁrmware business programs. Commodore did have
plans to produce an expansion RAM pack hut it didn't go into
production and much praise is due to A w n  who have been
successfully selling their own Cl() expansion cartridge.
The screen of the CI6 measures 40 columns by 25 rows in
text mode. 320x200 pixels in hi --res and 160x200 pixels in
multicolour. hi —res mode. Additionally, there are two extra split
screen hi —res modes which leaves the bottom live lines in text

mode. All these modes are addressable through the superb,
extended Basic commands.
There are no sprites in the computer's graphics armoury
which means that games often display attribute problems unless
the moving characters are multiples of the basic eight pixel
square. If a character doesn't ﬁll the full square, overlap onto
the background results in the colour of the moving graphic
masking the colour of the background.
Colour capability generally is far superior to the C64. Apart
From black, each of the remaining 15 colours can be displayed
in one of eight hues. or luminences. This permits the use of subtle
shading effects.
The 0 6 looks very like the C64 or VIC20 until you examine
the 110 ports, they all look different from the C64 apart from
the video and serial ports. The use of miniature DIN sockets
for joystick and cassette linkage has caused problems because
of the unavailability of these plugs and the delicate nature of the
very thin connection pins.
The cartridge port is also different from that of the C64
but this time there's a very good reason. If anyone was foolhardy.
enough to try connecting a C64 cartridge to the C16, the result
would be an apparent malfunction because of the differing
internal memory architecture of the two machines.
By far the greatest strength of  the machine lies in its
extended Basic Version 3.5. This adds about 50 new keywords
to the original Basic which Commodore had clung to since the
early PET machines.
Through the new commands, graphics and sound registers
can be addressed more easily, the loop structures are more
sophisticated and error trapping is at last possible. The built—in
machine code monitor is also an asset. Having been plagued
by the lack of a C64 internal monitor, this is a feature which
elicits my envy.
The C16 has been a much misunderstood machine standing
in the shadow of the C64. It is still a bargain today at under i100
hut the few software houses who have persevered with C16
conversions are now tiring as more and more of the users become
disenchanted with the lack of charisma of the machine.
Plus4
Everything I've said about the CI6 is true for the Plus4. In
addition to all these virtues. the Plus4 has 64K of RAM ft) which
a massive 60K is available for Basic programs. Given that the
new Basic ROM means more structured and less verbose
programs than with previous versions of Basic, the machine
becomes awesome in its programming potential.
In appearance. you could be k m
close links with its little sister machine, the two computers bear
less resemblance than the C16 does to the C64. Although
Commodore intended the Plus4 to ooze businesslike appeal, to
my eyes it looks cheap and nasty and belies its real strengths.
An extra port is available on the rear of the machine. This
is the standard RS232 type of connector which also appears on
the C64. Through this port parallel communications are possible
and an adaptor will turn this into a suitable RS-232 link for
use with a modem.
The Plus4 got its name because of the four in --built
COMPUTERS
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
38
programs contained o n  special ROMs. These contain a
wordprocessor, database, a spreadsheet and a business grahics
program.
There are two schools of thought on this subject. I f  the
programs suit your needs, this is the best machine you could
ever wish to own. If the programs fail to satisfy you then they
may as well not be there.
Another irritating fact is that the Plus4 is generally supplied
with a cassette recorder but the application software is geared
up solely for disk use! This means that buyers of the Plus4 also
have to fork out an extra i200 for a disk drive, or ﬁddle about
with the internal monitor to access tape. I often ask myself why
Commodore didn't allow dual operation of tape and disk but
always come up with a stupid answer.
The wordprocessor allows a maximum line width of 77
characters. My ﬁrst reaction was to ridicule the fact that this
was d e c
have 80 characters to a line. However, I then realised that I always
set a left and right margin of ﬁve characters' width, so 77
characters is. after all, quite reasonable.
Once all the text has been entered for a document, special
commands allow lines to be inserted or deleted, the movement
of blocks of text around the document, set the page length and
the number of lines which will appear on that page. and has
a function which enables the user to search for a speciﬁed word
and change it when necessary.
Other commands allow you to set tabulation points, centre
lines of text on the page automatically, right justify a document,
and to load, save or even merge another ﬁle onto the text in
memory.
The database allows each record to contain a maximum of
17 ﬁelds (pieces o f  information) with a  maximum o f  38
characters per ﬁeld. The maximum number of individual records
in a single database is restricted to 999 but this can be less if
all o f  your ﬁelds are used with the maximum number of
characters.
Once your database has been set up. there are several
commands at your disposal to help you to sift through the
information. One of the normal functions of a database is to sort
the information into alphabetical or numerical order and this
can be done on the Plus& The main requirement, however, is

! M I
a
ics
:he
ild
Icy
.ed
ed
SO
iut
hy
tut
77
is
d)
ys
77
al
nt
rd
re
t
in
Is
if
ii
rt
the need to be able to extract information. To this end, there
are Search and Review facilities. Review simply ﬂips a number
of records sequentially onto the screen, starting from a speciﬁed
record number. When a desired record is found this  function
can easily be aborted. Search allows you to ﬁnd a speciﬁed
record by allowing you to specify a string of characters, such
as a friend's surname, and the computer will pull this from the
tile and display it onto the screen. The database also allows the
user to print out a report ﬁle which only itemises selected data
from each record.
The spreadsheet is a ﬁxed frame type. having a matrix
measuring 17 columns by 50 rows. This gives 850 cells but only
a three by twelve block of cells can be viewed at a time. The
cells can be assigned complex formulae which automatically
calculate its contents according to the contents of other cells
speciﬁed by the equation.
The graphics program is  more an extension o f  the
spreadsheet than a stand alone module. It is very disappointing
allowing only bar and point graphs. I t  would have seemed
reasonable to have expected a pie chart with the graphics
capabilities of the machine. Commodore's excuse is that it
maintains compatibility with all printers but surely those owners
of archaic dot matrix or daisywheel printers would soon learn
that some of the graphs were unprintable and that owners of good
dot matrix machines would have beneﬁtted from extra ﬂexibility.
Commodore decided that it was better to penalise all with this
bureaucratically democratic facility!
Owners of C64s with disk drives can beneﬁt from buying
a Plus4 at today's low prices. For less than the cost of four
applications programs they can buy the Plus4 as a dedicated
business machine, sharing the C64's drive. For others, it's not
such a bargain unless you're willing to cough up for a disk drive
and printer. You'd probably be better oft with a C128.
Commodore 128
The Cl28 brought Commodore back onto the right lines for
system development. Upward compatibility does not mean that
you can't run a toad ly different Basic and change the architecture
about to suit the new regime. You simply include the old machine
inside the new one, and upgraders will still be able to use their
old software until the new programs can be afforded. Throw in
CP/M as well a n d
Well it was a nice theory but it faltered because of the
reticence of software houses to speculate on the 1.28 side of the
machine in deference to the guaranteed sales of C64 products.
If the houses had been willing to invest in the C128 by producing
software today to raise proﬁts tomorrow, then the scene could
have been all that Commodore had envisaged. The C128 is the
best eight—bit that Commodore haw produced. It has relatively
fast disk access and stacks of memory to play with. The V7.0
Basic is an improvement on version 3.5 and the RGB facilities
means the best Commodore picture you've ever seen.
What shattered t h e  software houses' conﬁdence?
Commodore should have more readily put their money where
their mouth was both tOr the 128 and the CP/M modes. Investing
capital to get selected, reputable companies to produce a
reasonable software base would have shown their conﬁdence in
COMPUTERS
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
39
the machine's success more effectively. A range of adapted and
inexpensive CP/M business programs could also have aroused
the interest of the small business fraternity giving second wind
to the sales drive. Commodore must break their arrogant attitude
that all they need do is produce the machine and then the software
world will support it. Who wants to buy a machine that has no
software: who wants to develop software for a machine with a
small user base?
The original C128 did not last for long before the Cl281)
appeared. With 128K of memory to ﬁll. few users have a lifespan
that will outreach the time that a cassette machine takes to load
a suitably large program! The Cl28D with its classy separate
keyboard and integral disk drive is the machine that should have
been launched originally.
Little has been said about the Cl28D in the computer press
and yet it's such a superb machine. Admittedly the 80/40 column
split can be a hit of a pain but I've known worse situations.
The keyboard is  very professional looking and quite
comfortable to use. Hacking in data is facilitated by the numerical
keypad and. once you get used to theirnew• position, the function
keys are easily reached. This  layout did initaially cause
probablems with games using keyboard overlays but, now that
software houses take this into account, life isn't so bad.
The disk drive is a 1571 double—sided drive which means
better value for  money where disk storage is  concerned.
Although this pushes bytes around 17 times faster than the old
1541, when your using the machine in CM mode the brakes are
applied and it's back to relying on software turbo systems.
The C128 could have an important role in a business. All
of the text in this magazine was processed on one and the editor
loves his Cl28D dearly. The software base is there but you have
to look for it, perhaps another price cut would breathe new life
into the machine.

Amiga
The Amiga k Conmaxiore's new ﬂagship. It's not their lirst foray
into the 16—hit market hut it's certainly their best. With the A500,
A2000 and, while stocks last, the A1000. their is plenty of choice.
The A500 at its current price of around t:500 has still been
criticised as being too expensive compared to the Atari ST hut.
let's face it. it beats that machine hy light years and a higher
price didn't stop the BBC Micro from gaining a fair proportion
of the eight—bit market with less to commend it.
The features of the Amiga are almost legendary: 5I2K
RAM. the Muer high speed data transfer chip. 320x256 up to
640x5I2 pixel resolution. more colours than a hippies wardrobe.
built in text—to—speech facilities. a  stereo sound chip o f
awesome capabilities. integral 3.5—inch disk drive...this list
could go on li)rever!
When you consider the A2000, the true power of the machine
becomes obvious. With 11Y1b RAM standard hut expandable
internally t o  9Mb. multitasking capabilities a  nd the nem,
Bridgeboard system. Although the Bridgeboard appeared to have
a few glitches in the original A2000. Commodore now claim
to have cured this and I ain waiting with baited breath to Nee
if full IBM XT  level compatibility. is possible. At the Amiga
launch cynically seasoned journalists were heard to gasp when
the Amiga was shown running Microsoft's MS—DOS graphics
program. Deluxe Paint in Amiga mode and the Amiga demo
programs all at the same time!
COMPUTERS
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
40
Time will tell if  the Amiga is a winner, it should be but
Commodore have had so many winners in the past that have
fallen behlre the winning. post. It all depends on marketing hut
Commodore seem to he gaining the lead which has always been
their rightful place.
uottgal
1

PERIPHERALS
Of Mice and Pens
Computcr graphics can produce stunning results. hut the
artist often needs a help in hand,
Norman Doyle
he difference between conventional art and computer
T
graphics is that the maestro and the medium no longer come
into contact. Instead a remote control device of sonic kind must
be employed. This can take the limn of the keyboard. a joystick.
a mouse. lightpen or graphics tablet.
Eor most people the ﬁrst graphics tool will be the keyboard
or a joystick used in conjunction with one of the many graphics
programs which are currently available.
Using the keyboard is probably the hardest way in IA hieh
to create a picture. The use of cursor keys is simple for straight
horizontal or vertical lines but diagonals and arcs are almost
impossible to create accurately in freehand mode.
Although most art packages have special facilities for
drawing such shapes, there will come a time when the design
calls for a spiral or a speciﬁc parabola which cannot be created
in anything other than freehand mode.
Working Sticks
Even if they own no other peripherals. most computer users have
a joystick in their collection and this must singularly he the most
common tool used in graphics.
The selection of a joystick is one of personal choice. I am
currently using a Quiekshot Turhti which is ideal lbr graphics
because of the integral tire buttons on the ergonomically designed
handgrip. Spectravideo's design team also had the foresight to
include rubber suckers on the base of the unit. This means that
I can anchor it ﬁrmly on my desk leaving one hand free to
manipulate the key'board selected modes of my graphics package.
If t:12 .99 a13.99 br  C16/Plus4) is too much Ito- your budget.
there is a less expensive version. The Quiekshot II. lin
0.99 (1:8.99 C16) which also sports suction feet.
The way a joystick program operates is to check the value
of memory location 56320 D C 0 0  f o r  Control Pon I or 56321
t DC01 I for Port 2. These locations correspond to two bytes
on the MOS 6526 complex interface adaptor ( C I A  ) •  The
joYstick's connection plug doesn't actually use all nine pins of
the socket because only six are required; one for each direction
(tour connections), one for the ﬁre button and an earth connector
which grounds the pin which is currently' switched to on by the
joystick's movement.
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
41
Inside the CM. the niovement of the stick can be detected
by reading the lower four bits of register 56320, the ﬁfth hit being
the ﬁre button detector.
Direction
North
Smith
West
East
Northeast
Southeast
Southwest
Northwest
Fire
%Wile
2
4
8
5
16
The easiest yvay to read the joystick front Basic is through
the WAIT command using the tOrm WAIT JAL% For Control
Port I the value of a is 145 and for Port 2 its value is 56464.
To test for a direction the values of b and c are both the
same. So to test tbr an upward movement on a joystick in Port
A. a sample program would he:
10 PRINT"(CLR MOVE JOYSTICK"
20 WAIT 145.31:REM CLEAR THE PORT
30 WAIT 145.1.1
40 PR1NT"JOYSTICK UP"
Although sampling of the joystick port is possible from
Basic, a truly reliable program is best created using an interrupt
routine in machine code to test the Control Ports' states. This
means that the joyport is tested sixty times a second which is
much faster than any subroutine call in Basic could ever be.
Greater Potential
Just as a joystick is many times better than keyboard control.
so a potentiometer joystick is better than the normal switched
joystick. The reason for the greater control lies in the way it
is connected to the computer.
The Control Ports have nine pins, we know that six of these
are used by the standard joystick but there are two special pins
which give access to a special facility known as AID, or analogue
to digital, conversion.

POT X o r
POT Y input
GND
100k ohm
• 1 mfd
Potentiometer joystick circuit.
An analogue signal is one which constantly varies. a digital
one varies in ﬁnite steps. The potentiometer joystick creates an
analogue signal through a variable resistor (potentiometer) which
gradually allows more or less voltage to pass as it is rotated,
rather like a volume control increases and decreases sound.
Movement on the screen can be broken down into two
components, vertical and horizontal. Accordingly. the joystick
contains two potentiometers ingeniously. linked at 90 degrees
to one another so that the amount of stick movement in any
direction causes rotational movement of the potentiometers which
reﬂects the degree of the two components of the movement. This
increases and decreases the voltage through each over a range
from zero to ﬁve volts.
A single byte can store any whole value from 0 to 255 hut
with no decimal places. The voltage must therefore be made to
trigger the byte to jump one value as every 20 millivolt change
is detected. This analogue to digital conversion is achieved
a special section of the SD) chip. The values recorded for the
horizontal and vertical component can then he used to pinpoint
a speciﬁc position on the screen.
The external circuitry for this control is shown in Figure
I but remember that there are two identical circuits in each stick.
These circuits connect through pins 5 (vertical component) and
9 (horizontal component) on the Control Ports. The pins are
indirectly connected to the SID chip locations 54297 and 54298
and their values should be 128 when the stick is in its central
rest position.
A mouse works on the same principal but resembles a
trackerball turned upside down with two buttons placed on the
top surface. These two buttorfeyes
PERIPHERALS
NI101
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
42
the table with a long•tail
earned the unit its name. Mice can he totally controlled by one
hand and frees the other hand for operating the keyboard. Many
people seem to dislike mice when they ﬁrst use them hut after
a while they ﬁnd these delightful little creatures have become
totally indispensable.
Light Works
Watching someone using a lightpen is very like watching
a traditional artist at work. The sheer magic of passing this
hi—tech wand over the screen and creating an ellect is impossible
to describe. Apart from anything else, how does the computer
know where to make this mark?
Lightpens pinpoint their position through principles similar
to those employed by the potentiometer joystick md the mouse
hut each location is derived by a totally different nietikx1 sensing
system.
A T V picture is created by a stream of electrons being
beamed across the screen in a regular pattern of (25 lines la
raster scan). The screen is treated with a special coating which
emits light according to the strength of the beam of electrons
which hits the screen and fades slowly enough Ibr it to maintain
a reasonable output until the next scan. I f  a sensor is placed
in front of a point on the screen it can detect the moment that
the scan passes by.
A lightpen contains one such sensor and. because the scan
is controlled by the computer. the position of the pen can be
accurately located. By peeking into memory locations which
keep track o f  the beam scan. the horizontal and vertical
placement of the pen can he calculated.
This is the theory but the practice is a little less accurate
than it could be because of the way in which the VIC chip
operates. The Y—axis (the vertical position) is measured to two
pixels of accuracy but on the X—axis this is reduced to four
pixels. What this means is that you don't get pinpoint accuracy
with a lightpcn and software has to compensate for this with
Zoom tkilities and the like.

The components for the screen position can be read from
locations 53267 (X component) and 5326 C  Y component
Obviously accuracy will further be affected if these locations
are read from Basic because of the time delay involved in reading
the two locations_
To help soft ware programniers, a switch or trigger of some
kind is also included on the pen so that software can be informed
of the exact moment when a point is to be plotted. This trigger
is connected through the same pin which is used for the jovstick
tire button on Control Port A only.
The Plot Thickens
Potentially the most useful art peripheral is a graphics tablet like
the lamed Koala Pad This is another way that computer art
can approach the traditional pen and paper approach, Simply
by tracing out a shape w ith a st Ins, a faithful reproduction can
be produced on the screen.
The pad is crisscrossed with a pressure sensitive matrix
covered by a rugged but yielding surface. Ideally there would
he a crosswire at each pixel location hut once again the
limitations of the computer's electronics inhibits such pixel point
accuracy.
Access to the output of the pad is achieved through the same
pins used by the mouse.
Shoppers' Guide
Several companies produce mice for the C64/128 and anyone
buying the special 64C pack will ﬁnd the Neos mouse and its
accompany ing Cheese soft ware inside the box Those yy ho wish
to buy the Neos package will ﬁnd it widely available hut anyone
haying problems can buy the mouse and software from Stack
Computer Products for 124.95 on cassette or 129.95 on disk.
Their own Stack Mouse may seem a little expensive at 05.00
hut it has three tr iter  buttons and an X —Y axis lock ibr greater
control.
The AMA' Mouse from Advanced Memory
features three buttons and the package costs ./.69.95.
Wrigmore's produce the .1 /82000 Mouse for 164.90 which
includes their Artist 64 cassette software. Disk owners will have
to fork out an extra 13.50 for their copy. The mouse has a special
function. if the computer is powered up while holding down one
of the two mouse buttons it can be used like an eight —directional,
switched joystick_
PERIPHERALS
r
• L i t Z i
CAME
C c h
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
43
With a price LQ.! of £24.99, the Date! Muttse may seem the
most economical of the three—button mice hut it doesn't ha e
any software support included in the price.
The ﬁrst lightpen I ever saw was the Slack Light pm. It's
around today and still costs only £28.00 which can't be had
especially when you consider that you get a graphics package
and ten games.
Trojan's lightpen is  another old trooper yy ith a  great
reputation. Rather than sell a graphics package as a backup to
the lightpen. this is a lightpen which backs up the Cadmaster
software. There's more good news because the C16 version costs
exactly the same as the C64 one. £19.95. which by any standards
is excellent value.
Another  package offering a free hightpcn is Blazing Paddle.%•
From Date!. Blazing Paddles is an impressive software package
and at I:24.99 with a lightpen it is a bargain which is hard to
resist.
When it collies to potentiometer joysticks and graphics pads
the range becomes extremely limited. The Koala Pad has not
been available over here for some time hut may occasionally.
turn up in second hand offers and should he snapped up
immediately. Beyond this I know of no other pads speciﬁcally
designed for the Commodore market.
With potentiometer joysticks the outlook is not so bleak hut
can hardly he described as rosy! Stack Computer Products
stock the Revs Analogue Jo stick lin only £10.95 and many of
the Japanese MSX standard joysticks were produced with
potentiometers inside but their leads would need modifying 10
suit the Commodore socket. It's best to stick to the Japanese
manufacturer's makes such as Toshiba, Pioneer or JVC because
all of the British made joysticks are standard sw itch—operated
types.
Missing Feature
Whatever you decide to buy for your graphics aid, there's no
getting a t  fr om the fact that you'll have to buy a graphics
package to supply the correct on—screen environment. If you're
going for the exotic options such as a I ightpen then go for a fully
inclusive package of pen and software. I f  you don't like the
software in the package, you can always buy a suitable package
later on.
Whatever your ﬁnal decision may be there is an extra facility
which you'll need that isn't supplied on any of the software menus
I've seen...tdicnt.'

A
La
Cart
It's taken live years hut the cartridge revolution is here.
Now the only problem is to ﬁnd the one tailored to your
needs.
by Tony Hetherington
T
its o w n  when i t  comes t o  utility
cartridges. The BBC has its ROM chips
but the C64 owner need only plug in a
cartridge to speed up disk access, add a
range of useful utility commands. create
a screen dump. freeze a game to create
a cheat version or. in my case, take a
magazine screenshot and dump programs
from tape or disk onto another disk or
tape in a compact ft)rm allow ing you to
pack more games on one disk.
Some cartridges contain routines to
backup commercial software whic h
should only be used for personal use. I
accept the right of an individual to backup
his own games and convert them from
tape to disk (instead of paying again for
a disk version of the same game) but 1
must condemn any attempts to use these
devices for software piracy.
Piracy robs the software house of its
proﬁts and the programmer, designer and
graphic artist of their royalties and as a
result is pushing up software prices. This
will affect everyone and inay eventually
deprive the honest users of devices like
these of a useful utility.
The current trend towards packing
UTILITY IRRDWARE
game boxes full of booklets and play aids
may counteract this form of theft and will
ensure that pirate copies will never he
quite the same as the original.
Before we look at the amazing range
available I'd just like to remind everyone
that cartridges should never be plugged
in while the computer is powered up. You
may get away with it once or twice hut
it's a sure thing that' o u r  computer and
possibly the cartridge will come to grief
eventually.
Most of these cartridges are available
from m a il order houses and good
computer shops but some may take a little
more effort to track down. 1 would like
to thank Microsnips (37 Seaview Rd.
Wallasey. Merseyside. 1.A5 4QN) (Or their
help in supplying some of the cartridges
mentioned in this article.
Quickdisc+ /  Evesham
Micros / E19.95
This cartridge provides a LOAD/SAVE
facility that's 5  times faster than the
normal 1541 snail's pace plus a variety of
other utilities.
The cartridge has a large red reset button
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
44
within easy reach. This button will break
int() any program that has locked up the
C64 and using the OLD command you
can then retrieve your bugged Basic
program.
The reset button may be the most
visible beneﬁt and the faster LOAD/SAVE
ability the most used but the cartridge

also contains a selection of commands
accessed through two key presses or one
of the function keys as well as a cure I'm
the'save and replace' bug.
Formatting a disk is a quick and
simple task w ith Quickdisk II. Instead of
typing in a laborious conunand and then
having to wait for over a minute while the
drive hammers away, %NO:disk name. ID
formats the whole disk in just 20 seconds!
Pressing F7 displays the disk directory
which can be paused at any stage by
pressing the space bar, It's also as easy
to scratch, rename or copy a ﬁle or to
validate, renew or initialise a disk.
Programs that are loaded in at 5- 7
times faster (you won't apprecitate this
until you've used it) can be loaded to a
ﬁle address or into Basic where it may
even be autorun.
If you've got a disk drive and you
can't afford something like Dolphin DOS
then you might like to pick up a copy of
Quickdisc+.
The Final Cartridge /
Products / C39.00
The Final Cartridge has a freeze utility
that can backup software and generate
screen dumps. Basic extension commands
such as DIOAD and AUTO. software to
support C e n t r o n ic s  in t e r la c e s .
preprogrammed function keys. 24K of
extra RAM and a disk or tape turbo that
loads programs 6 or I() times faster.
When the C64 is switched on or reset
via the cartridge button, a  menu is
displayed from which you can call up a
comprehensive machine code monitor:
disable the cartridge: turn on the cartridge
ready to load or create a program: save
to tape or disk: or printout a screen dung).
The Final Cartridge also contains a
selection of toolk it commands that will
make programming much easier. AUTO
generates line numbers ranging from a
speciﬁed number by a set increment value
with the default settings producing line
numbers 10,20.30 and so on. RENUM
reorganises your programs (including
GUM and GOSUB commands into tidy
line numbers. D EL deletes a block of
program lines. FIND lists every line in
which a selected string o f  character,
appears. HELP highlights bugs when
testing programs. With APPEND and
DAPPEND you can add routines into
UTILITY HARDWARE
your pmgrams that you have previously
saved.
Disk users w i l l  appreciate t h e
foll()wing commands that speed up disk
housekeeping tasks and display disk
directories (as an alternative to pressing
F7). load a program , format a disk. or
SAVE and VERIFY a program in the
computer's memory.
Tape users, who are often left out of
the fast loader scene, will relish the tape
turbo that can save a program in memory
through the normal tape commands hut
then reload it ten times taster than the
normal rate.
The freezer stops a running program
so that you can you make backup copies
in a compact limn but you'll need to use
the cartridge to load them back in again.
Wrhen you reload the program it restarts
from where it was when it was frozen so
it's important t o  freeze them a t  a
convenient point such as a menu screen.
While a game is frozen you can also
disable sprite t o  sprite o r  sprite t o
background collisions. This may stop
alien missiles from killing you and give
you a chance to get further through the
game or it may stop .
them! I t  a l l  depends o n  how  t he
programmer wrote the game. Well. you
didn't expect cheating to he that easy. did
you?
luzcz7
TAIL OGfE
vc
TI
mow* ,
'
* '
. , 0 1 1
* t i  No t
oTorNno.,*
tst
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
45
While a game is frozen you can also
dump a screen to a printer, either a serial
Commodore printer or one connected by
a Centronics lead, supported by  the
interface built into the cartridge. The
screen dumps can be printed in two sizes
and feature full grey scaling lir  coloured
images but the ﬁnished result won't
contain any part of the screen sprites as
these aren't supported by the routine.
Finally, the cartridge also includes a
hill machine code monitor that can be
used to ﬁll an area of memory, compare
to blocks of memory. print out a block
of" machine code and directly manipulate
blocks of information stored on disk by
using sector read and write commands.
The Expert / Trilogic /
V29.99
The Expert cartridge is probably one of
the mos t comprehensive cartridges
available. Because the internal chip is
RAM rather than the usual ROM, it can
be readily updated to cater for the latest
programs simply by buying a new disk
for a fraction of the original cost of ill,:
cartridge.
As soon as you see the Expert you notice
something is different because it houses
a reset button, a three way switch marked
theexpert
. . . , , . _ . .  I m . . . . . . • • •
T AP P  T O  O tS 1  T O  O I S K T O  T A F i l l
•
COPV0110o. o i m o s  A r.
1 . 0 Uth Wi l  0
OCCUMUO
*SwitooihaVO • olotv
TRiLOGIC

ON. OFF and PRG, an if—all—else—fails
button and LED.
Much of the Expert disk contains
tiles that either contain the information
to transfer a difﬁcult or multi—load game
or offer routines to add extra lives and
other cheats before making a backup. The
saved backup is then compacted so you
can get .2 or 3 games on a disk which each
reload within 30 seconds.
The disk also contains a full monitor
with a printout facility and a series of
utility routines including ones to alter, edit
or disable a game whose sprites may he
of particular interest.
A lot or games use sprites which arc
animated to create the MOVeMent
critters, monsters and missiles that are out
to maul you. The Sprite Extractor routine
enables you to freeze a program. displaN
ifs sprites. view their animation and then
save them to disk. A separate sprite editor
on the Expert disk (which doesn't work
with the Expert cartridge) can be used to
edit or customise sprites for use in your
own games or to load them back into a
frozen out version of the original.
The Sprite Immortaliser can disable
sprite to sprite collisions and or sprite to
background collisions. This could save
vou a lot of lives as these are the collisions
which usually kill you but this may also
block the effects of your tiring back.
leaving you helpless.
The hi—res grabber and picture saver
routine can be used to grab any frozen
hi —res screen and save it to disk. This
saved screen can then be converted by
another utility into a Koalapad formatted
screen and edited and printed as normal.
However edited hi —res screens cannot be
loaded back into the original game.
If the cheat tiles don't work or there
isn't one for the game that currently foxes
you. then the method may be listed in the
cheat machine section which describes
how to freeze the game, list the code and
alter the relevant lines. This cheating aid
is just one function of the Experts full
machine code monitor which i s
completely invisible to the user and can
he used over the full 64K of memory. It
can be used to access both Basic and
Kemal ROMs and it's typical functions
arc to inspect a program, alter a program,
to list any part of a Basic program, to
write a machine code program. as a hex
to decimal convertor and to search lOr
UTILITY HARDWARE
data, addresses or text.
Cassette users can get a  special
version o f  the Expert. It's the same
cartridge but is programmed from a tape
which includes tape to tape transfer
utilities.
Loading from disk or tape each time
you power up may sound laborious but
it only takes a few moments and allows
easy' and inexpensive updating,
The Freeze Machine /
Evesham Micros / t28.95
The Freeze Machine is a  bright red
cartridge with two buttons marked
RESET and FREEZE. T h e Freeze
function obviously freezes programs
ready for saving to disk but the Reset
button is used to toggle between the
menus ﬂu
Mk II both of which have been brought
together on this cartridge.
The Freeze Frame menu allows you
to turbo load and save some commercial
programs a s  w e l l  a s  yo u r o w n
development programs in a fraction of the
normal time. typically .20 to 40 seconds.
This may not sound like a great1ime
saving but can make a big difference to
a program such as a word processor or
database which is used everyday. You'll
realise the difference if you ever have to
load them at normal snairs pace after
you've been using the cartridge for a few
weeks.
Freeze Frame also includes a Game
Killer utility to disable sprite to sprite and
sprite t o  backgn)und collisions plus
utilities to fast fOrmat. initialise and
validate a disk, display the directory and
to rename or scratch a tile.
The Freeze Machine also includes
the Lazer 11 system which saves frozen
programs as USR ﬁles that can he loaded
hack in 18 seconds or less! Lizer ﬁles
can't be scratched (the whole disk must
he formatted to remove them) so your
disks could become cluttered with
unwanted ﬁles.
The Lazer system has a similar set
of utilites to those with Freeze Frame plus
extra one to convert PRG tiles to USR
format
The Freeze Machine is ideal for
programmers w h o  need t o  save
development programs in seconds but
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
46
they will miss the machine code monitor
facility which is supplied in most of the
other cartridges.
Action Replay I Dosoft /
E29.99
Action Replay combines any combination
of disk and tape transfer that you can
imagine. It is also capable of backing up
multi—load programs and has a sprite
controller, fasth)ader, code inspector and
picture save utility.

M I L
The backup utility is easy to use and
produces a  compacted, fast —loading
version of any frozen program. The ﬁnal
copy usually occupies 220 blocks, so
three games can be compacted on one
disk and reloaded up to ﬁve times taster
than normal by  ﬂicking the fastload
switch on the cartridge.
The Sprite Controller allows you to
disable sprite collisions and save, edit and
replace customised sprites into any game.
Any multicolour hi —res screen can
be frozen. grabbed and saved to disk and
t i n
Paddles graphics packages and then they
can he edited, mixed w ith other graphics
and printed out.
Although Action Replay lacks a full
monitor it has a code inspector that, at
a press of a single 'key. will display the
current contents of the Program Counter
along with those of the IR() and NMI
vectors. 6510 on—chip registers. Vic 11
chip IRQ mask, the raster—compare latch
value, the CIA ICR mask values and
timer latch values. Four options are then
available: to load in a full monitor or load
and execute a machine language program,
jump to any address in memory, display
a block of memory, or return to Basic.
Dosoft also have a version of Action
Replay combined with Diskmate II which
includes a 10 second l i n
single keystroke disk commands and a
toolkit all fOr £39.95.
UTILITY HARDWARE
Mother Load
With all these cartridges around you may
well ﬁn d  y our s elf plugging a n d
unplugging them from dawn till dusk h
won't be long before the cartridge port
starts to wear out with all this activity so
why not invest in a motherboard for your
cartridge slot before it's tot) late?
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWIRE BUYERS GLIDE
47
Cardboard 5 / Precision
Software / £30.39 (plus
VAT)
This board has slots for ﬁve cartridges
which can be switched in and out as
required. A fuse and a reset button should
prevent any mishaps and a bank of LEDs
for each slot shows you which cartridge
is currently in use.
Date! Motherboard / Date!
Electronics I £16.99
Datel Motherboard has three slots for
cartridges, a safety fuse and a reset switch
but no LED indicators.
Evesham Motherboard /
Evesham Micros / C28.00
A useful little board that comes in two
varieties, One has four vertically mounted
cartridge slots but the other only has three
with a handy through socket t o lit a
modem.
Stack Motherboard
Meedmore 1Distribution) /
C28.00
A 'bur— slot, switchable motherboard
with an optional modem slot facility.

Fixtures and
Fittings
A plethora of peripherals are available tbr all manner of
speciﬁc jobs. Gan you aftbrd to be without them?
By limy Hetherington
S
easily be categorised. They're not a disk
drive, printer, monitor or graphics tablet
but they're just as useful. For example.
how can _you use a printer in a busy
environment without a stand to put it on
with paper stowage underneath it'? How
are you going to play a game without a
robust joystick or safely store your disks
without a disk box'?
Add to all this devices which double
your disk capacity: stop your drive from
hammering its elf to pieces; generate
teletext on your monitor: quickly and
efﬁciently back up tape data ﬁles: or keep
things generally running smoothly. and
you have the measure of the range of
auxiliary equipment available.
INTERACTIVE DEVICES
Interactive devices include any tOrm of
joystick, mous e o r  related device.
Beginning with the essential joysticks
themselves, there is an incredible choice
for the potential buyer.
Matching the right joystick to the
right type of game is essential as the
wrrong stick could cost you that high
score. As a general rule you get what you
pay for: a higher price generally means
a faster more responsive stick with a
quicker and more accurate means o f
gauging movement. As well as this the
higher p r ic e  r ange of t en br ings
reﬁnements such as shaped. ergonomic
sticks frequently with extra ﬁre buttons.
ACCESSORIES
Economy Joystick
Suncom £ 5 . 9 9
This is the basic Atari joystick that I still
favour. It's cheap and cheerful but not
particularly quick nor will it withstand the
constant battering o f  decathlon—style
games. Having said that. Suncom is
prepared to offer a one year guarantee and
sou can buy replacement switch boards
when the bubble switches eventually wear
out. In my experience, all my Suncom
sticks have parted company with their
bodies long before the switches failed.
The Economy joystick i s  als o
available from other sources hut at a
variety of prices as it was ﬁrst introduced
as part of the Atari VCS video game
system. It's a basic joystick at a basic
price.
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
48
Silk Stik Su n c o m C 6 . 9 9
The best way to describe the Slik Stik is
to say that it's small! A curved base makes
it easy to hold and it has a ball top handle
kir an easy grip. There is very little play
in the stick t' he distance the stick is moved
to make a contact making it ideal for rapid
movement games.
Starﬁghter Su n c o m
C9.99
The Starﬁghter is  described as  the
'ultimate joystick' but is little more than
an updated version of the Slik Stik with
a column handle. Commodore PC owners
should als o note that ther e i s  a
Starrighter IBM version that features
an extra tire button and a £24.99 price
tag. All versions carry a  two year
guarantee.
TAC 2 Su n c o m £ 1 0 . 9 9
The TAC 2 Totally Accurate Controller
is a tough all—action stick. The steel shaft
will take almost any punishment and
delivers the joystick movements to the
steel contacts with the nitrunitiﬁl of effort.
The TAC 2 features a ball handle and a
second ﬁre button that gives left handed
players a look in.
TAC 3 Su n c o m £ 1 2 . 9 9
The TAC 3 reshapes the micro switch

TAC 2 and gives it a pistol shaped handle
and three ﬁre buttons. Two buttons are
on either side of the base and the h e r
on top of the handle. If you still can't hit
the target %,k ith three buttons then the
joystick isn't your problem!
TAC 5 Su n c o m E1 3 . 9 9
The top of the Suncom range. the TAC
5 offers a pistol handle, three lire buttons
and audio feedback! That means it clicks
when VOW push it so that know when
you've made contact. Ideal iCir games
where precision is the key.
Speedking K o n i x
t00.00
Shaped to tit snugly in the right hand. the
Speedking has a small. audible contact
shaft w  ith accurate 1110Velneni.
designed to ﬁt neatly into the hand so that
the index ﬁnger hovers over the lir e
button. I f  it doesn't lit your hand then
look elsewhere. if it does ﬁt then it will
give reliable service. It's up to you to do
the rest.
This is  one o f  the few joysticks
currently being produc ed w i t h  a
C16. Plus4 connector.
IconTroller Su n c o m
t19.99
Users with more serious applications in
mind and who only need a ,ioystiek to
select icons. Ibr example in GEOS. will
appreciate the smart approach o f  the
ACCESSORIES
IconTroller. It's a mini joystick that sticks
onto the right—hand side of a C64 or
Cl28 keyboard and plugs into either
joystick port but has a second nine- pin
port and consists of a mini stick and a
shaped lire button,
Magnum Mastertronic Ltd
E12.50
A variation on the joystick theme is
provided by the Magnum's pistol grip
design. The short stick moves in a very
positive way w ith quite a strong return
spring. The rear mounted ﬁre button is
ideally positioned tOr the thumb making
this stick superb kir purposes where slow.
accurate movement is required. but not
very comfortable f o r  r apid ac tion
shoot—cm—ups.
AMX Mouse Advanced
Memory Systems t 6 9 . 9 5
The AMX mouse is the deluxe model of
the Commodore mice and features three
buttons which makes ii ideal to use with
the Stop Press desktop publishing
software.
Neos Mouse A M S
£27.95
Bundled with 64C or available separately
with tape or disk driver S O
mouse is the cut price version offering
only tw o buttons and little software
compatabil ity.
TAPE TREATS
Doubler Ev e s h a m Micros
£12.95
The Doubler is a very simple device that
plugs into the cassette port and allows tape
to tape backup of data. Two cassete decks
are connected to the input and output
sockets and the transfer is then controlled
by the accompanying taped program.
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
49
DISK KITS
Load—It L o ad —It
£19.95 t  7.95 kit
The Load—It kit provides a versatile and
effective answer t o  mos t loading
problems. These problems are usually
caused because the machine that recorded
the program has a slightly different head
alignment than your datasette. This is why
you might be able to load the game on
your friends computer but not your own.
The Load—It device replaces the
head alignment screw with a knob that
can adjust the position of the tape head
azimuth alignment: a graduated scale so
You can note the settings that work for
your favourite games and a piezo electric
speaker so you can hear when you get the
clearest signal, lithe tape still won't load
then the chances are that it never will.
Dolphin Dos Ev e s h a m
Micros C 6 9 . 9 5
Dolphin Dos is quite simply the disk
operating system that Commodore should
have installed in the C64 and the Cl28.
If you're con ti den I about desoldering
then you can ﬁt it yourself but if you're
not then get someone else to do it for you
because you could cause a lot of damage.
Once it's installed, both in  your
computer and the disk drive, you can
switch Dolphin Dos on and off from

switches on both units and have a parallel
operating system that can load a 200
block program in just 5 seconds!
Dolphin Dos can also save and verify
a 200 block program in  10 seconds.
tOrmat a blank disk in 20 seconds 12 secs
without VERIF Y and speed u p  the
loading and saving o f  sequential and
relative ﬁles by up to 8 times the normal
1541 snail's pace.
Even i f  you ﬁnd a disk that isn't
compatible with this high speed DOS. you
can switch it oft' at the drive but keep it
switched on in the computer allowing the
use of the extended operating system's
easy to use commands. For example.
pressing R U N  STOP becomes t h e
equivalent of WAD  " E
REPLACE. Dolphin Dos style. works
faultlessly and programs can he loaded
from a disk directory or listed on a printer
at the press of a key!
1541 Quiet Drive Stops
Evesham Micros £ 4 . 9 5
A cassette tape containing one short
utility program. an instruction card. two
washers and two metal clips may not seem
ACCESSORIES
huh=
Micros
.  • • • • • • • • •
7-..••••••••••.
much hut this kit will reduce the chances
of your disk head creeping out o f
alignment a n d  s top that hideous
hammering noise.
The disk head 'hammers' as it hits
the rigid stop when orientating itself or
with some commercial disk protection
systems. The kit replaces the normal stop
with a ﬂexible spring stop that reduces
the hammering sound to a purr and cuts
out thc jarring that can knock the head
off alignment.
Supplying tho control program on
cassette may  seem strange b u t  it's
perfectly sensible since your drive might
he so out of alignment that it can't load
a disk! The kit can quieten two drives.
1541 Physical Exam
Evesham Micros. ,C39.95
The performance o f  any mechanical
equipment deteriorates with age and a
disk drive is no exception. In time the
speed will itry outside the sate limits and
possibly t h e  alignment w i l l  d r if t .
Correction is relatively simple but may
cost over £30.
Evesham's Physical Exam is a high
quality product which will detect all types
of error which may occur with the disk
drive. After its ﬁrst use the kit will have
paid for itself and after that you'll be in
pocket.
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
50
Head Cleaner Su n c o m
E5.99
This is the disk equivalent of an audio
tape head cleaner. The cleaning disk and
bottle of solution is enough to spruce up
your drjve head 15 times and helps to
reduce read errors and, in had cases, will
avoid physical damage to your disks.
Amiga owners will be interested in
the 3,5 inch version that costs slightly
more at L6•99•
The Notcher Su n c o m
This amazing hole puncher can save you
money and disks. All it does is to punch
a second, correctly registered write
protect notch allowing you to use both
sides or a disk.
Although some disks are sold as
single sided, all disks are manufactured
as double sided and quality control sorts
out the quality rating they are given. All
this means is that a single sided disk is
not guaranteed to work on both sides.
although most do. Obviously, it's essential
that you try the disks before you save the
only copy of important data or only use
this in emergencies,
The Notcher is supplied with a pack
of labels and write protect tabs.
Disk Coupler Computek
M icrosnips £ 4 . 9 5
A robust version of the Notcher tiir heavy
handed disk users. This one lacks the
catalogue labels of the Notcher pack.

Diskit Su n c o m £ 1 7 . 9 9
-  C25.99
The diskit series is a range of disk boxes
complete with a classy roll top lid that
swings right over when you open the box
and won't fall on your ﬁngers.
Diskits come in  either single or
double boxes that hold 60 or 120 of your
5.25 inch disks. Both types have an
optional lock, hence the range of prices.
The had news is that they are supplied in
Ilatpacks and have to he assembled but.
if you keep your cool and the instructions,
this shouldn't take you more than a few
minutes_
Disk Boxes v a rio u s
makes £ 7 . 5 0  -  £11.70
A disk box needn't cost you as much as
the Diskit. the standard type with lilt up
clear plastic lid is available in a variety
of shapes and sizes from an array o f
companies ranging lioin Manor Court
ACCESSORIES
Supplies box capacity 50 disks — 17.50
and Micromedia box capacity 100 disks
111,70:
Alarmed Disk Box I n m a c
£39.95
[I y our  disks contain particularly
mportant information and you're worried
about burglars then you'll need Inmac's
latest burglar proofed disk hox. It features
a built in movement alarm that screeches
at 98 decibels for 15 seconds whenever
somebody tries to move it.
IN PRINT
Printer Stands v a rio u s
makes C E
If you've ever tried to use a printer in a
busy room or ofﬁce then you'll appreciate
the need for a stand that neatly stores the
paper underneath the printer. Then. for
a complete system. you could add a paper
tray to collect the paper as it Collies off
the printer.
Suncom has a wide selection of rigid.
wire—framed printer stands from 12 to 24
inches wide that range from £6.99 to
/19.99_ The Ripermate costs 1.10,99 and
is a pair of printer stands which ﬁt almost
all printers.
A paper tray which will clip on the
back of any wire framed printer stand hot
just Sunconfs adds an extra £11.99 to the
total cost.
Mictomedia's printer stand is made
to ﬁt all 80 column printers and is built
from 5mni clear perspex and costs 119.90
Printkit IV AV011 Printer
Technology £ 3 0 . 0 0
Not to be confused i t h  the Printer IV
the Printkit IV ﬁts into the MPS803
add true descenders t o  the original
character set. Italic. underline and bold
modes are added as well and Printkit
Teeds up the printer's operation.
Printer IV D a t e l  ,C19.99
The Printer IV is a replacement character
ROM f o r  the MPS801 printer that
provides the user with four new character
sets that can be selected by setting the
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
51
position of two switches.
Once installed the Printer I V  is
compatible with all software and will
print your text out in either Descender.
Eclipse. Scribe or Future characters.
ON SCREEN
Swivel Bases v a rio u s
makes £ 1 5  -  £15.90
Swivel bases o r  monitor stations are
revoloving and tilting plattOrms that allow
you to ensure that your monitor points
directly at you when you look at it. taking
the pain in the neck out of computing.
Suncom's Monitor Station E 15_99
supports monitors with a screen size up
to 14 inches and has a locking action so
you can keep the right setting once you've
found it.
Micromedia has a choice of two sizes
of swivel base one for 12 inch monitors
E 1.2.00 and a larger One for 14 inch
screens I  15_00.

Glaredown Su n c o m
£17.99 — £19.99
Available in two sites and prices the
Glaredown is am anti—glare screen that
ﬁts over I2 inch or 14 inch screens. They
effectively ease eyestrain by reducing
glare from sunlight and overhead electric
lighting, rendering the screen easier to
read.
111111111110,
• williall111111111•11#
,MNIV .11
1111111111C
OWL
11111111,
VIDEO ON
ComputerEyes S t e m
Computing £119.00
The ComputerEyes Video ,Aquisition
System converts a video picture from
either a good video recorder or preferably
a video camera into a lOrmat that can be
stored and used by
The unit plugs into the user port and
is connected to the video source via a
video cable. The scan begins at the press
of a button and takes about six seconds
for a full grey—scale image to he stored
on disk.
ComputerEyes is  controlled by a
menu driven control program that can
supplied with additional disks to allow the
captured picture to be converted into
Koala Pad, Doodle, Flexidraw. Print Shop
or Newsroom formats.
Teletext Adaptor
Microtext £ 6 9 . 9 5
By using the T V modulator built into a
domestic video recorder and the display
abilities o f  the C64. Microtext has
produced a teletext adaptor ﬁr a fraction
of the normal cost.
By connecting the video to the plug
in adaptor via a 20 metre cable you can
get a superb teletext picture on your
computer s c r een. T h e  d a p a t o r
continuously updates and improves the
page on screen with the result that the
picture is even better than on a teletext
television!
Now you can check on the weather
in Tayo or ﬁnd out what's on at the local
cinema, check the road reports and then
store any of these pages of infOrmation
on disk and print them out later.
You can also write your own BASIC
programs to read in teletext pages and use
the information in them for such purposes
as a football pools predictor database or
to plan your next move on the Stock
Market.
1
1
1
1
1
t
I
E
M
ilatr'' 
4
MISCELLANY
ACCESSORIES
Documate 2 Su n c o m
£12.99
The Documate 2  is  a  free standing
document holder complete with clipboard
and adjustable ruler to ease the typing in
of listings.
YOUR COMMODORE HARMARE BUYERS GLIDE
52
Copy Holder M i c r o  Media
£13.90
The Copy Holder is an adjustable version
of the Documate 2 but also contains a
clamp to fasten it onto the edge of a table.
Smart Cart D a t e !
£14.99
The Smart Cart is a battery backed 8K
RAM cartridge onto which you can save
or load almost any program you require.
After loading the program into the
cartridge you then ﬂick a switch to keep
it in instant cartridge recall format for up
to ﬁve years.
There is also a larger 32K version 4
switchable 8K banks that costs [29.49,
Reset Cartridge D a t e !
£5.99
This is simply a reset button that halts
programs so you can type in extra -life
pokes.
Cartridge Development
System D a t e !  £ 1 2 . 9 9
This kit contains all you'll need to build
your own autostart cartridge and includes
a 1OK Eprom, PCB. reset switch and red
plastic cartridge case.
" 1 " 1
1

Heavy Metal
Hardware
If music he the food you love then read on
T
the hest sound chip of  any eight • - bit
computer but this doesn't make either of
them the ultimate music machine. There
may come a time when you get a touch
of the Oliver Twists and decide that you
want more, which means plugging in
external music hardware to get a greater
range of sounds with more control over
them.
Music add—ons fall into one of three
categories: external sound generators,
sound samplers. and MIDI interfaces with
their associated software. Each category
extends the capabilities of the C64/I28 but
the basic talent must be provided by the
user. Music extensions bring the world of
Beethoven. Britten and the Beatles within
the reach of the common man without the
physical dexterity necessary to play like
a virtuoso performer.
Using the Commodore with music
hardware and software can turn it into a
new machine which not only provides
hours of entertainment but can also be
used as a powerful music theory teaching
aid.
Sound Generators
These provide an alternative to the sounds
generated by the SID chip, adding more
and better sounds thereby opening up a
wider r ange o f  pos s ibilities  f o r
compositions and arrangements.
The Commodore Sound Expander
(09.99) falls into this category, bringing
FM synthesis to the Commodore. Apart
from eight channels of sound you also get
rhythm generation, auto accompaniment,
single ﬁnger chords and a riff sequencer
amongst many other facilities.
FM ( fr equenc y  m o d u la t io n )
synthesis was pioneered and popularised
by Yamaha with their range o f  D X
synthesisers. Through FM many sounds
and instruments c an b e  accurately
duplicated as well as many new and
unique sounds.
The cassette version of the Expander
contains 12 preset voices but the disk
version carries twic e that number.
Ahough tricky. it is possible to create and
edit y our  own F M  voices but the
Expander  package does not al low you
these facilities which means that you
could miss out on a lot of the potential
of FM music but help is at hand.
For a n  extra E29.95. t h e  F M
composer/Editor gives you simpliﬁed
editing control ov er the Expander's
voices, provides a voice library system.
and the Composer part of the software lets
you c r eate a n d  s tor e y o u r  o w n
compositions. I  w o u l d  c er tainly
recommend that anyone who buys the
Expander should also budget for this.
It's possible to play the Expander
from the Commodore's QWERTY keys
but if you ﬁnd that too awkward — and
it is! — you'll at least need the Music
Keyboard Overlay (19.991 a  plastic
piano—style, clip—on keyboard which tits
over the relevant computer keys. I f  you
want a more professional keyboard there's
the ﬁve octave Full—size Keyboard
(09.99) which is ideal for those with
previous keyboard experience.
At this point it's worth mentioning
Music Maker ii 64 (119_99) and Musk
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
53

Maker 128 (f24.99). These both contain
the Mus ic  Keyboard Overlay and
programs which help you to play and
record using the SW chip as the sound
source. Both sets contain ten preset
sounds and you can record tunes using the
SFX Easy Play Sequencer and play them
back with or without rhythm backing_
It this idea appeals to you. you can
also buy three Playalong albums fork:9.99
each: Popular Classics. The Beatles and
Pop Hits. The albums include a disk or
cassette and a music book with hints and
tips about playing.
The Sound Studio (f14_99) is
subtitled 'a Professional Synthesiser and
Recording Studio'. While I doubt if even
Trevor Horn could make a hit record with
It. you do get a pretty good introduction
to both the SID chip and the recording
process. The package is split into two
pans: the Synthesiser and the Editor.
The Synthesiser gives a  br ief
rundown o n  sound. pitc h. timbr e.
volume, v ibrato.  porta me nto. r in g
modulation, synchronisation and SI D's
ﬁlters.
Using the Editor you can enter music
in real—time or step—time. Music can be
recorded on three tracks, or six if  you
have a MIDI interface but you'll need a
synthesiser (or two) if you want to play
back these extra tracks.
The Sound Studio can be played
using the Keyboard Overlay, using a
MIDI interfaced keyboard or from the
Sound Expander's Keyboard. See how it
all ties tip?
Everything mentioned s o far  is
available from Music Sales, although
many other shops and mail order ﬁrms
also stock them. There is  a  special
package called the Commodore Music
Expansion System which contains the
Full —size Keyboard. Sound Expander
and Sound Studio, all for £149.99 — a
saving of £4498. Shopping around could
save even more because the CME System
has been advertised for less than DM
recently.
Sampling Sounds
A sampler is a device which -
a sound and converts it into bytes stored
in the computer's memory (a process
known as digitisation). The problem is
MUSIC
that samplers eat RAM like bunnies eat
lettuce and in order to produce clear
sampled sounds you need to store lots of
bytes — and that means you need lots of
RAM. How useful to have a computer
such as the Commodore with lots of
RAM waiting for bytes to be stored in it.
Despite this, you still have to trade off
available RAM and sound quality.
Jargon time rm afraid. In connection
with sampling you'll hear terms such as
sampling rate and bandwidth. Put simply,
the larger the bandwidth and the faster the
sampling rate, the better the quality of the
sample -  and the more RAM it will use.
Most samplers let you alter the sampling
rate so you can choose the optimum value
for the sound you want to digitise. With
speech. for example, you can often get
away with a relatively low sampling rate.
Drum sounds are generally pretty short
and can also be recorded at low speeds
without too much loss of quality. We'll
come back to drum software later.
In order to turn sound (analogue
quantities) into numbers (digital values)
and back again, samplers use an ADC.
not surprisingly standing for Analogue to
Digital Converter. This is the hardware
part of the package and the quality of the
sound will also depend on the quality of
the ADC_
The Commodore Sound Sampler
(1:69.99). from Micro Sales, plugs into
the cartridge port and comes complete
with its own software and a microphone.
It gives you IA seconds of sampling time
at 20kHz which means pretty good
quality. You are then given a graphical
representation of the sound which can
then be altered in several simple ways.
Four short samples can be stored at
once and played back on a  16—note
sequencer. Sounds can b e  reversed,
looped and played back at different
pitches. Special effects include echo with
variable delay and a harmoniser which
does funny things to instrumental sounds
and can make you sound like a robot with
a sore throat.
The Sound Sampler  i s  M I D I
compatible (although a MIDI interface is
not supplied.) or it can be used with the
Keyboard Overlay.
Datel also have their Sampler which
works out a good deal cheaper at £49.99,
A microphone is also supplied with this
package and it has MIC and LINE—IN
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
54
sockets with feedback control.
You can alter the sampling rate (the
trade off) , m ix  samples, play  them
backwards and loop them. It has ring
modulation and echo facilities, too. The
screen display shows the waveform which
can be split into eight sections so you can
store eight samples in memory at once.
Pieces can then be recorded and saved
through a simple sequencer.
Samples can played on the QWER'TY
keys and the package is NUDE compatible
— try Datel's own MIDI interface.
The top Commodore sampler is the
Micro; 'ON Sampler available from
Supersoft at I:229.95. Software is on disk
but a Pro version with extra features is
available on a  cartridge for  an extra
COMO. B o t h  versions a r e  M I D I
compatible.
The program is controlled through a
series of menu pages and offers eight
sampling rates. The waveform can he
edited by placing coloured ﬂags at the
editing points and the sound can be run
through companding to reduce aliasing
(unwanted noise). The Pro version also
contains an Auto Looping Tool which
tries to ﬁnd glitch—free loops.
You can store up to 26 samples at the
same time and a small sequencer allows
you to program up to 24 patterns, rather
like a drum machine. but you are limited
to 4/4 time and the samples can only play
monophonically (one at a time.), The
speed of the sequencer can be controlled
by an external MIDI clock.
If you want to process incoming
sound, the basic model has a digital delay
and t h e  P r o  c ar tr idge inc ludes
harmonising. ﬂanging, phasing and
modulation effects.
Drum Machines
Producing rhythm tracks has a certain
fascination which seems to cut across the
musician/layman div ide. Percussion
instruments are also amongst the easiest
to sample — on a limited memory system
anyway — purely because they are short
(often around a  tenth o f  a  second
duration) and don't have a large harmonic
range. Cymbals are an exception, having
a surprisingly wide harmonic range for
such a simple instrument.
Daters Corn—Drum at £29.99 can
store eight pre—recorded drum sounds in

memory at once and the output can be
channelled through your T V or  your
hi—ﬁ system. It comes with three separate
drum kits with some sounds being used
in more than one kit. The quality is quite
good, bearing in  mind the price and
considering that you'd pay over 1200 tOr
a dedicated drum machine.
Drum patterns can he entered in
real—time or step—time with up to 32
beats per pattern in 4/4 time or 24 beats
in 3/4 time. The program can store eight
patterns (not a lot) which can then he
chained together to form a song. There's
an external sync facility f or  linking
through to a MIDI interfaced synthesiser.
The standard Corn—Drum software
won't let you alter the three drum kits
supplied but with the Corn—Drum Editor
(14.990) you can rearrange the 24 sounds
to produce new kits.
If y ou already have the Datel
Sampler, you can buy the Corn—Drum
software to use with it  and turn your
sampler into a drum machine for £9.99.
Slightly more comprehensive and a
little more expensive at 13995 is Rhythm
King from Supersoft. The basic package
contains two kits of eight drum sounds but
additional kits are available. You can
record in real —time or step—time and you
can play more than one sound at the same
time. Up to 64 drum patterns can be
stored in memory and combined to form
up to 16 songs.
There are keyboard and joystick
Options for creating the patterns and the
editor is fairly easy to use. When you're
satisﬁed with y our composition. the
patterns and the songs can be saved for
recall at a later date. The Commodore 128
version o f  Rhythm King runs in  40
column mode.
This drum section would not be
complete without mentioning Firebird's
MicroRhythm. Although it's purely a
software program, !Or a mere 11.99 you
get 13 sampled drum sounds to arrange
into patterns and songs which can he
played through the TV or VDU monitor
speaker. There is a provision for saving
and loading sounds so perhaps Firebird
are planning to release other kits in the
future.
Stereo Split
If you want to hear SID, sampled sounds
MUSIC
or anything else that emanates from your
computer a little more clearly, you could
take a look at the Sound Splitter lion)
Tri logic.
The basic version costs 129.95 and
gives you a two—channel stereo effect
plus reverb. A  lead is  supplied for
plugging the unit into your hi—ﬁ or stereo
unit and there's a mono/stereo intensity
control.
For an additional 15.00 (ie. 04.95)
the Sound Splitter+ gives you a built—in
headphone ampliﬁer (you provide the
headset) plus  balance and v olume
controls. That should keep both you and
the rest of the family happy.
MIDI Interfacing
Even if you incline with only half an ear
towards music, you are almost certain to
have heard of MIDI. In case you haven't.
MIDI i s  a n  ac rony m f o r  Mus ic
Instrument Digital Interface. It is a set of
digital messages agreed upon by musical
instrument manufacturers which allow
intruments to communicate with each
other, This communication takes place
via three types of MIDI socket so you can
daisy—chain together a  number o f
instruments.
MIDI really comes into its own when
used with a computer. Sequencer software
enables you to store compositions in the
computer in the form of music data. Good
quality software will allow you to enter
musical notes by either of two systems:
you may be able to record in real-time
('live' as you play) or enter music one note
at a time in step-time. The music is
stored as a series of numbers so it is far
easier t o  manipulate than an audio
recording. Tricks can be merged and you
can edit individual notes with a degree of
accuracy impossible with an audio tape
recording.
To do all this, however, you th;ed a
MIDI interface. That's the core of the
system but, like a computerit is useless
without its own software, which is what
the main body of this section is about.
If y ou ar e recording o n  t o  a
multi—track recorder you will need an
interface with a sync—to—tape facility
which lays down a click track on the tape.
This ensures t h a t  a l l  subsequent
recordings keep in time with one another.
MIDI can also be used for voice
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
55
editing. Digital synths are notoriously
difﬁcult to program because most of their
parameters arc ﬁgures, a voice editor can
give y ou graphic displays o f  these
parameters to aid programming. A library
system then permits you to store voices
on disk and this librarian feature alone is
usually worth the price of the program.
Most Commodore MIDI interfaces
plug into the cartridge port and one
manufacture's s o f t  ware m a y  b e
compatible with another's interface, Note
this point well: compatibility cannot be
guaranteed and the safest course of action
is to use one manufacturer's interface and
associated software. With the cost of most
MIDI software being s o high many
suppliers will advise on compatibility
between products and may even allow you
to try it with your own MIDI interface.
In the interests of showing the range
of MIDI software, the following list is
necessarily brief but most companies will
be happy to supply further details about
their products.
Soft Choice
Four names, familiar to most MIDI
users, are now conspicuous by  their
absence from the British marketplace:
Sequential. SIEI., Steinberg and Dr T.
Sequential still have no UK distributor
and they don't seem to be particularly
interested in getting one. Steinberg and
Dr I  ar e n o  longer  dis tributing
Commodore MIDI products although you
may still see their products in some shops.
SIB, have now closed their doors for
good although you may also come across
some of their products occasionally, and
mention is still made of their interface
which was something o f  an industrial
standard.
It's not all bad news though. there are
many new companies willing to ﬁll the
gaps left in the marketplace.
Although Cheetah Marketing don't
produce anything speciﬁcally for  the
Commodore, they  d o  stock several
inexpensive keyboards which are worth
considering as  y our  music set—up
expands.
They have four  M I D I  Mas ter
keyboards: the basic MKS (L99.95), the
MK511 (E199.95) with pitch bend wheel
and patch change buttons. the AIK51
(1247.95) w it h  a  velocity—sensitive

keyboard and the 3/K7V4 (099.95) with
a seven—octave velocity and after—touch
sensitive keyboard.
Cheetah are also developing the
NIDII Digital Drum Machine at £139,95
and the LS'e Synth Module at C249.95
which should be appearing in the shops
as you read this.
C—Lab produce their own interfaces
and matching software hut their software
will also run with a Steinberg interface
amongst others.
Distributed in this country by Sound
Technology. the standard e— Lab AUDI
Interface costs 1:79.00 or you can buy one
with a sync—to—tape facility for E105.
The Super Track Sequencer (ill5)
software is  basically geared towards
real—time input but you can also record
in step—time. One major screen shows all
your options but for editing you go to the
NIIDI Event Editor which gives you
access to the bits and bytes of the MIDI
protocol. Ifs  one of the best—regarded
programs on the market and fairly easy
to use.
A recent release from C—Lab is a
16—track score—writing package called
Score Track (.110).
Datel produce one of the cheapest
MIDI interfaces on the market at a mere
£29.99. Although compatible with their
Sound Sampler, Datel have no software
to drive their interface yet but they' claim
that it is compatible with most leading
software (JMS. SIR— the Advanced
Music System and Joreth). Always check
with your software supplier to make sure.
ElectroNlosie R es ear c h a r e
arguably t he world's  mos t pr oliﬁc
producers of MIDI packages and have
made hardware and software for almost
every popular borne computer. Their
Commodore 64 interlace costs 1:39.90 and
they also produce a  link  box called
AtiMlink  (04.95) with one MIDI IN
and s ix  M I D I  TI-IRU sockets f o r
connecting together sevral pieces o f
equipment.
They o n ly  hav e one software
program for the C64. alas, which is the
Miditrack Perf ormer £49.95. a n
eight —track, real—time polyphonic
sequencer with features such as punch—in
(no punch—outs though), track merging
and transposition.
EMR often have special package
deals at Christmas and at User Shows, so
phone f o r  current details i f  you're
thinking of buying one.
Jellinhaus o r  .I MS) have almost
bowed out of the market but you can pick
up some bargains from Syndromic Music
who are currently handling their range.
Supplies may be limited. however.
The JAIS R M S  2 H  Interface
(129.95) was made far them by SIEL
(now defunct) and has a MIDI IN. a
MIDI T1 IRU. three MIDI OUTs and an
external CLOCK—IN.
The I2—Track Recording Studio is
a real—time package whic h holds
velocity. after—touch. pitch—bend, and
patch change in fOrmation. It is quite easy
to use once you discover how it works
because the manual could be better.
Despite this it's still a bargain at £24.95.
The Sequence Chain Programt
(f19.95) allows sequences to he linked to
produce changes in time, signature and
tempo.
The Seorewriter C 0995) comes on
EPROM and contains three programs: the
12 —track Recording Studio, the Sequence
Chain Program and the Scorewriter itself.
The package produces a hard copy
of your music, including the lyrics but you
may have a lot of setting—up to do to get
the results you want. The manual could
be better hut the printed notation is very
good.
The Slarack Sound Editor at a
mere 1:10(11) i s  a  voice editor f u r
Sequential's Six Trac k  a n d  M A X
polysynths.
mis  also have a very simple DN7
VOice Editor for the Yamaha at £19.95.
Joreth's eight—track M C S  ( Mus ic
Composer System) at 1225 includes their
professional A1,25 interface. The software
a
sequencing.
Step—time entry uses a simple MCL
(Music Compostion Linguage) and notes
appear on the screen as they are entered,
This is nice and in my opinion it's the best
step—time entry systems around with
comprehensive editing facilities.
Joreth's software offers a signiﬁcantly
different approach to most other products
and has attracted a great many devotees.
It's features make i t  one the most
comprehensive C64 MID I sequencing
packages on the market.
The Real—Time Pa rt  L o ad er
(111.85) allows the loading of real—time
part by part, from multiple tiles
(you'll realise the usefulness of this if you
have the MCS).
The h e y  Programmer (f11.85)
accepts input in any key (or even no key
in particular) and allows key selection
before printout.
A quality Casio CZ  voice editor
which includes features like envelope
copy and time—scaling can be found in
the CZ Time Editor (f44.85). Voices can
be stored on disk which saves a fortune
on RAM packs.
lithe ability to link, loop and repeat
up to 128 sections of music with minute
precision is important to you, the Linker
System is  a suitable extension of  the
real—time part of the MCS at a cost of
£94.90.
Systetn 7 ((79.99) is a voice editor
for Yamaha DX7 and TX7 synths which
is designed to allow the creation and
naming of your own banks of 32 voices,
The system has lots of facilities and comes
with 320 pre—programmed sounds.
All Joreth's programs can run with
other interfaces although their own AL25
is a very impressive device complete wilt
comprehensive synchronising facilities
and is worth considering as your ﬁrst
interface. Because the A1,25 plugs into
the user port, software fr om other
companies is unlikely to work with it—
but the Joreth range is so comprehensive
that y ou may  n o t  need any  other
programs!
Joreth have lots of package deals if
YOUR COMMODORE HARIWARE BUYERS GUIDE
56

you want to buy more than one of their
prograMs. For example. the Linker and
the AL25 Interlace is 0.19.65. System 7
and the AL25 is £199.99 and the CZ
Editor is offered at t:172.50 with the
interface.
Passport Designs' C64 intertiice
(CIO) has NUN IN. MIDI OUT. drum
sync input and output at 24. 48 or 98 ppqn
(pulses per quarter note) to suit most
drum machines, A version with tape sync
is also avaailable at 1;149.00.
Something of a rarity is Passport's
Musk Shop for MIDI (E80.00). Notes
are entered in step—time on a stave in
traditional notation and the program can
produce a printout of your piece at the
end. It is very easy to use but much of
the MIDI exotica is not supported, a fact
which will not worry many users but
should be borne in  mind. I t  works
superbly with multi —tinibral instruments
such as Casio's CZ synths. This package
tOrms a very easy introduction to MIDI
and represents good value for money.
Eight track sequencing is offered by
Master Tracks ( f199) with real— and
step—time facilities. Step—time options
include full MIDI note and data editing.
Notes are described as name plus octave
number. eg. C3. Song mode lets you build
up a song from pre—recorded sequences
and overall it is a very ﬂexible program.
Passport also have voice librarians
(not voice editors) at 1:45.00 each for the
Yamaha DX7. Roland JX8P, Casio CZ
series and Korg's DW synths.
Also available is the MIDI Player
(1:65,00) which stores up to eight songs
or arrangements on a disk and produces
a sychronised video display on the screen
during playback.
THE MUSIC
1
1 • 1
=
'',
Rain bird Software's Advanced
Music S.tstem (.1:39.95) is designed to
help you get the most out of the SID chip
but it also includes a novel MIDI module
which acts as a six—track real—time
sequencer_
Although not in the same league as
the other dedicated sequencers mentioned
here, it is certainly interesting. It's ability
to convert music tiles from MIDI and
vice—versa is an experience in itself!
Sonus International are well
established in America and have recently
opened a UK ofﬁce. They have tons of
goodies tin' the Commodore 64 and look
as i f  they could make a  name ﬁn
themselves by tilling the gap left by
Steinberg. Dr  I  et al. Their range of
software includes many facilities not
available elsewhere for the Commodore
so read on!
We'll s tar t w i t h  t h e i r  M I D I
interfaces. T he standard interlace at
1:54.00 has one MIDI IN and two MIDI
OLITs, while for 1:92.00 you can have one
with sync facilities.
To ease newcomers into the world of
MIDI, Sonus have a n  introductory
program called Giasstrackk 1E54.00)
which actually won a software award in
the USA. I t  is  basically real—time
oriented b u t  w it h  s ome step—time
facilities. I t  has  eight tracks plus
comprehensive editing capabilities and
the program includes several demo songs
and is very easy to use.
The biggie in the Sonus catalogue is
the Super Sequencer (1:113.85) and there
are separate versions 14 both the 64 and
the 128 to take advantage of all available
memory. It can hold 16 sequences over
light t r a c k s  a n d  c o n t a in s  a
system—exclusive librarian to save. for
example. an entire bank of DX7 voices.
It has many editing facilities and with the
1.28 version vou can use your keyboard's
modulation wheel as a volume control.
Personal Musician 64/128 (1..69.00)
has ﬁle compatibility to the other Sonus
systems and is designed tOr new MIDI
users. The package includes all cables and
a MIDI interlace.
The Alidi Processor (E69.00) can be
used to perfect ),our recordings. With it
you can load ﬁles fr om the Super
Sequencer and pertOrin elaborate event
and range editing on them. Features
include the removal of patch changes,
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
57
pitch and mod wheel, after—touch,
sustain—pedal v olume and channel
information. You can also •unbounce' —
extract information from a channel and
put it on another track, clever stuff!
Alidilech 64 (09.00) is a monitor or
system—exclusive librarian program. You
can view, manipulate and save MIDI bytes
as they are transmitted from any MID!
instrument. I t  includes M I D I  ﬁlter,
trigger functions and a  preﬁx send
capability for initiating system exclusive
dumps — more hi—tech talk hut hackers
will ﬁnd it very interesting indeed,
I haven't seen it yet but Score! rack
11155.25) promises to be worth a close
look (the ﬁnal version should be ready by
now), One of the main functions available
is the ability to printout the scores in
traditional notation.
Finally, there is  a range of  voice
editors and librarians. Space is limited so
it will have to NU nice merely to list them:
if you're interested you can get further
details from Sonus or you can sample
their wares with a SOMIN Demo Disk tbr
16.00 plus E1.50 post and packaging.
DX—TX 7/216/816 Design (1.92.00)
DX—TX D i g i t al  D i sks 1: 40. 25 )
containing 18 banks of sounds
TX81Z Design ( 02,00)
DX21/273181 Support (E109_25)
RX11/21 Librarian (1:4.50)
FR-01 Design (1:92.00)
Casio Programmer Librarian (1:69.()0)
Casio Digital Disks (134.50) with I()
banks of sounds
Sonic Editor  fOr the Ensoniq Mirage
([69.00)
Sonic Editor fOr Sequential's Prophet
(1:69.00)
Summary
A computer can help the less—proﬁcient
musician produce technical and complex
pieces which would otherwise be beyond
his ability (I take advantage of this aspect
every time 1 Otto, into a MIDI program!).
It c an serve a s  a  compositional.
arrangement or musical teaching aid and.
of course, it can be used just for
Primarily, I  believe music should be
enjoyed and the Commodore certainly
gives you plenty of  options. Whether
you're a  professional musician o r  a
novice. there's a package somewhere to
suit you.

Life
in the
Fast Lane
Turbo charging your snail paced peripherals opens up a
wide and conliising world of cartridges, tapes and chips.
by Norman Doyle
ommodore
C
are probably the most reliable available
on any microcomputer but they are also
the slowest, In my old VIC 20 days this
wasn't too much of a problem with only
a kw kilobytes of memory to ﬁll but even
with the Cl() loading can take a I —o—n—g
ti MC .
The software houses solved this with
their own fast load systems which revelled
in names like Turbo and Burner but it has
been the cartridge revolution which has
made these kind of facilities available to
the home programmer. Much of this revo-
lution started in Germany and Holland
where Commodore owners seem t o
approach programming their machines
with a  Teutonic gusto fOr order and
control.
Companies such as Robtek. Evesham
Micros, Datel and W O  siezed the
opportunity to snap up these fOrehm
products and launched them on the British
market. In many cases the popularity of
these products was not just because of the
last loaders and savers but the back—up
Facilities which allowed commercial
DISK UTILITIES
games to be transferred onto disk or tape.
The ﬁrst last disk facility that
awakened me to the fact that my 1.541
could actually operate taster than normal
was Disk Express and Flash! h  ich b411 h
emanated from Supersoft. Disk Express
was a plug in device which claimed a
modest increase of ﬁve times the normal
loading speed and could he ﬁtted in
seconds. Flash! was a  little more
sophisticated and required changes in
both the C64 and the 1544,
To ﬁt Flash! caused a problem k r
most CM owners because the Basic ROM
chip had to be removed to make room for
the new operating system. The space left
by the newly desoldered chip could then
be ﬁlled with a DIE socket to take the new
operating system chip assembly. The
problem was that the original ROM chip
had t o  b e reinserted into the new
assembly. so any careless slips with the
soldering iron and heat sink would cripple
the computer for several weeks until a
replacement ROM could be acquired.
Inside the disk drive the problem was
not so dramatic. For many years all the
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWIRE BUYERS GUIDE
58
major chip components on the drive
boards have all been held in mounts and
could be removed by gentle leverage. A
connecting lead from the user port on the
CM to the drive then supplied the data
line, with a switch to select Flash! or
normal operating modes.
A side beneﬁt of the new system was
that the new operating system also gave

some extra commands t o  assist the
programmer. Cursor movement was
eased with commands to move the cursor
to an area of the screen in large jumps.
Just as the HOME key moves the cursor
to the top left from anywhere on the
screen. s o the new system allowed
a'reverse• homing of the cursor to the
bottom right. jumping to the end of lines
and erasure of large areas of the screen
at will.
Flash! was suitable tbr a limited and
skillful few who could afford the expense
of a new system plus the cost of having
it inserted if they
it themselves.
In real terms the speed increase with
either of the Supersoft systems was only
about twice the normal, nowhere near the
claimed live times improvement. This is
something worth bearing in mind when
reading advertisements, the stated speed
beneﬁts always take the optimum condi-
tions into consideration. As a general rule
always halve the advertised ratings to get
a more realistic ﬁg u re
Next in line was a cartridge bawd
utility
could he used by the novice simply by
plugging one of them in. Tip of this range
was Robcom Turbo 50 which increased
disk speeds by ﬁve times and held a
cassette system which was ten times taster
than normal. Additionally the user gained
extra. wry useful Basic wedge commands
which allowed programs to he merged.
SiOW run with a TRACE facility. and
listed in a page system one screenful at
a time_ There was also a simple monitor
to assist machine code proeraminers to
develop and check their own programs.
UntOrtunately Ole one. insurmount-
able drawback of this system was the fact
that i t  downloaded its elf fr om the
cartridge and into the computer RAM.
This greatly inhibited its use and meant
that it could easily be over 
b
y
long Basic programs or by machine code.
This brings us up to the recent past
and a new series of cartridges and devices
but beliwe we go on to these considera-
tions you may still he wondering how its
possible to speed up a tape or disk system.
Routine changes
One my th whic h should b e  ﬁr mly
knocked on the head is that tape turhos
DISK UTILITIES
actually speed up the recorder. A cassette
recorder works at just under two inches
per second and there is no practical way
that it can be speeded up or slowed down
without internal mechanical or electrical
changes. The use of tape turbos results
in the erosion of the reliability which is
built into the standard iiperating system.
Under normal control each bit of
every byte is  recorded in  a  form o f
electricarMorse code signifying the
noughts and ones of binary. Added to this
is an odd parity bit whose value depends
on the preceding eight bits. This  is
t011 owed b y  another s ignal w hic h
indicates the end of a'word'. the nine bits
of data. Then the next byte is recorded.
After each block of 194 bytes the
computer leaves a two second gap, once
again adding to the length of the record.
Before moving on to the next block, the
system re—records the previous block to
insure against tape dropouts corrupting
the data. This means that each program
is effectively
reliability.
Simply b y  s tripping inka% t h e
structure of the tape system over 505 o f
the normal loading anti saving time can
be achieved. For many loaders this is
increased to a greater degree by cutting
the lengths of  the pulses which form
the'Morse code' used to record the data.
This increases the concentration of data
per inch an tape but does make it more
vulnerable to tailure.
The tape speeds achieved with a
well—designed turbo now equals that
achievable w it h  a  dis k  driv e load.
Accordingly. the tape recorder must be in
tip —top condition. The record/playback
head must be accurately aligned and the
use o f  an azimuth alignment tape is
essential. The Rohcom Turbo 50 has a
built—in alignment program and separate
tape ﬁr this purpose. I know of no other
system which applies such foresight and
for most people their only resort is to
invest more money on one of the com-
mercially available alignment systems
such as that produced by Audiogenic or
Azimate 3000 from Evesham Micros.
Disk turbos can work in one of two
ways. Either the baud rate (the speed at
which i t  communicates w i t h  t h e
computer) is changed or the way that the
program is physically stored on the disk
is changed.
YOUR COMMODORE HARI:MARE BUYERS GUIDE
59
The most radical disk turbo system
that I saw was limbo N  from Cockroach
Software of Australia. This took over
the normal disk storage system and
formatted the dis k  t o  s uit it s  own
requirements. Unkrtunately this does not
help when a commercial disk is acquired
and it has no turbo of its own. It's far
better to get a system which accepts the
disk storage system on the 1541 hut ups
the baud rate.
Today's Turbos
Much of the attention these days is turned
towards disk turbo systems which, an hest,
can achieve speed increases of up to 25
times the normal rate,
Most turbo systems are only available
on cartridge. Unlike the Robtek cartridge,
this new generation is virtually invisible
to the system. Rather like an electronic
iceberg. the t ip  of' the system only
protrudes into a k w bytes of the C64s
internal memory. The main part of the
program resides externally within the
cartridge, totally undetectable.
If its a no—nonsense turbo—disk
operating system that you want then it's
still possible to buy Quickdisk+ from
Evesham Micros. The Quickdisk+ system
offers a basic operating system. giving
ﬁve to seven times a speed increase,
whose commands are similar to the DOS
wedge supplied on the demonstration disk
which comes with the 1541.
This system eliminates the necessity
to type in OPEN commands to read error
channels o r  issue dis k  commands.

replacing t h is  c omplex  a n d  l i m e
consuming syntax with a single keypress.
It also has a  facility
directory onto the screen, a  simple
Centronics printer driver and a help menu
for only C19.95_
D I M have a cartridge to compete
with the speed of Quickdisk+_ Called
Disktnate 11. i t not only has a more
attractive price at just £14.99, but also has
a wider range o f  functions including
extended Basic commands and a monitor.
It's Evesham w h o  s upply  t h e
excellent Fr eez e M a c h in e  w hic h
absolutely bristles with facilities apart
from its disk and tape turbos. The speeds
of the turbos are further enhanced by the
inclusion of a program compactor on the
cartridge. This reduces the program h the
minimum possible number of bytes and
then r e  --expands the program after
loading.
The Freete Machine contains two
last disk routines. The ﬁrst is equivalent
to the Quickdisci system giving about live
times normal speed but the second. Later
system claims an amazing 20 times
faster than normal.
The only drawback with the Liter II
routine is that it saves the program ﬁle
as a USR tile on disk. This means that
transfer and erasure of the program is
impossible_ I f  you want to remove a
program from a Later II disk, then you
have to load and rcsave the programs that
you want to keep onto another disk and
then refOrmat the old disk_
Despite this. Later II and the Freeze
Machine form the fastest conthi nation in
DISK LI M I T I E S
an cartridge system. Evesham Micros
claim that sou could load your favourite
game in as little as ten seconds and no
more than l Considering that the Freeze
Machine only costs [28.95.
/team/ I-?cp/ay 311,1ti's companion
program. War p 25. claims to be the
lastest fast loader available. Unﬁwtunately
I wasn't able to test this claim hut I doubt
if the difference is particularly signiﬁcant
over Later W h a t  is important is that
it can be oNained tut disk friHil Datel lOr
just [2.50!
At 130 and with a disk speed only
six times 1101111al. the Huai Cartridge
from IMP Computers may seem to he
a little outmoded now but it has many
other things to offer in addition to its disk
speed. If your needs are for a faster disk
system but backed up by plenty of Basic
facilities and a machine code monitor.
then this could he well worth the money
My favourite system is the Trilogic
Expert cartridge. Unlik e the other
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
60
cartridges, this is a RANI chip which can
have the current Mimic  software booted
up onto it. The disadvantage o f  ihk
system is that any spike through the mains
supply will upset it and require the system
to be rebooted. This is a small price to
pay. I feel. for a system which can be kept
at the forefront of the backup and disk
speed revolution at low cost.
The other nice thing with the Expert
is the way that the monitor drops in with
a readout o f  the memory location at
which it  was interrupted, a  fantastic
debugging facilitN
I think l i n  digressing a little! The
main point about the Expert is that it
incorporates an excellent compaction
system which is  the envy o f  many a
software house. This . and the turbo
loader. means that no program takes
longer than 30 seconds to load and the
cartridge i s  competitivelY pric ed a t
19_ 99_
Deciding on a cartridge system is not
merely a case of weighing up the pros and
cons of the disk and tape turbos. They arc
package deals and just as I prefer the
Expert. another programmer may prefer
Action Replay. Final or Freeze Frame.
The only way to decide is to read the ads.
decide how much you believe and sift
through the range of facilities to see how
many titi need and how many would not
he used
Flash Successors
The Flash system needed a chip change
in the C64 and this seems to be the trend
once more. Ali three of the big utility
suppliers have a chip change system:
!fate! '
Phantom a nd Evesham i c  ros•
fholphin DOS.
Much higher speeds can he achieved
if the data is sent in parallel through the
computer's user port. This means that in-
formation can be exchanged between disk
and computer a byte at a time instead of
a bit at a time in serial interactions.
Obviously this is about eight times faster
hut it does mean a new operating system
has to be installed.
One fact that all the systems seem to
gloss over is that ﬁtting these systems isn't
child's play. I've seen inside many a C64
and in all hut one case the RUM chips

were soldered directly onto the PCB. This
means a desoldering job for most people.
Don't attempt this job yourself unless
)011 know what your doing. The complex-
ity and vulnerability of both the chip and
the PCB trace is  a formula for  total
klisaster. If a good heat sink isn't used the
chip will he irrepairably damaged and, if
all of the solder isn't removed. you could
strip the pathways off the surface of the
hoard and then you've got serious
problems.
Given these two situations its better
to risk overheating the chip to ensure that
the PCB is undamaged_ I say this for two
reasons: ﬁrstly because a replacement
chip can be acquired more readily and.
secondly, because you may never need the
chip anymore!
Using a solder sucker and a substan-
tial heat sink I've removed many a ROM
ithoul causing damage. I've had more
problems soldering in the replacement IC
socket which seem more ready to shed a
leg than a dragonﬂy in the mating season.
The lesson I've learnt is not to settle
a cheap. Fragile and, therefore. shoddy
socket.
Once you've spent an hour or so
modifying the hoard. it's just as the ads
tell youlitting only takes a few minutes
and usually requires no soldering'! Pah!
Professional D O S  includes a n
operating system called Disk Demon. It
boasts an unbelievably fast rate of 60
limes faster than normal load. This means
that a 202 block ﬁle loads in under 3
minutes, a transfer rate of over 15,000
DISK UTILITIES
bytes per minute or 135,000 baud! A rate
this high is. frankly, suspect. Datel could
not suppIN me with a copy of Professional
DOS hy the time that this magazine went
to press but I wait to be convinced of the
reliability of this data transfer rate.
The rest of the system's claims seem
to be much more moderate with pwgram
and sequential uk  save times 20 times the
normal rate and a sequential tile load 25
times faster than normal.
The system also adds thirty n e
commands to Basic and includes a last
ﬁle copier. The Professional DOS costs
£64.99 on the C64 or C69.99 ti)r the
Cl28164 version.
Triloeic's DOS claims a 240 block
load in 7 seconds which, at just under
70000 baud is a more plausible rate than
Datels claim.
Trilogic boast that full error checking
has been retained which•other system
have sacriﬁced in favour of speed. An
additional 60 commands include those
hich allow the system to ignore write
proteet tabs. To the user this means that
disks can be doubled simply by ﬂipping
them over, no more hole punching.
At E78.99, Phantom is not a cheap
'Astern and their is no C128 mode version
but it is 1001 British, by love.
Dolphin D O S is n't Britis h but it's
probably the model for the new genera-
tion of turbo DOS chips. !laving been
around longer, this system is one that I'm
very familiar with and one slightly
worrying factor is possibly a cause for
concern vk it h the Datel and Trilogic
systems as well.
Dolphin DOS seems to make the
6522 outpui chip niore vulnerable than
before and the recommended switch on
procedure ol C64 on and then 1541 must
be adhered to every time the system is
powered up. Through casual careless
moments. I have succeeded in burning out
this chip twice during the year that I've
had the system running and it does add
quite a lot to the cost of the system!
Care is  rewarded with a  system
which will load 202 hlocks in less than
5 seconds (85000 baud). a save speed
which is 12 times the normal rate for
program and eight times for sequential
ﬁles. Like the old Flash! system there is
also a full screen editor system.
The inclusive monitor is a very basic
but useful utility and the single keypress
YOUR COMMODORE 11ARDAAUE BUYERS GUIDE
61
command channel access is carried over
when in Basic programming mode. Apart
from this only three extra Basic
commands are added w ith Dolphin but
you do get a free Dolphin Copy disk.
At £69.95 it falls midway between the
other two systems bin does have a long
and reliable track record to support its
claim to be the'esiablished standard' turbo
lin
Turbos have now gone as far as they
can go. Any further increase in speed will
deﬁnitely be at the expense of' reliability
and chip safety. The C64 can only cope
ith so much and who really needs a full
memor‘ load faster than seconds''
Touchline
Date! Electronics
Units 8/9
Dewsbury Road
Fenton Industrial Estate
Fenton
Stoke—on—Trent
1eLW82 273815
Evesham Micros
63 Bridge Street
Evesham
Wives
WR11 4SF
rleL0386 41989
IMP Computers UK
9 Hornbeam Walk
William
Essex
CM8 2SZ
TeL0376 511471
Supersoft
W
Canning Road
Wealdstone
Harrow
Middlesex
HA3 7SJ
TeL01-861 1166
Tri logic
Dept PX 3
329 Tong Street
Bradford
BD4 9QY
TeL0274 691115

On Line
Line Up
by Dalid Janda
()lag online with your Cominodore
G
may seem like a daunting task at ﬁrst, but
there's a fascinating world of computer
communications waiting which can be
accessed with very little effort.
Purchasing the software to get going
is no problem. Basically there are two
types of package: viewdata and terminal.
Viewdata software enables you to access
services such as Micronet and Prestel
which feature low resolution, colour
graphics. Terminal software on the other
hand simply offers plain text, but is still
by far the most popular user interface in
the world of comms.
Your next item will be an RS232
interlace to plug into the user port of the
C64. There is a large number of interfaces
available, and you can pick one up tOr as
little as E20,
Undoubtedly' t h e  mos t difﬁc ult
choice to make is which modern you
should buy. This depends entirely on
what you want to do. If. for example. you
wish to subscribe to Micronet K(X) then
all you'll need is  a  modem that can
operate at 1200/75 — they'll even give you
one free i f  you subscribe for a year.
However, if  you wish to access bulletin
hoards and online databases such as
Telecom Gold then the sky's you limit.
Various modems operate at various
speeds. Generally speaking. the faster the
operating speed of the modem the luster
you can send or receive intOrmat ion. It's
COMMUNICATIONS
Computer communications are a source of coniUsion to
many people. We supply the key to modem living.
also true that the faster the modem. the
more expensive it is.
Of the modems that are currently on
the market today. ther are three basic
types:
Manual: these are quite simple and have
to be operated manually by  pressing
buttons. They arc also the cheapest.
Software controlled: modems such as
the Designer are software controlled and.
as the name suggests. they need the
appropriate software to allow full access
to the modems features,
Intelligent: this type of modem is still
Ltuite rare in the home or small business
markets as they are very expensive
indeed. Intelligent modems have their
own set of commands and can be used
Fully automatically.
We can now go on to look at a
selection of modems that cover all three
types.
VOYAG E R
The Voyager 7 is a V211V23 device which
is suitable for use with Viewdata and
scrolling types of databases (DB). The
baud rates available are 3(X)/300. 1200175,
75/1200. and 1200112(0 half duplex. A test
mode allows the modem to he tested
ofﬂine at 3(X) baud.
The Voyager 7 offers auto—dial and
auto—answer as standard. but it should
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
62
be pointed out that the Voyager is not
approved for auto—dialling and that the
auto—answer option has been found to be
very unreliable. Potential buyers are
warned t o test these facilities before
making a purchase.
The modem is  o f  'average'
165x145x55mm. Four rubber feet keep it
from sliding around and an ample length
of mains and PTSN cable are provided.
A ﬁve—pin Domino type (female) socket
at the back is used to connect the Voyager
to the Comms Cartridge o r  RS232
interface, and a six—way rotary switch on
the front panel is used for selecting the
baud rate (originate or answer) or the test
mode.
Five coloured LEDs on the front
indicate data ﬂow. power. carrier detect
and so on. There is a lack of an on/off
switch or an in' ine telephone socket. The
latter means that it will be necessary to
purchase a splitter socket in order to use
your phone on the same socket if  you
want to avoid a lot of plug swapping.
The Voyager is a software controlled
modem and is therefore best used with
auto—dial and auto—answer software
such as Mustang but the main problem
with this modem is  its reliability. As
mentioned, the auto—dial feature is not
approved but many people don't take any
notice of this. However, the auto—answer
facility cannot be guaranteed as Modem
House. the now defunct company who

produced t h e  Voyager series, h a d
problems with production. As a result
Voyagers with a serial number less than
1200 will not auto—answer, However. in
tests, Your Commodore has found that
some Voyagers w it h  serial numbers
higher than this have not auto—answered
either.
Other aspects of' the modem were
ﬁne and. t ak ing t h e  faults  i n t o
consideration, i t  d o e s  t h e  j o b
satisfactorily. I f  you can pick up the
Voyager 7 Ibr around 1:40 then you have
a bargain. if the price is higher then look
elsewhere.
NIGHTINGALE
The Rice Nightingale was one of the ﬁrst
reliable duel speed modems on the
market. It has been available for a number
of years and is now sold as the ofﬁcial
Amstrad modem,
The modem operates at 300/300
baud ( o r ig in a t e  a n d  a n s w e r ) .
1200/75,75/1200 and 1200/1200 h a lf
duplex. T h e  ear ly  (non—approved)
versions also operated at 300/300 full
duplex at Bell frequencies. which means
that it  could unofﬁcially be used t o
connect t o  American systems. T h e
modem also features a 300/300 baud
self—test mode,
Three push buttons are situated on
the front panel of the Nightingale. One
COMMUNICATIONS
is marked modem select and is used to
seize the line once a carrier is detected.
The second and third buttons select the
speed and whether to use originate or
answer mode.
On the older, non—approved models
an extra button was used t o  SA itch
between U S  B e l l  o r  Eur opean
frequencies. This button was removed and
covered with a  plug t o  gain BART
approval. T he reason why  U S  Bell
frequencies are not approved is because
they cause havoc with Br test equipment!
Despite the BART approval, it  is
possible to remove the plug and insert a
push button to restore US Bell capability
but this would invalidate warranty and
upset BT.
Two tri—colour LEDs on the front
panel indicate carrier detect/line hold and
power/data. At the rear of the modem is
a recessed BT socket that the phone plugs
into, a push button f r  selecting self—test
and a ﬁve—pin RS423 Domino socket
(female).
One other item of note is that there
are plenty of ventilation grills on top, and
underneath the in()dem. Handy, as there
is no on/off switch and its easy to leave
the modem plugged in.
The Nightingale i s  a  manually
operated modem, and as  such the
auto—dial and answer facilities of any
software used with it will not be of any
use. Having said that. i t  is  perfectly
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
63
possible t o use the Nightingale with
packages such as Mustang: simply press
the modem connect button when the
carrier is heard and press the RETURN
key on the computer.
An interesting non—documented
feature of the Nightingale is that it will
auto—answer when in  reverse Prestel
mode ie. 75/1200. This is achieved by
setting the speed to 7511200 and pushing
in the carrier detect button. After a few
rings the modem will answer! It should
be noted that thislacility' was  not
purposely designed.
Although t h e  N i g h t i n g a l e  i s
technologically rather old hat. it has the
advantage of being a very. very reliable
modem, and. although rather expensive
when compared to low cost moderns with
more facilities. it can represent excellent
value f o r  money  v (  hen purchased
secondhand.
COMMODORE MODEM
(C64)
The Commodore Modem is also referred
to as the'Compunet modem' because it
was designed to be used with that service.
UntOrtunately Commodore don't
manufacture the modem any more, which
is a shame as it is a very versatile device
even though the speciﬁcation apparently
belies this fact.

The Commodore NA odei ii y e rates at
two speeds only: 1200/75 and 1.200/1200
half duplex. However. the 1200 half
duplex mode, as  with the Designer
modem. has a very fast turnaround time,
and as such can he used with all the
enhanced software that Y2 Computing
produee.
The plus side to the Commodore
modem i s  that i t  contains terminal
software on ROM speciﬁcally designed
titr connection t o  Compunet. T his
ﬁrmware includes a HELP facility, a
frame editor and the ability to load and
save software patches that enhance the
CM when online (see the section on
Compunell.
Connecting to Complinet is done by
entering'C' with the shift key held down
and then pressing RETURN. You will
then he prompted t o  enter a  phone
nun iber which the modem w ill auto-dial
titr you.
The modem is completely software
driven and plugs into the C64's cartridge
port. A  telephone lead trails front the
hack of the modem hut an inline socket
would have been more useful.
Because the modem is no longer in
production, arid is designed for use with
the Compunet service does not limit it in
any way. User to user software can he
obtained f r o m  ( 'ompunet o r  Y 2
Computing and one very popular package
is D ia Item whic h i s  available fr om
Micnmet 800. A ls o  available fr om
Micronet on disk or tape is the Mustang
COMMUNICATIONS
software which gives the user access to
Micronet thnitigh this Compunet inttlem!
All things considered, the Commodore
Modem is a very useful item that is ideal
for viewdata. Compunet and scrolling
terminal applications tat 120075 baud of
course). and is ideal lOr user -to-user
purposes provided you have the right
software. Although n o  longer  i n
production. these mittlems can be picked
up secondhand for as little as E25.
DESIGNER
For those who are not satisﬁed with the
existing range o f  software-controlled
modems, and yet do not want to spend a
large sum of money on an intelligent
model. t h e  Designer modem f r om
Dataphone could be just what you're
looking litr.
Dataphonc have answered the prayers
of many by combining elements of a
manual modem w i t h  thos e o f  a
software-controlled [widen', added extni
features and packaged it into a neat unit.
The Designer can operate at 1200/75
originate. 75/1200 answer. 3001300
originate and answer and 12(0/12(X) baud
half duplex. It's worth noting that the
1200 half duplex mode has a very last
turnaround time (unlike the Voyager.
Enterprise or Nightingale). which means
the us er-to-us er and ﬁle  transfer
software supplied by Y2 Computing will
be compatible with it.
The modem its elf is  very well
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
64
designed and has a low proﬁle. Th,:
software-controlled aspect enables the
m o d
auto-diallinglanswering. The Mustang
software will do this well.
Another software controlled feature
is the auto-baud rate scanning. but at the
time of writing there was no Commodore
related software t o make use o f  this
Feature. Howev er. D a t v h o n e  a r e
currently working in conjunction with a
comms software house to rectify this
situation.
The Designer can he completely
controlled manually by using the ﬁve
push button sw itches on the front panel.
Three switches ir e used to select the
speed and to put the modem into originate
or answer mode: two more switches
introduce features not lOund on a modem
ot this price.
Firstly, there is a power onloff switch
and, secondly. there is a monitor on/off
switch. The monitor allows you to hear
the call in pmgress and is very handy for
detecting a had line. Six LEDs on the
Front panel also give vou a full status
readout of the modem.
One feature that is not visable. but
welcome. is the anti-tinkle circutry that
suppresses the annoying tink le that
modems like the Voyager and Enterprise
niake when auto-dialling.
On the back of the Designer is a
25 -was. D  -type RS232 connector
(female p and a recessed telephone socket.
A generous length o f  telephone cable
trails from the rear as does the power cord
which is ﬁtted with a plug.
In us e the Designer p e t
perfectly. The option of controlling it by
software or manually is very handy and
makes the Designer an extremely ﬂexible
tool. But by far its biggest asset is the
price. F or  E99.95 excluding VAT, i t
represents excellent value for money.
ENTERPRISE I
The best way to describe the Enterprise
I is to say that it's a Voyager 7 with bits
added on. Their appearance and control
are almost identical: this  is  not s o
surprising as both the Enterprise 1 and
the Voyager 7 were manulactured by Kirk
Automation.
The Enterprise 1 is housed in a black
casing with green lettering on the front

COMMUNICATIONS
panel. A rotary switch on the right is used
hi select the required baud rate which can
be one o f  300/300 oririnatelanswer.
12001200 half duplex. 1200175. 75/12(X)
band and test. A leatUTT not tOund on the
Voyager 7 is the on/off line button which
is us ed w h e n  diallinglans wering
manually. An  oddity is  that when the
button is pushed in the modem is ofﬂine
and when the button is out it is online -
the reverse would have seemed a more
logical choice.
Situated at the rear of the modem is
the RS232 socket (female), phone socket.
telephone lead and power cable. O f
particular interest is the 21—pin RS232
connector which uses pins 1-6. 15. 17, 20.
22-23 and 25. Basically this means that
connecting t h e  Enterprise t o  y our
Commodore should he no problem as a
variety of wiring options is available,
The phone sol.''ket is  recessed in
accordance with Kr regulations. and this
enables a telephone to be used in line wjib
the modem thus saving you the expense
of purchasing a double adaptor.
Using the Enterprise I is simplicity
itself — even though the manual is not up
to standards. When used IA ith software
such as Mustang from Y2 Computing. the
auto—dial feature can he used. T he
Enterprise series uses relay technology to
auto - dial which is quite loud in operation
and not the most reliable method o f
getting a telephone to dial. One eftect is
that auto—dialling will cause any phone
extensions t o
annoying. This is a common trait of all
software controlled modems.
One aspect o f  the Enterprise l's
operation that i s  annoying i s  t he
auto—answer facility w hich is controlled
by the terminal software. Auto—answer
would only work providing that a three
wire extension is being used. Potent
purchasers are advised to test this facility
belOre buying.
Despite this. all other aspects of the
modem's operation were ﬁne. and 1 would
conclude that i f  you are looking for a
cheap (hut mostly reliahlet modem w ith
dual speed operation then it would he a
good idea t o  shop around tO r  a n
Enterprise I.
SERIES FOUR
The Series Four range of modems from
Pace Micro Technology consists of three
models. and the item reviewed was the
12(X)S which is in the middle of the range.
What y ou get f o r  the price is
sophistication with simplicity. The Series
Four is one of the new breed or intelligent'
modems. That is. a lot of the work that
is normalk done by the RS232 interlace
software is done by the modem itself
which has its own control program and
central processing unit and is, in effect.
a computer in its Mk 11 right.
Control of the modem is achieved by
sending commawk from through the
terminal software. These commands were
developed bly the Hayes Company and are
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
65
widely used throughout the industry,
The 12(XIS re% iew model can operate
al 300/30( 1200175, 75/12(X) or 1.20012(X)
full duplex. I t  features auto—dial.
auto—answer, auto—hand rate detection
and selection. Also included is a battery
backed calendar clock and notepad which
has the facilitx to store up to 64 phone
numbers in its internal memory, The
12IX)S also features a full RS232 port with
inline phone socket a s  w ell a s  a
Centronics printer port and 20 segment
LED display with line strength indicator.
Speed buffering is  also incorporated
enabling the modem to connect to a host
at one speed whilst the terminal software
is operating at another.
The modem itself is quite ﬂat but
takes up a lot of space. The front panel
consists o f  an LCD display with two
touch—sensitive buttons (that are used to
manually seleet options) plus the line
status and line strength LEDs. AI the rear
of the modem is  the socket for  the
external power supply unit, the Milne
phone socket. the Centronics poll a
reset switch.
Once connected to the micro, the
1200S is easy to operate. Due to the way
the modem is wired up to the micro the
comins software w ill think  that the
modem is online and can go into terminal
mode. The reason for this is that the
commands to operate the modem are
entered from the keyboard whilst in
terminal mode. To understand this better
consider the t011owing example.

lint would like to contact Telecom Gold
at 1200 baud hill duplex even th4 lugh sour
software does not have a 1200 hill or half
duplex mode.
First of all a speed must be selected
from the software menu. Although you
want 1200 baud eventually the choice is
purely arbitrary such as 30)/3(X) baud
just so that you can go online. Even
though you aren't connected to a host at
this point, the moderiftricks
into thinking that it is.
At this stage you are greeted with a
blank screen but by enteringATr. the
Series Four HELP screen is displayed
(Table 2). To connect with Telecom Gold
at 1200 full duplex you would simply
enter the following:
ATD 583 1200
The rest now happens automatically
with the modem dialling. detecting the
carrier, selecting the appropriate baud
rate and so on. Even though the terminal
software still only operates at 300/ 3(X)
baud it's possible to use services that
operate at 1200 baud full—duplex because
of the Series Four's internal memory
buffer keeping things in cheek. The net
result o f  this is  that the modem is
exceptionally easy to use, but extremely
powerful at the same time.
COMMUNICATIONS
TABLE I -  Series Four AT Command
Set
A Answer call without delay.
C Carrier control (CO/OFF, Cl/ON
D Dial number and originate call
E Echo commands (E0/OFF. El/ON)
F Echo data ( 1
H Hook control (HO/ON. HI/OFF)
In isplay Identity (n/0.1.2)
Kni Display/set time/date (n/0,1,2)
Ln Speaker Loudness (n/L2
Mn Monitor status (n/0.1.2)
NC Display/set number store
O Go back on—line
P Pulse dialling ON
Q Result code (Q0/0N,Q1/OFF)
R Reverse to answer after dialling
SE Display/set S registers
T Tone dialling ON
lit  Unattended mode (L10/OFF. Ul/ON)
V 
R
e
s
u
l t
 
c
o
d
e
(VO/Numeric.VI/alphabetic)
W Wait for secondary dial tone
Xn Extended result code (n10.1.2,3.4)
2 Resets S registers/commands
NOTE:1." indicates additions t o  the
standard Hayes command sef
MULTIMODEM (C64)
The M u l t i  modem f r o m  M i r a c l e
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
66
-
and software in one package. I f  you are
looking for a modem that can be used for
N• lewdata as well as terminal applications
then this could be what you're looking for.
The modem operates at 1200/75.
75/1200. 300/300 answer and originate.
and at 1200 half duplex. A 300/300 baud
M11 duplex mode is also available for Bell
tones. Other hardware features include
auto—dial a n d  answer ( whic h ar e
controlled by the software) and a very fast
turnaround time when using the modem
at 1200 half duplex
Y2 Computing have written a
number o f  pr ogr ams  in c lu d in g
user—to—user and enhanced 40 column
packages. These require modems that
have a very fast turnaround time and the
Multimodem could ﬁt the bill.
The Multimodein lacks buttons and
switches because it's completely software
driven. It plugs into the C M cartridge
port and has a telephone cable trailing
from it  which plugs into a  standard
telephone socket. No telephone socket is
supplied on the modem itself, so it will
be necessary to purchase a splitter if you
wish to use a telephone on the same line.
Using t he Multimodem v ia  it s
menu—driven software is very simple and
the combination is a nice one, leaving you
the option of buying other packages such
as Y2's ﬁle transfer package.
PRISM 2000
If you subscribe to Micn)net for one year.
and pay in advance, they will give you the
Mustang viewdata and terminal software
on disk or tape and a Prism 2000 modem
free of charge!
The modem is  n o longer being
manufactured. hut was one of the ﬁrst to
he approved for use at 1200/75 baud. Two
speeds are available. 1200175 (for use with
Prestel/Micronet) and I200/12(X) half
duplex. The half duplex mode is a little
awkward t o  use, requiring y ou t o
manually switch from send to receive by
pressing a  button. T he modem can
otherwise be turned around by software
control and details are given in  the
manual.
The Pr is m 2000 i s  good f o r
accessing the viewdata services for which
it was designed.

MPS SO1 PRINTER
Fresh Chips
With the Printer IV chip you can improve the quality of
the copy you get from your MPS 801 printer.
By Paul Eves
O
the MPS 80 I printer is the kick of true
descenders. There have been many
programs written t o  overcome this
problem. There have also been many
top quality programs written which
provide the user with the option o f
many different f o n t  styles. ( F ont
Master is just one which springs to
mind). A l l  these programs have one
thing in  common. As  software, the
user has ﬁrst to go through the process
of loading i n  t h e  program. then
selecting a given font from a  menu
before getting on with the job in hand.
Printer I V on the other hand has
none of these drawbacks, as hardware,
once the chip has been installed you
just ﬂip a switch and turn it on. The
selected font is now ready to go.
Fitting the chip is simplicity itself.
It only took me three minutes and I am
hopeless with electronics. Instructions
for ﬁtting Printer IV are as follows:
I. Disconnect the printer from the
mains, remove t h e  perspex cover.
paper shelf, and feed knob.
2. Using a  cross- head screwdriver.
remov e the four screws holding the
upper housing and the lower housing
together. Lift the top away to expose
the tray holding the electronics. Lift
and remove the tray to the rear of the
printer. Using a ﬂathead screwdriver.
carefully lift out the original character
ROM chip (this is a 24 pin chip).
N.B. Take careful note of the position
of the chip e.g. a small notch at one
end,
3. Take the Printer IV character chip
together with adaptor. and ﬁt this into
the carrier that housed the original
chip (taking note of the position of the
notch in  the c hip w  Inch should in
most cases be facing the right of the
printer looking from the front). The lly
lead with the two logic switches can be
placed to suit (I have drilled a small
hole i n  t h e  r ear  of ' the housing,
threaded i t  through and i t  is  now
permanently secure).
4. Re-assemble the printer and you are
ready to use o u r  new character sets.
CAUTION: Opening the printer will
invalidate your warranty if it is still in
force at the time.
There a r e  f o u r  character sets
a‘itilable to you:
I. Descenders
2. Scribe
3. Eclipse
4. Futuristic
When using a word processor.itis
advisable t o  use a  pause command
before switching between character
sets.
It is inadvisable to switch between
sets w hile t h e  pr inter  is  actually
printing. T his  w ill cause corrupted
characters and will also result in  a
blown fuse inside the printer.
I would also advise that you put the
original R O M  c h i p  s afely  away
somewhere.
For anyone who uses their printer
often this chip is a must. It's quick and
easy t o  use and the end results are
impressive.
10 4 4 . 1 1 4 • 4 4 4 4 1 4 # 4 4
12 i f  E A I N P L E  o r  NOPMOL TV CI
14 + + + . 4
16 ,
16
Pot 
I
t
 P  01 ES 32;S 1 1  1
PPINT"fC1_51tVELJPipN CHI P  I Y "
Z4 F C I P A
I F I :
;V541.415Z
Lgirftzo,45.14,145,1a5,15s,t,54
4 1 , -
40
4 4
11: 4  E X A M P 4 f  O r  I T A L I C  TYAY t
14 4 1 * * 1 4 M 4 4 4 4 4 * * * * 4 4 4 - t i t t t t t
16
16
•  P O N E ” 2 6 0 , 1 1 P 0 A t E S 3 Z
•  P P I N 7 " ( C L S 1 r t T L 1 P O n  CHI P  I t "
• t-op.4.49157c49...-67Reme
• A o x e # 1 , N
•  I r C X ( 7
30 t7YS24915Z
•  . n
*14 e A 7
,
▪ 9
4,0 •
1
10 4 t 4 I M I I 4 4 1 4 1 * 1 1 1 4 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 t
te E p m p L e  oF EcLip5e TypE
14 1 4 1 4 4 4 1 1 1 * 1 4 * * * 1 * * 4 4 4 4 . 4 14114
16
10 •
eo P L I K E 5 3 2 o o , 1 1
ee P P 0 1
eq F 0 1
E5 P n l E r l ,  h Lt-L.P; ti. N U J
eo ir-c>151tunrriminT-ou-,Eﬂu
lo 5Y514.119e
30 O n m E n  4 5 , 1 3 4 , 1 4 5 . 1 E 5 , 1 5 3 . 1 3 4
34 L4lTR3E, 0 1 , 1 4 0 , 4 E ,  -
5n
10
34 ,
40
10 I f  S41 : I t *  $4*11414 t t t t  M U * :
12 S UMP LE  1011 FUIUR 1ST 11: TYPE*
IL 4* * * * * #4* $ / 1 4 * * * t t i l l t t 4  1 tt $
:
18 :
20 Pr i vE9i 2ao, l i  "
?e P01111"ILLS1 LYL1 MI N CO IF I V
24 
I
ﬂ
j
1
2E, PEIVE4 ,114:CH
28 Lk D i < > 1 5 7
30 SYS49152
3e vilaeo,411,134,1[.9.1 es, is i, i k
14 LtaI11i?,87,19a,k e , e2 5,215,1.
:
Id :
:
40
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
67

Net
Beneﬁts
What are networks and bulletin boards all about? We
leave no stone unturned as we engage in communications.
by David Janda
W
meet your ﬁrst problem: who can you
call? The three main networks. Micronet:
Compunet and Mic r olink. require a
subscription payment if yOU want to get
more than just a few free screens. Is it
worth the money or is it best to stick to
the bulletin board circuit?
NUCRONET
micronet 800 started approximately three
years ago. The service is an information
provider (IP) operated on the Prestel
database. Subscribing to NI icronet not
only provides the user with access to
Micronet itself. hut also access to the rest
of the Prestel database. Furthermore. you
can register as an Interlink user for free
which provides a gateway
Gold and all of its services.
The structure of Micronet is tairly
simple. Pages o f  intOrmation (called
frames) measuring 40 characters by 24
lines are displayed on the TV or monitor.
Each frame can incorporate colour and
low resolution graphics.
All frames are numbered and priced.
The majority of frames on Micronet are
free to subscribers but sonic services do
incur a charge which is displayed at the
top right—hand corner of the frame.
Manipulating NI icronet and the rest
of Prestel) can be done in one of three
ways. First, providing you know the
speciﬁc page number you want to look at,
you can enter an asterisk followed by the
COMMUNICATIONS
MICRONET ( c . )  
8
0
0
a
K e y i n g
* 0 *
fr o m
a n y
p a g e
w i l l
a l w a y s
t a k e
yo u  t o
y o u r
f r o n t
p a g e ,  
F
U
L
L
 A - 2  I N D E X :  K e y  0 1
1 N e w s  a n d  Co m m en t
2 M i c r o b a s e s
3 C o m m u n i c a t i o n s
4 S o f t w a r e
5 P r e s t e l  F o c u s
6 G a m e s  a n d  E n t e r t a i n m e n t
7 T e l e s h o p p i n g ' A d v e r t i s i n g
8 B u s i n e s s  4,  C o n s u m e r  I n f o .
Ke
H E LP ? K e y  0  f r o m  a n y  p a g e
page number and this w ill take you
directly to that page. Secondly
searching enables you to enter a name
associated with a particular page. For
example. to get to the'from page' of the
Shades adventure came simply enter
ESHADES. This is. by far. the best way
to move about Micronet. Thirdly. pages
will often have messages along the lines
orPress I kir news
you to the news pages. This option is
especially useful to those new to the
service.
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
6S
rxlicronet mainly caters for the BBC
ic ro. Commodor e 6 4  a n d  Z  X
Spectrum. each of which has at microhase
dedicated to it. These microbases can be
considered as  mini—databases within
Micronet. A  microbase has its  own
features and reviews which are supplied
by the editorial staff. Each area also has
a user group section with articles and
features supplied by editorial staff and
subscribers alike.
Some o f  the features tOund on
Micronet include the news pages. Micro

Mouse, Bizznet. Sunday ) ( Ir a and
Chatline. The news is updated daily with
the latest microcomputer news. Comms
fans can tune into Micro Mouse which is
a daily column edited by Steve Gold who
gained notoriety k i r  t he Duk e o f
i nburg h hack a few years back
Bizznet is an area on Micronet which
is not micro related hut is aimed at the
small business user, providing features on
subjects such as tax and insurance.
Another non—micro related area is
Sunday Xtra which has ﬁhn and record
reviews plus  a  gossip c olumn a l l
presented in a magazine fOrmat.
A Mainframe Chattily service allows
subscribers nftalk• to each other on a
public type of bulletin hoard. Messages
are updated instantly. numerous Chatlines
are provided, each dedicated to a speciﬁc
area of interest. A Celebrity chatline is
held each week where a special guest
answers questions put by subscribers.
Subscribers can also book frames in a
special gallery area and use them to stall
their own mini —magazines.
A major part o f  NI icronet is  the
Telesoftware area. This stores software
that can be downloaded into the micro
and saved to disk or tape. Commercial.
subscriber and free software is provided
but, where there is a charge. the user is
always infOrmed o f  the price betOre
downloading.
COMPUNET
Compunet has been in service for the past
three years and was designed to•interiiice•
with the C64 micro. Until now the service
was exclusively f o r  Commodore ( 4
owners but there are future plans to cater
Mr other types of micro, the ﬁrst being
the Amiga. Because Compunet is geared
towards the C M  user, the database is
much more ﬂexible and can take full
advantage of the Commodore machine.
This is  the biggest advantage o f  a
dedicated system.
The database is organised as a series
oI directories arranged with a tree—like
structure. Each directory can contain one
or more entry which may' be text, a
program o r  a  further, more detailed
directory. Eac h directory follows a
common lb r ma t  T h is  includes the
indexing which infOrms the subscriber
CO:M1 MC...U[0M;
MICRONET 8 0 0  < C >  
6
0
0
1
1
0
a
 
O
p
THE COMMODORE DATABAS E  O N  M I CRO NE T
ELIE PloRE
O-MI CRONE T 3 - S O F T  T E C H  6 - I C P U G
which part o f  the database they are
currently accessing. This index consists
of a name and a  directory reference
number.
Entries also contain a standard set of
information. T his  includes the page
number. name. type of entry tprogram
text etc). price (if any), life on system in
days. author and a vote.
Traversine the database and issuing
commands are very easy. The bottom line
of the display forms what is  called a
duckshoot menu. This can be scrolled
from left to right Until a command is
centred. Through these commands the
subscriber is able to upload, download.
show the contents of a directory entry.
access electronic mail and so on.
To call up a directory entry it is ﬁrst
necessary to move a blue bar over the
entry usine the cursor keys. If it is a text
entry, the SHOW command o n the
duckshoot will cause the contents of the
entry to be displayed in C64 text mode.
If. on the other hand it is a program it
can be downloaded straight onto disk.
Moving about Compunet can be
done in  three ways. First, by  going
directly to an entry with the GOTO
command followed by a page number or
name. Secondly, b y  using the D I R
command to go further down the tree, or
by using the BACK command to go higher
Up. Thirdly, frequently used areas can be
accessed by pressing one of  the C64
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
69
function keys.
The contents o t  Compunet ar e
mainly supplied by the users themselves.
Compunet design the structure of the
database and provide many services such
as the Courier electronic mail service.
guidelines. Multi —User Games (MUGs)
and so on.
Many o f  the t o p  Commodore
software producers sell their software via
Compunet at reduced prices. A service
called party—line enables real—time
chatting between individuals or groups.
Another v er y  popular area i s  t he
adventure game areas which feature
MUD and FEDERATION.
By far  the biggest attraction on
Compunet is  an area o f  the database
called The Jungle. This area can be used
by the subscriber as a marketplace into
which they can upload and distribute their
own programs or text! Other users may
then access or buy this material ensuring
that this electronic bazaar contains a
wealth o f  u s e  p r o g r a m m i n g
information, club news, free software and
so on.
Another very powerful aspect o f
Compunet is that tacilities can easily he
added, any changes to the system that
would normally require modiﬁcation of
the user's communication software is not
necessary as a softwarepatch' can be
downloaded into the C64 (or other micro)
before logging on.

MICROLINK/TELECOM
GOLD
For the past four years British Telecom
has operated an electronic mail service
called Telecom Gold. It's a service aimed
ofﬁcially at the business user but in
reality it's far more then that.
M' Gold can be accessed by any
micro. modem and terminal software
combination w it h  a  s c roll facility.
Further, it can be accessed at a variety
of speeds from 300/300 full duplex to
1200/1200 full duplex. I t  can also be
accessed from PSS which is BT's high
speed data network.
At ﬁr s t s ight B I  G old seems
dauntingand yet it's really quite simple to
use. U n lik e  Micronet/Prestel a n d
Compunet. B T  G old is  operated by
issuing a number of commands.
The facilities provided by BT Gold
are tailored for the business user. Each
subscriber has a mailbox and can send
and receive electronic mail to and from
other subscribers be they in the UK. or
anywhere in the world with a DiaIcon]
system in operation. Telex lacilities are
also provided as well as a number of
games. and business programs such as
spelling checkers, statistical tools. and
forecasters.
Help is  always at hand with the
HELP and INFO commands. Even froin
within a program (such as the text editor)
help can be sought by entering'?'.
13T Gold is split into a number of
systems b u t  subscribers c an s t ill
communicate with each other regardless
of the system they are using. One such
system (72) is called Microlink and is
operated by Database Publications,
A subscriber to Microlink has all the
facilities of a Gold user and plenty more.
Microlink has a HICIILI driven front end
to LIT Gold which is very user friendly.
Nlicrolink also provides a number o f
enhanced services such as a bulletin
board. telemessage service, regular micro
news. telesoftware (not for Commodore
micros though). and gateways into other
computer databases.
One s uc h gateway i s  t o  t h e
Mnematics s erv ic e i n  t h e  U S A .
Mnematics is a database which offers
multi—user games, software ( f m the
Commodore!). special interest groups.
real—time chat and so on. It's rather
C O M
MICRONE1WELCOME TO MICE
Interlink Gateway cr
Interlink User Gui,
How To Join Interlik
Interlink Charges g
9 :  M i c r o n e t
expensive to use at 25p a minute. but far
cheaper then dialling the States direct.
Subscribing to Microlink is by far the
best way to gain access to Iff Gold. This
is due to a number of reasons. Firstly.
there ar e t he added facilities that
Microlink provide. Secondly. Microlink
has a monthly subscription fee of  E3
which is  quite cheap considering that
normal BT Gold subscribers have to pay
1:5. Thirdly. because Microlink can be
used both as a serious business tool anti
for entertainment. o f  which there is
pie n t .
BULLETIN BOARDS
A bulletin board (BB) can best be
compared to a community notice board.
BBs are usually run by hobbyists in their
own spare time o n  a  home mic r o
equipped with a  disk drive and an
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
70
auto—answer modem.
Typically, BBs will only allow one
user at a time to browse through the ﬁles
stored on the board. These can include
messages fr om other users, general
information, s pec ialis t s ec tions ,
downloadable software and so on.
Compared t o  M i c r o n e t  o r
Compunet. BBs  ar e not technically
brilliant. but they are by no means crude.
One o f  the best things about using
different B B s  i s  that they 're n o t
bureaucratic, ofﬁcial, or run by money
makers — and that makes a difference.
The UK currently has over 200 BBs
that operate at regular times, and this
number is grov. int!. Basically there are
two types of BB to choose from. There
is the traditional scrolling type of BB and
those using the Viewdata standard.
To access scrolling BBs you'll need
terminal (often referred t o  as dumb

401999999w O p
MET
Gra 1
id COTO 2
lirk COTO 3
G110
t
[le
es
Je
S.
:)F
C.
ig
ot
C.
Bs
'is
re
re
-
lb
terminal) software. M o s t  c omms
packages include this type of facility but.
in case you are a Viewdata (Prestel) user
who doesn't have this facility. there are
lots of  public domain (free) terminal
programs available from user groups such
as 'CMG  or C .1B64. Terminal soft ware
does not give you any colour or graphics
but it does allow you to logon to most
types of BB.
The second type o f  BB operates
using the Viewdata (Prestel) standard
which presents information with colour
and low —res graphics in a page fOrmat.
Micronet/Prestel subscribers w ill not
need to buy any additional software. but
Compunet users w ill need the free
Viewdata program which can be obtained
through the system. Again, as with the
dumb t e r m i n a l  s oftw ar e, m o s t
commercial comms software has  a
Viewdata mode,
COMMUNICATIONS
Most Bib are operated at 300 baud.
This means that you'll need a modem
such as the Designer. Nightingale or
Multimodem from Miracle Technology.
All three will also allow you to access
boards at 1200/75 in Prestel and scrolling
formats. CBM Modern owners need not
tel hard done by because many boards
now allow access at 1.200/75 baud, and
some even operate at 1200/1200.
Logging On
Each BB has its own unique style and
character. Facilities common to all types
of BB include an E—Mail (Electronic
Mail) option that enables you to send and
receive messages. These messages can be
sent privately to another user or be posted
on the general board Ibr everyone to see.
Other features on ﬁlls typically include
free downlimdable software.
Downloading can be achieved in
several ways but by far the most popular
system is the X —Modem format, so your
comms package should have this option.
Don't worry too much if it doesn't support
X —Modem. as most liBs can transmit the
software in ASCII (or PETASCII) fOrmat.
Another common feature to be found
on BBs are SIGs — Special Interest
Groups. These are areas which contain
information on one particular subject
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
71
such as a  speciﬁc micro. comms in
general. politics or  whatever the SIG
operator wants.
There are a few BBs running on
Conimodore machines. typically Amigas.
You can set up and run your own BB with
American BB public domain software. or
by buyine the BB Host software for the
C64 from Y2 Computing for £69.
When us ing a  B B  it ' s  wor th
remembering that the quality of a bulletin
board is governed by its contents. The
software and messages are all supplied by
the users in the ﬁrst place so don't be a
parasite. a s  w e ll a s  downloading
programs and reading messages. why not
put some up as well?
BBs To See
This table details a very small selection
of BBs that are currently in operation on
a 24 hour basis.
View means that you w ill need
Prestel style software to access the board.
1200 means that you'll need scrolling
software and a 1200/75 option modem
such as the one from Commodore to gain
access t o  the service. 3 0 0  means
300-300 baud access whic h needs
scrolling software, CBM Modem users
will nor be able to access this type of
board.
Name
BARS 1
Brixton 'Tee
Cardiff ITec
C —View
DUBBS Dublin f
Dragon's Lair f
FBBS Swansea
Gnome at Home
Grendel ABBS f
Hackney BB
Haunting Thunder
IntOmatique
LABBS London f.
Lightﬁngers Place f
Livingston BBs
London BB
London Underground
Mactel
Mai I hox —80 (Liverpool)
Metrotel
NKABBS
Norview
THEIS Blandti)rd
Telephone R a t e s
0394 276306
01-735 6153
0222 464725
0702 546373
0001 885634
01-502 4543
0792 203953
01-888 8894
053
01-985 3322
0752 364059
0001 764942
0883 844164
0202 485723
050 6385.26
01-455 6607
01-863 0198
01-341 1719
051-428 8924
01-941 4.285
0795 842324
0604 20441
0.258 54494
300
View
View
View
300/1200
300/1200
300
View
300/1200
View
300
300/1200
300/1200
31)0/1200
300
300/1200
300/1200
300
300/1200
View
31)0
View
300
‘••••
t2,

RS232
2
Transmitted data
Sout
3
Received data
Sin
7
C o r n  MO n ( O v I
Gnd
Maur people switch off when they hear the Mehl l011 of
the RS232 interface and related subjects. This article is
aimed at clearing up some confusion and doubt.
By Steve Carrie
0 me (if not most) of you will have
S
heard by now of that favourite of all
computer industry subjects, the RS232
communications s tandard. People
have been known to go weak at the
knees and hide when it is mentioned.
Every , day, i t  causes problems f o r
computer engineers connecting u p
equipment s uc h a s  pr inter s  a n d
modems. I t  has even given rise to a
lucrative business of building the so-
called " b r e a k - o u t  b o x e s "  f o r
monitoring and "ﬁxing" RS232 lines.
If it is supposed to be an industry
standard. why does it cause so much
hassle? Every computer manufacturer
has different ideas on how to build a
computer, which devices to use, how
big the screen should be, etc. It would
seem that this train of thought also in-
cludes the RS232 standard.
Now. before I go on, let me say that
the idea behind RS232 is  great_ A
standard interfac e f o r  connecting
different types of hardware (including
computers) together. RS232 is really
useful in the ﬁeld of telecommunica-
tions_ Modems are usually connected
to a computer via an RS232 link. You
can connect two computers together
and transfer programs between them
(a technique often called "porting").
Unfortunately, things are not this
simple. With different manufacturers
having different ideas on how to imp-
lement the standard (Commodore is
no exception) a great deal of con fusion
can arise when two pieces of hardware
R S
are to be connected together. Most of
this confusion surrounds the way in
which the control lines of  an RS232
should be used. Thankfully., this does
not concern us in this article since we
will b e  us ing only  a  basic RS232
interface_
Basic RS232
As you may know. RS232 uses the
serial method o f  data transmission.
Information is sent bit by bit along a
single wire t o  a  receiving machine.
Since data may ﬂow in both directions.
two wires plus a common return are
required t o  mak e a  basic RS232
communication line. T he lines  are
usually connected to equipment by a
25-way D - t y p e  c onnec tor. D a t a
leaving a computer exits via pin two
and incoming data enters via pin three.
The O v  return is  connected t o  pin
seven. This gives the "3-line" RS232
interface. There is no control over the
ﬂow o f  the data in  either direction
unless handled by the software (more
on this  later). A n  RS232 interface
using more than these three lines is
YOUR COMMODORE HA R DISAR E BUYERS GUIDE
72
known as an "X-line" interface.
It is hest to use a three or four core
cable with a shield (we will see why in a
moment) rather than separate wires.
For the purposes of this article, this
is all we require. " A h  yes" you say.
"that's a l l  v e r y  w e l l  b u t  m y
Commodore doesn't have a 25-way d-
type connector let alone any RS232
interface". True it doesn't have a 25-
way connector but it  does have an
RS232 interface. You mean you didn't
know?
Commodore RS232
Since tile time o f  the Vic  211 Com-
modore gas "programmed" in a limited
form of RS232 port. I say programmed
because the hardware device normally
associated w ith RS232 communica-
tions. t h e  Universal Asynchronous
Receiver/Transmitter (UART), is not
present in the circuitry of the Vic 20.
C64, N C ,  C l2 8  and C  I28D. T he
omission o f  the C I 6  and Plus/4 is 1
intended. T h e  C 16 cannot handle
RS232 comms (we shall see why in a
moment), T he Plus /4 o n the other
3-LINE RS2 INTERFACE:
pin
CONNECI IONS (25-way D-connector)
function
1

hand i s  omitted f o r  a  different
reason. This machine DOES have a
UART.
RS232 signals appear at the user
port. 'MINis  exactly the reason w hy the
C16 cannot handle RS232: it does not
have a user port (a strange omission by
Commodore. Anyone know why?). All
the conversion i s  handled b y  t he
Operating SN IC in (Kernel). T h u s
(except in the case of the Plus/4) the
user por t coupled w ith the Kernel
becomes almost the equk alent of the
6551 UART (the 6551 is the device that
the software is supposed to emulate).
In the Vic  the user port is con-
LBJ Lg LI L z 1
Pin ID
2
RS232
trolled b y  a  Vers atile Interfac e
Adaptor (VIA). In the other machines
a Complex 1 nterfaCe Adaptor (CIA) is
used (not a lot of difference as far as
this article is concerned). Now before
some o f  y ou r un and hide at  the
mention of 1 ,
that (thankfully) we do not have to
program these devices directly. The
Kernel handles all of the RS232 asso-
ciated programming.
Figure I  s h o w s  t h e  R S2 3 2
associated connections t o  this  port
looking from the rear of the machine.
Note that the user port uses a 0.156
edge c onnec tor  ( av ailable f r o m
RS232 LINES FROM THE USER PORT
M 171 7  T
Description
Received data
Request to send
Data terminal rdy.
Received line sig.
Clear to send
Data set ready
Transmitted data
Received data
A P r o t e c t i v e  ground
Signal ground
+5V supply
DJ EN] t r \ I J
Abreviation
Sin
RTS
DTR
DCD
CTS
DSR
Sout
Sin
GND
GND
*These lines are not used in 3-line mode
Signal ground is the Common return.
Protective ground for screening.
Maximum of 100mA may be drawn from
the +5V supply
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
73
Maplin: order number BK74R ). The
top row of terminals are identiﬁed with
numbers w h i l e  t h e  b o t t o m  r o w
terminals are identiﬁed with letters.
This means that i t  is  very easy t o
connect the socket the wrong way up
which c ould hav e disastrous c on-
sequences f o r  y our  computer. T he
correct way is with the letters to the
bottom as shown.
Connecting Up
The terminals labelled Sout (trans-
mitted data) and Sin (received data)
and O ND (0v common) are the three

lines we need. Note however that there
are TWO terminals labelled Sin. The
reason for this lies with the way in
wrhich the RS232 on these machines
works. One of the Sin lines is for data,
the other is a ﬂag or trigger input.
Because the Commodore RS232 relies
on Non-Maskable Interrupts (NMI ) or
interrupt request (IR()) in the case of
the Plus/4, there must be some form of
detection to let the system know when
data is being received.
When data is being received over
the Sin line, the voltage level on this
pin changes rapidly, causing interrupts
to occur. The system software collects
the data on the Sin line, placing it in an
area o f memory called the Receive
Buffer. There is also a Transmit buffer
for outgoing data, Thus the reception
and transmission o f data is basically
transparent to the user. However, this
method has its problems as we will see.
The practical upshot of all this is that
BOTH S i n  terminals m u s t  b e
connected to the Sin line. Since they
are next to one another, this is no great
problem.
Also note the connection called
PROTECTIVE GR OU N D . T h i s
terminal should be connected to the
shield of your cable if you suspect any
outside electrical interference o f
causing data errors.
While on the subject o f making
connections, you will have to use a
soldering iron. Now don't run and hide
(again). If you are not too sure about
handling one, g e t a n  electronics
hobbyist friend to do it for you.
It should go without saying that
YOU SH OU L D  NEVER M A K E
CONNECTIONS TO 1'IIF SOCKET
WHILE I T  IS CONNECTED T O
THE C O M P U T E R .  A l w a y s
disconnect the socket BEFORE mak-
ing or changing any connections and
NEVER connect the socket to a line
machine, ALWAYS switch o ff the
power B E F O R E  plugging o r
unplugging!
OK. So  you've connected your
socket up and plugged it in the correct
way.., what now? If you only want to
communicate w i t h  a n o t h e r
Commodore (Vic. C64. Plus/4 o r
Cl28) then there is no great problem.
The only thing to watch is that you
CBM
Sin
Sin
Sou t
GND
PT
RS232
Fig 2
must connect the Soul ot one machine
to the Sin of the other as in Figure 2 in
order for them to exchange data (a bit
Obvious really!).
Commodore connections
If you don't intend connecting your
machine t o  anything other than
another Commodore. you can skip the
next bit all together and get on with the
programming. I f  you have a friend
with one of the machines mentioned,
you will be able to type messages to
one another handy i f you live next
door and you have a long piece of 3-
core cable - your own mini-network!
(Not recommended i f you live across
the street o r several houses away!)
I low far you will be able to keep the
machines apart depends very much on
the operating conditions. Electrical
interference may cause errors and
there will come a point where the line is
just too long, It's best to experiment
with what you've got.
Non-Commodore Connections
This is where things get tricky. Con-
necting t o  any thing other than a
similarly equipped Commodore has its
problems. This i s  because normal
RS232 requires logic levels -I2v (logic
and + I2v (logic 0) as opposed to the
Commodore RS232 logic levels of Ov
(logic 0) and +5v (logic I )(No that isn't
a mis-print. RS232 logic is opposite
voltage level-wise to  your Commo-
dore). However this problem can be
overcome quite easily. There are
various l o g i c  devices available
speciﬁcally for this purpose. Among
CABLE (3 CORE OR 4 CORE)
CONNECT SCREEN TO
PROTECTIVE GROUND (PT)
AT ONE END ONLY
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
74
Power Supplies
CBM
Sin
Sin
Sout
G ND
PT
these arc the RS423 line driver 3691
and RS4.23 line receiver 881.S120N.
These devices convert between TTL
logic levels and RS423 logic levels.
RS423 is another (stricter) standard
which is compatible with RS232 (at
least to a certain extent). The beauty of
using these devices is that they will
operate from a +5v/-5v supply. This
means that the user port's +5v output
(pin 2: see Figure I.) may be used for
the +5v supply and all that is required
is a -5v supply. These are the devices
used by the BBC micro for it's RS423
port. Figure 3  shows the circuit
required.
I can hear the groans of discontent.
"I can't do that! I've never built an
electronic circuit before!". I f  you do
have an electronics hobbyist friend. try
bribing him/her into building it for
you_
I will not go into detail over the
construction o f the interface, I  will
assume that it' you are building this.
you know what you are doing. The
74LS0O device is used here as a logic
inverter. I  suggest that you use i.e.
sockets so as not to subject the devices
to heat %vhich could damage them.
If you plan to use the mains (careful!)
power supply circuit shown in Figure
4, I suggest that you use both the +5v
and -5v supply circuits so as not to rely
too much on the already overworked
computer power supply. I t  goes
without saying that no-one should use
the mains unless they d o  know
EXACTLY what they are doing.
The alternative battery supply cir-

cult in ﬁgure 5 assumes that you are
using the +5v supply from the com-
puter. This circuit may also be used
with one o f  those pocket calculator
mains adaptors (lik e the Spectrum
power s upply )  s inc e t h e  c ir c uit
regulates the voltage to -5v. The diodes
shown prevent damage to the circuit if
the battery/adaptor i s  incorrectly
connected. Remember t o disconnect
the battery when you are not using the
interface. This  has the advantage of
not requiring you t o  build a mains
power supply.
Remember t h a t  y o u  c a n n o t
connect a n  o r d  inary Commodor e
(without this interface) to one using
Fig 3
bit 
7
 
6
5
4 
3
 
2
0
S 
D
D
R
B
B
B 
B
S-  stop bits D  -  data bits
B-  baud rate
R -  Rclock
DD
BBBB
0-  one 
0
0
 8
0001
50
I t w o  
0
1
 -  7
0010
75
10 -  6
0011
110
11 -  5
0100
134.5
0101
150
0110
300
0111
600
R (plus 4 only)
1000
1200 (C64 max)
0-  external clock
1001
1800
I - internal clock
(keep to 1)
1010
2400 (max)x)
this circuit. Both machines must be
similarly equipped. Using this inter-
face, you will be able to connect your
Commodore to other computers such
as the BBC and any suitably equipped
IBM compatible. I have connected my
C128 to my Televideo TSI605 (IBM
compatible r unning MSDO S)  a n d
transferred ﬁles between them without
any problems. This should also work
with the Commodore POO and PC20
IBM compatibles. The only thing to
watch f o r  here is  that most I B M
compatibles need to have pins four and
ﬁve ( R T S a n d  C I S )  connected
together as shown in Figure 6. The
BBC will also require a similar con-
nection. Because of RS232 differences
between systems, I cannot say that this
will work with every machine, but it
will wor k  w it h  mos t. I  have also
connected my 128 up to a mainframe
DECSYSTEM 2050 running at 1200
baud with absolute success.
RS232
Programming Commodore
RS232
OK s o you've got this far. You've
linked your Commodore to another
machine. What now?
Using the RS232 interface on a
Commodore is much the same as using
a printer or  a disk drive. You must
OPEN a logical ﬁle and use PRINT#
and G ET # to send and receive data.
Note t h a t  y o u  s hould N O T  us e
INPUT/4 since there is a possibility that
the system might hang by attempting
to get input when it isn't there. Also be
aware that on the Vic 20 and C64, the
RS232 receive and transmit buffers are
t ROM
UStR
PORT
so
IV 0
SV 0
411-1
•
4
i i  4
4C3
R2
CI
0
0 Soto
0 CND
Rt2232
LEVEL
RI • RESISTOR AZ
R2 • RESISTOR 3.3
CI •  CAPACITOR 41,4
C2 • CAPACI TOR 2•2
ICI • Idt SOO
1172 • 118LS12CoN
IC3 M I
created at the top of  Basic meMon
when the OPEN command is executed.
(The buffers are permanently deﬁned
on the Cl28 and. I think, the Plus/4).
This has the effect of wiping out any
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
75
variables pr ev ious ly  deﬁned.
performs a  CLR) . Therefore, y ou
should make the OPEN RS232 state-
ment t h e  ﬁr s t i n  a n y  program.
Another, more serious problem occurs
if your Basic program is very large.
Then there is a chance that OPENing
an RS232 channel may destroy the end
of your program. So Beware!
The format for  the OPEN state-
ment is shown below:
OPEN Ifn,dev.sec,CH RS ( c ont r ol
register)+CHRS (command register)
where:
Ifn = logical ﬁle number
dev = device (2 for RS232)
sec = secondary address (usually 0)
<control register>= see below
<command register>= see below
The RS232 interface i s  device
number two. I n  or der  t o  operate
correctly, the system requires you to
tell it  how fast you wish to transfer
data (baud rate) and the format of the
data number of stop bits, number of
data b i t s .  par it y ) .  T h e  c ontr ol
register t e l l s  the system the baud
rate, stop bits and data bits as in Table 2.
2400 baud is the maximum speed
that is available on the Commodore
RS232 on the C128. The C64 will allow
up to 1200 so this is the maximum
baud r ate t hat  I  w i l l  us e i n  t h e
examples. I f  however you have any
problems, t r y  selecting 600 baud
instead.
The c ommand register deﬁnes
other interface parameters as follows
Table 2
Plus/4 capable of up to
19200 baud

Plus/4 users should refer to pages
207-211 of the user manual for further
details on their machine's RS232 inter-
face. This machine can handle transfer
rates of up to 192.00 baud.
Handshake determines h o w  the
interface will operate. We will be using
3-line. X-line is where you are using
control lines as well as the data lines.
This makes things a bit complex so we
will stick to 3-line.
Duplex should be set to Full. This
determines h o w  t h e  receive a n d
transmit will behave.
Parity is  a  k ind o f  error check.
When data is  received, the system
checks it to see if  it agrees with the
parity. If not, the parity error bit in the
variable ST (status) is set indicating
some sort o f  error. These hits allow
you t o  set the type o f  parity check
required. O f  course, both machines
should be set to the same parity. In
most cases, parity is not used and error
checking is  done in a different way
(more on this later).
This may seem a little complex hut
it is n't really. Lets suppose that we
want to open an RS232 channel to run
at 1200 baud, eight data bits, one stop
bit, no parity. The OPEN statement
would be:
OPEN 2,2,0,CHRS(24)-1-CHRS(0)
(non Plus/4)
OPEN 2.2.0.CHRS(24)+CHRS(5)
(Plus/4)
Fig 4
RS232
PPP
000 Disabled
0010dd
Oil Even
101 Mark  (I)
III Space (0)
hit 
7
 
6
 
5
 
4
 
3
 
2
 
1
 
0
P 
P
 
P
D
 
T
 
T
 
R
 
H
P -  Parity 
D
 -  duplex 
H
 -  handshake
T -  Transmit control 
R
 -  receive control
0 Full
I Half
TT (Plus/4 only)
00 I RQ Disabled; RTS= I ; TX off
01 IRQ Enabled: RTS=0; TX On
10 IRQ Disabled: RTS=0; T X On
I I IRQ Disabled; RTS=0; BRK
H (non PLUS4)
0 3-line
1 X-line
R (Plus/4 only)
0  IRQ on
I IRQ  off
H (PLUS4)
0 Receiver on
I Receiver off
Table 3
and that is that! Simple. eh? in fact, if
you stick to this particular format ot
eight data bits and no parity, you can't
really go wrong. Just change the baud
rate to suit.
Incidentally, the Commodore 64
programmers reference G uide telis
you t h a t  t h e  c o m m a n d
register character is NO T required.
It's probably safer to leave it in. My
C I
it!
Using PRINT#AND G El # we can
write a fairly simple terminal program
running at 1200 baud. Running this on
two machines (assuming i t s  t w o
Commodores) you will be able to type
in a message on one keyboard and see
it appear on the other machines dis-
play as well as your own, Figure 7
shows the program while Figure X
shows a similar program for an IBM
compatible machine running PCDOS
or MSDOS arid GWBASIC.
- 24.2V
0 1 6  • 0100ES IN4002
Cl 2 E  LEcTnot. VT IC 2200vF 25%.
RI-2 RESISTORS ak 7
ICI -  7011• IA  REGULATOR
IC2 7 9 0 6  IA  REGULATOR
I t  2 4 0
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
76
Figure 7  Commodore B a s k  m i n i
terminal program
10 OPEN 2.2.0.CIIRS(24)-1-CHRS(0)
II R EM PLUS4 USERS USE ( WI N
2,2.0.CHRS(2.41+CHRS(5)
20 PRINT I C E S I
30 GETt12.A$
40 IF AS<>
50 GET 13$
60 I F  B S < > " "  • 1
BS::PRINT#2.13$:
70 GOTO 30
Figure 8  G WBAS1C mini terminal
program
10 OPEN "CO M 1:1200,N,S,1" AS CI
20 CLS
30 IF LOC( 1)=0 THEN 50
40 AS=INPUTS(1.#1):PRINT A$:
50 BS ANKEYS
60 I I  1 3 $ <>' " '  T H E N  P R I N T
B S : : P R I N
70 GOTO 30
Both programs check ﬁrst f o r  a
character from t he RS232 port. If one
is found, it is output to the screen. if
not. the program checks for a key-
board input. If found, the character is
sent t o  the screen and also t o  the
R S
Another i n  e x p e r i m e n t
when u s in g  a n  I B M  c ompatible
machine i s  t o  mak e the following
change to the mini terminal program
on the Commodore:
60 IF 13S<>“" THEN PRINT3/4:2.n

E
T!)
' ﬁV MAINS
ADAPTOR
1._
CITPA
;IT E R F AC
Si"
SO1
Sort
SoLet
SOW
IBM CO ATPATABL E
Soul
GN D
GNO
BBC O R S I M I L AR M AC BM W
11S232,423 L EVEL  L I N K
O NO
I S
IBM u SES 75 WA Y  0
BBC USES 5 PIES DIN
TN_ LOOIC
LEVEt
CT5
D I  4  -  DIO DE S  1194002
CI  •  CAP ACI T O R 1 0 0 9 E Z 5 V
ICI 7 9 0 5  I A  R E GO I A T O R
R I  •  RESIST O R Ak
Fig 5
l'ig 6
and run it_ Now type the following on
the IBM while in DOS:
MODE COM1:1200.N.8,1
CIT Y COM 1
(MODE is external so disk containing
he command must be in the default
drive).
This causes the IBM to think that
its input/output device is the RS232
port instead of the console. This has
the very odd effect o f  making the
Corn modo re c o n  t rot t  he I B M !
 (although the character sets are dif-
ferent a n d  s o m e  o d d  gr aphic s
characters may be printed). To return
control to the IBM console, you must
type CTTY CON on the Commodore.
Obviously, not many o f  you have
access to an IBM. but this experiment
does show u p  one very important
problem with the Commodore's 3-line
RS232 interface. If you take control of
the I B M  us ing the C I T Y  C O M  I
command again and type DIR which is
the MSDOS command to display the
directory, the ﬁrst few lines are printed
normally and then suddenly, there is a
whole lot of garbage. I Is vou slow down
the baud rates to say 300. the problem
may disappear. Why does this happen?
Remember what I  s aid about t he
Receive buffer? Well what happens is
that data is received transparently over
the RS232 lines and placed in  the
buffer. The buffer ﬁlls up quicker than
Basic can empty it with the result that
the buffer overﬂows and data is lost.
Buffer overﬂow can be detectd by
examining the ST status variable. but
Basic is just too slow and you may still
loose data.
Solutions
RS232
There are a few ways of solving this
problem:
• Use a slower baud rate to let Basic
keep up.
2. Devise some form of software data
ﬂow control.
3. Connect control lines up and use an
x-line interlace.
4. Use machine code to process RS232
data.
Option 1  i s  n o t  a  good idea.
Anyone who has used an RS 2321ink at
300 baud will know why (yawn!).
Option 2 is better but requires pro-
gramming which we will touch on later
when we discuss ﬁle transfer.
Option 3  is  not really practical
here.
Option 4  is  probably t h e  best
solution i n  this  case. Data can be
removed from the buffer much faster
using machine code and this will be
line for the speeds at which we will be
working (up to 1200 baud).
A v e r y  s h o r t  mac hine c o d e
program can be written to handle the
RS232 interface. T h e  routine that
follows is given in the form of a Basic
loader. Change the variable Al)  to any
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
77
free area in your computer's memory
(the tape buffer is a good place). This
program is for a Cl28 but it should
work o n  any  o f  the Commodore
machines discussed.
10 OPEN 2.2,0,CHRS(24)+CHRS(0)
11 R E M  PL U S4  USERS: O PEN
2,2.0.CHRS(24)+CHRS(5)
20 AD=2816:CA=AD
30 READ BY
40 I F  B Y  - 1  T H E N  P O K E
AD.BY:AD= AD + 1:60TO 30
50
60 PRINT CHRS(14):REM SWITCH
TO LOWERCASE'
70 SYS CA
80 :
90 :
I(X) DATA 162.2.32.198Z5,32,228,255.
168
110 DATA 32,204.255,152.240,3,32,210.
255
120 D A T A  32,228.255,240.233,72,
162.2.32
130 D A T A  201.255,104,32,210,255.
32,204
140 DAT A 255,56.176.217.-1
The only way out of this program
a RUNSIO P/RESIO RE. Table 3
the disassembled code with COMMent5
(addresses m a y  dif f er  f r o m  y o u r
version.
The pr ogr am us es  t h e  k er nal
jumptable calls so it should be valid for
all of the machines.
After the machine code has been
placed in memory, the RS232 channel
is opened with a ﬁle number of 2 (the
channel number. It
vou mu s t  change t h e  t w o  L D X
instructions i n  t h e  code) a n d  the
machine code routine called. Now the
RS232 receive buffer does not get a
chance to ﬁll up so no data is lost. The
OPEN statement could be replaced 1IN
the code in Table 4.
Character set translation
All this should be tine for Commodore

.
OBOO LDX #$02
01302 JSR SITC6
01305 JSR $FFE4
OB08 TAY
01309 JSR $FFCC
OBOC TYA
0130D BEQ S0B12
OBOE JSE $ 1
01312 .ISR $FFE4
0815 BEQ SOBOO
0B17 PHA: Save data
01318 1,DX #$02
OBI A JSR SFEC9
0131 D PLA
OBI E JSR #FFD2
0B21 JSR SETCC
01324 SEC
013
Table 4
to Commodore communications, It
will also work with Commodore to
IBM/BBC etc. comms but may yield
strange results, the reason being that
the Commodores do not use standard
ASCII codes. They use what is some-
times called PETSCII, the Commo-
dore PET being the ﬁrst to use it. The
most noticeable effect of this is that
certain characters will appear on the
Commodore's screen a s graphics
characters, The solution to this is to
insert some form of translation table
or routine into the code. Since data
ﬂows two ways, a routine or table
would be required for each of input
and output.
Two translation tables, each of 256
bytes. are required to handle outgoing
and incoming data translations. The
following p ro g ra m b u i l d s t h e
translation tables and the machine
RS232
: Make channel 2 the current input device
: Scan the RS232 buffer for I character
Save data
; Clear the channel
; Restore the date
If data is a null (a zero byte) then skip
; Output valid character
; Check for keyboard input
; If none then recheck RS232
; Make channel 2 the current output device
; Restore data
: Send byte to RS232
; Clear channel
; Force loop to check RS232 input
LDA #S02
LDX #S02
LDY # $00
JSR IfIFFBA
LDA f.$01
LDX # NAME
LDY # NAME
JSR $FTBD
JSR SFECO
Rest of code
.NAME#B:24,0 ; Control and command register values (PLUS 4---
,NAME#B:24.5) (#B: Is the byte directive of my CM and Cl28
assemblers)
; Channel 2
; Device 2
; Secondary Addr. 0
: Set logical ﬁle
2 chars in ﬁlename
Pointer to ﬁlename
Pointer to ﬁlename
: Set ﬁlename
; Open RS232
code into memory starting at address
AD. I t  needs at least 600 bytes to
operate in so you need only change AD
to the address you require. This
version i s fo r the Cl28 (Program
Translate).
Program Translate
Line 5 :  A  D=start a d d r e s s ;
BR=Control reg: CR=command reg.
Lines 10-100: Prepare tables
Lines 111-113: Setup name of channel
(register images)
Lines 120-160: POKE receive table
Lines 170-200: POKE transmit table
Lines 210-230: POKE code to memory
Lines 240-270: Adjust table references
in code
Lines 280-290: Adjust register image
references in code
Lines 300-310: Select lowercase and
call routine
Lines 330-370: Code data
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
78
Table 5 shows the disassembled
machine code (addresses are offsets
from the start address):
Basically, the operation is the same
as before except:
1. The channel is opened from machine
code.
2. Characters sent and received are
translated.
Note th a t t h e  backslash ( \ )
character received will be displayed as
a pound sign. The CBM Charset does
not have a backslash.
Transferring ﬁles via RS232
This is probably the most useful appli-
cation o f  RS232: transferring data
between unalike machines. I t  i s
possible to transfer programs between
two entirely different machines.
When using a 3-line interface, it is
necessary to introduce some form of
protocol into the software at both
ends. This ensures that each machine
understands exactly what the other
intends to do.
A typical protocol exchange would
look like a conversation between the
two machines:
machine I: Are you there?
machine 2: Yes.
machine 1: Requesting data transfer.
machine 2: OK,
machine I: Transferring data (block of
data sent)
machine 2: Received data.
and so on. The "are you there", "yes"
etc, messages are actually I  byte
control codes. Normal ASCII has 32
control codes (codes 0-31). The actual
usage varies from system to system and
there are one or two protocol stand-
ards. For your own use, you don't have
to follow any set protocol AS LONG
AS BOTH MACHINES ARE USING
'HIE SAME ONE. Figure 9 gives a list
of A S C II code 0-31 a n d  th e i r
meanings.
Note the two marked XON and
XOFF. These you may recognise.
XON/XOFF protocol is useful where
large amounts of continuous data are
being transferred. Th e  receiving
machine can send an )(OFF code when
it wants the transmitting machine to
hold o ff sending data, and send an

XON when it wants to resume. This
type of control is often used with dumb
terminals to mainframes.
Another method o f  transferring
data is to send it in blocks of 2-255
characters (usually 128 chars). This
removes the need fo r XON /X0 FE
control because as each block is sent.
the two machines exchange control
codes. This method o f transfer also
allows error checking to be carried out
on the data. One of the most popular
error check methods is the Cyclic
Redundancy Check (CRC). We won't
go into this here as there is no real need
for such a complex check with hard-
wired RS232. CRC is really useful for
Telecommunications via modems.
Phone lines are noisy and data errors
may easily result at high baud rates.
The CRC error check allows the two
machines at either end to check the
data for errors, if an error is found, the
receiving machine requests that the
data is transmitted again.
When sending data using the block
method, the software collects data
bytes into "packets
Assuming the link is open, the trans-
mitting machine (TM) sends a start-of-
transmission code. Th e  receiving
machine ( R M )  replies w i th  a n
acknowledge code. The TM then sends
a start-of-block code followed by a
data packet followed by an end-of-
block code. The RM replies with an
acknowledge code (assuming the data
was received correctly) and the TM
sends the next block. This continues
unitl all data has been exchanged,
whereupon the TM sends and end-of-
transmission code and the link enters a
wait-state, 
•
The above description does not
conform t o  any standard but will
wrork. If error checks are included, the
RM could send a data-error code if the
data had been corrupted whereupon
the TM would re-transmit the same
data packet.
The program given in Figure R)
should ru n  o n  any o f  the ( 'B M
machines discussed and is written in
Basic. Since the comms are being con-
trolled by the software, the receive
buffer will not overﬂow. It allows a
user to transfer a data ﬁle from one
machine to another. The link is 1200
baud, eight data bits and no parity. It
Code
ASCII
Meaning in this program
5
ENQ
Attent/enquire
6
ACK
Acknowledge
SOH
Start transfer (transfer ﬁlename)
4
EOT
End transfer
2
STX
Start block
3
ETX
End block
26
SUB
Enter terminal mode (special seq.)
10
DLE
Exit terminal mode (data link escape))
RS232
0000 L DA 44$02
0002 L DX # $02
0004 L #
 $OO
0006 JSR SFEBA
0009 LDA C$02
0008 LDX #<NAME
000D LDY #>NAME
000F JSR SFEBD
0012 ,ISR SFECO
0015 LDX #S02
0017 JSR SFFC6
001A JSR SETE4
0011) TAY: Save it
001E JSR S F
0021 TYA
0022 BEQ 002A
0024 LDA RXTABLE,Y
0027 JSR SFED2
002A ,ISR SET
002D BEQ 0015
002F TAY
0030 LIDA TXTABLE,V
0033 PHA
0034 LDX #S02
0036 ,ISR SETC9
0039 ['LA
003A JSR SFED2
003D JSR SFFCC
0040 SEC
0014 BCS 0015
: Logical channel 2
Device 2
;
Set ltn
Name length (2 chars)
NAME is address of char string
Setnam
Opem
Make RS232 the input device
Get a character
Restore default device
If char =0 then no char rec.
Get PETSCI I char from TXTABLE
Send to screen
Check keyboard
No char, loop to check RS232
Index
Get ASCII equivalent
Save
Make RS232 the default output
: Output character
: Restore normal output
; Forced loop
should be run on both machines. The
control codes are shown in Table 6.
Note that I'm not using some of'
these as they should be used but, as I
said earlier, as long as you stick to the
same protocol o n  both machines,
you'll be OK.
Possible Developments
The example programs I've given here
do n o t  s how a ll o f  what may  he
achieved using the RS232 interface. It
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
79
'Fable 5
is possible (using a special version of
the circuit described earlier) to have
more than two machines running on a
single 3-line RS232 commlink. This
would allow a group o f users (with
special software written in machine
code for maximum speed) to set up a
mini-network. Th e  possiblities are
endless. I hope this article has helped
to fuel your imagination: If you have
any comments or ideas, please write to
me c/o Your Commodore or leave a
COURIER on Compunet ID SCl2.
Fable 6

RS232
Fig 10
'odes.
PRUGRAM; T R AN SL AT E
C l
320 EN O
56
320 REM  O D S U B  M OD E, F I x, I F R m
Shill in
(
E8
330 D AT A 1 6 9 . 2 , 1 6 E , E . 1 6 0 . 0 . 3
e.1e5,e55,169,2,162,0,16n,0,
3 2 , 1 0 5 2 5 5 , 3 2 , 1 9 2
39
SF
OD. EXI T
330 6 0 1 0  E 5 0
340
READY.
76
340 D AT A 2 5 5 , 1 6 2 , 2 , 3 2 , 1 9 8 , 2 5
65
350
55
S0 1 0 . . 4 8 6 4 - N A A 0 : 5 2 9 • C R O
3
5 , 3 2 , 2 2 8 , 2 5 5
1 5 2 .2 4 0 , 5 , 1 8 5 , 0
74
BF
360 REM  E X I T  PROGRAM
370 C L OSE2 :EN O
58
5 R EM  P L u s 4  U SER S U SE 1 3 2 4 1
2A
350 D AT A 0 , 3 2 .2 1 0 .2 5 5 , 3 2 , 2 2 8
47
380 !
BG
CR..5
10 D I M  F 2 5 S ) . 1
5
, 2 5 5 , 2 4 0 , 2 3 0 .1 6 8 .1 8 5 , 0 , 0 , 7 2 ,
1 E2 .2 , 3 2 , 2 0 1 .0 5 5 , 1 0 4
BD
C8
350
400 REM  MODE
AF
2 0  FOR  . . . 0  T O  6 .4 :1 % ( J) .% ) ! N EX
61
360 DATA 3e,210.e55,32.204,2
79
9 1 0  R EM  EN O R EC EI VED  -  W A I T
LAB
End transmissiiin block
7
5 5 .5 6 .1 7 6 .2 1 0 , - 1
Rings ternunal bell
FOR EI T H ER
ES
30 .
8
98
920 R EM  S S  ( T E R M I N A L  MOUE P
34
90 F OR  J - 6 5  T O  9 0 , X . 1 . 3 2 : T U
10PROGRAM- F I G U R E 1 0
El
EQUEST)
1
J ) . •
Special sequence
F7
9 3 0  REM  SOH  ( F I L E  TR AN SFER  H
23
50 FOR  ..1 9 1  T O  5 5 ; T
ES(
l'.scape
EQUEST)
XI
1
83
990
ES
se
GO FOR  ...1 1 9 3  T O  a l e , K - i - l e e ,
TvJ)-K.NEXT
70 T ( 1 9 5 ) - 1 6 , 1 7
READY.
a r  1 0 0  OPEN  E.2 .0 , C H R S( 2 4 ) * C H R S
85
37
450 PR I N T  " ( S E , S N .5 0 1  R EC E1 0
460 GOSUB 9 0 0  :  R EM  SEN D  AC K
35
BO F OR  P . 0  T O  2 5 5
SO
( 0 )
11
US
F7
90 K - T ( J )
C6
110 REM  • 4  OPEN  2 , 2 , 0 , C H R S( 2
7C
470 6 0 5 U 6  1 3 1 0 ,  P E N  GET  R EC E
EA
EC
100 I F  K c > 0  T H EN  P4 ( X) ....) , F A(
K .1 2 8 ) .1
110 N EXT
42
9A
9 ) .C H R S( 5 )
120
130 REM  C 6 9  M AY N EED  T O  R U N
se
69
IUE m o m
460 O N  C  GOSU B 6 4 0 .7 3 0
990 RETURN
A l
I I I  P O K E  AO , BR
A l  6 0 0  BAU D
CF
SOO
92
112 POKE A D .1 .C R
93
190 REM  I . E .  O PEN  e , e , o , c H n s
CS
510
OF
113 A O - A 0 .2
(23).cups(0)
SF
520 R EM  F I X
513
120 R 1 3 A0
ric
150
CF
5 3 0  REM  I N I T I A T E  F I L E  TR AN SF
FS
130 F OR  X • 0  T O  a s s
9E
150 GOSUB 2 3 9 0 :R En  SET U P T A B
ER
BC
140 POKE A D .X .F % ( X )
LES
B5
540 GOSU B 2 3 0 0 :R EM  FI L EN AM E
14
150 N EXT
90
170
FROM U SER
FA
160 A D A 0 . 2 5 6 T B . . A 0
CA
180 P R I N T
84
550 GOSU B 9 5 0  , R EM  SEN D  EN O
20
170 F OR  ) ( 0  T O  2 5 5
94
150
AF.
560 005U13 I I 5 0 :R E M  W AI T  F OR
ce
180 POKE A D . X , T ( X )
30
E00 REM
ACK
3C
190 N EXT
SO
570 GOSU B 1 0 5 0  :R E M  SEN D  501-4
72
230 AO..4 1 0 .2 S6 , R T A0
SS
210 REm  P A I N  L OOP ST AR T S H ER
.  F I L EN AM E
SE
210 RESTORE
02
5E40 Gosua Ilso!REm tunir FOR
92
2 2 0  R EAD  B Y
49
220 Re m
ACK
DB
230 I F  B Y ' ' - )  T H EN  POKE A 0 , 0
1E
590 PR I N T  " I S F 1 I L E  TR AN SFER
Y:AD - AD .1 :GOT O 2 2 0
FO
230 REM  t o o T s  F OR  R 6 2 3 e  EN O
B E G I N S .."
A9
240 H R .• I N T I R 8 / 2 5 6 ) , L R R B- H R .
CODE
Al
GOO GO9 u 8  1 7 6 0 ,  REm R U N  F I L E
256
SF
240 REM  C T R L - F  ( F I L E  TR AN SFE
TRANSMIT
AC
e so  H T • I N T ( T B / 2 5 8 ) , L T T 9 - H T °
R)
22
610 RETURN R
E M
 BAC K T O  n
256
OD
a so  PEN  C T R L - 2  (T ER M I N AL  M OO
AI N  L OOP
13C
2 6 0  POKE R T .3 7 .L R , PC KE R 1 .3 8
E)
54
620 •
.HR
Fe
EEO REM  C T R L - C  ( E X I T  PROGRAM
42
633
23
270 POKE R T .4 9 , L T :PO KE R T . S 0
7D
6 9 0  REM  RESPOND T O  F I L E  T R AN
,HT
35
270 •
SEER REQUEST
CS
280 N H .' I N T ( N A/ 2 5 6 ) , N L ..N A- N H •
23
280
13
650 PR I N T  " T S F ) I L E  TR AN SFER
255
69
2 5 0  PR I N T  " C SAJ W I I T I N G  E S E . 5
REQUEST
C5
2 9 0  POKE R T .1 2 , N L , PO KE R T • 1 4
N .S0 3  O R  XEYPR ESS"
BC
660 F R S -
,NH
13
300 GOSUB 1 2 1 0 : R EM  G ET  F u N C
97
570 GOSUB 1 3 8 0 , R EM  GET  NAM E
17
300 PR I N T  C H R S( 1 9 )
H ON
FROM R S2 3 2
EF
310 S Y S  R I
F9
310 ON  C  GOSU B 4 0 0 , 5 3 0 .9 0 0 , 3
3C
E80 GC SU B 8 0 0  .R E M  SEN D  AC K
60
BB
690 GOSU B 1 9 6 0 -R EM  F I L E  R EC E
Figure 9 ASCII (•ontrol
'odes.
15
SI
Shill in
(
ASCII
Function
16
Data link escape
0
1
N UE
Sol
Null
Stall ! leading
17
18
DC1
DC2
Device control I  X O N
Device control 2
3
SIX
F I X
SNIT! ICXI
I n d  icxt
19
20
DC3
DC4
Device control 3 X O E
Device control 4
4
EOT
End transmission
21
NAK
Negative acknowledge
5
ENO
huiture
22
SYN
Synchronous idle
A t K
Ackmmiedgc
23
LAB
End transmissiiin block
7
111.1.
Rings ternunal bell
24
CAN
Cancel
8
Backspace
25
EM
End medium
El
1Fult ont al tab
1
SUB
Special sequence
IO
I.ine feed
17
ES(
l'.scape
11
Vertical tab
1
FS
File separator
12
11
FE
CR
Form lee('
Carriage return
29
30
( i s
RS
Group separator
Record separator
14
SO
Shih out
11
US
llnit separator
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
80

RS232
TUE
74 7 0 0  RETURN : R E M  BAC K T O  M
AI N  LOOP
FP 7 1 0
EB 7 2 0
FE 7 3 0  REM  RESPOND T O  TER M I N AL
MODE R EQ .
87 7 4 0  PR I N T  "T ST 1 ER M I N AL M ODE
R E Q U E S T . F2 750 GOSUB 9 0 0  :R EM  SEN D  AC K
BO 7 6 0  GOSUH 1 5 2 0 :R Em  R U N  TER M !
NAL M OOF
e r 7 7 0  RETURN : R E M  BAC K T O  M
AI N LOOP
35 7 9 0  !
23 7 9 0
86 8 0 0  R EM  I N I T I AT E  TER M I N AL M O
OF
89 M I D  PR I N T  "E S I T N I T I AT I N G  T ER
MINAL M OOE"
30 9 2 0  GOSU B 9 5 0  :R EM  SEN D  EN g
99 8 3 0  GOSUB 1 1 5 0
ACK
10 0 9 0  GOSUG 1 0 0 0  :R E M  SEN D  5 5
AS ESSO GOSU B 1 1 5 0 :U AI T  F OR  AC K
B9 8 6 0  GOSUB 1 5 2 0  REM  R U N  T E R M
NAL M ODE
98 8 7 0  RETURN , R E M  BAC K T O  m
A1N LOOP
45 8 8 0  •
47 8 9 0
BB 3 0 0  REM  SEN D  AC K
40 9 1 0  1 'R I N TI O2 .C H R SI 6 );
15 3 2 0  RETURN
9F 9 3 0
95 9 4 0
39 9 5 0  REM  SEN D  EN O
97 8 E 0  PR I N T 0 2 .C H PS( 5 ) ;
43 9 7 0  RETURN
ED 9 8 0
08 9 9 0
SA 1 0 0 0  REM  SEN D  S S
E0 1 0 1 0  PP/ N T S2 .C H R 5 ( 2 6 ) ;
71 1 0 2 0  RETURN
30 1 0 3 0
2E 1 0 9 0
C l 1 0 5 0  R EM  SEN D  SOH  •  F I L EN AM E
C2 1 0 6 0  PR I N T 0 2 , C H R S( 1 ) ;
E9 1 0 7 0  PR I N I .1 2 , c 4 R S( F L ) i
30 1 0 9 0  F U R  X...1  T O  F L
7E 1 0 9 0  PR I N T # 2 , C H R SC I M A9 C (M I D
S ( F S . X , 1 ) 1 1 ) ;
DP 1 1 0 0  N EXT
136 1 1 1 0  P R I N T # 2 , C H R S ( T
) 1 ;
EA 1 1 2 0  RETURN
64 1 1 3 0
42 1 1 4 0
27 1 1 5 0  REM  w i l l '  F O R  AC K ( u n c K )
F3 1 1 6 0  G ET * 2 , AS
95 1 1 7 0  I F  n s ( › E m R s ( s )  T H EN  1 1 6
0
2E 1 1 8 0  RETURN
90 1 1 9 0
BE le o °
39 1 2 1 0  REM  GETFUNCT/ ON
CF 1 2 2 0  GET O2 , AS
19 1 2 3 0  I F  AS.C H R S( 5 )  T H EN  C ..1 :
RETURN
CC 1 2 4 0  G ET  AS
86 1 2 5 0  I F  AS..C H R S(6 1  T H EN  C 2 7
RETURN
03 1 2 6 0  ! F  n s- E H R sce s)  T H EN
RETURN
A3 1 2 7 0  I F  A S
RETURN
e f  1 2 0 0  GOTO 1 2 1 0
35 1 2 9 0
23 1 3 0 0  .
A8 1 3 1 0  REM  G ET  EN O MODE
AC 1 3 2 0  G ET * 2 , AS
AS 1 3 3 0  I F  AS- C H R S( 1 )  T H EN  C ..1 :
RETURN
7F 1 3 4 0  I F  AS- C H R S( 2 5 /  T H EN  C ..2
LIC
70
07
Pr
93
SC
58
80
3E
68
ES
:RETURN
64 1 3 5 0  GOTO 1 3 2 0
6 r 1 3 6 0
65 1 3 7 0
40 1 3 8 0  REM  GET  F I L EN AM E FROM  R
5232 SOH
SE 1 3 9 0  G ET I 4 2 , AS:I F  A S - " "  T H EN
1390
1C 1 4 0 0  A - A S C ( A s )
E4 1 4 1 0  FOR  X - 1  T O  A
90 1 9 2 0  G E T * 2 , AS :I F  A S ' "
420
47 1 4 3 0  F R S- F R S•C H R S( R VASC C AS)
) )
27 1 4 4 0  N EXT
C3 1 - I S O  6 E 1 0 2 .1 5 .I F  T S . " "  T H EN
1-ISO
3C 1 9 6 0  E S S . W "
88 1 4 7 0  T S
D5 1 4 8 0  I F  T 5 - "E S R 1 " O R  T S . . "P "
THEN E S . . ", P , U "
SS 1 4 9 0  RETURN
DB 1 5 0 0
01 1 5 1 0
83 1 5 2 0  R EM  TER M I N AL M ODE
94 1 5 3 0  REM  R EM AI N  I N  TER M I N AL
MODE U N T I L
C3 1 5 4 0  REM  EI T H ER  D L E FROM  P S ?
32
BC 1 5 5 0  R EM  O r  C T R L - C  KEYSTR OKE
24 1 5 6 0
CA 1 5 7 0  PR I N T  "I S E JN I E R I N G  TERM
!NAL M O U E."
15 1 5 8 0  G ET 0 2 .AS
18 1 5 9 0  I F  
T
H
E
N
 1 6 2 0
ETA 1 6 0 0  I F  AS.H I H R S( 1 6 )  T H EN  GOT
0 1 7 1 0
06 1 6 1 0  PR I N T  C H R S ( R V A 9 L c A 5 » /
10 1 9 2 0  GET AS
E3 1 6 3 0  I F  A s - •  T H E N  1 5 8 0
40 1 9 4 0  I F  A5 - C H R 6 ( 3 1  T H EN  GOTO
1680
04 1 6 5 0  PR I N T AS, :PR I N T # 2 , C H R scT
( A S C ( A S ) ) ) ;
A7 1 6 6 0  GOTO 1 5 8 0
BS 1 6 7 0
3F 1 6 9 0  REM  C 1 R L -C  KEYSTR OKE
92 1 6 9 0  PR I N T S2 , C H R S( 1 5 ) ;
90 1 7 0 0
Al  1 7 1 0  R EM  E X I T  R EOU E5 T R EC EI U
ED
EA 1 7 2 0  PR I N T  "T ST ) ER M I N AL  MODE
E N D S ..."
45 1 7 3 0  RETURN
EB 1 7 4 0
E6 1 7 5 0
01 1 7 6 0  REM  F I L E  TR AN SM I T
22 1 7 7 0  OPEN  3 . 9 . 3 . F I 5
25 1 7 8 0  1 3 1 -1 :9 9 ..0
3E 1 7 9 0
2 0  1 8 0 0  C . . 0 , C H S . . "
"BL OC K"i6 1 ;
SA 1 9 1 0  1 1 EI 0 3 .C H SAF  T S " T "  T H E
N C H S - C H P S ( T ( A S C ( C H S ) ) )
nc 1 8 2 0  I F  S T  T H EN  F U R  X..C H  T O
1 2 8 : 1 3 1 5
- 1 , 0 0 1 0  1 8 5 0
on 1 8 3 0  1 3 1 1 ..B1 S.CH5
63 1 9 4 0  C . C . I . I E  C 4 1 2 8  T H EN  1 9 1
1850
1960
1870
1890
1890
1900
1910
GOTO
1920
1930
1940
1950
mAIN
pRINT112,cmR5Le),
pRINroe,ins
PR I N T * 2 , C H R S(3 );
PRINT " . 1 2 8  BYT ES" ,
00SUIS 1 1 5 0
PRINT -
IF N OT  S S  TH EN  8 1 ..8 L • 1 :
1800
PR I N T# 2 , C H R S(4 )
CLOSE 3
RETURN
LOOP
REM s n c K  T O
95 1 9 6 0
83 1 9 7 0
OS 1 9 8 0  R EM  R EC EI U E F :L E
EC 1 9 9 0  PR I N T  "r S F 1 I L E  " i t P S
OF T Y P E  " ; T S
77 2 0 0 0  V I S .F R S .E S
SI  e o l o  OPEN  3 . 8 . 3 . F I 5
78 2 0 2 0  BL ..1
CF 2 0 3 0
38 2 0 9 0  C H S "  B L S " "
09 e o s o  GOSUB 2 2 4 0 :I F  R S•C H R S( 4
THEN 2 1 9 0
AS 2 0 6 0  I F  R S ) C H P S ( 2 )  T H EN  2 0 5
0
Au e 0 / 0  PR I N T  "C 5 8 1 L 0 C K " i B L ;
Al  2 0 9 0  F OR  x - 1  T O  1 2 0
EO 2 0 9 0  6 ET 0 2 , C H S- I F  L EN ( C H S) ..0
THEN C H ! - C H S
F5 e l o o  I F  T s - - E s r 3 -  O R  T S - " T "
THEN C H SC H R S(R !..;(0 9 C (C H 5 I I )
E l  2 1 1 0  BL S- EL S•C H S
02 2 1 2 0  N EXT
78 2 1 3 0  GOSU B 2 2 4 0 1 F  R SO.C H R S(
3 ) T H EN  2 1 3 0
SC 2 1 4 0  PR I N T* 1 3 .1 3 LS;" BYT ES - ;
DB 2 1 5 0  8 L -EI L + 1
84 2 1 6 0  GOSU B 9 0 0 , PR I N T  -
KT ." ;L EN C 8 L S)
AD 2 1 7 0  GOTO 2 0 4 0
66 2 1 8 0
58 2 1 9 0  PR I N T  'E5 1 ] R AN 5 F E9  COMP
L E T E ."
13 2 2 0 0  C LOSE 3
1A 2 2 1 0  RETURN :  R EM  BAC K T O  M
AI N  LOUD'
BE 2 2 2 0
84 2 2 3 0
CB 2 0 4 0  REM  WAI T  F OR  E T X  O R  ED T
A9 2 2 5 0  G ET * 2 , P5
CF 2 2 6 0  I F  R S . . "T H E N  ? e s °
ER e . 7 0  RETURN
CA 2 2 9 0
CO 2 2 9 0
I F 2 3 0 0  R EO G ET  F I L EN AM E FROM  U
SEP
74 2 3 1 0  I N PU T  -
RANSFER -
57 e 3 2 0  I N PU T  - ( r ) e x T  ( E S S , 9 E , 9
0 1 ) O R  (P)R OGR AM  C E S P , S R . 5 n
) " ; I S
I S 2 3 3 0  F S..." S , R "
OC 2 3 4 0  / F  I S - " P "  T H EN  E S . .
31 2 3 5 0  F I S . F S . E S  F L L E N ( F S )
C r 2 3 6 0  RETURN
71 2 3 7 0
SF 2 3 0 0
AS 2 3 5 0  R EM  SET U P TR AN SL ATI ON  T
ASI EG
FF 2 4 0 0  PR I N T  .
07 2 4 1 0  O I M  P 4 ( 2 5 5 ) , R ( 2 S S )
FO 2 4 2 0  F OR  J - 0  T O  6 4 , n ( J ) - J , N
EXT
3A 2 4 3 0  T U I 0 / . 0 , T V 2 0 1 . 8
C3 2 4 4 0  F OR  J . .  6 5  T O  9 0 :K . 1 . 3 2 :
T % C .J) K:N EXT
60 2 9 5 0  F OR  J - 9 1  T O  9 5 T .M ..1 / ..J:
NEXT
54 2 4 6 0  F OR  J . 1 9 3  T O  2 1 1 3 A - J - 1 e
8 , T . 1 ) . . K, N E X T
OS 2 4 7 0  T V 1 4 6 ) 1 6 : 1
22 2 4 8 0  F OR  J.1 0  T O  e 5 5
2C 2 9 9 0  K.T "....( J)
Er 2 5 0 0  I F  KC > 0  T H EN  r s( K) ...J:R %
55 2 5 1 0  N EXT
6F a s e o  RETURN
4F 2 5 3 0  G ET  A S
SA e 5 4 0  I F  A $
64 2 5 5 0  PR I N T  n s o c n s )
eS 2 5 6 0  GOTO 2 5 3 0
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
81

Talking
through your
RS232
There's more to this interface than meets the eye. Do
not be deceived by ﬁrst impressions.
By Eric Doyle
A
most exciting product a s  f a r  a s
appearance is concerned. Fo r your
money all you appear to get is two
connectors with a length of cable to
separate them. Don't he deceived by
appearances, this could be one of the
most gratifying additions fo r your
Commodore.
An RS232 is the Commodore's link
with the real world via the user port,
the most ignored socket on the back of
any recent Commodore machine, Via
this outlet you can communicate with
Compunet, link up with another CM,
access a wider range o f printers or
perform electronic wizardry with a
whole series of domestic equipment.
I can already hear the muttering
about the user port being RS232 and
H A R D W A R E  R E V I E W
you're n o t  T o n g  b u t  t h e  gr eat
drawback i s  that t he Commodore
implementation o n l y  pr ov ides  a
0/-i-5V output and most true RS232
equipment requires a +/-12V supply.
York Electronic Research's interface
does the necessary conversion tor you.
Ntalue for Money?
For your money you also get a disk or
tape which initialises the port for use
and w ill also convert the 64 into a
terminal emulator f o r  use w it h  a
suitable modem.
It is obvious by reading the manual
that t h e  modem lin k  a n d  pr inter
interface are considered to be the most
important uses for  the unit and the
detail is sufﬁcient to get you up and
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
82
running. As far as connecting two 64s
together, the detail is sketchy and a few
wiring diagrams w o u ld  av oid t he
possibility o f  t h e  k een amateur
blowing up two Ms in one fell swoop!
RS232 communications hav e a
language all their own. Handshakes,
baud rate, parity and duplex form the
new vocabulary w h ic h  n o t  o n l y
confuses the newcomer but also has an
off-putting effect on those considering
modem communications. T h e  new
syntax is  explained quite welt in  a
concise way  which proves that the
jargon is no more than part of the rites
of telecommunication.
Handshaking is a way in which one
terminal tells the other that it is about
to send data and the other terminal
says it is ready to receive. Baud rate is

the speed a t  whic h information is
transmitted. Quite often the speed of
transmission can be different t o  the
speed at which information is received.
In human terms this means that one
machine speaks more slowly than the
other.
Parity i s  a  c hec k  f o r  d a t a
corruption. Anyone who has used a
telephone knows how a had line means
that conversation can be difﬁcult. This
is also true in the corium world. Parity
does riot solve the problem but it can
let you know that something is wrong.
Information is sent in binary form, a
string o f  ones and zeros in bursts ot
eight digits. If you're working on even
parity, seven o f  the bits  hold the
information for a single character, the
computer counts the number of ones in
that character and it' this is an odd
number the eighth bit will be a one it
not i t  w i l l  trans mit a  zero. T h e
receivine, terminal knows that if there is
an o d d  number  o f  ones  i n  t h e
transmitted 11
wrong. Similar k  'some s  stom
LJJ sPaltg 
E
g
Y
ainktili? 
I
I
I
0 a
Y
G4ME3'-800A'S-1/771ITIES-EXP4IVSION PACKS
JOYSTICKS -ADAPTORS-- ALL YOU HEED FOR
YOUR Cla OR PIII84 WWIITER.
it'EP/ CHRISTMAS CATALOGUE HAS MAN
PECIAI OFFERS, — OOH'T MISS I T !
H A R D W A R E  R E V I E W
parity based on odd numbers,
Full duplex is when both machines
are able to talk simultaneously to one
another a n d  h a l f  duplex  means
transmission in one direction must end
before the machine can receive.
The Relevant Software
The s oftwar e f o r  Y E R ' s  RS232
interface supports any of these systems
via a simple menu selection system.
The Set Up program is mainly for use
with RS232 printers and your only real
concern is the baud rate. lithe printer
does not tell you which rate to use it
will n o t  damage t h e  machine t o
experiment a little. The worst that can
happen is that the printer will, fail to
respond.
A handy troubleshooting section
should solve most of the problems with
printers. but if a baud rate over 2400 is
required the 64 cannot respond fast
enough. Luckily most printers have
switches to select various rates so all
may not he lost.
ﬁetc
Limitations
The one drawback o f  the Terminal
Emulator i s  t h a t  i t  c an't handle
Viewdata/Prestel style graphics which
limits y our  entry i n t o  the comms
world slightly, Apar t from this, the
software menu is ﬂexible enough for
any system you'd want to talk to and
cuts down the sophistication and cost
of the modem required.
York Electronic Research hav e
provided a  service whic h t o  most
Commodore owners never realised
they required. RS232 interfacing is the
subject o f  several books and articles
which beneﬁts a sector of users who
wish to combine an interest in amateur
electronics with their computer hobby.
For these people YER can supply the
missing link.
Touchline:
Supplier: Yor k  Elecironic Rewurch,
(0904) 610722. Price: (
YORK ELECTRONIC RESEARCH
Commodore 64/Plus 4 Products
6502 ASSEMBLER 64/Plus 4'   t a p e / d i s k '  £12.99
A sophisticated two-pass symbolic assembler and text editor
which supports tape and disk ﬁling. The assembler, the editor,
and your source and object code may all be resident in memory
simultaneously, facilitating rapid and interactive code develop-
ment. Recently extended manual with many examples.
Z80 EMULATOR/CROSS-ASSEMBLER 64 only   d i s k  E12,99
A unique integrated Z80 development package. The emulator
compiles Z80 source code into optimised 6502 which iuns on
the 64 at approximately one sixth the speed of a 2MHz Z80. It
supports all but 20 of the 688 Z80 operations, calls to 6502
routines, and interrupts. The cross assembler generates hex or
binary 280 object ﬁles. The disk also contains a powerful editor
and several example programs.
BI-DIRECTIONAL RS232 INTERFACE WITH
COMMUNICATIONS SOFTWARE 64 A* _ tape/disk* E29.99
The 64 K ER NAL supports RS232 via the user port. This interface
provides the necessary voltage conversion for direct connection
to RS232 printers, modems and other devices I t  is compatible
with Easyscript and Superscript. The unit is supplied with 1
metre of cable (add 75p per extra metre') terminated in a 25-way
male ( o r  f emale') 0-c onnec t or.  Th e  software includes a
terminal emulator which supports split baud rates and auto-dial,
ﬁle transfer utilities, a menu driven port initialisation program,
and a transparent printer driver which vectors the KERNAL to
redirect device 4 printer output to the RS232 port.
*Please specify.
Prices are fully inclusive. Overseas orders add E2.50
Allow up to 1 week for delivery
Manuals available separately E1.00
YORK ELECTRONIC RESEARCH
The Fishergate Centre, Dept HBG, 4 Fishergale, York Y01 4AB
Telephone: (0904) 610722

P 1 1 S / 4  U T I L I T Y
RS232
On The Plus/4
19,200 baud on the Phis/4? A Beeb listing in a
Commodore mac? Are we kidding you? We certainly aren't.
R C Hones
urprising though it may seem, the
S
Plus/4 is a lot faster at communicating
using RS232 than the 64. This is due to
the 64 using a software simulation to
copy the action of the 6551 AC IA IC
which would normally
RS232. Indeed, the 64 is so slow that it
often misses characters even at the
leisurely 300 baud.
The Plus/4 on the other hand. has a
6551 whic h handled all the RS232
signals except CTS which is dealt with
by a 6529. Also, there is no need to
connect S-into pin B as  suggested in
'Interfacing w it h the RS232'. Your
('ommodore, January 1987. p 82-90),
The Plus/4 software has the ability.
to use XO N/XO F F ﬂow control with
the user's choice of ' XO N / XO F T
characters. These are normally CTI./S
for x o r F  and ( 'T L/Q  for XON. This
facility is  used t o  stop the remote
device fr om transmitting more data
when the receiving device has no more
mom in its input butter, and to restart
the remote device w hen the recel‘ ing
device has removed enough characters
from its buffer.
The Plus/4 has a dedicated 64-byte
RS232 user receive buffer located at
S031
transmit buffer at $S07CF which is
used to hold the current XO N/O FF
character.
If the A C I A  is  conﬁgured. the
interrupt h a n d le r  w i l l  c a l l  t w o
subroutines t o  h a n d l e  R 5 2 3 2
interrupts. The ﬁrst routine:
Checks for a remote d o  ice initiated
XO N/XO FT sequence and handles it
appropriately:
Checks user receive butter is full, and it
so then ignores this received character
and returns:
If there is room for eight characters.
then it sets various ﬂags, and stores
XOFT character from SFr) into the
system transmit buffer and nuts the
received character in the user input
buffer.
I he second routine called will:
Check A C I A  transmit buffer empty
5 RE M BBC PROGRAM TO  T E S T  P L U S / 4  T O  ARC R S 2 3 2  A T  1 9 2 0 0  BAUC
10 * 4 ) ( 7 , 8
20 * F  x8,13
30 * F x 3 , 5
40 * F X 2 , 1
50 FO R T 0 1 O 7
60 A 1 = i N K E Y S ( 0 )
70 I F  Ac , < > CHRS ( 1 9 )  T H E N 1 0 0
ao As...INKFys(6)
90 I F  A l < > C H R S ( 1 7 )  T H E N 8 0
100 P R I N T  S T R S ( T ) ;
1 1 0  NE X TY
120 GOTO 5 0
L i
a n d  th e  P l u 8 /  .1 t o  ,
to the Plas/4 at 19.200 baud.
5 RE M P L U S / 4  PROGRAM TO  T E S T  P I U S / 4  T O  B B C R S 2 3 2  A T  1 9 2 0 0  EAU()
10 C P E N 2 . 2 . 0 . C H R S ( 3 1 ) + C H R S ( 5 )
20 P3KEDEC("FC")4, 17:POKEDEC("FO")•1
SO G E T I 2 , A S
40 I F A S < > " "  THE NP RI NTAT. ;
50 GOTO 7 0
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
84

and return if not;
Check for ( 'IS signal low, and return
if so;
Check input buffer full ﬂag, and send
either XO FF or XON as appropriate.
It is the job of the RS232 portion of
the CHRIN routine to reset the user
huller-full and remote-paused ﬂags
and initiate sending o f  the X O N
character.
Note t h a t  t h e  X O N / X O F F
protocol is used Only if  the user has
POKEd the XO N /XO F F  characters
into SEC and SID respectively; if these
two locations are zero then characters
received when the butler is full are
ignored.
ORG
5 1 0 4 3
1043
78
S E !
1 0 4 4
80
3E
F F
STA
SF F3E
;S WI TCH T O  RO M
1 0 4 7
AO
00
LDY
/ • O O
1 0 4 9
B9
0 0
80
LP1
LDA
5800 0 ,  Y
;COPY P A R T  1  O F
ROM
TO
RAM
104C
9 9
0 0
80
STA
5 8 0 0 0 ,  Y
; $ 8 0 0 0  T O  S F  CF
1 0 4 1
C8
I NY
1 05C
DO
17
ONE
LP1
1 0 5 2
E E
413
10
IN C
1 . 1
1 0 5 5
EE
4E
10
I NC
LP14-5
1 0 5 8
AD
4E
10
L DA
LP 1 +5
105B
C9
FD
C MP
/S FD
105D
DO
EA
FINE
L o l
1 0 5 F
AO
40
LDY
£ 5 4 0
1061
139
10
11
1P2
LOA
SF FOO, y
;COPY P A R T  2  O F
ROM
TO
RAM
1 0 6 4
9 9
10
F F
STA
SF FOCI. Y
;SF F40 T O  S F  IF
1 0 6 7
C8
I NY
1 0 6 8
DO
F7
BNE
LP?
P L U S /  4 U T I L I T Y
And The Proof.
I have tested the Plus/4 connected to a
BBC Model B. running at 19,200 baud.
with the BBC sending the Phis/4 at full
speed. and over a one hour period not
a single character was lost b y  the
Plus/4. T he t w o  programs for  the
Plus/4 and the BBC  are shown in
Listing I and 2.
Unfortunately, there is a bug in the
Plus/4 RO M RS232 routines, which
causes the Plus/4 to crash immediately
after it has transmitted the ﬁrst XON
resume character, and the rest of this
article describes how to ﬁx this bug.
First we need to make our own
1 P O K E 5 1 , 0 : P 0 K  E 5 3 . 0 :P O K E 5 5 • 0 :P O K E 5 2 • 1 2 8 :P 0 K E  5 4 .1  2 8 :P O KE 5 6 •  1 2 8 :CLR
S Y S 4 1 6 3
3 N EW
Listing 3.4: RaNic program to reNet top of memory pointer% tald call machine code program to copy the Aernal and &Pi k jinn, R O M  Ito RAM,  and
change all reference% to 5FF3l  to SH-141-
Liming .?11: Machine code program to copy RO M to RAM  and inhibit switching to RO M.
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
85
copy o f  the Kernal RO M, and then
patch the incorrect code. This is not so
easy... Listing 3 is a listing of a Basic
Program and a machine code program
which copy the ROM down into RAM,
cause the new version of the Kernal to
be executed, and inhibit switching
back t o  RO M. The top o f  memory
pointers are also reset to S7FTE, and
the had code in the RAM copy is ﬁxed.
The Basic program must be typed in
Exactly as shown, with No additional
spaces, etc . a s  t he mac hine c ode
program is  immediately a bm e it at
$4163.
A disassembly of the RS232 code in
the Kemal is included in ﬁgure 3.

P L U S / 4  U T I L I T Y
106A
A9
SF
L DA
f < 5 1 1 3 1
; I N H I B I T  A L L  RO M S I T C H I N G
106C
80
82
04
STA
$ 0 4 8 2
106F
80
9E
04
STA
$ 0 4 9 E
1 0 7 2
80
AC
94
STA
SO4AC
1 0 7 5
80
87
04
STA
$ 0 4 8 7
107E
80
C2
04
STA
SO4C2
1 0 7 8
80
CD
04
STA
s n 4 c D
107E
BD
DM
04
STA
SO4D8
1081
80
E3
04
STA
s O4E3
1 0 8 4
80
El
0 7
STA
SO7E1
1 0 8 7
80
12
81
STA
$ 8 1 3 ?
108A
80
4E
81
STA
$ 8 1 4 E
1 0 8 0
80
RB
CF
STA
S U B B
1 0 9 0
RD
F7
FF
STA
$ E FF7
1 0 9 3
80
31
FF
STA
S 1 1 3 1
:swrTcH TO RAM
1096
A9
4C
LDA
1$4C
; p u T  J P  S CE C5  A T  S E 8 1 8
1 0 9 8
80
18
EB
STA
SE916
1 0 9 8
A9
C5
LDA
t <S CE C5
1 0 9 0
go
1C
EB
STA
s u l l e n
10A0
A.
CE
L DA
f >S CE C5
10A2
BD
10
En
STA
SEB1B+2
10A5
A?
06
LOX
i S 0 6
; COPY CODE T O  P A T C h  A RE A
10A7
80
82
10
LPS
LDA
PCH, X
10AA
90
C5
CE
STA
SCEC5, X
10AD
CA
DEX
10AE
10
17
BPL
LP3
1 0 6 0
58
1081
60
R I S
1 0 8 2
80
CF
07
PCH
STA
SO7CF
; SAVE C H  I N  S Y S TE M 0 / P  B UFFE R
1 0 9 5
68
PLA
; P UL L  NE X T U S E R  I N P U T  CHA R
1 0 8 6
4C
l E
EB
JMP
S H O E
; RETURN T O  R S ? 3 2  R C U T I N E
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
86

P L U S / 4  U T I L I T Y
Listing 4 : The  PiliV4  RS232 routines.
TRANSMI T R S 2 3 2  CHA RA CTE R,  E NTE RE D FRO M I R O  R O U T I N E  A T  S C E 2 8
EA5B A D  0 4  0 7  S E A 5 B  
L
O
A
 S 0 7 0 4  
;
G
E
T
 A C T A  S TA TUS
EASE 2 9  1 0  
A
N
D
 t S 1 0  
;
I
x
 D A T A  RE G  F L A G
EA60 F O  3 2  
B
E
D
 B E A 9 4  
;
-
>
T
X
 D A T A  RE G  N O T  E MP TY
EA62 A D  1 0  F D  
L
D
A
 S F 0 1 0  
;
6
5
2
9
B
EA65 2 9  0 2  
A
N
D
 i S 0 2  
;
C
T
S
 P RE S E NT
EA67 F O  2 B  
B
E
D
 B E A 9 4  
;
-
>
N
O
,
 D O  NO T T R A N S M I T
EA69 A 2  0 0  
L
O
X
 i s 0 0
EA6B 2 C  D C  0 7  
I
T
 $ 0 7 0 0  
;
S
Y
S
T E
M  I N P U T  B UFFE R F U L L ?
EA6E 1 0  0 9  
B
P
L
 0 E A 7 9  
;
 - >  NO
EA70 A D  C F  0 7  
L
D
A
 S O 7 C F  
;
Y
E
S
,
 G E T  CHA R FRO M S Y S  B u F
EA73 8 E  D O  0 7  
S
I
X
 S O 7 DO  
;
C
L
E
A
R
 S Y S TE M B UFFE R F U L L  F L G
EA76 4 C  8 9  E A  
J
m
P
 J E A 8 9
EA79 2 C  C E  0 7  A E 4 7 9  
B
I
T
 S O 7 CE  
;
u
S
R
 I N P U T  B U F F E R  F U L L ?
EA7C 1 0  1 6  
B
P
L
 B E A 9 4  
;
 - >  N O
EA7E 2 C  D 6  0 7  
9
I
T
 S 0 7 0 6  
;
Y
E
S
,
 L O C A L  R A I S E  S E T ?
EA81 3 0  1 1  
B
M
I
 R E A 9 4  
;
 - >  Y E S
EA83 A D  C D  0 7  
L
D
A
 S O 7 CD 
;
N O
,
G
E
T  US E R CHA R T O  S E N D
EA86 B E  C E  0 7  
S
I
X
 S O 7 CE  
;
C
L
E
A
R
 US E R B U F F E R  F U L L  F L A G
EA89 8 D  0 0  F O  J E A 8 9  
S
T A
 S E 0 0 0  
;
A
C
I
A
 T R A N S M I T  RE G
EA8C A D  0 4  0 7  
L
D
A
 S 0 7 0 4  
;
G
E
T
 A C I A  S TA TUS  RE G
EA8F 2 9  E F  
A
N
D
 E S E F 
;
S
A
V
E
 O NL Y  T R A N S M I T  D A T A  R E G
EA91 8 D  D 4  0 7  
S
T
A
 $ 0 7 D 4  
;
 S TA TUS  B I T
EA94 6 0  
9
E
A
9
4
 
R T S
CHECK F O R  RE CE I V E D R S 2 3 2  CHA RA CTE R E NTE RE D FRO M I R D  A T  s C E 2 5
EA95 A D  0 4  0 7  S E A 9 5
EA98 2 9  0 8
EA9A F O  5 4
EA9C A D  0 4  0 7
EA9F 2 9  F 7
LDA $ 0 7 0 4
AND f S C/ 3
BEG BE AFO
LDA $ 0 7 0 4
AND O F ?
;GET A c I A  S I A I L S  RE G
;RECEI VE D A T A  F E G  F L A G
; - > RX  D A T A  RE G  N O T  F I L L
;GET R X  D A T A  RE G  F L A G
;SAVE O NLY  R X  D A T A  RE G
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
87

P L U S / 4  U T I L I T Y
EAA1 8 D  0 4  0 7
EAA4 A D  0 0  F D
EAA7 F O  1 9
EAA9 8 D  0 5  0 7
EAAC C 5  F C
EAAE D O  0 7
RECEI VED X O N  RE MO TE  E N D  WANTS  U S  T O  RE S TART TRANS MI S S I O N
EABO A 9  J O
EAB2 8 O  0 6  0 7
EAB5 F O  3 9
EAB7 C 5  F D
EAB9 D O  0 7
BE A87
STA $ 0 7 0 4
LDA $ F D 0 0
BEQ B E A C 2
STA $ 0 7 0 5
CMP S E C
ONE B E A D ?
LDA 1 5 0 0
STA $ O 7 D 6
BEO BE AN' )
CMP S F D
BNE B E A C 2
; S T A T U S  B I T
;GET A C T A  R C V  R E G I S T E R
; — > N O  D A T A  O R  N U L L
;SAVE T H E  CHAR
; I S  I T  X O N CHARACTE R'
; — > N O
; Y E S .  C L E A R
; L O C A L  P AUS E  F L A G
AND RE TURN
; i s  I T  X O F F  C H A R A C T E R '
; — >  N O
RECEI VED x u r  C H A R A C T F R .  RE MO TE  E N D  WANTS  U S  T O  S TO P  TRANS MI S S I O N
EABB A 9  F F  
L
D
A
 t S F F  
;
Y
E
S
.
 S E T  LO CAL
EABD 8 D  D 6  0 7  
S
T
A
 S 0 7 0 6  
;
 P A U S E  F L A G
EACO DO  2 E  
O
N
E
 BE AFO  
A
N
D
 RE TURN
EAC2 A D  0 3  0 7  BE AC2  
L D A  5 0 7 0 3  
;
N C H A R S
 I N  U S R  I N P U T  B U F F E R
EAC5 C 9  3 F  
C
M
P
 t 1 3 F  
;
F
U
L
L
"
EAC7 F O  2 7  
B
E
O
 BE AFO  
;
 — > Y E S
EACg C 9  3 e  
C
M
P
 1 1 . 3 8  
;
N
O
,
 A T  THRE S HCLD F O R  X O F F 1
EACB D O  O F  
O
N
E
 BE ADC 
;
 — > N O
EACD A S  F D  
I
D
A
 S E E  
;
Y
E
S
.
 G E T  X O F F  C H A R
EACF F O  O B 
B
E
D
 BE ADC 
;
 — > N O  X O F F  Ci - AR D E F I N E D
EAD1 8 0  C F  O i  
S
T
A
 S O 7 C F  
;
P
U
T
 I N  S Y S TE M 0 / P  B U F F E R
EAD4 A 9  F F  
L
D
A
 i S F F
EAD6 8 D  D O  0 7  
S
T
A
 S 0 7 0 0  
;
S
E
T
 S Y S TE M B U F F E R  F U L L  F L (
EA09 8 D  D i  0 7  
S
T
A
 5 0 7 0 7  
;
S
E
T
 REMOTE  P AUS E  F L A G
EADC A E  0 1  0 7  BE ADC 
L O
X
 S 0 7 0 1  
;
G
E
T
 U S E R  I / P  6 U F F E R  I N D E X
EADF E 8  
1
N
X
 
;
A
D
D
 O NE
EAEO !i l i  
T
X
A
EAE1 2 9  3 F  
A
N
D
 t S 3 F  
;
M
A
K
E
 I N D E X  MO D 6 4  A N D
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
88

PU TS U T I L I T Y
EAE3 S D  D 1  0 7  
S
T
A
 S 0 7 0 1  
;
 S TO RE  NE W I N D E X
EAE6 A A  
T
A
x
 
;
G
E
T
 I N D E X  I N  - X
E A E
EAEA 9 0  F 7  n 3  
S
T
A
 $ 0 3 F 7 , x  
;
 A N D '  STORE I N  US E R I / P  B U F
EAED E E  0 3  0 7  
I
N
C
 $ 0 7 0 3  
;
N C H A R S  I N  U S R  t / P  B U F F E R
EAFO 6 0  
B
E
A
F
O
 
R T S
CO NTI NUA TI O N O F  C H R I N  FO R R S 2 3 2  D E V I C E
E A ﬂ A D  0 3  0 7  S E A F1  
L
D
A
 $ 0 7 0 3  
;
N C H A
R S
 T N  U S R  I / P  B B F F E R
EAF4 F O  3 4  
8
E
0
 B E B 7 A  
;
 — > E MP TY
F4 1 6  0 8  
P
H
P
 
;
S
A
V
E
 I N H I B I T  S T A T U S
EAF7 7 8  
S
E
I
EAF8 A E  0 2  0 7  
L
O
X
 $ D 7 0 2  
;
1
/
P
 0  F E T C H  I N D E X
EAFB E 8  
I
N
X
 
;
A
D
D
 O NE
EAFC 8 A  
I
x
A
EAFD 2 9  3 F  
A
N
D
 i $ 3 F  
;
M
A
K
E
 MO D 6 4
EAFF R D  0 2  0 7  
S
T
A
 $ 0 7 0 ?  
;
 A N D  RE S TCRE  I T
EB07 2 8  
P
L
P
 
;
R
E
C
O
V
E
R
 I N H I B I T  B I T
E 9 0 3  A A  
T
A
X
 
;
1
/
P
 0  F E T C H  I N D E X
EBO4 B D  F 7  0 3  
L
D
A
 $ 0 3 F 7 , x  
;
G
E
T
 N E X T  CHA R FRO M I / P  B u F
E807 4 8  
P
H
A
 
;
 O NTO  S TA CK
EBOI  C E  0 3  0 7  
D
E
C
 $ 0 7 0 3  ; D E C R E M E N T  NCHA RS  I N  B U F
EBOB A D  0 3  0 7  
L
D
A
 $ 0 7 D 3  
;
G
E
T
 NCHA RS  I N  T i p  RUE
EBOE C 9  0 8  
C
M
P
 i $ 0 8
EB10 DO  1 9  
B
N
E
 BEB2Es  
;
 — > NCHA RS  
8
EB12 2 c  0 7  0 7  
B
I
T
 $ 0 7 0 7  
;
I
S
 RE MO TE  P A US E  F L A G  S E T
E815 1 0  1 4  
B
P
L
 B E E 2 B  
;
 — > N O
EB17 A S  E C  
L
D
A
 $ F C  
;
I
S
 X O N CHA R D E F I N E D ?
EB19 F O  1 0  
B
E
D
 ' 1 E 8 2 9  
;
 — > NO
EB1B 8 D  C F  0 7  
S
T
A
 S O 7 C F  
;
Y
E
S
,
 P U T  I T  I N  S Y S  0 / F  B U F
HERE I S  T H E  B U G .  T H E  N E X T  CHA RA CTE R TO  B E  RE TURNE D T O  T H E  U S E R
IS T H E  T O P  E NTRY  O N  T H E  S T A C K .  A  P L A  S HO L D B E  DO NE  H E R E .
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
89

P L U S / 4  U T I L I T Y
ERI E
38
SEC
Ealr
6E
DO 0 7
ROR S 0 7 D 0
; RESET S Y S  B U F F E R  F U L L  F L A C
E 0 2 2
4E
D7 0 7
LSR $ 0 7 D 7
; A N D  RE MO TE  P A US E  F L A G
ER25
2C
D8 0 7  S E B 2 5
B I T S 0 7 D 8
; A CI A  P RE S E NT?
E 8 ? 8
10
08
BPL 9 E 8 3 5
; — >  N O
EB2A
48
BEB2A
PHA
: Y E S .  S A V E  N E X T  CHA R T O  S E N D
E028
AD
04 0 ?  8 E R ? B
LDA S 0 7 D 4
;GET A C T A  S T A T L S  RE G
EB2F
29
4F
AND f % C 1 0 0 1 1 1 1  
;
 S A V F  D S R
E 8 3 0
49
40
EOR ( M : 1 0 0 0 0 0 0  
;
 A N D  I N V E R T  I T
E03?
85
90
STA $ 9 0  
S
T
O
R
E
 I N  K E RNA L  S T  WORD
EB34
68
PLA
; RECOVER CHA R RE A D
ER35
18
8 E 0 3 5
CLC
; FLAG N O  E RRO R
ED36
60
RTS
SETUP US E R CHA RA CTE R T O  T R A N S M I T
E 3 7
2C
CE 0 7  8 E 8 3 7
B I T S O 7 CE
; USER X M I T  B U F F E R  F U L L ?
EB3A
30
FR
nmr 8 E 8 3 7
; —>YES,  W A I T  F C R  I T  T O  E MP TY
E83C
8D
CD 0 7
STA S O 7 CD
; NO,  S TO RE  U S E R  0 / P  CHA RA CTE R
EB3F
38
SEC
; I N  U S E R  X V I I
E 8 4 0
6E
CE 0 7
ROR s O 7 CE
; U S E R  X M I T  B U F F E R  F U L L  F L A G
E 0 4 3
4C
2A F A
JMP 8 E 8 2 A
I N I T I A L I Z E  R S 2 3 2
CONSTANTS A N D
A CI A
EB46
A9
30 S E 8 4 6
LDA ! S O O
; CLEAR A L L
ER48
A2
08
LOX i S O B
; R S 2 3 2
ER4A
9D
CD 0 7  EI EB4A
STA S 0 7 C D , X
; V A R I A R L E S
Ea4D
CA
DEX
ER4E
10
FA
BPL B E R4 A
E 8 5 0
80
31 F D
STA S E M ' ,
; RESET A C T A
E 0 5 3
85
F t
STA S F C
; CLEAR X O N CHA RA CTE R
ER55
85
FD
STA SEC)
; CLEAR X O F F  CHA RA CTE R
E 8 5 7
60
RI S
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
90

COMPtITERS
Past and Present
Connnodore's history is a fascinating story of depression
and elation. Where did it come from and where is CBM now!
by Norman Doyk
he story of Commodore's rise is a typical American rags
T
It) riches tale, a story which is inextricably linked with the
ﬁn
Caine late in the development of the company starting with the
PET series and currently scaling the heights with the new Amiga
range.
During the War. Tramiel lived in Nazi occupied Poland
where he was subjected to the suffering associated w WI lying
a Jew under Hitler's reign of terror. When liberation came it
meant a new life for Tramiel in his adopted c( iuntrv. the USA.
After a time as a taxi driver. Tramiel joined the US Army
where he was in charge of Army ofﬁce equipment maintenance
in New NOrk. Elardly a hazardous occupation hut one which was
to set him on his way to a fortune back on eivvv street.
Typewriter maintenance became his career and soon he was
able to form his own company in Toronto. This was back in 1958
and the Commodore •Typew riter Company's ﬁrst product was
the Everest ty pewriter. The shape of things to come started to
form in 1961 when Japanese-made mechanical adding machines
were added to the range. The ﬁrm expanded through the Sixties
encompassing all fonns of ofﬁce furniture and equipment. The
rapid growth was f011owed by an equally rapid decline and in
1965 it would have vanished completely but lOr the intervention
of an enterprising ﬁnancier
When Irving Gould stepped in with the much needed cash.
he started a new phase of growth for Commodore which saw
the introduction of electronic pocket calculators in 1969. The
C108 calculator sold (or just under C200. a phenomenal price
by today's standards but a relative eheapie in the early Seventies.
The middle of the decade saw Commodore in trouble once
more. Suddenly chip prices fell from Cl2 to CI and the calculator
price wars began. Commodore liiiind itself sitting on a pile of
devalued chips and eventual bankruptcy once more stared
Tramiel in the face. The problem was exacerbated when the chip
supply d IN ed up after Texas Instruments decided to switch from
chip manufaeture to calculator production. ' F r
not doing anything by halves and his solution was to buy out
small companies which produced the raw materials and
components for his new range of machines.
Tram iers decision brought 22 lawsuits from companies
which he had contracted to supply his needs. Miraculously none
of these suits succeeded and CBM was on its way to the top.
Fortuitously, one of Commodore's acquisitions in 1976 was
MOS Technology which was developing a new microchip called
the MOS 6502. Another side beneﬁt was in the person of Chuck
Peddle whose vision of computers tOr the home planted the seed
for Commodore's ilia] re development,
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
91
There followed a short ﬂirtation with the hobbyist market
ith the production of the KIM. a single hoard kit based around
the 6502. Shortly alter this the ﬁrst PET appeared. Originally
destined !Or a leather goods company which was breaking into
the electronics market, the PET was turned down by Thndy's
in favour o f  another machine which became the TRS80
computer.
'Tramiel decided to take on the PET even though he now
considered Commodore's prime business to he component
manufacture. At the time his main aim seemed to he recouping
a potential loss from the development of the machine. Any
qualms which he may have had were dispelled alter the 1977
Consumer Electronics Show in Chicago when the Pet attracted
C3 million worth of orders within two months. Commodore had
had entered the big league.
The ﬁrst PET was an inelegant beast with built-in 40 column
screen. cassette recorder and a mini 8K memory. Though
pathetic hy modern standards this was low-cost hi-tech and more
and more American families decided it  was a really neat
addition to there home furniture.
1978 saw sales increase and Commodore saw itself 'rime
and more as a computer company rather than a pure component
manufacturer. In I'M) Japanese disk drives and printers were
added to the Commodore range and 1980 saw the appearance
of the 4000 and 8000 series machines.
Also in  1980 the ﬁrst o f  Commodore's mega selling
computers hit the streets. The V1C20 was cheap and colourful
and captured the imagination of the home market. It's eight
colours and 22 column by 24 line screen display with 3.5K of
RAM was soon surpassed in this country by the Sinclair
Spectrum but not helitre the VIC had established Commodore
as a major Iiiirce in the home computer market.
Since then Commodore has had a chequered history. The
continuing popularity of the V IC's successor, the Commodore
64. has been tempered by a wine of less notable machines.
Tramiel's tempestuous departure from Commodore leading to
his take over of rival company Atari has added to Commodore's
worries. Extensive Govermnent and European loans to ﬁnance
the setting up of a factory at Corby were counteracted by market
forces which caused the works to be closed down only a few
years after it opened.
Conmiodore now seem to be hack on the road to total
recovery and a lot of their future hopes are pinned on the Amiga.
a project instigated during Tramiers reign and now being
shadowed 1)% Atari's ST machines. Yes. Jack Tramiel has had
a lot to do with Commodore's lOrtunes!

Red Boxes
Now there's a home control system available for the
C64, which will switch on the kettle and the telly or even
warn of intruders.
By Mycroftt Appleb
H
promoted as one of the major uses of
computers i n  t h e  c oming years.
However, in  the past home control
systems were expensive. difﬁcult t o
use, and were only available on micros
with g o o d ,  c omplex  inter fac ing
systems lik e the BBC Micro. Mor e
c ommon c o m p u t e r s  l i k e  t h e
Commodore 64 were not really used at
all. O ne unbuffered user por t that
doubled as an RS232, and an obscure
custom serial system, isn't really the
stuff that interfacing dreams are made
of.
Finally, there is now on the market
an easy to use home control system
that is  available across a  range o f
mirros including the Commodore 64.
The s tarter pac k  f o r  R e d  Boxes
comprises t h e  m a in  c ontroller —
called 'Red Leader', and two control
units — an infra-red detector (red two)
and a  plug actuator (red one). The
concept behind the Red Boxes is the
controller unit 'talking' to all the other
units via a modulated serial link via the
mains.
Red Leader is a computer in itselt.
Compr is ing a  6 5 0 2  d e r iv a t iv e
processor just like the C64. 8K of RAM.
and a  BBC-like control Basic. The
Commodore 64 connects to this and is
used as a terminal. The way this is done
is extremely clever. A wire is connected
on the C64. Press 'Run/Stop' and the
Red Leader behaves just like a cassette
player, sending cassette-type signals to
the Commodore 64.
After a  short time the terminal
program is loaded into the computer
and the link between the Red Leader
and the Commodore 64 turns into a
proper two-way serial link. You will
then drop into the control program
mode.
This mode is the simplest operating
method on the Red Bares system (the
other being Red Basic, but more o f
that later). You are presented with a
menu where yrou can log-on devices
(i.e. tell Red Leader that they exist)
type in their code addresses, turnthem
on or off and set them up to turn on or
off at speciﬁc times. You can even
relate the input of one to the output of
another so that a movement on the
infra-red detector w ill activate a n
alarm for instance.
This p r o g r a m ,  w h i l s t  b e i n g
extremely s imple, i s  a ls o  q u i t e
powerful and lets you perform all the
major actions that you would want to
in a quick and easy manner. However
for complex, multi-unit, interaction
you need to get down to some planning
and programming. For this you need
to use Red Basic and probably need to
get hold of the Projects Manual (good
value at E9).
Documentation
HARDWARE
The manual supplied gives you some
simple information on the Basic, but is
really aimed at the inexperienced user
so goes into more detail about the
menu program. The Projects Manual
on the other hand, is one of the better
tomes that I  have read. G oing into
enough detail f o r  t he experienced
programmer o u t  t o  d o  something
really ﬂashy, or the beginner who is au
fait with Commodore Basic and wants
to get down to using Red Basic.
If you have ever used a BBC micro
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
92
you will be immediately used to Red
Basic as Red Basic is a subset of BBC
Basic. with a lot of  extra commands
added to handle the control aspect of
the system. If you think that Red Basic
being the same as BBC Basic is a little
strange, then you won't when you hear
about t h e  F o u n d e r  o f  G ener al
Information Systems (the people who
make Red Boxes). Chris Curry (for it
is he) started Acorn many years ago
and this is one of the ﬁrst projects that
he has embarked on since the Acorn
shake up.
As well as most of the BBC Basic
commands and instructions — which
includes m o s t  o f  t h e  s truc tured
programming a id s  (repeat, gos ub
name, long variable names etc.) there
are commands to log-on devices and
manipulate them. As this Basic is a lot
more advanced than the Commodore
64 Basic, you should have no trouble at
all in telling units to do whatever you
want especially w it h  the real-time
commands. These are commands that
are very similar to some commands on
the Amstrad. Sections of program are
executed when a n  external device
instructs them. So if the timer section
of your program is  controlling the
heating and a burglar trips the infra-
red motion detector then the 'alarm'
section o f  y our  program c an b e
activated.
8K may not sound like a lot, but try
and think  o f  the last time that you
y'rote a program that was actually 8K
in length. Remember, you don't have
to w or r y  about screen o r  c olour
memory, o r  sprites, o r  sound. The
Commodore 64 handles all o f  that.
And i f  Basic is a bit tight you can

.a•
always switch to machine code.
The Red Leader uses a  6502
processor, and you can program it in
machine code by pokeing code into
memory and then executing it. The
Projects manual carrys a  list o f
operating system functions which are
very similar in a lot o f ways to the
Commodore Kernal system. The Basic
has the same memory management
aids as the original BBC Basic with
pseudo-variables like Page and Top to
indicate when the Basic program is
going to sit, and Lomem and I Iimem
to reserve space for the machine code
area. T h e  operating system a n d
memory areas are also very similar to
the BBC. even down to  where the
system memory ends.
The Basic can also save any
programs written under it to a tape
connected to the Commodore 64. To
do this, the Red Leader ﬁrst transfers
the contents of its memory to the C64.
You must then disconnect Red Leader
and connect up a tape recorder, and
write t o  tape. Th e n  re-connect
everything up.
The main plugs o f this system is
that when y o u  have a  program
debugged and working to your satis-
faction. y o u  c a n  u n p l u g  t h e
Commodore 64 fro m Red Leader
completely and use it for something
else or whatever. Yet, Red Leader will
just sit there executing your program
forever. However, you can leave your
Commodore 64 connected if you want
to — i f you need to see information
displayed on the screen for instance —
though the power consumption over a
period o f time would be offputting.
The Red Leader on its own uses up
very little power, and it is feasible to
leave it switched on all the time.
Reds One and Two
The two units supplied with the starter
pack are Red One and Red Two
(sounds a bit like something out o f
Apocalypse Now). Red One is the
actuator. This is a unit that plugs into
the mains at one end and then has a
mains socket at the other. Anything
you like can be connected to this and
turned on and off from Red Leader.
There is also a manual override on the
unit to toggle it on and off as you see
HARDWARE
ﬁt. A n  L ED  on the box tells you
whether it is on or off.
Red Two is an infra-red motion
detector. One end plugs into the mains
(as usual) and at the other end is a
small box about half the size of Red
One and Red Leader. In this is a large
window. I f  anything that i s a t a
different temperature th a n  t h e
surrounding air moves within 16 feet
of it then a signal is sent back to Red
Leader.
All three units come with wall
mounting brackets with all screws and
Rawlplugs, though they don't need to
be wall mounted, it is excellent that
these are included. The cables are also
very long, over six feet in most cases.
This is just about the right length.
Usually on systems such as these the
cables are not quite long enough. I
think that they got it right this time.
In the near future GIS will be
releasing an alarm unit and an analog
input unit. These will allow you to
build up an alarm system more easily
or control a thermostat for heating.
Next in line are temperature probes
and an RS232 link.
This last unit will allow your
computer t o  talk t o  a  printer i n
another ro o m. o r  even another
building, by sending its information
down the mains line. This could also be
used in networking computers in a
simple and easy manner.
If anyone is worrying about the
mains system, don't. It is perfectly safe
and very well worked out. Each unit
has its own unique serial number and
the Red Leader has to know what it is.
So whilst you could control your next
door neighbour's heating system,
you'd have to  know his encryption
code ﬁrst. However, if you wanted to
communicate with a friend down the
road, as long as you were on the same
local ring main, and within a  few
hundred yards, you could do it.
Verdict
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
93
On the whole this is a brilliant system.
One of my main interests in computers
is in the ﬁeld of real event control. And
this is the easiest to use, safest, and
most well thought out system that I
have ever seen. This only obstacles in
its path are public resistance to this
sort o f  thing. and the price which,
though low for a control system, is
still high for the average Commodore
owner. I will watch this with interest.
Touchline
Company: Ge n  era 1 i n to  rm a 1 ion
Systems. 1 White Hart Yard, London
SE! 1NX Price: 1

Spanner
in the
Works
you rely heavily on your computer for business or
leisure activities, then a breakdown can be infuriating.
Here are a few tips on simple .
By Mike Roberts
he entire range o f  Commodore
T
computers s e t  h i g h  standards i n
design. production and reliability.
All the hardware is built up to a
speciﬁcation rather down to a price.
unlike one or two of its competitors.
Opening u p  a n y  Commodor e
computer will show a large number of
integrated circuits which are the chips
that m a k e  t h e  c omputer  w o r k .
However. they are usually the ﬁrst
items t o  produc e problems w hen
anything serious malfunctions in your
computer.
There can be other reasons for your
machine's failur e, a n d  m a n y  a r e
serious. If your guarantee has expired.
you may be faced with a hefty bill.
However, all is not lost. You can
usually trace the cause of a breakdown
to one or more of the [Cs. Replace the
chip. and the problem is solved.
Following a simple check list, can
save pounds when it comes to repairs.
\lour Options
Imagine a nightmare situation. You set
up your C64, plug everything in, and
M A I N T E N A N C E
connect the screen turn it all on. and
nothing! The screen is blank and the
keyboard dead.
What can you do?
Firstly, you should check the LED
on the top of the machine. If this is off
then the power supply has probably
blown. T his  i s  t h e  only  situation
(excepting the unlikely event o f  the
LED failing) in which the LED will not
light up. If the LED is alright, then you
must test t he c omput er.
Going Inside
First, connect a tape deck, insert a tape
in the usual manner, and press shift-
run/stop. If the tape is dead then so is
the computer.
The nex t step is  t o  check the
internals of' the machine_ Remember
that the LED power is tapped from the
supply before the fuse. The computer
takes its power after the fuse. So this is
the ﬁrst thing that must he checked. If
it has blown then you've located the
problem, and y ou c an ﬁx  i t  quite
simply.
.1 he fuse only costs a few pence and
is o f  the type BEL 3AC.i. one amp
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
94
250V, it  is located on the right hand
side near the power socket close to the
regulating and rectifying circuitry. I f
the fuse is whole, then the only other
explanation is  that a section o f  this
circuitry is blown. But this is rare, and
you would usually see the damage as
blackened fused components. If this is
the case then you need professional
help.
Chip Testing
It the computer is just behaving oddly
then you need to ascertain which chip
is causing the trouble. A lack of screen
display usually means that the video
output circuitry has blown, as this
involves a lot of discrete components.
You will also need professional help
for this_ The chip can be tested by
plugging it into a friend's C64 to see if
the same problem re-occurs.
This technique o f  using another
C64 to test chips is relatively safe. but
be careful not to force chips or bend
pins. Make sure you earth your hands
by touching something metal before
handling any components,
If your video circuitry is OK then

any other  problem w ill generate a
screen display from which vou may be
able to diagnose a fault.
Junk on the screen with a regular
pattern and an underlying picture of
the correct display indicates a R AM
problem. Professional service again
I'm afraid.
Abs olute s ile n c e  o b v io u s ly
indicates a  dead s ound c hip. T he
sound circuitry is very robust, and it is
usually the chip that is the ﬁrst to go.
If the ROMs fail. then You will be
left with a blank screen. Although this
is very unlikely as these arc amongst
the most reliable chips in the machine,
A dead processor w ill also exhibit
symptoms similar to this.
The remaining main chips are the
I/O 6.569 type. There are two types of
these, U I handles the keyboards and
joysticks. Junk being typed out on the
screen as soon as you turn it on, or a
dead keyboard, indicates either a fault
with this chip or its support circuitry.
M A I N T E N A N C E
Alternatively, older  machines ma y
have their  keyboards f ull o f  dust.
Cleaning will solve the problem.
The other chip. U2, handles most
of the main I/O with the user port and
series I/O.
The problem here is  that i t  is
difﬁcult t o  distinguish whether the
fault lies with the chip at U2 or the
device currently in use e.g. the disk
drive.
Summing Up
If you follow these simple tips you may
be able to rectify a small fault yourself,
or at least have some idea of what has
malfunctioned.
If the fault is more complex. you
need to ﬁnd a good repair shop. In this
case, i t  i s  better t o  us e a  larger
organisation rather than a one horse
outﬁt, a n d  preferably  o n e  t h a t
specialises in Commodore computers.
Repairs Touchline
I. Bateman: Tel: 0536 69454 (phone
MCE Serrices: Glyn Spencer. 33 Albert
Street. Mansﬁeld. Notts NG18 IE. Tel:
0623 31202.
Prompt Electronics: Mr Pedro. Unit 4.
15 Springﬁeld. Harrow. Middx 11A5
IQF Tel: 01 836 7166,
Nobles: Mr Jim Kennon, 14-17 Eastern
Esplande. Southend-on-Sea. Essex. Tel:
0702 63377/8.
GC Bunce and Sons: M r  Mince, 36
Burlington Road. Burnham. Bucks SI.'
78Q• Tel: 06286 6/696.
Croydon Computer Centre: D o n
Scontnu'll. 2 9  Bridgstock Rood.
Thornton Heath. Surrey CR4
IV TS Electronics: M r  Pleece. .5-9
Portland Road. Luton. Reds LU4 RAT
Tel: 0582 458375.
Micromend: i f  Buckley, T h e O ld
School. M a i n  St r e e t .  l a r c e t .
Peterborough P E 7  3DB. T el:  0733
241718.
11410
Vd00
TUC A T I S T  K W E I S
FROM AROUND 11411 WORLD
C ,01111111.11E DOVER'S GUIDE
PI MA - TIEE 'ACTS
101,1 141ED
7 1
EACH MONTH WITH
Are you receiving it?
=  
=
-
 
-
 
--
 
-
 
=
=  
=  
=  
=
 
 =•=. 
=
 
=
 
=
 
=
=  
,
Easy to understand
•
Full programme details
•
In-depth reviews
•
Interesting features
•
Questions answered
•
and more...
Each month this magazine contains all you need to know
about Satellite TV t h e  latest news, hardware and
programme reviews, answers to often-asked readers'
questions, interesting features and a comprehensive
programme listing for the next month's viewing.
YOU CAN'T AFFORD TO MISS IT!
TODAY
OUT NOW AT YOUR LOCAL NEWSAGENT
Argus Specialist Publications Ltd., No 1 Gol den Square, London W1 R 3AB
Whichk
and Video?
—  
=
--
:- 1-7 ---

A b a c u s  S o f t w a r e -  s e e  P t e c : i s i o n
A dams : of t
18 N o r w i c h  A v e n u e
R o c h d a l e
L a n c a s h i r e
ON11 S J Z
A d v a n c e d  M e m o r y  S g s t e m s
1 6 6
W a r r i n g t o n
WA4 6 0 A
ANCO
35 W e s t  H i l l
D a r t f o r d
K e n t
DA1 2 E L
A u d i o g e n i c  S o f t w a r e  L t d
PO B o x 8 8
R e a d i n g
B e r k s h i r e
RG7 4 A A
A v on P r i n t e r  T e c h n o l o g y
S w i n d o n  H o u s e
4 H o w a r d  R o a d
S o u t h v i l l e
B r i s t o l
853 1 0 H
B r a i n  B o x e s
U n i t  3 6
W a v e r t r e e  T e c h n o l o g y  P a r k
W a v e r t r e e  B o u l e v a r d  S o u t h
L i v e r p o o l
L7 S P E
M34 5 J 0
CFS 3 A S
B r o t h e r  C o m p u t e r  P e r i p h e r a l s
J o n e s  &  B r o t h e r
S h e p l e y  S t r e e t
A u d e n s h a w
M a n c h e s t e r
Ze n o n  B u s i n e s s  M a c h i n e s
Waddon H o u s e
S t a f f o r d  R o a d
C r o y d o n
S u r r e g
Ch e e t a h  M a r k e t i n g
No r b iJ r g  H o u s e
N o r b u r g  R o a d
F a i r w a t e r
C a r d i f f
CONTAC
C i t i z e n  E u r o p e  L t d
W e l l i n g t o n  H o u s e
4 - 1 0  C o w l e g  R o a d
U x b r i d g e
M i d d l e s e x
UBB 2 X N
Commodore B u s i n e s s  M a c h i n e s  U K
Commodore H o u s e
Th e  S w i t c h b a c k ,  G a r d n e r  R d
M a i d e n h e a d
B e r k s h i r e
SLB 7 X A
Co mp u n e t
S h e r r a t o n  B u s i n e s s  C e n t r e
W a d s w o r t h  R o a d
P e r r i v a l e
M i d d l e s e x
U86 7J EI
CRL
9 K i n g s  Y a r d
C a r p e n t e r s  R o a d
L o n d o n
E/ S 2 HO
D a t a p h o n e
22 A l f r i c  S q u a r e
W o o d s t e n
P e t e r b o r o u g h
PE2 O J P
B e t e l  E l e c t r o n i c s
U n i t s 8 / 8  D e w s b u r y  R u e d
F e n t o n  I n d u s t r i a l  E s t a t e
F e n t o n
S t o k e
D e l t a  P i  S o f t w a r e  L t d
8 R u s w a r p  L a n e
W h i t b y
N o r t h  Y o r k s h i r e
YO2 1 N D
D i m e n s i o n  C o m p u t e r s
2 7 - 2 9  H i g h  S t r e e t
L e i c e s t e r
LE1 4 F P
E l e c t r o  M u s i c  R e s e a r c h
14 M o u n t  C l o s e
W i c k f o r d
E s s ex
5511 8 H G
Eps on
D o r l a n d  H o u s e
388 H i g h  R o a d
Wembley
HAS B UN
TS
Ev es ham M i c r o s
6 3  B r i d g e  S t r e e t
Ev es ham
Wa re s
WR11 4 S F
FCC S y s t e m s  L i m i t e d
The O l d  A r m o u r g
C o u r t  B a r t o n
C r e w k e r e e
S o m e r s e t
TA28 7 H P
F i r e b i r d
F i r s t  F l o o r
74 N e w  O x f o r d  S t r e e t
L o n d o n
WC1A 1 P S
F i r s t l i n e  S o f t w a r e
2 0 6  G r e a t  N o r t h  R o a d
E a t o n  S o c o n
S t  N e o t s
C a m b r i d g e s h i r e
PE19 3 E F
G l e n t o p  P u b l i s h i n g
S t a n d f a s t  H o u s e
B a t h  P l a c e
H i g h  S t
B a r n e t t
ENS l E D
H&P C o m p u t e r s  U K
9 H o r n b e a m  W a l k
W it h a m
E s s ex
CM8 2 5 Z
I n c e n t i v e  S o f t w a r e
M i n e r v a  H o u s e
C a l l e v a  P a r k
A l d e r m a s t o n
B e r k s h i r e
RG7 4 0 W
J o r e t h
PO B o x  2 0
Ev es ham
War cc
WR11 5 E 6
J u k i
C/O I n t e c  2 ,  U n i t  3
Ha s s o c k s  W o o d
Wade R o a d
B a s i n g s t o k e
RG24 O NE
YOFR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
96

X o n i x
U n i t  1 3
S i r h o w y  M i l l  I n d .
T r e d e g a r
G went
NP2 4E/ 2
L o a d - I t
35 S t r e t t o n  R o a d
S h i r l e y
S o l i h u l l
Wes t M i d l a n d s
2 9 0  2 R X
Ma n o r C o u r t  S u p p l i e s
G l e n  C e l y n  M o u s e
P e n y b o n t
L l a n d r i n d o d  W e l l s
Powy s
L i n  5 S Y
M a s t e r t r o n i c
0
L o n d o n
EC2A 4 J H
M i c r o  P e r i p h e r a l s
I n t e c  2 ,  U n i t  3
Wade R o a d
B a 5 i n g s t o k e
Ha n t s
PG24 O NE
M i c r o m e d l a  C o m p u t e r  S u p p l i e s
R y d a l  M o u n t
B a k e r  S t r e e t
P o t t e r s  B a r
H e r t f o r d s h i r e
ENS 2 B P
M i c r o r e t  8 0 0
8 H e r b a l  H i l l
L o n d o n
EC1 S E J
M i c r o s n i p s
37 S e a v i e w
W a l l a s e y
M e r s e y s i d e
L4S 4 0 N
Road
M i c r o t e x t
7 B i r d l l p  C l o s e
Mo rn d e a n
H a n t s
PO8 9P W
M i r a c l e  T e c h n o l o g y
S t  P e t e r s  S t r e e t
I p s w i c h
S u f f o l k
! P I  1 X B
M u s i c  S a l e s  L t d
0
L o n d o n
Wit.) 5 1 2
E s t a t e
Pac e M i c r o  T e c h n o l o g y
J u n i p e r  W i e w
A l l e r t o n  R o a d
B r a d f o r d
Wes t  Y o r k s
61315 7 A G
P a n a s o n i c  I n d u s t r i a l  ( U K )  L t d
2 0 0 - 2 9 0  B a t h  R o a d
S l o u g h
B e r k s
SL1 S J G
P o s t r o n i x  L t d
6 F a r a d a y  C o u r t
P a r k  F a r m
W e l l i n g b o r o u g h
N o r t h a n t 5
NN8 3 X Y
P r e c i s i o n  S o f t w a r e  L t d
5 P a r k  T e r r a c e
W o r c e s t e r  P a r k
S u r r e y
K T/  7 J 2
Oume
Oume H o u s e
P a r k  W a y
Ne wb u ry
B ec k s
RG13 l E E
R i t t o r  M u s i c
24 B r o o m g r o v e  G a r d e n s
E d g wa re
M i d d l e s e x
MA8 S S J
Ro b t e k  L t d
U n i t /  I s l e w o r t h  B u s i n e s s  C o
S t  J o h n ' s  R o a d
I s l e w o r t h
M i d d l e s e x
TWI 6 N L
S m i t h  C o r o n a  ( U K )  L t d
SCM H o u s e
N o r t h  C i r c u l a r  R o a d
S t o n e b r i d g e  P a r k
L o n d o n  NW1 0
5 o n u 5  I n t e r n a t i o n a l
R. O .  B o x  1 8
W o k in g h a m
B e r k s h i r e
RG11 4 B P
S ound T e c h n o l o g y  p l c
5 L e t c h w o r t h  B u s i n e s s  C t r .
A v e n u e  O n e
L e t c h w o r t h
H e r t s
5136 2 MR
S p e c t r a v i d e o
1SS G a r t h  R o a d
Mo rd e n
S u r r e y
SM4 1 L M
S t a c k  C o m p u t e r  P r o d u c t s
Me e d mo re  ( D i s t r i b u t i o n )  L t d
28 F a r r i e r s  Wa g
N e t h e r t o n
M e r s e y s i d e
L 3 0  i X L
S t a r  M i c r o n i c s
C r a v e n  M o u s e
40 U x b r i d g e  R o a d
E a l i n g
L o n d o n
W5 2 2 5
S t em C o m p u t i n g
3 B l a c k n e s s  A v e n u e
Dundee
S c o t l a n d
002 1 E R
Sunc om
M i c r o P r o s e  L t d
2 M a r k e t  P l a c e
T e t b u r y
G l o u c e s t e r s h i r e
GL8 813A
S u p e r s o f t
W i n c h e s t e r  M o u s e
C a n n i n g  R o a d
W e a l d s t o n e
M i d d l e s e x
MA3 7 S J
S y n d r o m i c  M u s i c
2 4
L o n d o n
N10 3 N F
Te l e c o m  G o l d
5 0 - 5 8  S t  T h o m a s  S r e e t
L o n d o n
SE1 3 0 U
T r i c o m p u t e r  S o f t w a r e
1 5 1 - 1 6 9  U x b r i d g e  R o a d
E a l i n g
L o n d o n
W13 9 A U
T r i u m p h  A d l e r  ( U K )  L t d
OEM S p e c i a l  P r o d u c t s  0 1 v
27 G o s w e l l  R o a d
L o n d o n  E C1
T r o j a n  P r o d u c t s
c / o  C o m p u t e r  C u p b o a r d '
53 B r u n s w i c k  R o a d
E a l i n g
L o n d o n
W ig m o r e  H o u s e
113 G o d w i n  R d
Fo r  e s t a t e
L o n d o n
E7 0 2 W
Y o r k  E l e c t r o n i c  R e s e a r c h
Th e  ﬁs h e r g a t e  C e n t r e
F i s h e r g a t e
Y o r k
N o r t h  Y o r k s h i r e
Y01 4 A 8
L t d
YOUR COMMODORE HARDWARE BUYERS GUIDE
97

THE M PS803
BLANK 5 1 /4
P URCHAS E D
50 1 0 0  1 0  in a
11O. case
U N B R A N D E D  
T
R
I
A
L
 1 0  2 5
5548 TP I 
4
.
5
0
 9 . 0 0
17.00
3100
5.50
0 5 4 8  TP1 
5
.
5
0
 1 1 . 0 0
19.00
35.00
6.50
DS96 TP I 
6
.
5
0
 1 3 . 0 0
21.00
37 0 0
7.50
0 5 9 6  I P I  FLIP  S IDE  
7
0
0
 1 4 . 0 0
22.00
38.00
8.00
M IM IC FLIP  S ID E D  DS 96 TP I 
8
.
9
5
 2 0 . 0 0  3 8 . 0 0  7 0 . 0 0
9.95
M IM IC H I G H  DE NS ITY  1 .6 m e g 
2
3
 00 5 2 . 0 0  1 0 0  00 1 8 0  00
24 00
C OLOU R E D  -  mix A m a lc h or  all •ri one  colour
100 OS 48TP 5.25" DISKS & 100 CAP LOCKING DISK BOX
SS48 TP I 
6
.
5
0
 1 2 . 0 0
22.00
42.00
7.50
0 5 4 8  TP I 
7
.
5
0
 1 4 . 0 0
24.00
44 00
8 50
0S 96 TP I 
8
.
0
0
 1 6 . 0 0
28.00
50.00
9.00
SPECIAL P R IC E  II DY S AN DS 48TP I B OX  O F  10 ON LY
10.95
LOCKING DISK BOXES
5 1 ,4  H O L D S  50 -  
7
,
9
5
 5  1 .4
9.95
3 1 ;2  H O L D S  40 -  
7
.
9
5
 6 0 ; 9 0  IH OLOS  60 3
or 9 0 3  1 ,2  )
9.95
25 SS
48IP
5.25" DISKS & 100 CAP LOCKING DISK BOX
16_03
SO SS
48TP 5.25" DISKS & 100 CAP LOCKING DISK BOX
25.00
100 SS 48TP
5.25°' DISKS & 100 CAP LOCKING DISK BOX
39.95
25 OS
48TP 5.25" DISKS & 100 CAP LOCKING DISK BOX
17.00
50 OS
48TP 5.25" DISKS & 100 CAP LOCKING DISK BOX
26.50
100 OS 48TP 5.25" DISKS & 100 CAP LOCKING DISK BOX
42.00
AT IA ST
Top quality perform
from your MPS803 Printer. Simply ﬁt 'PRINTKIT IV
 directly to your MPS803 printer and you will get •
PRINTKIT IV
+TRUE DESCENDERS
+ u u [ L E E L L a wa
•Ft B O L D O P TI O N
•  27.4.L I C
And up to 50% speed increase!
All facilities are fully CBM compatible -
a very impressive upgrade kit" CCI Nov '87.
'Will give your MPS803 a new lease of life" YC Dec '87.
Send just £30.00 to join the hundreds of satisﬁed
customers.
NEW! Coming soon._ Connect your MPS803 DIRECTLY
to your Amiga, ST, PC,... Full information when you order
'PRINTKIT IV'.
We also supply: Ribbons, Tractor feeds, Serial leads etc.
Call for details.
AVON PRINTER TECHNOLOGY
SWIN DON HOUSE, 4 HOWARD ROAD, SOUTHVILLE,
BRISTOL B53 1 QH. Telephone BRISTOL (0272) 667167
tenqui nes frorn non-UK Distributor% welcome)• add t2 00 P&P tor overseas orders
7 r.ldvs •Jelwery Full guarantee
YO UR
%
A
%
/ 4
,
* , , •
,
0  ' d
. " '-'4, (
e &  .
/. •
17 
•  . 
-
 
_
/ ;  ' •  
"
 es; , 
N
-0,  ,
d
1
/ 4  pe , 
r
.
,
,
,
_
 0 , .  % ,
4 0  Cfpfr, 
0
 P
6
. ,•
. * c - 6 • . 4
‘
%.
... 
-
-
.
)
 
'
'
.
/
 
%
's;'i• * I . ; ,  e / f
%
t ••••• 
%
- 
•
 r , „ . . „ ,  r . ,
• 
v
!
,
.
 4
•
‘
.. 
.
1
;
,
.
., 
.
,
 
‘
t
•
.•
6
0  t
4
.0
9'17
t; t
cb,
6
CAN HELP.
•
Per
MAIL ORDER SPECIALISTS
INCREDIBLE LOW PRICES!
ALL DISKS CARRY A NO QUIBBLE REPLACEMENT GUARANTEE ARE
CERTIFIED 100% ERROR FREE & COME WITH LABELS, 5 1/4'• ALSO
HAVE SLEEVES& WRITE PROTECTS. FLIP SIDFn DISKS HAVE 21NDEX
HOLES AND 2 NOTCHES.
SPECIAL OFFER!
5 1 /4" DISKS FROM AS LITTLE AS 33 PENCE
_ 4
• s
' o
.r
••° * ,
'
,
- - t %
STORT SOFT
TRYING TO USE YOUR COMPUTE-IV.,
COMMODORE'
Send this form with sour remitianee to:
I NFO NE T LI D. ,  5, River ParA ENtate.
Berkhdensted, Hens 11P4 1HL
1 MEG AMIGA CUMANA DRIVES E 1 2 9 . 0 0
0
add 10% and r em ain povnets Srethno by bank & air  or Intl, m o
o f h e t
ACCE S S  M A S TE R  C A R D
CRE DIT C A R D  OR D E R  LIN E  -  0279 89509 24 H OU R S  A  DAY , 1 DAY S  A WE E K
V A T  P A P  IN C  N O  H ID D E N  E X TRAS  -  W H A T  Y OU  SEE IS  WH A T Y OU  P AY
18 CROWN CLOSE. SHEERING. BISHOP'S STORTFORD,
HERTS. CM22 7NX
12 issues UK 113.20
12 issues Europe £20.90
12 issues Middle East £21.20
12 issues Far East £24.00
12 issues Rest of World £21.60

Cut Price Disks fro
Dire D i  u  lies
' 2 5  dis k s
t  1 4 . 9 9
Packed in 25's, complete with envelopes,
50 dis k s
C 2 7 . 9 9
hub-rings Dis k s  individually certiﬁed and
100 dis k s
C 4 9 . 9 9
sides) t o 96Ipi means  no problems  and
200 dis k s
C 9 6 . 9 9
Lifetime Warranty
250 dis k s
500 dis k s
£ 1 1 9 9 9
E229.99
ALL PRICES INCLUDE VAT
1000 dis k s
E399.99
& DELIVERY TO YOUR DOOR!
NO HIDDEN EXTRAS
RA
OFFER 1 P remiu m Universals One disk for ail reasons!
The Premium Universal disk tested to DSDD 96tpi - suitable for all drives needing high quality
media iSSDD, DSDD 40/80 track)
labels,WP tabsand
r
ir
isk Su
0 1
O
10
2
50
100
2
2 5
4
5
1 0
- 3.5" Media Life Disics
O D
S S  
e
5.99
13 9
2 6 .
E6 4  9
t  _  99 
1
3
 , 9 9
C1 1
c 2
CE.24924999999999 Ec 551999 9999
c 49 • E - 1 0 9 9 -
NEW LOWER PRICES
3.5 d is k s  in  plas tic  library
boxes
by a  leading m a
Made 
n
u
-
lacturet, all out disks are in-
dividually certitied to 135tp1.
Don't tercet the price includes
VAT, delis /en" a n d  lib ra ry
boxes'
di
OFFER 7 3 M  8c Verbatim
Brand L d
skS 3M/ Verb
SSOO 4 8 t p i 7 4 4 / 5 2 5  20 disks £ 2 5 9 9
O S00 48t pi 7 4 5 / 5 5 0  20 disks £ 2 9 9 9
0 8 0 0  9 6 f p i 7 4 7 / 5 5 7  20 disks £ 3 7 9 9
3. 5- disks
DSHO 96t pi 7 9 9 / HD 2 0  disks £ 4 9 9 9
13800 / 3 5 t p t
SSOO / 3 5 t p i
20 disk$ £ 3 9 9 9
OSOCI Hig h  Dens it 1 0  disks 
.
20 disks C49,99
includes V A y
T and der/•
y
Cash n 49aers
 Carry
p
these a v o u n t e .
are
then do . : o e f ,
n ' t  o moss Our CRAZY
k/l4, r i r e s  tor 20 disks
Remember there's no
extras. rust tetritir value
OFFER 10 B o x  Clever
Safe! Clean! Tidy
Shiers 6  stylish plas tic  library
cases for 10 disks VAT & carriage
included.
3, 5" S l i m p a k
5. 25" V is io n -1
E8.99
£8.99
Loc k able Box es
3. 5" TDS O 4 0  40/50 disk box E 9 . 9 9
TDS080 80/90 disk box £ 1 2 9 9
5. 25" TDS050 S O  disk box ( 9 . 9 9
TDS100 1
IBM parallel printer cable C 9 . 9 9
OFFER2  Rainbows
Sets ol 5 colours in each pack Universal coloured disks to code your
tiles and programs Without doubt the best value colou red disks on the
E 1 8 , 9 9  P a c I t e d  i n  ' s ,  
t
e
 i t
market 
h
. iSSOD. DSDD 4 0 8 0  track) 
2
5
 c o m p l e  
w
envelopes, labels, W P  t abs  and
ndividually c er-
25 dis k s
SO dis k s
100 dis k s
200 dis k s
250 d t s
500 dis k s
1000 dis k s
OFFER 8
20 disks
40 disks
60 disk
80 disks
100 disks
200 disks
500 disks
Dept H  /B
E 3 5 - 9
E 6 9 . 9 9
C 1 2 9 .
E1 49-9
C 2 7 9 -
E 4 9
OFFER 4 H Ig rad e  Doubles 8c
PC Preformatted
Hlgrade 
P
C
Doubles  Fo r m a t t e d
25 dis k s  
E
 1 2 . 9 9  C  1 8 . 9 9
50 disks 
2
3
.
9
9
 E  3 5 . 9 9
100 dis k s  
E
 4 5 _ 9 9  C  6 9 . 9 9
200 disks 
C
 8 9 . 9 9  £ 1 2 9 . 9 9
250 disks E 1 0 5 . 9 9  £ 1 4 9 . 9 9
500 disks E 1 9 9 . 9 9  £ 2 7 9 . 9 9
1000 disks £ 3 5 9 9 9  £ 4 9 9 . 9 9
HI-ﬂyers
PC-AT H i g h  Dens it y  Dis k s
made b y  o n e  o f  o u r ma jo r
manufacturers. S u it a b le  f o r
PC-AT and other High Density
drives. Lifetime warranty
Total price ino extras)
C 3 2 . 9 9
C 6 2 , 9 9
C 8 9 . 9 9
£119. 99
£139. 99
£259. 99 111'
E599.99
tested Ion both
higher reliability
hob-rings. D s
tilted and tested (on both sides) to
961pt me a n s  n o  problems  a n d
higher reliability LitelimeWarranhy.
Premium quality, individually
certiﬁed to OS 48tpi. Made
for the PC. giving premium
quality at budget prices
Why not spoil yourself, and
buy them formatted- a little
extra saves a lot! There's
never a  d is k  f ormat t ed
when you need it.
OFFER 9
3" CF2 disks
Maxell or Panasonic 3"
CF2 disks
10 disks 
C
 2 5 . 9 9
20 disks 
C
 4 9 . 9 9
50 disks 
C
1
0
9
.
9
9
100 disks E 2 0 9 , 0 0
T & carriage included
l
q
=
day des
-  at no ertr
E3
FREEPOST, 129 High St
20 dis k s
40 dis k s
60 dis k s
80 dis k s
100 dis k s
200 disks
SOO dis k s
1000 disks
OFFER 3 Fliplaisohn'ndiCskasn
y  from
es
pire t  Disk Supplies
tor 88C. APPLE. Comrnoctore etc
Reversible disk tested both sides. 2 notches and 2 index holes 1 ded
This is the disk tor turnong,
25 disks
50 disks
/ 0 0  disks
200 disks
250 disks
500 disks
1000 disks
t H ampton
•
E 1
c 35.99
c 59,99
E129.99
E / 49. 99
C
E
OFFER 5 Bargain Box
Price per order qty.APProx price per
disk ex VAT
onto, only
48
44
42
40
.38
36
35
34
C 1 0 . 9 9
E 1 9 . 9 9
E 2 8 . 9 9
E 3 6 . 9 9
C 4 2 . 9 9
E 8 2 _ 9 9
C199_99
C389.99
ow to order
DIAL-A-DISK ON 01-979 7811, and give your
ACCESS or VISA number and expiry dale
2 S e n d  your cheque etc. to Direct Disk Supplies Ltd_
Ofﬁcial Orders, Bona-ﬁde orders from Universities,
Colleges, Schools, Charities, etc are very welcome.
Cash orders, no mi • v a l u e .
Account orders. mi v a l u e  C30_
Packed i n  25's , c omplet e wit n
envetopes /abets. W P  tabs  and
hub-rings Dis k s  individually c er
titled and tested (on both sides) to
96tpi me a n s  n o  probtems  a n d
higher re/lability Lifetime Warranty
Branded S C O T C H
lmade by 3M1 SSDD
48tpi at prices below
other people's  plain
label. Certiﬁed error
free and tested by 3M.
disks have hub-rings,
tyvek envelopes and
labels.
Stocks are decreasing
rapidly, t h e s e  h a v e
been extremely pop-
ular
Middlesex TW12 1BR

ccountability I sic. responsible, liable.
A i 4
With a print speed of 480cps or rather 252
v
.Amo
accountability, ideal fo or invoice runs, statements, reports
and much, much more. When you want fast throughput
at an economical price you can't get better value for
money. Furthermore, there is a whole family of Micro P
matrix and daisywheel printers each tailored for
individual needs, whether for home, business or
educational use. This accounts for the fact that in a
recent industry survey of matrix printers, the MP range
MPI
A low h i g h
performance printer using
the latest i t
pr. attire print that makes
dtaft quality I.
M AI. Speed:137AT, ilra
27 N1,14. Columns: aft
Compatibility: IBM
Ep
a n t i .
M Pi 65
Thi, I .
N tAt printer if  fers the user
the veri best in  Inv/ oco:t
matrix printing. Speed;
I 61Icp, d r a t, n c p ., NI.( 1
Cuiumeh: MO. Compatibility:
IBM F . P r i c e :  2 2 9 .
MP201
This 136 e lu m n . 2 ( a t e m
offers the hest value in the inarket place -
pod 1110 buy hetter, A nano
are available. Speed: 211u,p, lr, f t
M M . CoIumm 1 3 6 . Compatibility: ISM
Epson. Price: CM%
was voted as some of the best buys - another example of
MP printers accountability.
For a copy of the best buys report and print samples
contact:-
MIP micro
Peripherals Ild R P  m k t ! "  P
Inlet: 2. Wade Road. itasinestok
I hanitahi r. R t i 21 ONE.
Tel: 0256 473232 (32
Whatever the Words - We've Got the Abilities.
M P IMO 'Pictured al). ive I.
Spord: litoep
4111111r,
&
M P26
feature rich very quiet (57(IH4
printer. Universal compatibility
with almost all Nino 'nal
m pu tcr% at an unbeatable prim.
Speed; 26cpa. Column.: 132.
Compatibility
Interim,. Parallel +  icrit il. Price:
t 259..
All price,' an. R RP Ex VAf . and hpeci licut ions subject to ehanile at anytime. A l l  trademarks reciognisedi.
Unit 5/6. Newhallhey Road. kawtenstall.
1 , 1 1 1 1 , i nti  I ry  
6
H
L
Tel: 0706 217799 t ill Lamest.
1
M Pin
A e r y  fast. quiet pnn ter parked with
features. compatible with virtually all
ro t outer, ;inil at ii fantastic prier.
Speed: tilers, Column.: 112,
Compatibility: F Ii n.h I 6:111 Interface:
Pa:aliel P r i b r i r :  t 379,

