“Your Ticket To An Online Fortune” 
1 | P a g e  
YYOOU
UR
R  TTIICCK
KEETT  TTOO  AANN  OONNLLIINNEE  FFOOR
RTTU
UNNEE!!  
 
“Thank you very much for purchasing this fantastic eBook; you are now a step closer 
to your online earning success!” 
 
Earning and income disclaimer: 
This eBook was brought to you with the only intention to help you as much as possible to make you a 
steady income of $200 a day; we have heard very good words from previous people who had special 
access to this method. This method was highly successful for me too and now it’s my main income 
provider. Nevertheless, I cannot give you a full guarantee that you will earn this amount, but being unable 
to give you a guarantee, I will give you full assistance and coaching if you are unable to earn within two 
weeks. You will get familiar with the assistance by the end of this eBook. Thank you for understanding! 
 
On the next 23 pages, I will personally show you how to make over $200 a day
I have been performing this marvelous method for years and I reached the $200 a 
day milestone in my first week. I was a total newbie at the business and I had no one 
to guide me through the process. Imagine how much you can make with this method 
now that you have purchased this eBook! 
 in 
less than a week with a brilliant money making method which involves creating 
mobile websites for selected businesses. Best of all, this money generating method 
doesn’t require a special skill for creating such websites! 
What makes this method so special is that it is perfect for both, the newbies and the 
experts. It requires no investment from your side at all! All the expenses are 
covered by your clients’ payments, so basically, all you have to invest is a little time 
and effort at the beginning while you’re new to the business. 
This method has the ability to make you a living online if you go through my easy-to-
follow instructions. Now, if you want to succeed, make sure to read every single 
word of this eBook carefully! Let me begin to explain to you the method thoroughly, 
so that you can have a clearer idea of what you are going to deal with. 
 

“Your Ticket To An Online Fortune” 
2 | P a g e  
W
Whhaatt  M
Maakkeess  TThhiiss  M
Meetthhoodd  SSuucccceessssffuull??  
As mentioned previously, this fantastic way of earning you a living online involves 
making mobile websites for various businesses which already have their websites 
but which are not designed for performing on mobile phones as well. 
Now, let’s briefly discuss why having a mobile-friendly website can help a business. 
The number of mobile internet users is rapidly growing. There are no exact figures 
on the users of mobile Internet, but analysts believe that by the end of 2010 the 
number of mobile Internet users will reach 1 billion users or more. 
The major websites, such as YouTube, Facebook and Yahoo already have their 
website specially made for mobile use. In top of that, Google alone has developed a 
special search engine just for mobile Internet. All this can serve as a proof that 
mobile Internet is taking the market! 
 

“Your Ticket To An Online Fortune” 
3 | P a g e  
Another prediction says that by 2012, the number of Internet capable mobile 
phones will be equal to the number of the people on Earth. China alone, as of June 
2009, had 155 million users
You don’t believe these figures? Well, I didn’t believe my eyes at first, either. Take a 
look for yourself in here: 
 of mobile Internet. As you can see, the picture above 
shows the mobile Internet growth until July 2008. Just imagine how much it must 
have grown until now! 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mobile_Internet_growth 
Apart from all this, it is also important to discuss who uses mobile Internet the most. 
The answer to this question would probably be that the biggest number of mobile 
Internet users are the busy people who use Internet on the go. Tourists also use 
mobile Internet very much, and while traveling to a city, they use their mobile 
phone to connect to the Internet and search for hotels, restaurants and other places 
of interest. This is one of the major reasons why businesses such as hotels or 
restaurants need a good website for mobile devices. 
 

“Your Ticket To An Online Fortune” 
4 | P a g e  
TThhee  GGeenniiuuss  M
Meetthhoodd  EExxppllaaiinneedd  
As said previously, this method includes making mobile websites for various 
business owners who already have a website for PC but not for mobile phones. You 
will be making the mobile websites and it’s extremely easy to do them, I will explain 
it to you later in details. Firstly, your only preoccupation should be getting clients. 
This normally is hard to do, but I will present you with a wonderful, effortless way 
to get tons of clients everyday. 
In the meantime, the number of business owners who seek for a mobile website is 
pretty high, so this will be a very profitable business. Nevertheless, you won’t be 
looking for already interested business owners who have thought of mobile 
websites. In the contrary, you are going to approach business owners who haven’t 
heard much of mobile websites and you will ask them if they need a mobile website. 
You will outline them the true advantages of why having a mobile website can help 
their business and with my help, you will write an e-mail to which they can’t say no. 
You will develop the website easily following my instructions and you will make 
plenty of money this way! If you devote enough time to this method, I am telling you 
that it can make you a living online! 
As all other make-money-online methods, only the beginning of implementing the 
method might be hard to you. It might be hard until you get used to the method and 
I am telling you that on your first week you will most certainly make your first sale! 
And only one sale will bring you about $200. Imagine if you’re making ten sales a 
day, which is also easy! 
Best of all, at the end I will show you how to make this earning method completely 
auto-pilot! By auto-pilot I mean that you will get some people to outsource you and 
they will all handle the work, which involves getting the clients and building the 
mobile websites. Your outsource people will get a pretty small share, while you will 
get the big bucks when all you do is nothing! 
 
 
 
 

“Your Ticket To An Online Fortune” 
5 | P a g e  
HHoow
w  M
Muucchh  YYoouu  W
Wiillll  CChhaarrggee  FFoorr  YYoouurr  SSeerrvviiccee  
First of all, let’s discuss the price that you will charge to create a mobile website for 
your customers. A simple mobile website takes less than an hour to develop and the 
whole development process is done online on a PC. It normally costs $12 a month to 
host the website and you will charge this fee to customer directly and each month. 
However, what we are doing here is creating a price for developing the website. This 
is the price that you charge for your personal services. There are people who charge 
as much as $500 for developing a mobile website but we’re going to stick with more 
down-to-earth prices. I have started charging people $197 and throughout all the 
years I’ve been on this business, I’ve never changed the price. It’s affordable, 
realistic and very profitable. 
You might even try charging $300 and you’ll still have a lot of costumers lining in for 
you, but it’s always better to start off this business with a price close to $200. You 
can even make it more appealing, such as $197, which is a proven way to make your 
costumers think less of the price. On the whole, pay close attention to this matter, 
this can either make you or break you. Get to know with your competitors and your 
price. All in all, $200 seems more than reasonable. 
Why are we charging this much for a simple, one-hour job? The answer is simple, 
not all business owners have the time to devote to such small details. There are even 
clients who will think you’re doing a favor to them, and you are! For you, this is just 
like a dream job getting paid $200 an hour for so simple assignments. 
Still, there is yet another fee that you will have to charge your customers monthly. 
It’s the hosting which the mobile website requires. It costs you $12 but I normally 
charge my clients $15 in order to cover the transfer fees. You may also offer one free 
month of hosting and you can easily cover that with the payment of $200, but in 
order to have a pure profit, I usually charge my customers $15 every month. 
Aside from that, I also offer my customers an optional service and that is website 
maintenance. This is indeed a good way to make more money and what your 
customers usually ask in return for the maintenance may be a few changes to the 
website every here and then. Now the price is totally up to you, but I usually charge 
$80, and in fact, it’s a big money maker compared to what you will have to do. And 
bam! You’ve just solved yourself a pretty big problem. 
  

“Your Ticket To An Online Fortune” 
6 | P a g e  
M
Maakkiinngg  tthhee  m
moonneeyy  
This whole money making process can be done in two very simple steps
 
. Step #1 
involves spotting clients for your business and contacting them, while step #2 
involves creating the website for interested costumers. I will explain each of these 
steps in details. 
SSTTEEPP  11::  FFIINNDD  PPOOTTEENNTTIIAALL  CCLLIIEENNTTSS  AANNDD  CCOONNTTAACCTT  TTHHEEM
M  
Most people who are into selling products or services think that finding a client can 
be extremely hard. It does take some energy and some time but in your case it’s 
much, much easier to get clients, especially if you use a developed a strategy which I 
will demonstrate to you carefully. 
What is so good about this case is that most companies that run a website don’t have 
their website specifically developed for mobile use and most people you will contact 
might be interested in getting it done. You may get a few clients if you contact large 
local companies and ask if they want their website developed for mobile use, but 
this is not a steady way to get clients. However, that is also worth a try because the 
interest for mobile Internet websites is constantly growing. 
However, the strategy I am going to show you is brilliant and it will probably get at 
least 1-2 clients a day and each of them will bring you massive profits. This strategy 
involves e-mail marketing and is very effective. Basically, e-mail marketing is finding 
some potential clients, getting their e-mails and sending them an e-mail where you 
tell them about your services. 
The first thing you would want to do here is to find the potential clients. In other 
words, a potential client is anyone who has a website but it is always more effective 
if you contact business owners, because they want to expand their business even on 
the mobile Internet field. Developing a mobile website will be beneficial for both, 
you and them. For them it is advantageous because that way they will get clients 
who browse the Internet on mobile, while for you the benefit is clear, you will earn 
money. 
 

“Your Ticket To An Online Fortune” 
7 | P a g e  
Finding a client is pretty easy, and on this strategy we will use our good old friend 
Google to get some potential clients. You will use Google Maps to find certain 
businesses in certain areas. The keyword you are going to type in Google Maps will 
be made up by ‘area & business’ for instance, ‘Seattle restaurants’. 
 
 
 
And this is what our search has returned us. Wow, there are a lot of restaurants in 
Seattle; it’s a great city by the way! Okay, we’re going to click on the highlighted 
business and look into it. Click on ‘more info’, you can see it clearly next to the title. 

“Your Ticket To An Online Fortune” 
8 | P a g e  
 
 
This is what showed up. Nice place they got there. I’ve been there and it’s wonderful. 
Honestly, I could only afford the trip to Seattle with the money I made online from 
this method, but that was a long time ago. Okay, back in topic. Let’s click on their 
website and see what it looks like on a mobile device. 
To see what a website looks like on a mobile device, I use a free online tool that I call 
the ‘Mobile Magic’. This is the website: 
http://testiphone.com/ 
It’s a pretty popular website and it will show you exactly what your website looks 
like in iPhone and it be perfect for our purposes. Now, let’s check their website out: 

“Your Ticket To An Online Fortune” 
9 | P a g e  
 
Very beautiful website, but looks kind of ugly in mobile devices such as iPhone. If we 
contact them about creating a mobile website for them, we will be doing well for 
their business. A large number of people check out restaurants, clubs, bars etc. on 
the go, using their mobile device. Having a mobile-friendly website is the best thing 
that could happen to these businesses, so that’s why we’re going to approach the 
manager and offer him our brilliant services. 

“Your Ticket To An Online Fortune” 
10 | P a g e  
 
 
 
I searched for the contact page, which will be present in 99.99% of the websites, 
and I copied the e-mail. We’re going to send an e-mail to the manager now. This e-
mail has to tell about who you are, what you do and what you can offer. You should 
put in the spotlight every single advantage that mobile websites can have for 
business owners. You should put a lot of time on the e-mail because this is what 
you’re going to get the clients with. This e-mail strategy is called e-mail marketing 
and hopefully, it will be very effective in your case. 
 

“Your Ticket To An Online Fortune” 
11 | P a g e  
Meanwhile, to help you and your business, I have already written you a wonderful e-
mail which you can use for your e-mail marketing. All you have to do is to edit the 
parts that clearly need to be edited: 
 
Dear Sir or Madam, 
 
Please allow me to introduce myself, I am YOUR NAME, SURNAME and I come from 
YOUR LOCATION. I recently visited your website and I must say that I like it, the 
person who developed it has done a wonderful job. Nevertheless, I just checked 
what your website looks like on a mobile device and it does look unprofessional. 
Have a look for yourself here: http://testiphone.com/ 
By profession I am a mobile website developer and I offer my services to business 
owners such as you, in order to expand their business on the profitable field of 
mobile Internet. You probably may be wondering why you need a mobile website. 
Well, the answer is clear; most people who search for BUSINESS (ex. Restaurants, 
bars etc.) in your city, they do it while they’re out and use their mobile phone. 
As you could witness it yourself, your website on a mobile device is not that pretty 
but with my help, you can start getting tons of new clients. Not only that I will set up 
a mobile website for you, but I also will optimize it for search engines, so that your 
website shows higher on search engines results. 
Now, regarding to the price, I can do all this for a reasonable charge of INPUT PRICE 
(preferably around $200), and INPUT PRICE (preferably around $15) a month to 
cover hosting fees.  If you are interested email me back and I can have the site set up 
for you in less than 24 hours. 
You can see examples of my work at SAMPLE SITE.  
(You can leave this line 
out to start, but once you get a few sites up you’ll definitely want to show examples.  Or 
take advantage of the offer at the end for starting sample sites.) 
Please let me know what you think. 
Sincerely, 
YOUR FULL NAME 

“Your Ticket To An Online Fortune” 
12 | P a g e  
That e-mail is really something! It will probably get you a lot of clients, and all it 
needs is a few edits that are only necessary. You can work on your own e-mail, but it 
is better to use that e-mail in the beginning. Now, you should also understand that 
not all people reply. There are people that receive such e-mails all the time and they 
only ignore them. 
The secret to success in this method is not to give up. After you’ve sent a few e-
mails, at least some people will reply to tell you they’re interested in your service! If 
they don’t, keep on trying because believe me, the beginning might be a little hard 
until you get used to the method, but then, it becomes just a money making routine! 
Now, let’s assume one person replied. You’ve probably got yourself a client. If 
someone took the time to reply and asked you a few questions, then he’s probably 
setting eyes on your services. You’ve just accomplished the first step successfully; 
it’s time to move to the next step! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

“Your Ticket To An Online Fortune” 
13 | P a g e  
SSTTEEPP  22::  DDEEVVEELLOOPP  TTHHEE  M
MOOBBIILLEE  W
WEEBBSSIITTEE  
Now, believe me or not, this is the easiest step of all! This is what this whole method 
is about and it’s extremely easy to do this! Please note that you don’t need any 
special skill to develop a mobile website, all you need to complete this task is some 
time.  
The time that this step needs is about 1 hour! That’s right, you’re getting paid $200 
for a one hour job!
We’re all set and we can begin the work. The first thing that we ought to do is to find 
a website where we can develop a mobile website. There are tons of them, but I 
would highly recommend you to use one of them, which is: 
 This is not, in any way, taking advantage of business owners by 
overcharging them. Most of them don’t have an hour to waste on a mobile website 
because they have bigger things to do. But a mobile website for them could mean a 
lot of big, huge profits! 
http://www.mobisitegalore.com/ 
This is what this fantastic website looks like: 
 

“Your Ticket To An Online Fortune” 
14 | P a g e  
We still have to pay for the hosting, but we will directly charge that to the business 
owner. Now let’s start building a mobile website: 
 
 
 
 
Pick one of the numerous designs that you can see. You can afterwards change the 
colors of the design, the header, footer and of course, the text in it. For now, just pick 
the design that looks the best. 
 
 

“Your Ticket To An Online Fortune” 
15 | P a g e  
 
 
 
Here you can change the colors of the design, header, footer etc. The color doesn’t 
matter that much, virtually all the colors seem nice. About the header, it’s always for 
the best to upload the company’s logo. If you upload the logo, it simply looks better. 
 

“Your Ticket To An Online Fortune” 
16 | P a g e  
 
 
Here you can add as many pages as you need. You can select some from the left or 
create your own. You should pay close attention to the pages, these one will be very 
crucial for a mobile website. You should also ask your client about what pages he 
wants. 

“Your Ticket To An Online Fortune” 
17 | P a g e  
 
 
This is a general preview of what the mobile website will look like. You will be able 
to edit the text and each page individually right after you sign-up for this service. 

“Your Ticket To An Online Fortune” 
18 | P a g e  
 
 
 
Fill in correctly all the info. Now it’s time to discuss about the packs. There are 
various packs available, to be more precise, there are four packs. These packs 
represent the hosting for the mobile website and these charge you a specific price 
each month. You will charge your customer every month in order to cover the 
expenses. Let’s compare each of the packs. 

“Your Ticket To An Online Fortune” 
19 | P a g e  
 
The Starter Pack is the cheapest with $8 a month but it really doesn’t offer much. My 
favorite one is the Professional Pack, which is only $12
It also offers the “Click to Call” button, once you press it, it will allow you to talk to 
the business owner directly. That’s very good too! On the other hand, the Advanced 
Pack is $17 a month and it offers not many more things than the previous pack. 
 a month and it offers most 
things you need for a wonderful mobile website! First of all, it will let you optimize it 
for search engines, which is something you promised your costumers to do. It offers 
maps and directions, which is too essential for a successful business website.  
After you make the purchase, it’s all history. You will gain access to a dashboard 
where you can edit the page one by one. You also will have a button for search 
engine optimization. Generally, it takes about an hour
 
 to make such a website and 
you will earn $200 only for that! Well, I believe this also concludes the second step! 

“Your Ticket To An Online Fortune” 
20 | P a g e  
OOPPTTIIOONNAALL  SSTTEEPP::  M
MAAKKEE  TTHHEE  EEAARRNNIINNGGSS  AAUUTTOO--PPIILLOOTT!!  
Now, this is an optional step but it can be extremely rewarding! This extremely 
quick step will show you how to make this whole process auto-pilot and it will take 
you a few hours to complete this step. What this step is all about is getting 
outsourcers
In this case, you will have to get separate outsourcers; one or a few outsourcers will 
send that e-mail to several business owners every day, while the other outsourcer 
will build your mobile websites. There are many places to find these outsourcers, 
but I mostly use oDesk and Freelancer where you can get the outsourcers completely 
for free and there I usually get cheap work for great services. 
, in other words, people who work for you to do the entire job. 
Regarding to the first outsourcer, it is best to make his payment by share. For 
example, for every client that he brings to you, he would get $50. To you, giving $50 
is really nothing compared to the fact that you won’t have to do anything at all. You 
can hire several outsourcers at once to bring you more profit. You can hire 10 
outsourcers at once, or 20 of them, you won’t have to pay any of them until they 
make sales! 
However, make sure to select your outsourcers very, very carefully. There are plenty 
of lazy people who try for a few days and then they quit e-mailing, and you certainly 
wouldn’t want to be dealing with such people. On the other hand, the payment that 
you’re giving them is also very reasonable because if he makes four sales, he can get 
$200, but you’ll get the rest! 
Regarding to the second outsourcer, you need him to build your mobile websites. 
You can also get him on oDesk or Freelancer and you will pay him much less. You 
shouldn’t mention that you’re getting paid $200 for the website because after some 
time he might ask for a raise. You can pay this outsourcer $10 for each website that 
he creates. 
Again, this is NOT
 
 you taking advantage of the situation. He is getting paid $10/hour 
for a very simple job, and in many places that is a great salary! You most probably 
will need only one outsourcer for this purpose, or maybe two, so make sure to pick 
this outsourcer extremely carefully. This outsourcer is much more important than 
the first outsourcers. 

“Your Ticket To An Online Fortune” 
21 | P a g e  
The second outsourcer doesn’t have to be qualified for creating mobile websites, but 
preferably he has to be American or English native, or at least speak the language 
very fluently. He will be in charge of creating your websites so this outsourcer will 
be your most important employee, and he’s getting paid well enough. 
This concludes your earning on auto-pilot. The only thing you will have to do is get 
the information of your client from outsourcer #1, receive the payment from him, 
and show his info to outsourcer #2. So, you’re getting all the fun and without no 
hard work at all! 
Now let’s calculate how much you will make on auto-pilot. Each sale will get you 
$200. Let’s remove the expenses from outsourcer #1 who will take $50 for every 
successful sale. Now it’s $150. Let’s also remove the expenses from outsourcer #2, 
who will take $10 out of this. Now it’s $140. You’re making on autopilot $140! Sure, 
it’s not as good as making $200, but still, you’re not working at all for this money! 
You will most probably have at least two sales a day if you hire 10 outsourcers. Two 
sales a day will make you $280! Three sales will make you $420
After a few months, you can get as much as 100 outsourcers. The best thing about 
this all is that you don’t have to pay a single cent to your employees until you make 
profit yourself. 100 outsourced workers will get you 
. 
at least 40 sales a day, and 
you’re making $5600 a day
 
. So, think about this! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

“Your Ticket To An Online Fortune” 
22 | P a g e  
AA  QQUUIICCKK  RREECCAAPP  OOFF  AALLLL  TTHHAATT  HHAASS  BBEEEENN  SSAAIIDD  
 
 This wonderful method can get you at least $200 a day within your first 
week of work, and best of all, it requires no investment at all! 
 This method involves creating mobile websites for business owners. You will 
contact the business owners, outline the advantages of having a mobile 
website and finally build their mobile website. 
 It is believed that by the end of 2010 the number of mobile Internet users will 
reach 1 billion or more. 
 Each sale will get you around $200. For you, it’s extremely beneficial! For 
your customers, this price is affordable, realistic and reasonable. 
 The first step is to find costumers. You will use Google Maps mostly to get the 
e-mails of some potential clients and send them an e-mail about your service. 
Many of them will reply to ask for more information. 
 The second step is to build the website. It’s extremely easy to do it and it 
requires no qualification, besides being devoted. 
 You can make all your earnings auto-pilot. This means that you can earn as 
much as $140 for each sale without having to do ANY work at all. This $140 
per sale can easily turn to $1400 a day
 
! 
 

“Your Ticket To An Online Fortune” 
23 | P a g e  
The end is painful, I know! It’s so hard for me to say goodbye to you, but I hope that 
you had as much fun reading this eBook as much as I had writing it! One thing I can 
tell you that after you have read this eBook, you are a step ahead of the others and 
this can be your ticket to earning a fortune online! I don’t personally believe this 
method will ever get saturated; there will always be some people who will be 
interested in such services. I have been doing this method for several years and I’m 
now earning more than ever! 
I also mentioned before that by the first week you should see your first sale. At least, 
I know that I did! Some people whom I showed this method got their first sale 
within an hour! Now, I’m not guaranteeing anything, but if you tried hard for a full 
week and didn’t make any sale, I will personally help you make a sale. I don’t 
guarantee I’ll make you a sale, but I will definitely do all my best to help you! 
Also, if you ever need anything at all, if you have any question or anything unclear 
about this method, or simply want to thank me for allowing you to lay hands on such 
a wonderful method, you can anytime contact me at: 
admin@mediamega.info 
Also, as a bonus I wrote a short document with tips such as which businesses to 
target, how to target them differently, and even other methods of getting potential 
clients.  This method alone will earn you some money, but as with any market it is 
ever-changing. As yet another bonus, I will e-mail you all the latest tips and tricks 
and will keep you updated with information through my newsletter. (I won’t be 
spamming you or selling your information, I promise. I just don’t want to rewrite this 
eBook each time new information surfaces). 
Upon subscription, you will also receive your free bonus document, which will help 
you make your first sale in much less than a week. Click the link below to subscribe: 
Subscribe Now 
That is all for now, hope to keep in touch with you. 

