Cybernetics for 
the 21st Century
Vol.1: Epistemological 
Reconstruction
Edited by Yuk Hui
Philosophy, Art and Technology Series

Cybernetics for 
the 21st Century
Vol. 1: Epistemological 
Reconstruction
Edited by Yuk Hui
Philosophy, Art and Technology Series

Cybernetics for the 21st Century
Vol.1 Epistemological Reconstruction
First published 2024
Hanart Press
Jia Li Hall Foundation Limited
Flat C, 2F Mai On Industrial Building
19 Kung Yip Street Kwai Chung
New Territories, Hong Kong
Editor: Yuk Hui
Associate editor: Jianru Wu
Copyeditor: Heleen Schroder
Proofreader: Alice Ladenburg
The digital edition of this publication can be 
downloaded for free at: hanart.press.
This publication is licensed under CC BY-NC 4.0 
International. To view a copy of this license, 
visit: creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/
ISBN: 978-988-70268-0-8 (print)
ISBN: 978-988-70268-4-6 (e-book)
© Hanart Press
© The Authors
hanart
press
Research Network For
Philosophy and Technology

7
Acknowledgements
This project was initially organized by the Media Lab of the Guangdong 
Times Museum, the Cosmotechnics and Critical AI Project at the City 
University of Hong Kong, and the Research Network for Philosophy and 
Technology. Hanart Forum and the M Art Foundation kindly support­
ed the continuation of the first phase of this project after the sudden 
closure of the Times Museum in October 2022. I would like to take this 
occasion to thank: all the authors for their contributions; Wu Jianru, pre­
viously curator at the Times Museum’s media lab and currently curator 
at the Hanart Forum, for the invitation to initiate this programme and for 
her production (with the assistance of Guo Yun) of the video lectures 
and symposia that took place between autumn 2022 and spring 2023; 
Johnson Chang of Hanart Forum for supporting the publication of these 
proceedings and the second phase of this project; Heleen Schroder for 
her excellent copyediting; and Edwin Lo and Ashley Wong, who were 
essential to the operation of the Research Network for Philosophy and 
Technology in the past years.
Yuk Hui
Autumn 2023
Rotterdam

Table of Contents
Acknowledgements 
7
Introduction
Why Cybernetics Now? 
11
Yuk Hui
Part I: Maps
Translating Rationalism: Leibniz and 
23
Cybernetics
Brunella Antomarini
Machine and Ecology 
43
Yuk Hui
Ontology and the Politics of Information 
67
in the first Cybernetics
Mathieu Triclot
Detoxifying Cybernetics: From 
85
Homeostasis to Autopoiesis and
Beyond
N. Katherine Hayles
James Lovelock, Gaia, and the 
101
Remembering of Biological Being
Dorion Sagan

Part II: Territories
Cybernetics in Britain 
111
Andrew Pickering
Cybernetics Across Cultures: 
127
The Localization of the Universal
Slava Gerovitch
Cybernetics, Communism, and 
153
Romanticism: Cybernetic Thinking
in the Polish People’s Republic and
in the Pre-Cybernetic Era
Michal Krzykawski
A Brief History of Chinese Cybernetics 
171
Dylan Levi King
Why Did Cybernetics Disappear from 
203
Latin America? An Incomplete Timeline
David Maulen de los Reyes
Life-in-formation: Cybernetics 
237
of the Heart
Daisuke Harashima
Biographies
268

Introduction

11
Why Cybernetics Now?
Yuk Hui
The title Cybernetics for the 21st Century may arouse an immediate 
question: Why cybernetics, and why now? As Katherine Hayles notes, 
by the 1970s the term cybernetics seemed to have disappeared from 
public discourse. The term ‘cybernetics’ was coined by Norbert Wie­
ner in the 1940s as an outcome of his collaboration with Arturo Rosen- 
blueth and his research group. We know that the term originates from 
the Greek word kubernetes, and in 1834, Andre-Marie Ampere des­
ignated the term cybernetique for the future art of governance. The 
term gained even more international fame through his seminal book his 
seminal Cybernetics, or Control and Communication in Man and Ani­
mal (1948), which was dedicated to Rosenblueth in acknowledgement 
of their long-term collaboration. In the following decades, cybernetics 
rose to a generalized science which could provide a systematic and 
evolutionary analysis of any given phenomenon, be that Humberto Ma- 
turana and Francesco Varela’s autopoiesis or Niklas Luhmann’s social 
system. This development, from the period of the Macy Conferences 
(1946-1953) to the post-Macy Conference period, is widely recognized 
as a shift from first-order cybernetics to second-order cybernetics. 
We can identify here the change of vocabulary—from feedback to re- 
cursion—which expresses itself in different tautologies: cybernetics of 
cybernetics,1 society of society, observing observation, and so on. We 
can also find the effort to tackle the complex phenomenon of living be­
ings, which demands neologisms such as ‘structural coupling’ and ‘op­
erational closure’. This introduction does not aim to recount the history 
of cybernetics—Hayles’s How We Became Posthuman (1999), Mathieu 
Triclot’s Le moment cybernetique (2008) as well as the Macy Confer­
ence Proceedings edited by Claus Pias (2016)1 2, have been key texts for 
understanding different waves of cybernetics—instead it serves as an 
invitation to reflect on the relevance of cybernetics to our times.
1 Heinz von Foester, ‘Cybernetics of Cybernetics’, in Communication and 
Control, ed. K. Krippendorff (New York: Gordon and Breach, 1979), 5-8.
2 
Cybernetics The Macy Conferences 1946-1953: The Complete Transactions,
ed. Claus Pias (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2016).

12
WHY CYBERNETICS NOW?
Martin Heidegger, in his 1966 interview (published ten years later) 
with Der Spiegel, was asked what came after the end of philosophy; 
Heidegger answered: cybernetics.3 In other words, he announced that 
cybernetics marked the end of Western philosophy. This assertion is 
dramatic but significant for reflecting not only on the history and future 
of philosophy, but also on the future of cybernetics. When speaking 
of cybernetics, we tend to trace its origins, as Wiener himself did, to 
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz. However, Heidegger went back even fur­
ther, to Plato’s metaphysics, which for him already anticipated the ar­
rival of cybernetics. Its compatibility with philosophy also means that 
cybernetics has been a philosophical project since the beginning. For 
Heidegger, the triumph of cybernetics therefore equally means the end 
of philosophy—end here also means completion. In view of such an 
end of philosophy, Heidegger calls for a thinking to come; a thinking 
that is able to overcome the latest and last stage of Western philoso­
phy: cybernetics.4
3 
Martin Heidegger, ‘Nur noch ein Gott kann uns retten’, Der Spiegel, 30 May
1976, 193-219.
4 Martin Heidegger, ‘The End of Philosophy and the Task of Thinking’, in On 
Time and Being, trans. Joan Stambaugh (New York: Harper & Row, 1972); see also 
Yuk Hui, ‘Philosophy after Automation’, Philosophy Today 65 no. 2 (2021): 217-33.
5 
Gilbert Simondon, Du mode d’existence des objets techniques (Paris : Aubier,
2012[1958]), 147.
6 
Yuk Hui, Recursivity and Contingency (London: Rowman and Littlefield
International, 2019).
Cybernetics is, in this postulation, conceived as a triumph of 
method. That is to say, as a scientific method, cybernetics became 
dominant, as was the case of mechanism in the time of Rene Des­
cartes. Cybernetics marked the triumph of the scientific method that 
rendered philosophical reflections redundant. This is also observed 
by Gilbert Simondon when he compares Wiener’s Cybernetics with 
Descartes’ Discourse on Method and considers the former as a new 
epistemology based on reflectivity.5 Cybernetics is not something that 
arrives from somewhere outside of Western philosophy, but rather is 
its own realization or completion. Heidegger’s assertion remains to be 
thought and analysed, as I have tried to show in Recursivity and Con­
tingency (2019), as well as in the article titled ‘Machine and Ecology’ 
included in this volume.6
Ironically, philosophy has not ended, since departments of phi­
losophy continue to survive, while the term cybernetics has slowly 

YUK HUI
13
vanished from university curriculums, with the exception, surprising­
ly, of the National University of Australia, that recently established a 
School of Cybernetics. However, the absence of cybernetics even from 
engineering disciplines might also mean that it is omnipresent, like air: 
we do not pay attention to it as long as we can breathe properly. Heide­
gger’s assertion is not without significance, and in this volume, we will 
see how cybernetics was applied in various domains in politics, design, 
engineering and art in the twentieth century.
This anthology is dedicated to epistemological reconstruction. 
Some contributors reconstruct the history of cybernetics and its signif­
icance in both the history of philosophy and the history of technology; 
others discuss the reception and localization of cybernetics in Poland, 
Chile, the Soviet Union, China, Japan, the USA and Britain. Different 
scientific communities have attempted to localize cybernetics in order 
to resolve specific socio-political problems, ranging from the Cybersyn 
project in Chile to birth control policy in China. These accounts provide 
the historical and cultural background of the emergence of cybernetics 
in different parts of the world, and transmit the names of scientists and 
thinkers, as well as some neologisms, that remain unknown to most of 
us today. For example, a Polish thinker inspired by Ampere has further 
elaborated on the term ‘cybernetics’ as the art of governance, and Chi­
na’s one-child policy was implicitly an application of cybernetics.
If we want to look for cybernetics for the twenty-first century, it is 
necessary to take note both of the diversity of thought and imagination 
that happened on other continents, and of the shortcomings of the cy­
bernetic projects. Cybernetics does not have a single history limited to 
the invention and elaboration of some American scientists, nor to that 
of a few recently rediscovered French thinkers who connect cybernet­
ics to continental philosophy, like Pierre de Latil’s Thinking by Machine: 
A Study of Cybernetics (1953), Raymond Ruyer’s La cybernetique et 
l’origine de l'information (1954) and Gilbert Simondon’s On the Mode 
of Existence of Technical Objects (1958). Slava Gerovitch’s earlier work 
From Newspeak to Cyberspeak: A History of Soviet Cybernetics (2004) 
and Andrew Pickering’s The Cybernetic Brain: Sketches of Another Fu­
ture (2010) set good examples for us to understand cybernetics beyond 
such a limited history. The richness of cybernetics is yet to be explored. 
However, despite the temptation to categorize cybernetics according 
to different localities, it is futile to assign a nationality to cybernetics, 
because cybernetics aims to be a universal science, and as such it 

14
WHY CYBERNETICS NOW?
cannot be pinned down to a specific nation, as Stanford Beer claimed 
in his lecture ‘Recursion of Power’, which started with an appreciation 
of Pierre Teilhard de Chardin’s noosphere.7 At the same time, as a uni­
versal science, it has to be ‘placed’, therefore subject to a ‘localization’, 
or it would remain an ‘abstract universal’, as Hegel would call it.
7 Stafford Beer, ‘Recursion of Powers’, in Power, Autonomy, Utopia, ed. Robert 
Trappl (New York: Plenum Press, 1986).
8 Hans Jonas, The Phenomenon of Life: Toward a Philosophical Biology 
(Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 2001), 111; Charles Parsons, ‘Gotthard 
Gunther’, in Godel’s Collected Works, vol. 4, ed. Solomon Feferman and John W. 
Dawson (Oxford: Clarendon, 2003), 458.
In terms of its socio-political implications, cybernetics endeav­
oured to introduce a ‘human use of human beings’ by eliminating the 
‘inhuman use of human beings.’ Machines can take up the tasks consid­
ered as inhuman use and free the human for human use. From this as­
pect, early cybernetic thinking is more than relevant today, as Matthieu 
Triclot’s analysis shows. It also introduced a new kind of technocracy, 
which no longer takes the top-down approach of classical mechanism, 
but rather offers a flexibility that welcomes contingency and irregular­
ities. In this sense, it is also ambiguous, because cybernetics could be 
applied in the realization of a socialist, a communist as well as an anar- 
cho-neoliberal management. This has to do with the fact that episte­
mologically, cybernetics aims to break through the opposition between 
mechanism and vitalism and developed a theory of organismic opera­
tion based on feedback. Its continuation in second-order cybernetics 
was closely linked to complex organizations in biology and neurosci­
ence, as well as in business management. Ontologically, according 
to Hans Jonas, cybernetics has overcome the dualist logic pervasive 
since Aristotle and presents a unified logic and, according to Gotthard 
Gunther, it has overcome the two values system of Aristotelian log­
ic and gestures towards a three-value or multi-value logic.8 Wiener, 
as we know, endeavoured to make cybernetics a universal discipline 
that could integrate all other disciplines. Cybernetic thinking based on 
feedback and information indeed provides a generalized model for un­
derstanding the dynamism of living beings and living phenomena, or 
more precisely, a theory of individuation based on feedback and ho­
meostasis. Cybernetics is closer to thermodynamics and biology than 
to the classical mechanics and mechanism. The triumph of second-or­
der cybernetics could also resonate with the rise of a thermodynamic 

YUK HUI
15
ideology in the 1980s and 1990s, namely the free-market economy, 
neoliberalism and Francis Fukuyama’s ‘end of history’. Therefore, it is 
not surprising to read that Friedrich Hayek found in cybernetics the 
most adequate description of his idea of market mechanism.9
9 F. A. Hayek, Law, Legislation and Liberty: A New Statement of the Liberal 
Principles of Justice and Political Economy (London: Routledge, 1982), xviii.
10 Yuk Hui, ‘ChatGPT, or the Eschatology of Machines,” E-flux 137, https:// 
www.e-flux.com/journal/137/544816/chatgpt-or-the-eschatology-of-machines/.
Cybernetics, the forgotten term in the engineering curriculum 
today, should be resurrected (in the context of education), in order 
to understand where we are at the present. This retrospective could 
be read as an attempt to address the current impasses concerning 
the division of disciplines, the superficiality of interdisciplinary meth­
odologies, and the emptiness of art-tech enthusiasm. The history of 
cybernetics can reveal more than what we thought we knew—and yet 
we hardly know—and allows us to reflect on the possibilities of new 
transdisciplinary approaches.
The twenty-first century is a century of cybernetics. Many have 
been trying to distinguish cybernetics from artificial intelligence and 
artificial intelligence from machine learning. It is clear that cybernet­
ics and today’s AI belong to two different ages, but it is undeniable 
that cybernetics has laid an epistemological foundation for modern 
automation. The application of these technologies has been associ­
ated with static control via digital apparatuses, and with cybernetics’s 
intimate relation to military research as was, and continues to be, the 
case in the USA and beyond. These observations are all true and im­
portant, and we must be very cautious with the application of cyber­
netics in politics, which has the tendency to produce police states and 
surveillance societies; a tendency that we must confront and resist, as 
Tiqqun’s The Cybernetic Hypothesis (2020) warns. However, a more 
philosophically adequate understanding of cybernetics, which goes 
beyond the critique of surveillance capitalism, and beyond Heideg­
ger’s verdict, is urgently needed. Cybernetics is neither a technology 
nor an artefact, but rather, as Heidegger would say, a generalized sci­
entific method or a completed metaphysics.10 We have yet to critically 
re-examine the possibilities that cybernetics has attempted to open 
and its potential application for truly transdisciplinary research, and to 

16
WHY CYBERNETICS NOW?
explore the impasses caused by its actualization in our contemporary 
society. Ecological thinking (here we might want to refer to Erich Horl’s 
thesis on the parallel between cybernetization and ecologization),11 ar­
tificial intelligence (the Dartmouth conference in 1956 was a response 
to the aftermath of the Macy Conferences), and complex theory (which 
is still very important today in various disciplines such as Earth system 
science and Cliodynamics) are continuations of the cybernetic project 
in this sense. Therefore, a return to the history of cybernetics is indis­
pensable for understanding our contemporary situation.
11 Erich Horl, ‘A Thousand Ecologies: The Process of Cyberneticization and 
General Ecology’, in The Whole Earth: California and the Disappearance of the 
Outside, ed. Diedrich Diederichsen and Anselm Franke (Berlin: Sternberg, 2013), 121-30.
12 The text on the wall reads: ‘In dem zugehorenden Anwesen verbrachte der 
Soziologe Niklas Luhmann (geb. 1927) seine Kindheit und Jugend. Er entwickelte 
eine weltweit anerkannte, soziale Systeme ubergreifend analysierende, ideolo- 
giefreie Gesellschaftstheorie.’ (The sociologist Niklas Luhmann (born 1927) spent 
his childhood and youth in this place. He developed a globally recognized ideolo­
gy-free theory of society for a comprehensive analysis of social system).
What we are looking for here is not only a plea for the historical 
importance of cybernetics, but also cybernetics for the twenty-first 
century; that is to say, technologies and technological imaginations 
that exceed the framework and the ideological naivety of its twenti­
eth-century incarnation. This naivety consists of the insistence upon 
the objectivity of cybernetics, and that in this sense cybernetics re­
mains a science. We recall the claim painted on the wall outside Niklas 
Luhmann’s house in Luneburg, that Luhmann had invented a social the­
ory free from ideology!11
 12 Alas, is not a social theory free from ideology 
itself an ideology? It does not mean that we have to depreciate Luh- 
mann; on the contrary, we should appreciate his innovative and sys­
tematic approach. Other than this ideological naivety, we also have to 
be critical of the enthusiasm to overcome the opposition between the 
machine and organism (which was also expressed in the notion of the 
cyborg in the 1990s), as Hayles and I both suggest in our contributions. 
Today, we remain in a state of naivety that expresses itself in the pur­
suit of a transhumanist future, and we are blind to our own conditions 
of existence, while longing for immortality and superintelligence.
In 1971 Gregory Bateson described a feedback loop that traps 
alcoholics: one glass of beer won’t kill me; okay, I’ve already start­
ed, a second one should be fine; well, two already, why not three? An 

YUK HUI
17
alcoholic, if they are lucky, might get out of this positive feedback loop 
by ‘hitting bottom’; by surviving a fatal disease or a car accident, for 
example.13 We moderns are like alcoholics who have failed to get out of 
the positive feedback of progress, like Nietzsche describes in The Gay 
Science (1882): the pursuit of the infinite leads to the realization that 
nothing is more frightening than the infinite.14 A new recursive episte­
mology in Bateson’s sense, inheriting cybernetic thinking while seek­
ing to overcome its intoxication, is needed for our programme of re-ori- 
entation.15 This new programme can only set off from cybernetics and 
it can only survive by going beyond cybernetics—an attempt that also 
occurs within the history of cybernetics, when Varela tried to retrieve 
the concept of freedom by staging an antagonism between Wiener on 
one side and John von Neumann and Alan Turing on the other.16
13 The essay ‘The Cybernetics of “Self”: A Theory of Alcoholism’ is collected in 
Gregory Bateson, Steps to an Ecology of Mind (Northvale: Jason Aronson, 1987).
14 Friedrich Nietzsche, The Gay Science, ed. Bernard Williams, trans. Josefine 
Nauckhoff and Adrian Del Cargo (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001), 
119, aphorism 124: ‘We have forsaken the land and gone to sea! We have destroyed 
the bridge behind us—more so, we have demolished the land behind us! Now, little 
ship, look out! Beside you is the ocean; it is true, it does not always roar, and at 
times it lies there like silk and gold and dreams of goodness. But there will be hours 
when you realize that it is infinite and that there is nothing more awesome than 
infinity. Oh, the poor bird that has felt free and now strikes against the walls of this 
cage! Woe, when homesickness for the land overcomes you, as if there had been 
more freedom there—and there is no more “land”!’
15 One way of doing so is to think through art, as Andrew Pickering suggests 
in this volume, and as I have done myself in my last book; see Yuk Hui, Art and 
Cosmotechnics (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2021).
16 Francisco Varela, ‘Steps to a cybernetics of autonomy’, in Power, Autonomy, 
Utopia, ed. Robert Trappl (New York: Plenum Press, 1986), 117.
The anthology, dedicated to epistemological reconstruction in 
both the historical and geographical sense, is divided into two parts. 
The first focuses on the history of concepts in cybernetics. Brunella 
Antomarini’s ‘Translating Rationalism: Leibniz and Cybernetics’ offers 
us a retrospective on the influence of Leibniz on Wiener’s concept of 
cybernetics, and an explanation why Leibniz was referred to by the lat­
ter as the patron saint of cybernetics. My own ‘Machine and Ecology’ 
restages cybernetics in the history of philosophy, as a completion of 
Kant’s organic condition of philosophy, imposed since the Critique of 
Judgement (1790). I suggest that cybernetics should be re-situated in 
a much broader context—this is also the spirit of Bateson’s recursive 

18
WHY CYBERNETICS NOW?
epistemology—namely a locality, through a re-reading of Heidegger’s 
seminar ‘Holderlin’s Hymn “The Ister”’; and only in this sense can we 
talk about an ecology of machines. Mathieu Triclot’s ‘Ontology and the 
Politics of Information in the First Cybernetics’ brings us back to the 
debate on an ontology of information, and highlights the socio-political 
importance of such an ontology, illustrated by Wiener’s effort to elimi­
nate the ‘inhuman use of human being’—a thesis that is becoming more 
and more important in view of the contemporary paranoia about robot­
ic domination and mass unemployment. Kathrine Hayles’s ‘Detoxifying 
Cybernetics: From Homeostasis to Autopoiesis and Beyond’ suggests 
detoxifying cybernetics by revisiting the first and second wave of cy- 
bernetics—especially their effort to realize a machine-organism—and 
the collaboration between Lynn Margulis and James Lovelock. Hayles 
proposes a new framework that does not prioritize the living being and 
its environment, but rather a ‘technosymbiosis’ consisting of a cog­
nitive assemblage constituted by humans, living non-human organ­
isms and computational media. Finally, we have a special contribution, 
‘James Lovelock, Gaia, and the Remembering of Biological Being’, from 
Dorion Sagan, who pays homage to James Lovelock and recounts the 
encounter between Lovelock and his mother, Lynn Margulis. Sagan’s 
account is not only personal witness, it also lays down a scientifical­
ly informed philosophical foundation of the Gaia theory. This special 
contribution was originally commissioned by the Research Network for 
Philosophy and Technology after the death of Lovelock.
The second part is dedicated to the development and implication 
of cybernetics in different regions around the world. Andrew Pickering 
outlines a trajectory of British cybernetics, with its relation to the brain, 
and beyond the brain into art and society; he reconnects the cybernetic 
imagination with my own cosmotechnics. Slava Gerovitch challenges 
the universality of AI and cybernetics by demonstrating how the scien­
tists in the Soviet Union rejected American cybernetics and developed 
different models conditioned by their own socio-economic and politi­
cal constrains. Michal Krzykawski offers us a history of cybernetics in 
the Polish People’s Republic as a dialogue between cybernetics and 
historical materialism. He also introduces the work of Bronislaw Tren- 
towski, who, under the influence of Andre-Marie Ampere, published 
The Relation of Philosophy to Cybernetics as the Art of Governing a 
Nation in 1843. Dylan Levi King recounts a little-known history of cyber­
netics in China around the figure of the nuclear scientist Qian Xuesen, 

YUK HUI
19
and outlines some of its startling implications for the one-child policy 
and planned economy. David Maulen de los Reyes provides us with a 
historical survey of the introduction and application of cybernetics in 
Latin America, before and after the Cybersyn project in Chile. Maulen 
de los Reyes presents a much broader picture of the pan-Latin Ameri­
can cybernetics movements far beyond Cybernsyn in Chile (for exam­
ple, Mexico, Colombia, and Uruguay) and its relation to the intellectual 
exchanges in the USA and Europe. Daisuke Harashima describes the 
reception of cybernetics, especially second-order cybernetics in Ja­
pan, which was later developed into what is called neo-cybernetics, 
made popular by the work of Nomi Ohi and Toru Nishigaki. Harashima 
conceives a cybernetics that allows us to maintain peace and return 
to life. He introduces what he calls cybernetics of the heart (kokoro) 
(distinguished from a ‘cybernetics of the soul’), a subject that could 
bring significant contributions to an intercultural understanding of 
cybernetics.
This volume is the first anthology of the research project ‘Cy­
bernetics for the 21st century’. It attempts to enlarge the cartography 
of cybernetics, but it is still far too limited to cover the whole range of 
cybernetic thinking that emerged in the twentieth century. Neither can 
it sufficiently cover the relation between cybernetics and today’s bio­
technology, neuroscience, military technology and space technology. 
However, as we know that all futures are unthinkable without revisiting 
the past, I hope that this historical-epistemological project can provide 
inspiration for researchers who are interested in the history and after­
math of cybernetics. The second phase of the project will be dedicated 
to the future of cybernetics, and in this regard, we are envisioning Cy­
bernetics for the 21st Century Vol. 2.

20
WHY CYBERNETICS NOW?
Reference
Bateson, Gregory. Steps to an Ecology of Mind. Northvale: Jason 
Aronson, 1987.
Beer, Stafford. ‘Recursion of Powers’, in Power, Autonomy, Utopia, ed. 
Robert Trappl. New York: Plenum Press, 1986.
Foester, Heiz von. ‘Cybernetics of Cybernetics’, in Communication and 
Control. Edited by K. Krippendorff, 5-8. New York: Gordon and 
Breach, 1979.
Gerovitch, Slava. From Newspeak to Cyberspeak: A History of Soviet 
Cybernetics (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004)
Hayek, F. A. Law, Legislation and Liberty: A New Statement of the Liberal 
Principles of Justice and Political Economy. London: Routledge, 1982.
Hayles, N. Katherine. How We Became Posthuman Virtual Bodies in 
Cybernetics, Literature, and Informatics. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1999.
Heidegger, Martin. ‘Nur noch ein Gott kann uns retten’, Der Spiegel, 30 
May 1976, 193-219.
———. ‘The End of Philosophy and the Task of Thinking’, in On Time and 
Being. Translated by Joan Stambaugh. New York: Harper & Row, 1972.
Hui, Yuk. Art and Cosmotechnics. Minneapolis: University of Minessota 
Press, 2021.
———. ‘ChatGPT, or the Eschatology of Machines,” E-flux 137, https:// 
www.e-flux.com/journal/137/544816/chatgpt-or-the-eschatolo- 
gy-of-machines/.
———. ‘Philosophy after Automation’, Philosophy Today 65, no. 2 (2021): 217-33.
———. Recursivity and Contingency. London: Rowman and Littlefield 
International, 2019.
Horl, Erich. ‘A Thousand Ecologies: The Process of Cyberneticization 
and General Ecology’, in The Whole Earth: California and the 
Disappearance of the Outside. Edited by Diedrich Diederichsen and 
Anselm Franke, 121-30. Berlin: Sternberg, 2013.

YUK HUI
21
Jonas, Hans. The Phenomenon of Life: Toward a Philosophical Biology.
Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 2001.
Latil, Pierre de, Thinking by Machine: A Study of Cybernetics. Translated 
by Y. M. Golla. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1957.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. The Gay Science. Edited by Bernard Williams.
Translated by Josefine Nauckhoff and Adrian Del Cargo. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2001.
Triclot, Mathieu. Le moment cybernetique: La constitution de la notion 
d'information. Ceyzerieu : Chap Vallon 2008.
Parsons, Charles. ‘Gotthard Gunther’, in Godel’s Collected Works, vol.
4. Edited by Solomon Feferman and John W. Dawson. Oxford: 
Clarendon, 2003.
Pias, Claus (ed). Cybernetics The Macy Conferences 1946-1953: The
Complete Transactions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2016.
Pickering, Andrew. The Cybernetic Brain: Sketches of Another Future.
Chicago: Chicago University Press, 2010.
Ruyer, Raymond. La cybernetique et l’origine de l’information. Paris:
Flammarion, 1954.
Simondon, Gilbert. Du mode d’existence des objets techniques. Paris :
Aubier, 2012 [1958].
Tiqqun, The Cybernetic Hypothesis. Translated by Robert Hurley.
Cambridge, MA: Semiotext(e), 2020 [2001].
Varela, Francisco. ‘Steps to a Cybernetics of Autonomy’, in Power, Autonomy, 
Utopia. Edited by Robert Trappl. New York: Plenum Press, 1986.

Part I: Maps

23
Translating Rationalism:
Leibniz and Cybernetics
Brunella Antomarini
The need to give philosophical depth to the current debate on AI gives 
a renewed importance to cybernetics. In fact, the history of cybernet­
ics still offers a great opportunity to focus on the dynamics that has 
allowed AI to develop. We can even reconsider and reconfigure the 
Western history of philosophy in the light of a cybernetic perspective. 
My research on Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz is an attempt to do so.
Why Leibniz in particular? Because Norbert Wiener, the founder 
of cybernetics, considered him the first philosopher of cybernetics. My 
intent is to investigate what, for Wiener, was a crucial source of inspira­
tion, and to turn Leibniz from being a rationalist or a vitalist into a phi­
losopher of process, of auto-poiesis or organology. It is interesting that 
Leibniz and Wiener had similar destinies: they were both successful for 
a while, and both saw their success decline for similar reasons. Leib­
niz’s readers were caught up with Cartesianism and its divide between 
mechanicism and vitalism, and as a consequence of that distinction, 
they classified Leibniz as a vitalist. In the case of Wiener, his idea of 
finding in nature a technique that could explain the internal force that 
governs matter was taken as an obsession with control typical of post­
war and the cold war anxieties. It would be interesting to see how we 
can use both inspirations and expand or backdate the perspective and 
impact of cybernetics. Wiener constantly goes back to Leibniz in his 
most philosophical writings, famously saying that he chose Leibniz as 
a patron saint of cybernetics.1 Elsewhere he stated:
1 Norbert Wiener, Cybernetics, Or Control and Communication in the Animal 
and the Machine (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press 1985), 12.
Leibnitz, dominated by ideas of communication, is, in 
more than one way, the intellectual ancestor of the ideas 
of this book, for he was also interested in machine com­
putation and in automata. My views in this book are very 

24
TRANSLATING RATIONALISM: LEIBNIZ AND CYBERNETICS
far from being Leibnitzian, but the problems with which I 
am concerned are most certainly Leibnitzian.2
2 Norbert Wiener, The Human Use of Human Beings: Cybernetics and Society 
(London: Free Association Books, 1989), 19.
3 Brunella Antomarini, ‘L’eolipila di Erone alessandrino: L’intelligenza dimenti- 
cata dell’inventore’, in Sensibilia 6, ed. Monica Rotili and Marco Tedeschini (Milan: 
Mimesis, 2013), 27-42.
4 
An animation visualizing the machine is available on the Youtube channel
Perpetual Useless, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fxe55EtbR8Y.
5 
Pierre de Latil, Thinking by Machine: A Study of Cybernetics, trans. Y. M.
Golla (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1957).
Whether he finds Leibniz close to his research or tries to distance him­
self from him, what is it that makes Wiener think this way? The issue 
is how it is possible for a machine to possess sense organs, that is, 
to receive messages from outside, that guide its behaviour from the 
environment. If machines have sense organs, are they information 
machines? If there can be information machines, is it possible to find 
these dynamics in nature? Let us take a more detailed look at what this 
means, starting by asking what cybernetics means in terms of dynam­
ics: What is a cybernetic system? It is a system that is able to govern 
itself. This system is not just the effect of a cause, but it is a system with 
an internal orientation, an automatic telos. Whether living or artificial, 
a cybernetic system does not move by virtue of an external action, but 
it moves itself. It is able to regulate itself. How? The conquest of the 
internal dynamics that make a system move is an ancient dream, from 
Hero of Alexandria to Leonardo da Vinci. They both dreamt of a system 
capable of perpetual motion. By way of example, Hero invented the Aeo- 
lipile, a playful spherical structure capable of motion through steam.3 Da 
Vinci drew several models of a perpetuum mobile consisting of wheels 
containing balls that, pulled by gravity, move the wheel down and then 
upward due to the very momentum they gain from their fall.4
These two, among many other examples, show how there is a 
natural energy capable of sustaining motion and the reproduction of 
energy itself, through a constant exchange of ‘information’: the balls 
and wheel pass information to one another about the amount of energy 
needed and provided by returning in a circular way, retro-acting on the 
possible slow-down or inertia and generating the necessary speed to 
continue the motion. This is how the scientific writer Pierre de Latil (the 
first to disseminate cybernetics in Europe) visualizes the process (Fig. 1)5

BRUNELLA ANTOMARINI
25
Fig. 1: This is how Pierre de 
Latil visualizes the mech­
anism of feedback; image 
redrawn.
The system (at the centre) reaches its state of equilibrium without 
any external intervention, on condition that its very motion retroacts on 
the energy that has set it in motion and gives it the needed decrease 
(negative feedback) or increase (positive feedback) of energy. The sys­
tem adjusts its condition by intervening on the information it gets from 
the previous condition.
This self-reproduction implies a circular direction, an impulse to 
go back, a constant recursivity, that turns the effect into a cause, or, in 
cybernetic terms, into an effector. Whereas the cause is external to the 
effect, the effector is internal, as it acts upon an internal cause. This is 
what makes the system autonomous with respect to any external factor.
At the end of the 1940s, Wiener made an electronic perpetuum 
mobile; an electronically rudimentary device that he called ‘Palomilla,’ a 
phototropic animaloid whose motion depends on the voltage provided 
by light: its two sensors make it go toward or away from the source of 
light. The result is a goal-seeking behaviour.6 Its ‘software’ modifies 
its path according to the outside information; a random motion pro­
duces a variation in light and its ‘perception’. As if it had sense organs, 
Palomilla continues to modify its ‘choices’, as if it were alive. Whether 
perception and choice are metaphoric or not, Palomilla moves inde­
pendently of its creator. This is an update of the ancient dream of the 
perpetuum mobile.
6 ‘Wiener’s Moth “Palomilla”—Wiener/Wiesner/Singleton’, blogpost on 
the website Cybernetic Zoo, 19 September 2009, https://cyberneticzoo.com/ 
cyberneticanimals/1949-wieners-moth-wiener-wiesner-singleton/.

26
TRANSLATING RATIONALISM: LEIBNIZ AND CYBERNETICS
Let us go back to Leibniz: a typical Renaissance man—or, as Wie­
ner calls him, a universal genius—Leibniz is moved by different inspi­
rations. The first is Ramon Llull’s Ars Magna (1501), which he translates 
into De arte combinatoria and later Ars characteristica: an attempt 
to turn all possible information into symbols. In Leibniz’s speculative 
vision, combinations of symbols would guarantee the universality of 
knowledge and universality of information. Again, we have an automat­
ic device that could replace human agency, an automaton that does 
not need anything external to accomplish a task. Second, when Leibniz 
went to Paris, he became, together with Denis Papin, a pupil of Chris­
tiaan Huygens. Together, Leibniz and Papin made a steam engine; an 
automatic device in which a piston is powered by steam. It was one 
of the first steam engines; of course it did not work very well, but this 
shows Leibniz’ interest in the new technologies of his time, and his flair 
for a philosophy of transformation and process. Third, Leibniz made a 
reckoner that he called the Calculus Ratiocinator, which is usually con­
sidered the first computer: though completely mechanical, it was a ma­
chine that made calculations independently of any human operation. 
He wanted to write on it ‘Superior to Man’, envisioning the possibility 
of future computers.7 It works through a row of nine cylinders that are 
moved by a wheel. The wheel passes across cogs and it is either hit by 
the cogs (in which case it adds one number to an addition) or it is not 
(in which case nothing is added); the final addition results from on/off 
states, the presence or absence of the cogs. The reckoner converts 
data into sequences of on/off states. This proto-computer is quite ef­
ficient; it can make additions and multiplications, even of three-digit 
numbers. It was the first attempt to turn numbers into binary logic. In­
finite combinations of on/off states is what makes information possi­
ble. Fourth, in the early 1700s, Father Bouvet, one of the Jesuits who 
established the first European contact with the Chinese culture, gave 
Leibniz a chart of the divination text I Ching as a gift. Leibniz imme­
diately saw the similarity with his reckoner; the use of different com­
binations of Yin and Yang, broken lines and full lines, result in many 
possible numbers and therefore many possible meanings. Information 
7 ‘The Leibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators’, entry on the website 
of the Computer History Museum, https://www.computerhistory.org/revolution/ 
calculators/1/49.

BRUNELLA ANTOMARINI
27
is the result of an automatic combination of signals, of on/off states, 
and mathematical language that appeared to him as a way to calculate 
the positions of the stars and planets.8
8 An animated illustration can be found at https://it.wikipedia.org/wiki/ 
Stepped_Reckoner#/media/File:Cylindre_de_Leibniz_anim%C3%A9.gif; Yuen- 
Ting Lai, ‘Leibniz’s Studies of Chinese and Perennial Philosophy’, Il cannocchiale 
(January-April 1999): 101.
Let me now retrieve from these interconnected inventions and 
conceptual frames the three main principles of Leibniz’s philosophy: 
sufficient reason; the indiscernibles; and pre-established harmony.
1 Sufficient reason: Every actual event, or matter of fact, has 
its own particular unique reason to occur. On the contrary, 
Cartesian and Newtonian mechanics considered the ‘reason’ 
or ‘final cause’ or ‘aim’ to be obsolete or inessential notions; 
according to mechanics all material structures need some 
external and universal causes to move. Matter has no reason, 
no telos, and no purpose.
2 The indiscernibles: If two entities are indiscernible, they are 
the same entity. Here Leibniz is responding to Spinoza. In 
their dialogues in Amsterdam, they had to solve the Carte­
sian dualism. Whereas Spinoza’s solution is the uniqueness 
of substance (distinct in itself in at least two attributes and 
many modes), Leibniz concludes that there must be many 
substances; only their plurality could explain the variety of 
matters of fact that can neither be conceived as illusions, nor 
can be reduced to effects of one or a few universal causes. 
If matters of fact exist, they exist because there are many of 
them.
3 Pre-established harmony: This is the most controversial of 
the three principles, because it could be considered a deus 
ex machina, that is, when Leibniz is unable to make sense 
of teleology to solve the conundrum of everything having a 
purpose or sufficient reason, he refers to God, who pre-es­
tablishes the harmony, the order of the universe. However, 
Leibniz is quite aware that this is impossible. It cannot be that 

28
TRANSLATING RATIONALISM: LEIBNIZ AND CYBERNETICS
the world is a creature of a creator, neither in the theocentric 
sense, nor in an anthropocentric view in which the human is 
a privileged agent of action and the rational artificer of knowl­
edge. We will see how this principle is better explained in its 
relationship with the other two.
We start with sufficient reason. Leibniz said (in Discourse on Meta­
physics, the paramount argument through which he distances himself 
from Cartesianism): ‘This force is something different from size, shape 
and motion, and from that we can see that not everything that we can 
conceive in bodies is a matter of extension and its modifications, as 
our moderns persuade themselves’.9 If we reduce matter to motion 
and body, something is left out from the explanation; how these bodies 
come together, how they can be transformed. If the concept of force is 
reduced to geometric cause, it leaves the actual behaviour of matters 
of facts unexplained. In fact, the same effect can be the result of differ­
ent causes, the way a square can be produced by two rectangles or two 
triangles, as Leibniz says in Summa rerum.10 11
 Therefore an actual effect 
has its own cause, which must be found out from a number of possible 
equivalent causes. If we remove the final cause from the description 
of the world, we fall into a contradiction or an absurdity. Expelling the 
final cause would be as if, in explaining a great prince’s victory in a 
successful siege, a historian was to say:
9 Leibniz, Discourse on Metaphysics, in Philosophical Texts, ed. R. Woolhouse 
and R. Francks (New York: Oxford University Press, 1998), § 18, 71.
10 
Leibniz, De summa rerum, trans. G. H. R. Parkinson (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1992), 51.
11 Leibniz, Discourse, 1998, § 19, 73.
It was because the small particles of gunpowder, re­
leased by the touch of a spark, shot off fast enough to 
impel a hard, heavy body against the walls of the place, 
while the particles making up the strands of copper in 
the cannon were so densely interwoven that they were 
not pulled apart by that speed.11
What had really happened in the war could not be the mechanical prod­
uct of general causes, which can explain any kind of event as effect, but 

BRUNELLA ANTOMARINI
29
does not explain the singularity of the effect; that is, the moment that 
the effect becomes an effector, a cause guided by an anticipation of 
future events. There is a teleological behaviour that, though automatic, 
is not mechanical.
Here we have to solve the issue of vitalism, because this is exactly 
why Leibniz seems to align with the opponents of mechanicism; as the 
old dispute goes, if you are against mechanics, you must be a vitalist. 
Wiener himself was aware of this possible misunderstanding when, in 
his article Quantum Mechanics, Leibniz and Haldane, he recognized 
Leibniz ‘as a basis for Quantum Mechanics’.12 Wiener saw in this force 
vive an anticipation of electronic power, saying: ‘It is traditional to rep­
resent Leibniz’ theory of monads as a pluralistic spiritualism, or vital­
ism’, and he adds that if Leibniz’s language were ‘divested’ of its ‘pro­
tective layer of orthodox Christian phraseology’, the misunderstanding 
would probably be overcome and revealed as the legacy of theology. 
On the contrary: ‘We shall see that it might as well be called a pluralistic 
materialism’.13 In other places Wiener deconstructs the distinction be­
tween vitalism and materialism as an imaginative difference between 
living, non-living, vital and mechanical; a divide that is purely ‘a badly 
posed question’, or even a mere ‘semantic choice’.14 We simply choose 
to make a distinction between what is living and what is inanimate or 
simply material. The living and non-living systems cannot exist sep­
arately, because if that were the case, the transition from the one to 
the other would remain obscure. In a few words, we still need to un­
derstand the emergence of life. Not everything in a living system is 
alive, and vice versa, not everything inanimate is devoid of an intrinsic 
energy (that we may choose to call ‘life’). As Wiener states: ‘Even living 
systems are not (in all probability) living below the molecular level’.15 
Curiously, Leibniz asked the German linguist Andreas Mueller, who 
studied Chinese, whether it was a language that expressed inanimate 
objects in terms of the animate.16
12 Norbert Wiener, ‘Quantum Mechanics, Haldane, and Leibniz’, Philosophy of 
Science 1, no. 4 (October 1934): 479.
13 Ibid.
14 
Wiener, Cybernetics, 44; Wiener, The Human Use of Human Beings, 34.
15 
Norbert Wiener, God and Golem (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1964), 46.
16 Lai, ‘Leibniz’s Studies of Chinese’, 113.
Actually, no inanimate being is completely inert if it can sus­
tain itself as a cybernetic machine (think of the surface tension of a 

30
TRANSLATING RATIONALISM: LEIBNIZ AND CYBERNETICS
waterdrop, or the earth keeping its temperature stable; or, to go back 
to Wiener, if there can be cybernetic machines that have sense organs). 
Conversely, we know that more than fifty minerals are produced by liv­
ing cells.17 The continuity of all systems turns the world into a super-or­
ganism that sustains itself through a global mutual resonance, in which 
each part reconfigures the whole.
17 Lynn Margulis and Dorion Sagan, What is Life? (Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1995), 26.
18 
Leibniz’s Tentamen Anagogicum (1696) is quoted by Jeffrey McDonough,
‘Leibniz on Natural Teleology and the Laws of Optics’, Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research 78, no. 3 (May 2009): 512.
19 
Ibid., 512.
20 
Ibid., 520.
The organicist view of nature is expressed in an interesting pas­
sage from the fragment Tentamen Anagogicum, in which Leibniz uses 
the example of a ray of light. He takes it from the phenomenon of re­
fraction: according to a Newtonian paradigm, the path of light is a 
straight line, that is, the shortest path. This is the geometric paradigm. 
According to Leibniz, the path of light does not take the shortest path, 
but the easiest, because Leibniz considers that the concrete occur­
rence of light, its being a matter of fact, is not a geometric, theoretical 
entity, but an auto-poietic system following ‘the most determined or 
unique path, even in relation to curves’.18 So, it can even curve if there 
is an obstacle that compels the light to change its direction. It simply 
depends on certain step-by-step information; the light changes direc­
tion if needed, which means that even a ray of light has a teleological 
direction. It cannot just be a mental reconstruction of a reversible geo­
metric figure; it is a real system that has a direction and an irreversible 
destination meant to be reached. A ray of light is launched in space, 
and this launch means that it must go in a certain direction and must 
defend this direction, resisting any possible obstacles. Here Cartesian 
geometric objects are turned into what Deleuze would call “objectiles”. 
As Jeffrey McDonough states: ‘A ray of light will travel along the path 
which is unique with respect to ease; where “ease” is understood as 
the quantity obtained by multiplying the distance of the path by the re­
sistance of the medium(s)’.19 Distance, surface of reflection, and medi­
um are circumstances imposed on a system insofar as it is able to show 
elasticity, responsiveness and continuity. Rather than a thinker of the 
metaphysical structure of thought, we find Leibniz to be an empiricist, 
as McDonough himself notes.20

BRUNELLA ANTOMARINI
31
So, what do all of these phenomena have in common? The reckon­
er, the steam engine, the automatic combinations of symbols, events 
that are singular, that is: matters of fact? They all share the same natu­
ral strategy: an internal or living force. This is the way to defend Leibniz 
from vitalism. If living means self-organized, if the ray of light, the reck­
oner, and so on, organize themselves to defend their direction, taking 
information from outside, and if force means the ability of a system to 
transform itself, we can say that for a teleological automaton, its suffi­
cient reason to exist is not a vitalistic elan, nor an ultimate purpose of 
the universe, or a form of pan-psychism, but a force that is at work—in 
different ways—in all matter.
Within this perspective, the human rational agent is not the ori­
gin or the cause of understanding and knowledge, the one who makes 
sense of matter, or even the one who projects their behaviour on things; 
they are just one part of wider wholes. The reckoner or the I Ching make 
human mental effort irrelevant; the steam engine makes muscular ef­
fort unnecessary, and the human is possible only to the extent that it 
follows cybernetic automation present in its very structure, which is 
at the same time living and non-living, natural and technological, as 
we will now see. Human agency (so central in rationalism) is the cause 
and effect of its own nature; it identifies itself through a constant con­
frontation and adjustment to the environment. These circular feedback 
loops replace the rationalistic ideal of a linear transition from cause 
to effect, which, if heterogeneous, implies an action at a distance and 
a discontinuity that would make a relationship mysterious or magical. 
Circular transition, instead, from effector to effector, implies continu­
ity and no distance, because things placed in immediate contact with 
each other are touching each other without interruption. What comes 
to mind is the swarm intelligence, in which each element has to antici­
pate the motion of the other in order that the whole super-organism or 
super-system governs itself.
We move on to the argument of the indiscernibles. In Discourse, 
Leibniz says that it is never true that ‘two substances are entirely alike 
and differ only in number’.21 A plurality of substances explains the vari­
ety of reasons for each existence that, as we have seen, cannot be the 
inert effects of general causes. However, substances in continuous 
contact, in a relationship of contiguity, as partes extra partes, must
Leibniz, Discourse, §9, 60.
21

32
TRANSLATING RATIONALISM: LEIBNIZ AND CYBERNETICS
at the same time, be partes intra partes, if contiguity must be trans­
formed into a continuity (radical discontinuity would imply, as I said, 
an action at a distance). In Leibniz’s words, however plural, the ‘num­
ber of substances remains the same, although substances are often 
transformed’.22 We have to understand how each substance can at the 
same time keep its own unique identity and the identity of the whole 
they contribute to. As philosopher Federico Leoni puts it, very clearly: 
‘A man who builds a clock is one of many nodes in which nature divides 
itself, through folds and not cuts’.23 The machines of nature are forms in 
constant topological transition, phenomena that produce themselves 
ad infinitum: if whatever exists in nature is a machine, or an automatic 
system, living machines have a specific property; they are machines 
in their smallest parts ad infinitum.24 Later, he says: ‘We see that there 
is a world of created things, living beings, animals, entelechies, souls, 
in the minutest particle of matter. The minutest particle of matter has 
the same force vive (or in Latin vis vive, means living force) as human 
beings’.25 An organism, unlike a reckoner, is composed of an infinite 
number of systems in mutual continuity and with infinite combina- 
tions—and therefore never fully detectable—within a finite amount of 
possibilities (as I will clarify later).
22 Ibid.
23 Federico Leoni, L’automa (Milan: Mimesis, 2019), 33.
24 
Leibniz, Monadology, in Philosophical Texts, ed. and trans. R. S. Woolhouse
and Richard Francks (New York: Oxford University Press), §64, 277.
25 Ibid., §66.
26 Wiener, Quantum Mechanics, 1934, 481.
Let us now compare how Wiener retrieves Leibniz’ Monadology, 
in Quantum Mechanics:
Nevertheless, Leibniz’ great principle of the identity of 
indiscernibles is retained in the modern view. Since we 
may permute two electrons in such a way that they will 
be indiscernible from each other, we now say that two 
electrons cannot have complete separable individuali­
ties, but must be no more than two aspects of a complex 
containing two or more electrons. It is retained, we can­
not deny Leibniz’ principle of the indiscernibles.26

BRUNELLA ANTOMARINI
33
Wiener’s doubt depends on quantum nonlocality; yet, here ‘indiscern­
ible’ does not mean that electrons are exactly the same, and that there 
can therefore be a unique substance on the ground of apparent dif­
ferences. Rather, it means that the identity of a single electron is con­
stantly exchanged through the transition of energy, and though this may 
sound non-Leibnizian (some indiscernibility does exist) its identity can 
be ‘retained’: substances are plural, but also continuous, as there is no 
empty space between them. Wiener simply considers this definition as 
the result of a technological experiment that Leibniz did not have: ‘The 
modern philosopher is more subtle than Leibniz’ (author’s italics). 27
27 Ibid.
28 Leibniz, Monadology, 1998, §63, 277.
29 Wiener, Human Use of Human Being, 18.
Now, the issue of nonlocality or indeterminacy needs to be solved, 
because here Leibniz appears to be a determinist. In Monadology he 
says that the universe is regulated in a perfectly orderly manner, and 
based on this ‘pluralistic materialism’, every monad is a mirror of the 
universe in its own way.28
I will try to show that Leibniz offers a solution to Wiener’s doubt, 
because if every monad is a mirror to the other monads or to the envi­
ronment, it is at the same time continuous and discernible. It is a con­
tinuity given by communication through mirroring; it establishes an im­
mediate information with and about the other monads, and at the same 
time, it is discontinuous, because each mirror is placed in a different 
perspective. This complex view resonates with Wiener’s statement 
that communication is a ‘subtle consequence of optical interaction’.29 
Why optical? Because a mirror is optical, but at the same time, it is 
automatic, and exists in mutual tactile relationship. This optic does not 
concern the human eye so much as it considers the human eye one 
possible way to accomplish the automation of interaction among sub­
stances, through light, its refraction, and touch.
We find another answer to Wiener’s doubt in Discourse: Leibniz 
says that these many substances must keep themselves together in 
their place, and they keep their identities though constantly transform­
ing themselves, by obstructing or limiting one another. This is how the 
energy, the force vive works in them or among them:

34
TRANSLATING RATIONALISM: LEIBNIZ AND CYBERNETICS
In this way therefore, we can understand how substanc­
es obstruct or limit one another; and consequently we 
can say that in this sense they act on one another, and 
are obliged to adjust themselves to one another, so to 
speak. For it can happen that a change which enhances 
the expression of one diminishes that of another.30
30 Leibniz, Discourse, 1998, §14, 67.
31 
Niklas Luhmann, Social Systems, trans. John Bednarz (Stanford: Stanford
University Press, 1995),
Given that monads exist only in their mutual reflections, they are ‘in­
dividual’ in the sense of their variety, rather than in the sense of their 
substantiality. If we have an increase of energy in one, a decrease of 
energy must occur in the other. Of course, this is intuitive, because 
we cannot fully detect these mutual limitations that matters of fact, 
monads, or systems, exert on one another, as they actually occur in 
nature and are hardly measurable from outside.
Now, not speaking metaphorically, what are these mirrors? I 
would like to consider them as pervasive observers. In reference to 
second-order cybernetics, here we have to understand reflexivity. The 
question now is: if a system receives information, does it not imply the 
presence of an observer? This issue, which led first-order cybernetics 
to expand the scope if its research to complex systems, can be traced 
back in monads; a mirror is a kind of automatic observer. The seeming 
contradiction between discrete and continuous, automatic and reflex­
ive, can be resolved by the constant internal detection that all systems 
have with one another. This can be related to what, in second-order 
cybernetics, and particularly in the sense of Niklas Luhmann, is called 
‘double contingency’.31 That is, every system is contingent upon the 
other system or upon the environment, and it is this double contingen­
cy that causes or compels systems to adjust to one another. It might be 
argued that if the monads are closed in themselves and cannot retain 
a representation of the external environment, how can they detect the 
other monads and adjust to them? To that, a possible solution is that 
each monad just needs to identify its next feedback; it does not need 
to have knowledge of something outside. The operational closure that 
monads show overcomes the traditional deterministic or rationalistic 
illusion of ‘knowledge’, which might be solved in these terms: in the 

BRUNELLA ANTOMARINI
35
traditional model a subject (rational structure) knows an external ob­
ject (matter); in cybernetics ‘knowledge’ is replaced by combinations 
of networks automatically adjusting to one another through a retro­
active force. A mirror is a metaphor of the purely relational. Again, 
we can explain monads in terms of the emergence of more complex 
monads from basic ones, or from elementary monads which move only 
through attraction or repulsion.32 Here, of course, living force shows 
a close similarity to the electron, in which ‘force’ is a pure resistance 
and resistance is retroaction—that is, an active resistance—because if 
resistance were just passive or inert, we would not have any effector.33 
But retroaction is the ability of every system to gain new energy. From 
these elementary phases, we can understand the increasing complex­
ity in the form of a greater number of monadic relationships, until we 
arrive at the human level, in which this energy can be called freedom. At 
each level of complexity, every new strategy (or technology) represents 
a constant retroaction as a form of negentropy.
32 Wiener, ‘Back to Leibniz! Physics Reoccupies an Abandoned Position’, 
Technology Review 34 (1932): 203; Yuk Hui, Recursivity and Contingency (London: 
Rowman and Littlefiled, 2019), 119.
33 George Gale, ‘The Role of Leibniz and Haldane in Wiener’s Cybernetics’, in 
the Proceedings of the Norbert Wiener Centenary Congress on Norbert Wiener, 
1994, ed. Vidyadhar Mandrekar and Pesi Rustom Masani (Providence: American 
Mathematical Society, 1997), 252.
34 
Leibniz, De Summa Rerum, 19.
This last argument leads us to the third and last principle, pre-es­
tablished harmony. In the Summa Rerum, Leibniz states:
Assuming, then, that in a plenum one body cannot be 
expanded without another being contracted, and that 
one body cannot be contracted without another being 
expanded, and also that another expansion cannot be 
understood except by the aid of motion—assuming all 
this, it follows that for the same quantity of motion al­
ways to be conserved is the same as for the same quan­
tity of matter always to be conserved.34
This vision of matter and nature is a vision of constant transforma­
tion and motion, in which there cannot be any void, that is, no action 
at a distance. In this plenum, all monads interact with one another by 

36
TRANSLATING RATIONALISM: LEIBNIZ AND CYBERNETICS
immediate contact. Now, in the all-process that nature is, how is the 
conservation of energy possible? How can we explain the empirical 
systems (matters of fact) as open but at the same time stable? We can 
say, following Leibniz, that the conservation of energy is allowed by the 
constant self-correction of the amount of energy. Here Leibniz shows 
at his best his continuism as neither vitalistic, nor metaphysical:
Everything is full, which means that all matter is inter­
linked. In such a plenum, any movement must have an 
effect on distant bodies which are in contact with it, and 
in some way or other it feels the effects of everything 
that happens to them... . As a result, every body feels the 
effects of everything that happens in the universe.35
35 
Leibniz, Monadology, §61, 276.
36 
Wiener, Quantum Mechanics, 482
If everything is full, it means that all matter is interlinked. The contin­
uum is explained by innumerable networks and their intertwining. In 
such a plenum, any movement must have an effect on distant bodies 
through intermediate bodies that are in mutual contact and indirectly 
reach out to all. All things touch one another by reflecting (retroacting) 
on one another.
Leibniz is in perfect tune with Wiener’s machines having sense 
organs—if ‘sense organs’ means the ability to detect, or resonate with, 
the external environment, and to retroact accordingly. It is in this re­
spect that Wiener defines Leibniz as the forerunner of field theory. If 
there can be no action at a distance, the world must be a plenum. A 
monad can only mirror a distant monad through the intervention of in­
termediate monads,36 or intermediate effectors that simply destroy the 
idea of original and external causes.
How then to translate the deus ex machina of pre-established 
harmony? We have to liberate Leibniz from this misunderstanding. The 
overall harmony, which is the actual keeping-itself-together in the con­
stant transition, is not due to an external organization of the universe, 
but it is what happens step by step within each system when it tries 
to keep accord with the other systems and for the whole super-sys­
tem to remain in equilibrium. What does ‘organic’ mean? It means 

BRUNELLA ANTOMARINI
37
self-organized and correlated, a mutual correlation that Yuk Hui calls 
‘organizing inorganic’.37 This is how we can talk today about the monad.
37 
Hui, Recursivity and Contingency, 185 ff.
38 
Wiener, Human Use of Human Beings, 48
39 
Leibniz, Discourse, §13, 64
40 Ibid.
41 Ibid.
42 Ibid., 63.
43 Ibid.
Now a final issue: how can we translate contingency in Leibniz’s 
system, traditionally seen as deterministic? Wiener himself appears 
to argue against Leibniz: a living organism, he argues, is not like the 
“clockwork monad with its pre-established harmony, but actually 
seeks a new equilibrium with the universe and its future contingen­
cies. Its present is unlike its past and its future unlike its present. In 
the living organism as in the universe itself, exact repetition is absolutely 
impossible.” 38
Wiener takes the term ‘pre-established’ to mean ‘predetermined’, 
whether it is such by God or by a human rational agent who is able 
to know things through perfectly corresponding causes and effects. 
Contingency seems to be jeopardized here, but I think that Leibniz has 
an answer to that too. Leibniz says that, though it is true that pre-estab­
lished harmony seems to destroy the difference between contingent 
and necessary truths, ‘we have to make a distinction between what is 
assured but is not necessary’.39 What is assured is necessary ‘only ex 
hypothesi—and so to speak, accidentally; this is contingent in itself’.40 
There are two ways to necessity: one is theoretical, the other concrete 
and empirical. In the case of the latter, there can be only assurance. 
Whether it was assured—that is, rational—for Caesar to cross the Rubi­
con, it was not necessary, in the sense that that action was not inherent 
in the subject, meaning that the contrary would not imply a contradic- 
tion.41 We can only be assured of what will happen tomorrow, because 
there is no necessity in what has not occurred yet. He repeats, in the 
summary, that ‘it is true that there are always reasons for their choices, 
but those reasons incline without necessitating’.42 A fact or a decision 
occurs ‘among a number of equally possible things’.43 Again, reasons 
for the occurrence of matters of fact cannot be related to the principle 
of contradiction.
Empirical events are governed by propensity, inclination, di­
rection, a teleological impulse that is not vitalistic but automatic. A 

38
TRANSLATING RATIONALISM: LEIBNIZ AND CYBERNETICS
beautiful example is Leibniz’s vision of the origin of the earth in The­
odicy. He describes the emergence of the earth from a globe on fire, 
leaving rocks filled with metal and minerals, a kind of ‘natural furnace’ 
(to which he curiously adds that the human furnaces are imitations of 
the natural ones).44 Fire and minerals make an ocean of oil (oleum per 
deliquium), until the cooling of the heat leaves moisture in the air that 
falls down on the surface, absorbing the salt in the ashes and filling 
up the holes on its surface, turning it into salt water.45 The constant 
re-shaping of matter, however, being the effects of causes, leaves no 
room for any external pre-established cause. In fact, he adds that after 
the fire has gone, earth and water, having reached an equilibrium, keep 
making ‘ravages no less’.46
44 Leibniz, Theodicy, ed. A. Farrell (LaSalle, IL: Open Court, 1996), §244, 278.
45 Ibid.
46 Ibid.
47 Leibniz, Refutation inedite de Spinoza, ed. Foucher de Careil, Paris, 1854, in
8 oeuvres de Leibniz (e-artnow, 2013), 60.
Once a homeostatic condition is reached, there will be another 
disequilibrium to solve. All homeostatic conditions are only temporary 
and have to be anticipated to be protected from successive threats, 
through effectors retroacting on causes, or in other words, through 
recursive constant mutual re-adjustments. This is a kind of recursivity 
that is not ‘exact repetition’, as Wiener argues, if teleological systems 
find their persistence in their own empirical (not necessary) auto-poi­
esis. It means that not all possibles may be realized, but only those 
that circumstances allow, thanks to exploratory re-combinations of the 
same material factors and elements. By reading ‘possible’ in terms of 
energy, we can say that energy must produce, sooner or later, the same 
actualities—the same in the sense of systems following the same laws 
of feedback loops, recursive combinatory calculations; certainly not 
the same matters of fact (not another Caesar crossing the Rubicon). To 
Leibniz, things are not products of matter, rather the result of their ac­
tivity, or entelechies, which can operate without God’s intervention.47
The fact that what occurs does not occur out of infinite possibil­
ities can explain the famous ultimate question: ‘Why something rath­
er than nothing?’, and it can explain the fact that nothing is absolutely 
universal or fixed. That this is ‘the best of possible worlds’ may mean 

BRUNELLA ANTOMARINI
39
that this is the best result out of the world’s finite potentialities: more 
than that it is not possible. In Refutation de Spinoza, Leibniz argues 
against Spinoza that extension cannot just be the indefinite repetition 
of things, rather, ‘as numbers presuppose numerable things, accidents 
proper to each thing make actual the mere potential’.48 Redefining Aris­
totle, we can say that ‘potential’ means teleological, and ‘actual’ means 
homeostatic; the final cause is retrieved at the intersection of the con­
tingent transitions from potential to actual (conceived in Aristotle as 
necessary).
48 Leibniz, ibid., 59.
To summarize:
1 
The principle of sufficient reason is translated into the inter­
nal automatic inclination, or force vive, as effector that pro­
vides itself the preservation of motion and existence, as ac­
tive resistance or retroaction (feedback loops). Organic here 
means organized.
2 
The principle of the indiscernibles is translated into the nec­
essary plurality of substances, which can explain the auto­
matic and autonomous force governing all things, by virtue of 
systemic relationships, or mutual adjustment and perception 
(optical and haptic), in a condition of double contingency. Or­
ganic here means coordinated.
3 
The principle of pre-established harmony is translated into 
the activity of anticipating the effects that may accomplish 
the looked-for homeostatic condition. Whatever persists 
owes its persistence to its recursively going back to causes. 
Organic here means anticipating.
In conclusion, every effector establishes the next move. In order to do 
so, it has to anticipate what makes it survive and avoid what would de­
stroy it. Again, there is a constant self-observation of systems-monads 
that appears to belong to all levels of matter.

40
TRANSLATING RATIONALISM: LEIBNIZ AND CYBERNETICS
I would like to add a note in which Leibniz confirms his trust in 
material culture and technological practice, in opposition to abstract 
‘rational’ thinking:
And it is the main flaw of many learned people that they 
only amuse themselves in vague speeches and refu­
tations, while there is such a beautiful field to exercise 
their minds in solid and real objects to the public benefit. 
The hunters, the fishermen, the sailors, the merchants, 
the travellers and even games provide for an increase 
in useful sciences. There is even in children’s exercises 
that which could surpass the greatest Mathematician.49
49 Leibniz, ‘Discours touchant la methode de la certitude et l’art d’in­
venter pour finir les disputes et pour faire en peu de temps des grands pro­
gres’, in Leibniz, Die philosophischen Schriften vol. 7, ed. Carl I. Gerhardt (Berlin: 
Weidmannsche Buchhandlung, 1965 [1885]), 181.

BRUNELLA ANTOMARINI
41
Reference
Antomarini, Brunella. ‘L’eolipila di Erone Alessandrino: L’intelligenza 
dimenticata dell’inventore’. In Sensibilia 6. Edited by Manrica Rotili 
and Marco Tedeschini, 27-42. Milan: Mimesis, 2013.
———. Thinking Through Error. Lanham: Lexington Edition, 2012.
De Latil, Pierre. Thinking by Machine: A Study of Cybernetics. Translated 
by Y. M. Golla. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1957.
Forman, David. ‘Leibniz on Human Finitude, Progress, and Eternal 
Recurrence: The Argument of the ‘Apokatastasis’ Essay Drafts and 
Related Texts’. In Oxford Studies in Early Modern Philosophy, Volume 
8. Edited by Daniel Garber and Donald Rutherford, 225-70. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2019.
Gale, George. ‘The Role of Leibniz and Haldane in Wiener’s Cybernetics’. 
In the Proceedings of the Norbert Wiener Centenary Congress on 
Norbert Wiener, 1994. Edited by Vidyadhar Mandrekar and Pesi 
Rustom Masani, 247-61. Providence: American Mathematical 
Society, 1997.
Gray, Jonathan. ‘“Let’s Calculate!” Leibniz, Llull, and the Computational 
Imagination’. The Public Domain Review, 10 November 2016, 
https://publicdomainreview.org/essay/let-us-calculate-leib- 
niz-llull-and-the-computational-imagination.
Hui, Yuk. Recursivity and Contingency. London: Rowman and Littlefiled, 
2019.
Lai, Yuen-Ting. ‘Leibniz’s Studies of Chinese and Perennial Philosophy’. Il 
cannocchiale (January-April 1999): 101-146.
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm. De summa rerum. Translated by G. H. R. 
Parkinson. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1992.
———. Discourse on Metaphysics, in Philosophical Texts. Edited and 
translated by R. S. Woolhouse and Richard Francks. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1998.
———. ‘Discours touchant la methode de la certitude et l’art d’inventer 
pour finir les disputes et pour faire en peu de temps des grands 
progres’. In Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, Die philosophischen Schriften. 
Edited by Carl I. Gerhardt, Volume 7, 174-83. Berlin, Weidmannsche 
Buchhandlung, 1965 [1885].
———. Monadology, in Philosophical Texts. Edited and translated by R. S. 
Woolhouse and Richard Francks. New York: Oxford University Press, 
1998.
------- . Refutation inedite de Spinoza. Edited by Foucher de Careil, ed., 
Paris, 1854, in 8 oeuvres de Leibniz. e-artnow 2013.
———. Theodicy. Edited by A. Farrell. LaSalle, IL : Open Court, 1996.
———. Writings on China. Edited and translated by Daniel Cook and Henry 
Rosemont jr. LaSalle, IL: Open Court, 1994.

42
TRANSLATING RATIONALISM: LEIBNIZ AND CYBERNETICS
Leoni, Federico. L’automa. Milan: Mimesis, 2019.
Luhmann, Niklas. Social Systems. Translated by John Bednarz. Stanford: 
Stanford University Press, 1995.
Margulis, Lynn and Sagan, Dorion. What is Life? Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1995.
McDonough, Jeffrey. ‘Leibniz on Natural Teleology and the Laws of 
Optics’. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 78, no. 3 (May 
2009): 505-44.
Rey, Anne-Lise. ‘The Controversy between Leibniz and Papin: From the 
Public Debate to the Correspondence’. In The Practise of Reason: 
Leibniz and His Controversies. Edited by Marcelo Dascal, 75-100. 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company, 2010.
Rossi, Paolo. Clavis Universalis: Arti mnemoniche e logica combinatoria 
da Lullo a Leibniz. Bologna: Il Mulino, 1983[1960].
———. I filosofi e le macchine 1400-1700. Milan: Feltrinelli, 2007 [1962].
Sypniewski, Bernard Paul. ‘China and Universals: Leibniz, Binary 
Mathematics and the Yijing Hexagrams’. Monumenta Serica 53 
(2005): 287-314, https://www.jstor.org/stable/40727465.
Uchii, Soshichi. ‘Leibniz’s Ultimate Theory’. PhilSci Archive (2017), http:// 
philsci-archive.pitt.edu/12787/.
Wiener, Norbert. ‘Back to Leibniz! Physics Reoccupies an Abandoned 
Position’. Technology Review 34 (1932): 201-3; 222-24.
———. Cybernetics, Or Control and Communication in the Animal and the 
Machine. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press 1985.
———. God and Golem. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1964.
———. The Human Use of Human Beings: Cybernetics and Society. 
London: Free Association Books, 1989.
———. ‘Quantum Mechanics, Haldane, and Leibniz’. Philosophy of Science 
1, no. 4 (October 1934): 479-82.

43
Machine and Ecology
Yuk Hui
In this article I hope to investigate the relation between machine and 
ecology, and the philosophical and historical questions concealed in 
these two seemingly incompatible terms through a repositioning of 
cybernetics in the history of thought. First of all, I want to problematize 
these two ambiguous terms, ‘machine’ and ‘ecology’, as a preparation 
to de-familiarize and de-romanticize certain ideas about techno-ecol­
ogy, and to suggest a political ecology of machines, which will centre 
around what I term ‘technodiversity’. This quest for technodiversity 
belongs to a systematic inquiry of my thesis on cosmotechnics in The 
Question Concerning Technology in China (2016), which argues against 
certain traditions of philosophy, anthropology and history of technol­
ogy, and suggests that instead of taking for granted an anthropologi­
cally universal concept of technics, we should conceive a multiplicity 
of technics, characterized by different dynamics between the cosmic, 
the moral and the technical.
Conventionally, we tend to think that machines and ecology are 
opposed to one another, because machines are artificial and mechan­
ical while ecology is natural and organic. We may call this a dualism of 
critique (instead of a critique of dualism), since its mode of critique is 
based on the setting up of binaries, which it fails to go beyond, like the 
unhappy consciousness. This opposition has resulted from some ste­
reotypes concerning the status of machines. Even today when people 
talk about machines, they tend to think of mechanistic machines based 
on linear causality, for example, the digesting duck designed by the 
technician Jacques de Vaucanson, or the mechanical Turk by Wolfgang 
von Kempelen, (both in the eighteenth century), and when they talk 
about ecology they tend to think of nature as a self-regulating system, 
which gives everything and takes everything back.
After the overcoming of dualism
The above-mentioned notions of machine and ecology undermine both 
the history of technology and the history of philosophy, therefore they 
also ignore the technical reality which conditions the validity of such 

44
MACHINE AND ECOLOGY
a criticism. Criticism based on dualism fails to understand itself his­
torically and critically. The mechanistic view of machines was already 
completely surpassed and rendered obsolete by cybernetics in the 
mid-twentieth century; instead, we have witnessed the emergence of a 
mechano-organicism. Today cybernetics has become the modus ope- 
randi in machines ranging from smartphones to robots and spacecraft. 
The rise of cybernetics was one of the major events in the twentieth 
century. Different from mechanism, which is based on linear causality 
(i.e. A-B-C), it rests on a circular causality (i.e. A-B-C-A'), meaning that 
it is reflective in the basic sense that it is able to determine itself in 
the form of a recursive structure. By recursion I mean a non-linear re­
flective movement which progressively moves towards its telos, be it 
predefined or auto-posited. Cybernetics belongs to a larger paradigm 
in the sciences, namely, organicism, which originated from the criti­
cism against mechanism as a fundamental ontological understanding. 
Organicism also has to be distinguished from vitalism, which often re­
lies on a mysterious (separate, immaterial) ‘vital force’ to explain the 
existence of a living being; instead, organicism finds its foundation in 
mathematics. Cybernetics, as one form of organicism, mobilizes two 
key concepts, feedback and information, to analyse the behaviour of all 
beings, both animate (living) and inanimate (lifeless), and both nature 
and society. In the first chapter of Cybernetics: Or Control and Com­
munication in the Animal and the Machine (1948), the founder of cyber­
netics, Norbert Wiener, first reiterates an opposition between Newto­
nian time and Bergsonian time.1 Newtonian motion is mechanistic, and 
time-symmetric, hence reversible, while Bergsonian time is organic, 
biological, creative and irreversible. It is not until the Second Law of 
Thermodynamics, proposed by the French physicist Sadi Carnot in 
1824 (almost a century after Newton’s death in 1727), that we recognize 
the ‘arrow of time’ in being and the fact that the so-called entropy of a 
system increases with time and is irreversible. Already in his first book, 
Essai sur les donnees immediates de la conscience (1889), Bergson 
launched a fierce attack on the way in which time was conceptualized 
in Western science and philosophy.1 2 Time is here understood in terms 
1 
Norbert Wiener, Cybernetics: Or Control and Communication in the Animal
and the Machine. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1985), Chapter 1.
2 
Henri Bergson, Essai sur les donnees immediates de la conscience (Paris:
PUF, 2013).

YUK HUI
45
of space, for example, in terms of intervals which can be represented 
in space. Therefore, the time thus conceptualized is actually timeless, 
according to Bergson. It is also homogeneous, like the intervals marked 
on a clock. Instead, organic time or duree, Bergson suggests, cannot 
be fully understood as extension ordered in spatial terms; rather it con­
tains heterogeneity or qualitative multiplicity in organic forms. Time is 
a force that is singular in every instant, like Heraclitus’s river; it does 
not repeat itself twice like a mechanical clock. Indeed, mechanical or 
linear causality is not compatible with the concept of duration. Berg- 
sonian ‘organic’ time also provides a new way to understand human 
consciousness and experience.
Wiener proposed that such opposition was already surpassed by 
the discovery of statistical mechanics in physics. For example, con­
sidering a container of particles, from the point of view of statistical 
mechanics it is possible to communicate between the macrostates 
and microstates, and therefore, control the behaviour of the system. 
In other words, cybernetics endeavours to eliminate dualism; it wants 
to create a connection between different orders of magnitude—mac­
ro and micro, mind and body—akin to what Hans Jonas describes in 
Phenomenon of Life, regarding cybernetics as ‘an overcoming of the 
dualism which classical materials had left in possession by default: for 
the first time since Aristotelianism we would have a unified doctrine, or 
at least a unified conceptual scheme, for the representation of reality’.3 
The same observation is made in Gilbert Simondon’s On the Mode of 
Existence of Technical Objects (1958), where he considers the reflex­
ive thinking of cybernetics (characterized by feedback and information) 
as key to the resolution of the dualism intrinsic in culture; traditional 
and modern, rural and urban, major (adult) and minor (child) modes of 
technology education, and so on.4 In Recursivity and Contingency, I 
put feedback under a more general category: recursivity. Recursion 
in general designates a non-linear operation which constantly returns 
to itself in order to know and determine itself.5 There are different mo­
dalities of recursions, but they all share the overcoming of dualism. In­
formation is the measurement of the degree of organization; feedback 
3 
Hans Jonas, The Phenomenon of Life: Toward a Philosophical Biology
(Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 2001), 111.
4 
Gilbert Simondon, On the Mode of Existence of Technical Objects, trans.
Cecile Malaspina and John Rogove (Minneapolis: Univocal, 2017).
5 
Yuk Hui, Recursivity and Contingency (London: Rowman and Littlefield, 2019).

46
MACHINE AND ECOLOGY
is a recursive or circular causality that allows auto-regulation to take 
place. For example, when reaching out with my arm to grasp a bottle of 
water, many feedback processes are taking place, which allows me to 
adjust the attention of my eyes and the muscles of my arms until I reach 
the destination, or the telos. Therefore, towards the end of Chapter 1 of 
Cybernetics, Wiener was able to claim that
modern automation exists in the same sort of Bergso- 
nian time as the living organism, and hence there is no 
reason in Bergson’s considerations why the essential 
mode of functioning of the living organism should not be 
the same as that of the automation of this type... In fact, 
the whole mechanist-vitalist controversy has been rele­
gated to the limbo of badly posed questions.6
Wiener, Cybernetics, 44.
Whether Wiener’s claim can be completely justified has to be scru­
tinized under the light of history. However, it remains significant for 
us to reconceptualize what is happening today regarding the relation 
between machine and organism, human and environment, technology 
and nature, departing from Wiener’s cybernetics. Wiener’s bold state­
ment suggests a radical revaluation of the humanist values that oppose 
the organic and the inorganic, and it also renders the humanist critique 
ineffective. Different from what, for example, Andre Leroi-Gourhan and 
Bernard Stiegler might call ‘organized inorganic’, Wiener’s focus is not 
the man-machine or man-tool hybrid, but rather the possibility of as­
similating both the organic and the inorganic by cybernetic machines. 
Modern machines are all cybernetic machines: they all employ circular 
causality as their principle of operation. In this sense, a cybernetic ma­
chine is no longer merely mechanistic, but rather assimilates certain 
behaviours of organisms. It is important to bear in mind that resem­
blance does not mean equivalence, and it is this misunderstanding that 
dominates our contemporary politics of machines today.
Ecology is similarly a concept charged with ambiguity. If ecol­
ogy is rooted in an attempt to understand the relation between the 
living being and its milieu—as it is in the case of Ernst Haeckel in the 
6

YUK HUI
47
nineteenth century and is continued in the early twentieth century by 
Jakob von Uexkull—we have to bear in mind that this discourse remains 
important but insufficient to understand the complexity that belongs 
to human societies. Von Uexkull has furthered Haeckel’s concept of 
ecology to show that the environment is not only that which selects 
according to its physicality (in this respect Haeckel remains a Darwin­
ian), but also that which is selected and internalized by the living being. 
The first type of selection may be called adaptation, meaning that the 
living being has to adapt itself to the milieu according to the available 
resources and physical conditions. The second type of selection may 
be called adoption, meaning that the living being has to select and 
construct contexts from what is available to it as means of survival. 
The tick, an arachnid without eyes, remains inactive in its position on 
a tree, and only by detecting wind, warmth, and the smell of butyric 
acid (sweat)—which signify the approach of a mammal—it falls down 
in order to attach to the animal’s body, to reach the skin and then to 
suck its blood. There is a semiotics in the process of selection of infor­
mation, based on the Bauplan (literally building plan or blueprint), the 
sensorium and the central nervous system of the animal, which in turn 
defines its Umwelt (literally surrounding world).7 However, human be­
ings are not ticks, they invent tools and change the environment. They 
are beings talented not only with adapting to the external environment, 
but also with changing and adopting that environment itself through 
technical means. In these processes of adaptation and adoption, we 
see that there is a reciprocity between the living being and its environ­
ment, which we can also call its organicity, namely, the fact that they do 
not only exchange information, energy and matter but also constitute 
a community. A human community is far beyond the sum of the human 
actors that constitute it; it also includes their environment and other 
non-human beings.
7 Jakob von Uexkull, A Foray into the Worlds of Animals and Humans: With a 
Theory of Meaning (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2010), 50-51.
The intervention of human beings in the environment defines the 
process of hominization; the evolutionary and historical becoming of 
human and its politics. It is beyond my capacity to outline this process, 
but human civilization could be seen as an intimate and complicit rela­
tion between humans and their environment, which gives rise to what 

48
MACHINE AND ECOLOGY
has been called mesology since Plato (according to Augustin Berque’s 
historiography).8 However, to return the subject at hand, let us turn to 
a provocative claim from Marshall McLuhan:
8 Augustin Berque, Poetique de la Terre: Histoire naturelle et histoire 
humaine, essai de mesologie (Paris, Belin, 2014).
9 Marshall McLuhan, ‘At the Moment of Sputnik the Planet Became a 
Global Theatre in which There Are No Spectators but Only Actors’, Journal of 
Communication 24, no. 1 (1974): 49.
10 Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition (Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1998 
[1958]), 1.
11 Ernst Haeckel, Generelle Morphologie der Organismen (Berlin: Georg 
Reimer, 1866), Vol. 2: 286-87; see also: Robert J. Richards, The Tragic Sense of Life: 
Ernst Haeckel and the Struggle over Evolutionary Thought (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 2009), 8.
Sputnik created a new environment for the planet. For the 
first time the natural world was completely enclosed in a 
man-made container. At the moment that the Earth went 
inside this new artifact, Nature ended and Ecology was 
born. ‘Ecological’ thinking became inevitable as soon as 
the planet moved up into the status of a work of art.9
This statement has to be analysed further. The 1957 launch of Sputnik 
by the Soviet Union is the first time that human beings were able to 
ponder the earth from the outside, and in this respect, the earth is now 
principally viewed as an artifact with the aid of space technology. In 
The Human Condition, Hannah Arendt also describes the 1957 launch 
of Sputnik as ‘second in importance to no other, not even to the split­
ting of the atom’, because it suggests, as Konstantin Tsiolkovsky said 
in a phrase quoted by Arendt, that ‘mankind will not remain bound to 
the earth forever’.10 11
 This liberation from the earth directly confronts hu­
mankind with the infinite universe and prepares for a cosmic nihilism. 
It is the moment nature ended and ecology was born. In contrast to 
the meaning Haeckel gave to the term ecology towards the end of the 
nineteenth century, meaning the totality of relations between a living 
being and its environment,11 and to Uexkull’s definition of ecology as 
the selection process from the Umgebung (physical environment) to 
the Umwelt (the ‘interpretation’ of the world by the living being), what 
McLuhan means by ecology is no longer a biological concept. Accord­
ing to McLuhan, the earth is considered to be a cybernetic system 

YUK HUI
49
monitored and governed by the machines upon it and in outer space. 
What we are witnessing is the disappearance of the earth, since it is 
continuously absorbed into a plane of immanence constructed by the 
recursive thinking of cybernetics.
The hybridism between the natural environment and machines 
constitutes a gigantic system, and it is in this conceptualization that 
nature ended and ecology began. Ecology, beyond its strict use in bi­
ology, is not a concept of nature but rather a concept of cybernetics.12 
This is more evident when we refer to the notion of Gaia coined by 
James Lovelock to describe the ecological system of the earth as ‘a 
cybernetic system with homeostatic tendencies as detected by chem­
ical anomalies in the Earth’s atmosphere’.13 So we quickly arrived here, 
at the position that the modern machine is no longer mechanistic and 
ecology is nothing natural; in fact, modern machines and ecology are 
two discourses adhering to the same principle, namely, cybernetics. 
The difference being, if we insist, that we have moved from individ­
ual machines—for example, the automatic machines in the factories 
of nineteenth-century Manchester described by Marx—to technical 
systems that connect different machines and establish recursivity 
between them. These systems can take different scales, from a local 
network, to a planetary system such as the earth’s technosphere. Now 
I want to ask what the implications of this redefinition of (the relation 
between) machine and ecology could be.
12 Note that many biologists use the term ecology, and it is generally con­
sidered to be a biological discipline studying relationships of biotic and abiotic 
elements.
13 James Lovelock, Gaia: A New Look at Life on Earth (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2000 [1979]), 142.
Technological becoming of geophilosophy
We are more than ever in an epoch of cybernetics, since cybernetics 
was not a discipline parallel to other disciplines such as philosophy and 
psychology, but rather it aimed to be a universal discipline, able to unite 
all others—therefore, we could say, a universal mode of thinking par ex­
cellence. Cybernetics as universal reflexive thinking has displaced phi­
losophy from the position it used to occupy. This displacement is not a 

50
MACHINE AND ECOLOGY
rejection of philosophy, but rather, in the parlance of Martin Heidegger, 
the completion or end of philosophy (the German word Ende signifies 
both completion and end). What does this end mean? Does it mean that 
Western philosophy no longer has any role to play in the technological 
age, since it is already completed in technology as destiny? Or does 
it mean that philosophy will have to reinvent itself in order to survive, 
namely, become a post-European (or postmetaphysical, post-ontolog­
ical) philosophy, and that this also goes for Europe itself? I do not want 
to open a Pandora’s box here, but simply to point out that cybernetic 
thinking as an alleged universal and ecological thinking is that which 
sublates, or at least pretends to sublate, the traditional metaphysical 
dualisms in ontology and epistemology, and it is in this respect that 
it calls forth a new condition of philosophizing, and therefore a new 
inquiry into the question of ecology.
Here is the postulation: maybe it is no longer a dualism that is 
the source of danger in our epoch, but rather a non-dualistic totalizing 
power present in modern technology, which ironically resonates with 
the anti-dualist ideology (for example, the rejection of any comparison 
between the East and the West). Ironically, because the anti-dualist 
ideology still believes that the main danger is dualism, without real­
izing that this duality is no longer the foundation of modern science 
and technology. In other words, without having examined this intimate 
relation between philosophy and technology, it will be difficult, if not 
impossible, to develop a philosophical thinking adequate to our con­
temporary situation.
Now, let us bring our skepticism to the fore and pursue the argu­
ment further: Will cybernetics be the solution to the ecological prob­
lems that we face today? Will the organismic model at the heart of cy­
bernetics be able to escape the shadow that European modernity has 
cast for centuries? If the early moderns provide us a mechanistic view 
of the world through geometrization (Kepler, Galileo, Newton and Des­
cartes, among others) and experimental science (Bacon and Boyle), 
now with cybernetics as the realization and concretization of organis­
mic thought which started dominating since the end of the eighteenth 
century, can we finally terminate modernity with cybernetics? Do we 
not already find in cybernetics, and its planetary version, the Gaia theo­
ry, a generic logic that rests on the recognition of the relation between 
the living being and its milieu, as the philosopher and orientalist Augus­
tin Berque has emphasized in many places?

YUK HUI
51
To overcome the modern alternative is to recognize 
that the structural moment of our existence—our medi- 
ance—is such that each of us is split: ‘half’ (from the Latin 
medietas) in one’s individual animal body, while the other 
‘half’ consists of the eco-technical-symbolic system that 
is our life milieu.14
14 Augustin Berque, Thinking Through Landscape, trans. Anne-Marie 
Feenberg-Dibon (London: Routledge, 2014), 60.
15 Martin Heidegger, Panderings XII-XV: Black Notebooks 1939-1941, trans.
Richard Rojcewicz (Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 2017), 143.
Berque proposes a non-binary thinking that he found in Japanese 
thought, or Eastern thought in general, and opposes it to the dualism 
of which Descartes is the modern spokesperson. However, let us not 
rush to an answer, because we may fall victim to the dualism of cri­
tique discussed above. Instead, let us consider a comment from Heide­
gger’s Black Notebook concerning the relation between organism and 
technology: ‘It might very well still take a considerable time to recog­
nize that the “organism” and the “organic” present themselves as the 
mechanistic-technological “triumph” of modernity over the domain 
of growth, “nature”.’15 Heidegger saw that this becoming organic, or 
becoming ecological, is no more than the mechanistic-technological 
triumph of modernity over nature. This statement has to be assessed 
beyond the cynical impression that one may have at first glance. Heide­
gger’s critique of cybernetics deserves our reflection today, since he 
does not celebrate the overcoming of dualism, but rather calls for pru­
dence (phronesis) and for warding off illusions and false analysis. Be­
cause at first glance, one may be able to claim that cybernetics has 
fulfilled an anti-dualistic critique of modernity. I would like to suggest, 
rather provocatively, that with the rise of cybernetics and its organis­
mic model, we may need a new agenda for mesology. We will have to 
understand this by rethinking the relation between technology and the 
environment. Instead of seeing technology as a result of the determi­
nation by the geographical milieu, or concluding that the natural milieu 
is destroyed by technology, we cannot neglect how the technology­
environment complex constitutes its own genesis and autonomy, and 
how such genesis could be rethought or resituated in a cosmic reality 
which is proper to the milieu or fudo (S±) in the sense of the Japanese 

52
MACHINE AND ECOLOGY
philosopher Tetsuro Watsuji. I will elaborate on this point towards the 
end of the article.
To be brief—and this definitely deserves much more detailed 
analysis in the future—this technological-environmental complex 
could be understood in two senses, which are seemingly different yet 
remain intimately related. First, it is what the paleoanthropologist An­
dre Leroi-Gourhan terms a technical milieu.16 The technical milieu is 
that which acts as a membrane between the internal milieu conceived 
as an unstable and dynamic ‘mental tradition’, and the external milieu 
consisting of the climate, natural resources and the influences of oth­
er tribal groups.17 Leroi-Gourhan uses the cell as an organic metaphor 
to explain the relation between three milieus (technical, internal and 
external) and the permeability and resistance against technical ten­
dencies. The technical milieu is that which is produced by the irreduc­
ible differences between the internal and external milieus, while at the 
same time it filters and diffuses what comes from the external milieu 
so that it can maintain the consistency of the internal milieu. In other 
words, the internal milieu and the external milieu form a reciprocal re­
lation through the mediation of the technical milieu.
16 Andre Leroi-Gourhan, Milieu et technique (Paris: Albin Michel, 1973), 
340-50.
17 Ibid., 334-35.
18 
Simondon, Technical Objects, 57-58.
The second sense of the technological-environmental complex 
concerns a techno-geographical milieu, a term coined by Gilbert Si- 
mondon. It literally means that the geographical milieu, including natu­
ral resources, is no longer simply an object of exploitation but is rather 
integrated into the functioning of the technical object. In On the Mode 
of Existence of Technical Objects, Simondon gives us the famous ex­
ample of the Guimbal turbine, which successfully integrates the riv­
er as both the driving force of an engine and its cooling agent.18 The 
engine is immersed in oil at a high temperature. Oil effectively in­
sulates and protects the engine from water, at the same time acting 
as a lubricant. In the case of the Guimbal turbine, the functionality 
of the river is multiplied; it becomes an organ belonging to the tech­
nical objects. The river is also what Simondon calls an associated 
milieu which provides a feedback mechanism for stabilizing and reg­
ulating the dynamic system: the stronger the current, the faster the 

YUK HUI
53
turbine moves. Theoretically, more heat is produced which may burn 
the engine, while since the current is also fast, the heat can be more 
effectively carried away. The river and the turbine thus form a tech­
no-environmental complex.
Both Leroi-Gourhan and Simondon were influenced by the meta­
phor of the organism in their conceptualization of the technical milieu 
and the associated milieu. This aspiration to an organismic or holistic 
model was a significant intellectual movement of their time. The role of 
the technical milieu for Leroi-Gourhan as a membrane between the in­
ternal and external milieus, is similar to what Simondon calls the asso­
ciated milieu, with the difference that Leroi-Gourhan still wants to sin­
gle out the technical from the cultural (internal) and natural (external), 
while in the scheme of Simondon such distinctions have already dis­
appeared. Simondon calls it a techno-geographical milieu (this is also 
the reason why Simondon was able to conceive of a conceptual plan 
for overcoming the antagonism between culture and nature, nature 
and technology, culture and technology). Simondon’s interpretation of 
the significance of the Guimbal engine and the notion of the associat­
ed milieu was very much influenced by Wiener’s cybernetics; and the 
reflective logic in cybernetics seems to Simondon to have displaced 
philosophy. It is from this point that we can understand Heidegger’s 
claim that cybernetics marks the end of philosophy. Simondon’s river 
stands in a peculiar relation to what Heidegger says in The Question 
Concerning Technology about the hydroelectric plant in the Rhine river, 
where the river becomes a mere standing reserve, to be constantly 
challenged and exploited by modern technology.19 Peculiar because, at 
first glance, Simondon’s formulation of the river as a techno-geograph­
ical milieu expresses an optimism, while Heidegger’s description of the 
Rhine river as standing reserve is, though not necessarily pessimistic, 
a criticism of the ‘technization’ of phusis; they both refer to the same 
end of philosophy, but with two different attitudes.
19 Martin Heidegger, The Question Concerning Technology and Other Essays, 
trans. William Lovitt (New York: Garland, 1977), 16.
Simondon’s emphasis on what concerns the Guimbal engine is 
not simply about the exploitation of the river, but also demonstrates 
a reciprocity between the technological and the natural, or what Si- 
mondon himself calls ‘co-naturality’. The reciprocal and communal 
structure demonstrated by the Guimbal engine is only one case of 

54
MACHINE AND ECOLOGY
the cybernetic thinking to which Simondon aspires, in order to over­
come dualism—or its more aggressive form, antagonism—between 
culture and technology, nature and technology. After cybernetics, 
especially with biologists Huberto Maturana and Francisco Varela’s 
notion of ‘structural coupling’, the technical functionality of the river 
described by Simondon seems to be present as a generic model of 
the techno-geographical complex. Environment is not only that which 
is modified by technology, but rather it is also increasingly constitut­
ed by technology. Ecological thinking is not simply about protecting 
nature, but fundamentally a political thought based on environments 
and territories. Technology’s increasing capacity to participate in the 
modulation of the environment forces us to develop a geophilosophy. 
This is by no means a new discovery, however, it is essential to anal­
yse this historical trajectory in order to understand what is at stake in 
technological development today:
1 
The relation between the human and the environment is com­
plexified in the course of time and the semiotics that defines 
perception and interpretation has to be constantly updated 
according to the evolution of technical objects in Simondon’s 
sense. The continuity and discontinuity from biological sen­
sory detection, to the display of signs and symbols, and to 
the invention of electronic sensors that gradually cover the 
urban and rural area, today entails a technological trajecto­
ry that constantly defines and redefines human and nature, 
which Peter Sloterdijk might term the domestication of hu­
man beings.20
20 Peter Sloterdijk, Nicht gerettet: Versuche nach Heidegger (Frankfurt am 
Main: Suhr-kamp, 2001), especially the chapter ‘Domestikation des Seins: Die 
Verdeutlichung der Lichtung.’
2 
The technology that is used for the domestication of livestock
is fundamentally a modulation of the relation between live­
stock and its environment; or in other words, human beings 
intervene in the environment by controlling its fertility and 
sterility in order to modulate the behaviour of the livestock on 
a large scale. Human communities maintain an apparent au­
tonomy through the invention of laws, customs and symbolic 

YUK HUI
55
systems that define taboos and transgressions. These con­
stitute social norms and therefore also their opposite, social 
inadaptability, which is central to Michel Foucault’s analysis.
3 
The technology of livestock domestication has gradual­
ly merged with the self-domestication of the human being, 
which may be understood in terms of what Foucault calls 
governmentality. Human beings’ intervention in the environ­
ment constitutes a specific kind of governmentality, which 
Foucault calls environmentality. At the beginning of this en­
vironmental thinking, we see that, and here I quote Foucault, 
‘the population is the object that government must take into 
account in all its observations and knowledge [savoir], in 
order to be able to govern effectively in a rational and con­
scious manner’.21
4 
The control of the population represents a molar type of gov- 
ernmentality, which treats human beings in large quantities, 
therefore its technique can only be implemented through the 
mediation of laws and regulations that treat each subject as 
an equal and particular being. Technological inventions since 
the twentieth century supplement this molar mode of control 
with a molecular mode, meaning that each human being is 
treated as an individual who differs from other individuals. 
Such individuals are defined by the relation between the 
individual and their environment constantly captured and 
capitalized in the form of data. This form of governmentality 
became dominant during the coronavirus pandemic.
21 Michel Foucault, Power: Essential Works of Foucault, 1954-1984, ed. James 
D. Faubion, trans. Robert Hurley et al. (London: Penguin Classics, 2020), 217.
The generalization of recursive algorithms and its implementation in 
digital computers concretize cybernetic thinking and its applications 
in almost all social, economical and political domains. Capital moves 
from a mechanistic model, accurately observed by Marx, towards an 
organismic model realized by informational machines equipped with 
complex recursive algorithms. Data is the source of information; it is 

56
MACHINE AND ECOLOGY
that which allows the recursive models to be ubiquitous and effective. 
The digital urbanism that is in the process of developing, and which will 
be the central theme of the digital economy, is driven by the recursive 
operation of data. Data, in Latin, means something that is already given, 
like sense data that determines the falling of the tick, or the red colour 
of the apple in front of me. Since the mid-twentieth century, data has 
acquired a new meaning, namely, computational information, which is 
no longer merely ‘given’ as such, but is rather produced and modulated 
by human beings.22 In this sense, we can see that the notion of ‘societ­
ies of control’ described by Gilles Deleuze is far beyond the common 
discourse of a society of surveillance; it rather means societies whose 
governmentality is based on the auto-position and auto-regulation of 
automatic systems. These systems vary in scale; it can be a global cor­
poration like Google, a city like London, a nation state like China and 
also the whole planet.
22 Hui, Digital Objects, 48.
23 Ludwig von Bertalanffy, General System Theory (New York: George Braziller, 
2015 [1968]), 49.
Towards an ecology of machines
Here I would like to return to the question raised earlier: Is cybernetics 
and its continuation in the twenty-first century, via the systems theory 
of Niklas Luhmann et al., already a response to the critique of industrial­
ism, which inherited the dualistic tendency of early modern thought, as 
outlined by Ludwig von Bertalanffy in his 1936 General System Theory?
The mechanical world view, taking the play of physical 
particles as ultimate reality, found its expression in a 
civilization which glorifies physical technology that has 
led eventually to the catastrophes of our time. Possibly 
the model of the world as a great organization can help 
to reinforce the sense of reverence for the living which 
we have almost lost in the last sanguinary decades of 
human history.23

YUK HUI
57
With the becoming reflective of cybernetic machines, is it possible to 
surpass modernity, and hence the epistemologies that accompany it? 
Or is the generic model suggested by cybernetics for overcoming du­
alism still within the paradigm of modernity, as Heidegger suggested 
in the 1930s? What does it mean to still be within the paradigm of mo­
dernity? It means, I suggest, that such a concept of modernity under­
mines the necessity of locality and diversity, because it insists upon a 
universal episteme and upon the concept of progress.
Although it is true that machines are becoming organismic, it is, 
as Simondon has observed, in the permanent process of ‘becoming’, 
no matter how concrete a technical object is, that it still retains remi­
niscences of abstract schemes, while a living being is always already 
completely concrete. It is within the parallax between the ‘not being 
completely concrete’ and the illusion of being able to replace nature 
with digital informational technology that we find the question of pol­
itics today. The former remains a humanist critique, while the latter is 
transhumanist. Heidegger’s response is neither humanist nor trans­
humanist, but rather, according to our interpretation, local. Being, for 
Heidegger, is a notion specific to a locality, called the land of the eve­
ning (Abendland). The concept of being does not have a correspon- 
dending term in Chinese language and thought, at least, not from a 
linguistic point of view.24 We find it, for example, in Heidegger’s read­
ing of Holderlin’s hymn ‘Der Ister’, in which the river is conceived as 
both locality (Ortschaft) and wandering (or journeying) (Wanderschaft) 
at its origin.25
24 A.C. Graham, Studies in Chinese Philosophy and Philosophical Literature 
(New York: SUNY, 1990), 322-59.
25 Martin Heidegger, Holderlin’s Hymn ‘The Ister’, trans. William McNeill and 
Julia Davis (Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 1996), 30.
26 Ibid., 42.
The river is the locality of the locale of the home. The 
river at the same time determines the becoming of hu­
man beings as historical in their being at home. The river 
is the wandering of that journey in which the becoming of 
being at home has its essence.26

58
MACHINE AND ECOLOGY
The river, which is the external milieu for Leroi-Gourhan and the asso­
ciated milieu for Simondon, is the locality that is, by default, keeping 
stationary, and it is the wandering that moves forward. This seemingly 
contradictory movement, forward and backward, constitutes the his­
toricity of ‘being there’ (Da-sein). However, the destiny of locality is not 
yet clear in the technological epoch, and this ambiguity is the source 
of reactionary politics. It is because the reactionaries search for a Hei- 
mat without differentiating it from locality. However, the truth of Being 
can only take place in the danger brought about by humanity’s frenzy 
for the gigantic, in the form of an event of appropriation initiated by a 
‘shock of deep awe’ (Schrecken der Scheu).27 Ought we to wait for this 
eschatology to happen, or should we instead take other paths that do 
not follow the history of Western thought, as long as the universal has 
to be contested? The question of Being, which Heidegger explores, 
brings us back to the question of locality and historicity; one that is in 
tension with Heidegger’s own longing for the Heimat.28 One may claim, 
as many sociologists do, that with the invention of network technolo­
gy, time and space are both increasingly compressed. Such a claim 
prevents us from seeing what has always already been there and be­
yond. Indeed, one of the major failures of the twentieth century is the 
inability to articulate the relation between locality and technology, and 
the reliance on an almost standardized ecological thinking endowed 
with a strong European humanism. Technology became a provocation 
of either reactionary politics based on a dualism between tradition and 
modernity, or a fanatical accelerationism, which believes that the prob­
lems that we have and have inherited will finally be resolved by tech­
nological advancement, be it geoengineering for repairing the earth or 
the subversion of capitalism by accelerating towards full automation. 
From the economic and technocratic perspective, there is very little 
value in taking locality into consideration, other than accounting for the 
availability of natural resources. The advancement of network technol­
ogy will speed up the spatial compression, and therefore it is of no use 
to discuss what could be called ‘geographicality’, since all exchanges 
are done at the speed of light. This ignorance of the milieu is also an 
27 Martin Heidegger, Beitrage zurPhilosophie (vom Ereignis) (Frankfurt am 
Main: Vittorio Klostermann, 1989), 8.
28 I will treat this question more fully in Yuk Hui, Post-Europe (New York: 
Sequence/Urbanomic, forthcoming 2024).

YUK HUI
59
ignorance of locality; it fails to establish an intimate and complicit re­
lation between the earth seen from the perspective of the territory and 
globalizing technology.
We still have to add why cybernetics is not yet sufficient as a 
non-dualistic solution before we arrive at understanding locality. The 
logic of cybernetics remains formal; therefore, it underestimates the 
milieu by reducing it to mere functionality based on feedback, so that 
the milieu can be integrated into the operation of the technical object. 
In this respect, the milieu is exposed as a scientific and technological 
object, while its position within the genesis of technicity is ignored. This 
is also why in the introduction to Part III, ‘Genesis of Technicity’, of On 
the Mode of Existence of Technical Objects, Simondon claims that the 
analysis of the evolution of technical objects (Part I) and the analysis of 
the relation between the human and technics (Part II) are not sufficient 
to understand technicity. Instead, he says, it is necessary to situate 
technical concretization within the genesis of technicity, which means 
to relate technological thought to other thoughts. Simondon’s unfin­
ished project (judged from the standpoint of cosmotechnics) suggests 
that we think of a genesis with a first magic phase which constant­
ly bifurcates, first into technics and religion and then, in the second 
stage, each of them bifurcates into the theoretical and practical parts. 
Simondon understands technological development as a constant en­
tanglement with religious thinking, aesthetic thinking and philosoph­
ical thinking, oscillating between technology’s need to diverge and 
thinking’s desire to converge. Technicity means here the cosmo-geo­
graphical specificity of technology and how such cosmogeographical 
particularity has participated in shaping the technological mentality, 
which includes an understanding of technology, a sensibility towards 
matter, form and other forms of existence, the relation between art and 
spirit, and so on. It is also for this reason that Simondon’s project has 
to be pursued further by looking into the cosmological specificity of 
cultures. For example, Tetsuro Watsuji pointed out almost a century 
ago how the milieu affects the way of seeing and painting. The Jap­
anese word fudo (literally wind and soil, often rendered in English as 
climate) comes from the two Chinese characters for wind (fu S) and 
soil (do ±). Watsuji classifies three types of fudo, namely, monsoon, 
desert and meadow. To give brief examples of Watsuji’s observations, 
he thinks that, since Asia is heavily affected by monsoons, the resulting 
relative lack of seasonal change creates an easy-going personality. In

60
MACHINE AND ECOLOGY
Southeast Asia especially, since the weather is always very warm, na­
ture provides a plenitude of foodstuffs, and therefore there is no need 
to labour too much in order to survive, or to worry about the demands of 
day-to-day living. Similarly, he argues that the lack of natural resources 
in the deserts of the Middle East creates solidarity between peoples, 
so that the Jewish people, although they live in diaspora, remain united; 
while in the meadowlands of Europe, clear and regular seasonal chang­
es demonstrate the constancy of the laws of nature, thus suggesting 
the possibility of mastering nature with science.
This cosmological specificity gives rise to different technics, for 
example, in Greece the plenitude of sun and clear sky gives priority 
to the form, while the obscure fudo in Asia gave rise to the style of 
haziness in painting.29 Cosmo-geography constitutes an important di­
mension of locality.
29 
Tetsuro Watsuji, Climate and Culture: A Philosophical Study, trans. Geoffrey
Bownas (Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1961), 90.
30 
Gotthard Gunther, Das BewuBtsein derMaschinen: Eine Metaphysik der
Kybernetik (Baden-Baden: Agis, 1963), 95.
31 
For a more detailed analysis see Yuk Hui, Recursivity and Contingency
(London: Rowman and Littlefield International, 2019), Chapter 2.
Cybernetic thinking remains a thinking of totalization, since it aims 
to absorb the other into itself, like Hegelian logic, which sees polarity 
not as oppositional but rather as a motivation towards synthesized 
identity. The Hegelian and cybernetician Gotthard Gunther considers 
cybernetics fundamentally the operational (technical) realization of 
Hegelian reflexive—that is, dialectical—logic.30 The complexification 
of cybernetic logic finally leads to an absolute totality. Bearing this in 
mind, without being able to reiterate Gunther’s interpretation of the 
place of Hegelian reflexive logic in cybernetics here,31 my claim could 
be formulated as follows: To think beyond cybernetics is to think be­
yond the totalizing effect of a nondualist thinking. In other words, how 
can we reintroduce the question of locality into the discourse of ma­
chine and ecology today? And how does this reintroduction of locality 
contribute to the discourse on machines?
We are not opposing machine and ecology as if machines are 
those things that only rape Mother Nature and violate the harmony 
between the human and nature, an image attributed to technology 
since the end of the eighteenth century. Neither are we following the 
Gaia theory that the earth is a single super-organism or a collectivity 

YUK HUI
61
of organisms in line with the thought of James Lovelock and Lynn Mar­
gulis. Instead, I would like to propose that we reflect on an ecology of 
machines. To open this ecology of machines, we will need first to go 
back to the concept of ecology. The foundation of ecology is diversi­
ties, since it is only with biodiversities (or the co-existence of multiple 
species, including all forms of organisms, even bacterial) that the eco­
logical system can be conceptualized. To discuss the ecology of ma­
chines, we will need a different notion in parallel to biodiversity, which 
I call technodiversity. Biodiversity is the correlate of technodiversity, 
since without technodiversity, we will only witness the disappearing of 
species by a homogeneous rationality. Take the example of pesticide, 
which is made to kill a certain species of insect regardless of its geo­
graphical location, precisely because the pesticide is based on chemi­
cal and biological analysis. However, we know that the use of the same 
pesticide may lead to different disastrous consequences in different 
environments. Before the invention of pesticides, different techniques 
were employed to combat insects threatening the harvest, for exam­
ple, natural resources found in the region. Which is to say, there was 
a technodiversity prior to the employment of pesticides as a universal 
solution. Pesticides are apparently more effective in the short term, 
but it is well established today that we have only been looking as far 
as our noses in thinking about the distant future. We can say that tech­
nodiversity is fundamentally a question of locality. Locality does not 
necessarily mean ethnocentrism, nationalism or fascism, but rather, it 
is that which forces us to rethink the process of modernization and glo­
balization and allows us to reflect on the possibility to resituate modern 
technologies. Locality is also key to conceive of a multiplicity of cos- 
motechnics. Locality does not mean identity politics here, but rather 
the capacity to reflect on the technological becoming of the local, not 
to retreat to traditionalism of one form or another, but rather for multi­
ple localities to invent their own technological thought and future—an 
immunology, or rather immunologies, yet to be written.
What are the localities of non-European countries such as Japan, 
China and Brazil today? Heidegger’s long exposition on the relation 
between technology and Western philosophy is occidentally oriented. 
We should take the term orientation in a literal sense here, namely, as 
Erorterung (orientation), that is, an identification of where one is and 
what one will become. It is in this sense that Heidegger is also a think­
er of geopolitics. To take up Heidegger’s project today, but also to go 

62
MACHINE AND ECOLOGY
beyond him, is to carry his reflection beyond Europe. I want to put this 
challenge into a speculative question: For non-European cultures, can 
we identify their own technological thought in the same way that they 
also have different fudo? Can these technological thoughts contribute 
to the imagination of technological futures, which are now unfortunate­
ly dominated by the transhumanist ideology? I tend to believe that it is 
possible and necessary to rediscover different technologies, which I 
call cosmotechnics. Cosmotechnics is not simply about different ways 
of making things, for example, different techniques of knitting or dye­
ing. I gave it a preliminary definition in The Question Concerning Tech­
nology in China as the unification of the moral and the cosmic order 
through technical activities.32 The term unification will have to be fur­
ther elaborated,33 but for our purpose here, cosmotechnics should be 
understood as an Urtechnik; it challenges our current understanding of 
technology and therefore also its future. This cosmological specificity 
must be rethought beyond astral physics, beyond the conceptualiza­
tion of the universe as a thermodynamic system; it also reopens the 
question of morality beyond ethical rules that are added after the fact 
as constraints to new technologies. Technical activities unify the moral 
order and the cosmic order—by unification I mean reciprocal process­
es which constantly enforce each other to acquire new meanings. This 
is why I wanted to reinterpret what Leroi-Gourhan calls the technical 
tendency and technical facts.34 The technical tendency is what seems 
to be universal, like laws of nature. For example, the use of flint to pro­
duce fire and the invention of the wheel for transportation can be found 
in almost every civilization. Technical facts are the particular features 
that vary from one civilization to another; in the process of diffusion, 
technology was filtered and modified according to constraints intrin­
sic to the internal milieu. For Leroi-Gourhan, technical facts are deter­
mined by numerous factors, but largely by material constraints, while I 
tend to think that the differences in technical facts entail different cos­
mologies and their moral constraints, which encompass far more than 
functional aesthetics.
32 Yuk Hui, The Question Concerning Technology in China: An Essay in 
Cosmotechnics (Falmouth: Urbanomic, 2016).
33 I elaborate on this notion of unification in Art and Cosmotechnics 
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2021).
34 
Andre Leroi-Gourhan, L'homme et la matiere (Paris: Albin Michel, 1973), 27-35.

YUK HUI
63
I would like to conclude by picking up the biochemist-turned-sinol­
ogist Joseph Needham’s question here, namely: Why did modern sci­
ence and technology not develop in China and India, but only in Eu- 
rope?35 Historians who attempt to answer this question tend to carry 
out comparative studies on the advancement of technology in Europe 
and China as if the essence of technology concerns merely efficiency 
and mechanical causalities; for example, papermaking in the second 
century in China was more advanced than in Europe. However, this 
line of inquiry, it seems to me, has betrayed Needham’s own stance. 
This is so because Needham was actually suggesting that there were 
two different trajectories of technology in China and in Europe, which 
were less constrained by material causes than by their different ways 
of thinking and forms of life. To put it in other words, answering Need­
ham’s question is not to show who is more advanced, but rather to 
elaborate on the different systems of technological thought. In The 
Question Concerning Technology in China I aim to respond to Needham 
by taking his implicit thesis further.
35 Joseph Needham, The Grand Titration: Science and Society in East and 
West (London: Routledge, 2013).
36 Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, What is Philosophy? trans. Hugh 
Tomlinson and Graham Burchell (New York: Columbia University Press, 1994), 108: 
‘We lack creation. We lack resistance to the present. The creation of concepts 
in itself calls for a future form, for a new earth and people that do not yet exist. 
Europeanization does not constitute a becoming but merely the history of capital­
ism, which prevents the becoming of subjected peoples’.
The technological upheaval since the nineteenth century has pre­
sented us with a convergence which at times seems inevitable, while 
at the same time it is clearly problematic and has to be fragmented in 
favour of other social and political visions. The inquiry into the relation 
between machine and ecology is not so much about how to design 
more intelligent machines, but rather requires a discovery of cosmo- 
technical diversity; while such diversity has to be thought through by 
going back to the question of locality, therefore re-articulating the con­
cept of technics by resituating it within the geographical milieu, cul­
ture and thinking. The task that is left to all of us is to rediscover these 
cosmotechnics in order to reframe modern technologies, namely, by 
reframing the enframing (Gestell). Only through such a reframing can 
we imagine a ‘new earth and people that do not yet exist’.36

64
MACHINE AND ECOLOGY
Note
This chapter was originally published, in a slightly different version, in 
Angelaki 25, no. 4 (2020): 54-66. I want to thank the editors of Angelaki 
for their permission to reprint it in this volume.

YUK HUI
65
Reference
Arendt, Hannah. The Human Condition. Chicago: Chicago University 
Press, 1998 [1958].
Bergson, Henri. Time and Free Will: An Essay on the Immediate Data of 
Consciousness. London: Allen Lane, 1913.
Berque, Augustin. Thinking Through Landscape. Trans. Anne-Marie 
Feenberg-Dibon. London: Routledge, 2014.
Bertalanffy, Ludwig von. General System Theory. New York: George 
Braziller, 2015 [1968].
Deleuze, Gilles, and Felix Guattari. What is Philosophy?Trans. Hugh 
Tomlinson and Graham Burchell. New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1994.
Foucault, Michel. Power: Essential Works of Foucault, 1954-1984. Ed. 
James D. Faubion. Trans. Robert Hurley et al. New York: Penguin, 
2001.
Graham, A.C. Studies in Chinese Philosophy and Philosophical Literature. 
New York: SUNY, 1990.
Gunther, Gotthard. Das BewuBtsein der Maschinen: Eine Metaphysik der 
Kybernetik. Baden-Baden: Agis, 1963.
Haeckel, Ernst. Generelle Morphologie der Organismen. Berlin: Georg 
Reimer, 1866.
Heidegger, Martin. Beitrage zur Philosophie (vom Ereignis). Frankfurt am 
Main: Vittorio Klostermann, 1989.
Heidegger, Martin. Holderlin’s Hymn ‘The Ister’. Trans. William McNeill 
and Julia Davis. Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 1996.
Heidegger, Martin. Ponderings XII-XV: Black Notebooks 1939-1941. Trans.
Richard Rojcewicz. Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 2017.
Heidegger, Martin. The Question Concerning Technology and Other 
Essays. Trans. William Lovitt. New York: Garland, 1977.
Hui, Yuk. On the Existence of Digital Objects. Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press, 2016.

66
MACHINE AND ECOLOGY
Hui, Yuk. The Question Concerning Technology in China: An Essay in 
Cosmotechnics. Falmouth: Urbanomic, 2016.
Hui, Yuk. Recursivity and Contingency. London: Rowman and Littlefield 
International, 2019.
Hui, Yuk. Art and Cosmotechnics. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press, 2021.
Hui, Yuk. Post-Europe. New York: Sequence/Urbanomic, 2024.
Jonas, Hans. The Phenomenon of Life: Toward a Philosophical Biology.
Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 2001.
Leroi-Gourhan, Andre. L’homme et la matiere. Paris: Albin Michel, 1973.
Leroi-Gourhan, Andre. Milieu et technique. Paris: Albin Michel, 1973.
Lovelock, James. Gaia: A New Look at Life on Earth. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2000 [1979].
McLuhan, Marshall. ‘At the Moment of Sputnik the Planet Became a 
Global Theatre in which There Are No Spectators but Only Actors’. 
Journal of Communication 24, no. 1 (1974): 48-58.
Needham, Joseph. The Grand Titration: Science and Society in East and 
West. London: Routledge, 2013.
Richards, Robert J. The Tragic Sense of Life: Ernst Haeckel and the 
Struggle over Evolutionary Thought. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 2009.
Simondon, Gilbert. On the Mode of Existence of Technical Objects. Trans. 
Cecile Malaspina and John Rogove. Minneapolis: Univocal, 2017.
Sloterdijk, Peter. Not Saved: Essays after Heidegger. Trans. Ian Alexander 
Moore and Christopher Turner. Cambridge: Polity, 2017.
Uexkull, Jakob von. A Foray into the Worlds of Animals and Humans: With 
a Theory of Meaning. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 
2010.
Watsuji, Tetsuro. Climate and Culture: A Philosophical Study. Trans. 
Geoffrey Bownas. Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1961.
Wiener, Norbert. Cybernetics: Or Control and Communication in the 
Animal and the Machine. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1985.

67
Ontology and the Politics 
of Information in the First 
Cybernetics
Mathieu Triclot
Does cybernetics still have anything to teach us in our present time? 
Not only does the term ‘cybernetics’ refer to the now distant post­
World War II era of the twentieth century, but it also appears largely 
out of fashion. We would be hard pressed to find the word ‘cybernet­
ics’ in our universities’ curricula. Both the prefix ‘cyber’ and the word 
‘cybernetics’ seem outdated, belonging to a realm of obsolete futures.
Why should we consider a cybernetics for the twenty-first centu­
ry? I can identify four reasons. First, maybe ‘twenty-first-century cy­
bernetics’ is, in a way, already there. It is clear that the concepts and 
technologies promoted by cybernetics have become more pervasive 
than ever. The dissemination of the terms ‘feedback’ and ‘informa­
tion’ is monumental and disconnected from the declining usage of the 
signifier ‘cybernetics’. In other words, we are witnessing what could 
be called ‘a cybernetics without cybernetics’, that is, a diffusion of its 
concepts and artefacts, but without the outdated label. There was a 
‘first cybernetics’, associated with figures like Norbert Wiener, Warren 
McCulloch, and John von Neumann, and a ‘second cybernetics’ centred 
on self-organization, and associated with Heinz von Foerster and Fran­
cisco Varela, among others. Now, we may be at the beginning of a ‘third 
cybernetics’, no longer associated with the names of personalities, but 
names of firms like Google, Amazon, Facebook, or OpenAI. Could this 
be the elusive ‘twenty-first-century cybernetics’?
Beyond the progressive diffusion of the terminology of informa­
tion and feedback, the most striking development lies in the new social 
roles assumed by the artefacts, anticipated by cybernetics. These ar­
tefacts are now entering society on a grand scale. The first noteworthy 
instance is what has been called the machine learning tsunami, based 
on the resurgence of the neuroconnectionist models pioneered by cy- 
berneticians.1 But there is also the prospect of an industrial revolution 1 
1 
Dominique Cardon, Jean-Philippe Cointet and Antoine Mazieres, ‘Neurons
Spike Back: The invention of inductive machines and the artificial intelligence con­
troversy’, Reseaux 211, no. 5 (2018): 173-220.

ONTOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF INFORMATION
IN THE FIRST CYBERNETICS
68
resulting form the convergence of digital technologies and traditional 
industries. This new industrial revolution was indeed one of the grand 
predictions of the original cybernetics. We can think here of Wiener’s 
depiction of the automated factory: ‘The all-over system will corre­
spond to the complete animal with sense organs, effectors and pro­
prioceptors, and not, as in the ultra-rapid computing machine, to an 
isolated brain, dependent for its experiences and for its effectiveness 
on our intervention.’2 This description of the shift from the computer 
as a simple ‘isolated brain’ to ‘the complete animal’ evokes concrete 
figures today, such as Amazon’s robotic warehouses or autonomous 
vehicles. It is only now, with a time lag of seventy years, that cybernetic 
artefacts are really imposing themselves, with the kind of autonomy 
and agency envisioned by the first cyberneticians.
2 
Norbert Wiener, Cybernetics, or Control and Communication in the Animal
and the Machine (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000), 157.
3 
Martin Heidegger, Ecrits politiques 1933-1966, trans. and ed. Francois
Fedier (Paris: Editions Gallimard, 1995), 262.
4 
Mathieu Triclot, Le moment cybernetique (Seyssel: Champ Vallon, 2008), 405-11.
This brings us to the second reason for considering a cybernetics 
for the twenty-first century, not merely as an odd descriptive term for 
the contemporary era, but prescriptive. We may need a ‘cybernetics for 
our times’. One significant aspect of reclaiming the term lies in the fact 
that the original cybernetics produced a real-time critical discourse 
on these technologies. Cybernetics presents itself as a multidisci­
plinary endeavour open to philosophical and critical inquiry. Heideg­
ger expressed the fear that cybernetics would ‘replace philosophy’.3 
However, this overlooks the fact that within cybernetics itself there is 
a philosophical production, claimed as such. The impetus for revisiting 
and inheriting cybernetics lies in the significance of this inherent philo­
sophical production endogenous to the technical milieu.
The third reason that justifies this return to cybernetics is that we 
find, within this philosophical production, a unique stance regarding 
the nature of information. Cyberneticians advocated for a non-sym- 
bolic, physicalist conception of information, which I refer to as infor­
mation-signal, as opposed to an information-code.4 This distinction is 
important, given the inextricably conceptual and technical significance 
of the term. Information has emerged as a new universal equivalent, 
applicable to everything and ensuring the reduction of everything to 
computational devices. What can we learn from this alternative view 

MATHIEU TRICLOT
69
of information to critically assess the current digital technologies? But 
the discourse on information extends beyond ontology and the phi­
losophy of science: we encounter, particularly in Wiener’s writings, 
a discourse that links this ontology of information with politics. This 
nexus of ontology and the politics of information seems particularly 
interesting to re-examine today.
This brings me to the fourth and final reason supporting a return 
to cybernetics: we cannot pretend that the arguments of the first cy­
berneticians are applicable as they are to the present state of affairs. 
The time gap between the first cybernetics and our twenty-first-centu­
ry cybernetics is intriguing in its own right, primarily because the mode 
of science and technology production has undergone profound chang­
es. Hence, we cannot merely transplant the old cybernetic arguments 
to the contemporary landscape; instead, we must exploit this temporal 
gap to shed light on the characteristics of the current regime of science 
and technology.
The first cyberneticians were working at a turning point in the 
history of science and technology, during the Cold War, with sciences 
nationalized by the state and enlisted in the war effort. Cyberneticians, 
beginning with Wiener, took a stand against this transformation and 
advocated for an alternative way of doing science. Today, we inhabit 
a totally different mode of production of science and technology, in 
which the market has taken on an increasingly important role since the 
1980s. Consequently, cybernetics becomes relevant not because it fills 
the gap between the post-war and contemporary worlds, but because 
it exposes that gap. By revisiting Wiener’s arguments, we can assess 
these changes and their implications.
In this essay I revisit the debates surrounding the nature of infor­
mation, particularly the intersection of ontology and politics in Wie­
ner’s work. I aim to confront these positions with the contemporary 
moment, as a step toward a cybernetics for the twenty-first century. I 
will proceed in three stages. First, I will provide a brief historical over­
view of cybernetics to contextualize the movement. Next, I will delve 
into the debate that took place during the seventh Macy Conference, 
in 1950, on the meaning of the terms ‘digital’ and ‘analogue’. This de­
bate is a key document to understanding the cybernetic conception 
of information. Finally, I will present a small sample of precepts for an 
information politics, as they can be extracted from Wiener’s writings, 
and discuss their relevance in light of the contemporary situation.

ONTOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF INFORMATION
IN THE FIRST CYBERNETICS
70
The paradox of cybernetics
In the first part of this essay, I aim to highlight three messages. First, it 
is important to recognize that cybernetics is an object that can be dif­
ficult to pin down. Indeed, there have been many ‘cybernetics’, some­
times incompatible with each other. The term cybernetics functions 
as a floating signifier, which can be reappropriated in very diverse 
contexts. There have been several cybernetics in the United States,5 
but also in the United Kingdom.6 It existed as a distinct discipline in 
the Soviet Union, studied notably by Slava Gerovich.7 The experiments 
conducted by Stafford Beer in Chile are also noteworthy.8 Additional­
ly, cybernetics found its way into the structuralist social sciences in 
France, through figures like Levi-Strauss and Lacan, among others.9 
There was also a Chinese cybernetics, as I recently discovered thanks 
to Dylan Levi King’s research.10 11
5 Steve Heims, John Von Neumann and Norbert Wiener: From Mathematics to 
the Technologies of Life and Death (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1980); Steve Heims, 
Constructing a Social Science for Postwar America: The Cybernetics Group 1946-1953 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991).
6 Andrew Pickering, The Cybernetic Brain: Sketches of Another Future 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2010).
7 
Slava Gerovich, From Newspeak to Cyberspeak: A History of Soviet
Cybernetics (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002).
8 
Eden Medina, Cybernetic Revolutionaries: Technology and Politics in
Allende’s Chile (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2014).
9 
Ronan Le Roux, Une histoire de la cybernetique en France (1948-1975) (Paris:
Garnier, 2018).
10 Dylan Levi King, ‘The Genealogy of Chinese Cybernetics’, Palladium (2023), 
https://www.palladiummag.com/2022/10/17/the-genealogy-of-chinese-cybernetics.
11 
On the interpersonal problems, see Flo Conway and Jim Siegelman, Dark Hero
of the Information Age: In Search of Norbert Wiener the Father of Cybernetics (New 
York: Basic Books, 2005).
This uncontrolled diffusion of cybernetics can be attributed, in my 
view, to a key phenomenon: the failure of cybernetics to establish itself 
as a formal science or discipline; had that been the case, it would still 
be taught in our universities. This was the original intention of the first 
cyberneticians, particularly Wiener, but instead of having dedicated cy­
bernetics departments in universities, the field relied on events such as 
the Macy conferences. This inherent fragility led to the fragmentation 
of cybernetics, driven by interpersonal difficulties and a questioning 
of its scientific agenda, with the emergence of the symbolic artificial 
intelligence research programme.11 The word ‘cybernetics’ resembles 
the word ‘psychoanalysis’ in the first half of the twentieth century, in 

MATHIEU TRICLOT
71
that the first cyberneticians struggled to regulate its use.12 As a result, 
it circulated widely, and was reappropriated in various contexts, often 
with conflicting interpretations. For instance, I recall a letter from the 
artist Nicolas Schoffer, who created ‘cybernetic light towers’ and or­
ganized ‘cybernetic ballets’ featuring robots dancing alongside human 
performers. In 1957, Schoffer reached out to Wiener, who responded 
dryly, acknowledging the interest but asserting that these endeavours 
had no direct connection to cybernetics.13
12 
Elisabeth Roudinesco, L’histoire de la psychanalyse en France: Jacques
Lacan (Paris: Livre de Poche, 2009).
13 Maude Ligier and Mathieu Triclot, ‘L’art cybernetique de Nicolas Schoffer’ 
(paper presented to the third Congres de la Societe Frangaise d’Histoire des 
Sciences et des Techniques, 6 September 2008).
14 
Norbert Wiener, Arturo Rosenblueth and Julian Bigelow, ‘Behavior, Purpose
and Teleology’, Philosophy of Science 10, no. 1 (1943): 18-24.
15 
Norbert Wiener, ‘A Scientist Rebels’, The Atlantic Monthly 179, January 1947, 46.
The second element to keep in mind when approaching the first 
cybernetics is the originality of its way of doing science. Cybernetics 
is a scientific movement that is marked by multidisciplinarity. It is a 
well-known fact that cybernetics brings together mathematicians, en­
gineers, members of the life sciences, psychology and the social sci­
ences. This original style of science is also open to philosophy. Wiener, 
Rosenblueth and Bigelow’s 1943 paper on feedback as a model for un­
derstanding living organisms—which laid the foundation for the cyber­
netics research programme—was published in Philosophy of Science.14 
We have an article co-authored by a physiologist, an engineer and a 
mathematician, published in a philosophy journal.
Thus, cybernetics represents a style of science that is open to 
various disciplines and to philosophical reflection. In this regard, cy­
bernetics can be seen as carrying forward the spirit of 1930s physics, 
which embraced philosophical inquiry. However, cybernetics found 
itself at odds with the emerging structures of ‘big science’, shaped by 
the war. There is, in the very way Wiener put together the cybernetics 
group, a rejection of the enlistment of science in the Cold War. This 
refusal is expressed in the influential 1947 open letter ‘A Scientist Reb- 
els’.15 One cannot understand the form of the cybernetics group without 
these commitments.
If I had to delimit the first cybernetics in time, I would propose 
the year 1943 as the start and 1956 as the end. The year 1943 marks a 
significant milestone with the publication of two foundational articles: 

ONTOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF INFORMATION
IN THE FIRST CYBERNETICS
72
the aforementioned work by Wiener, Rosenblueth, and Bigelow on 
feedback; and McCulloch and Pitts’s paper on formal neurons.16 The 
1956 date is less obvious. It corresponds to the Dartmouth summer 
school that launched the symbolic AI program, which was to supplant 
the cybernetic paradigms in the field of computer science. One could 
also consider the death of von Neumann in 1957 to symbolize the end 
of the movement, which declines as a research programme in the Unit­
ed States after this date. This is the paradox of cybernetics: while the 
movement achieved remarkable success both technically and concep­
tually, it failed to establish itself as an independent discipline within the 
academic realm.
16 
Warren McCulloch and Walter Pitts, ‘A Logical Calculus of the Ideas Immanent
in Nervous Activity’, Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics 5 (1943): 115-33.
17 
Claude Shannon, ‘A Mathematical Theory of Communication’, Bell System
Technical Journal 27 (1948): 379-423, 623-56.
What is information?
After this brief overview of the key elements for framing the history of 
cybernetics, I now come to what seems to me one of the most inter­
esting aspects to be re-interrogated today: the debate on the nature of 
information. Cybernetics played a pivotal role in establishing the con­
cept of information, which emerged at the intersection of two technical 
fields. The first is the theory of telecommunications, or ‘information the­
ory’, established in the work of Claude Shannon.17Shannon introduced a 
mathematical measure of the quantity of information. The second field 
is mechanical computation, where Shannon’s measure, based on bits, 
was promptly adopted, as the new machines were seen as operating 
on information. However, cybernetics went beyond merely promoting 
and consolidating a technical vocabulary at the intersection of these 
fields. It delved deeper by questioning the very nature of this new term, 
‘information’. One might have expected this question to be dismissed 
as a philosophical inquiry secondary to technical advancements. Yet, 
within cybernetics, the question arises due to the multidisciplinary na­
ture of the field and its ambition to transfer the technical vocabulary of 
information and feedback to other domains such as the life sciences, 
psychology and the social sciences.

MATHIEU TRICLOT
73
So, what is information? The discussions following Ralph Gerard’s 
presentation at the seventh Macy Conference on 23 March 1950 pro­
vide a remarkable glimpse into the debates that permeated cybernet­
ics at the time.18 The conversation was initiated by Gregory Bateson 
and J.C.R. Licklider, who expressed concern about a confusion in the 
terminology, between digital and analogue. Here is what Bateson says:
18 Heinz Von Foerster, Cybernetics, Circular Causal and Feedback 
Mechanisms in Biological and Social Systems: Transactions of the Seventh 
Conference, March 23-24,1950 (New York: Caldwell, 1951): 11-57.
19 
Ibid., 26.
20 
Ibid., 27.
It should be a good thing to tidy up our vocabulary. We 
have the word ‘analogical’, which is opposed to the word 
‘digital’. We also have the word ‘continuous’, which is op­
posed to the word ‘discontinuous’. And there is the word 
‘coding’, which is obscure to me. First of all, as I under­
stand the sense in which ‘analogical’ was introduced to 
this group by Dr von Neumann, a model plane in a wind 
tunnel would be an ‘analogical’ device for making calcu­
lations about a real plane in the wind. Is that correct?’19
Von Neumann acknowledges the need for a clarification, while admit­
ting its difficulty. Indeed, the discussion goes on for about twenty pag­
es: ‘Von Neumann: It is very difficult to give precise definitions of this, 
it has been tried repeatedly. Present use of the words “analogical” and 
“digital” in science is not completely uniform’.20
The ensuing discussion offers two valuable insights. First, it 
highlights what I call the physicalist orientation of the cyberneticians. 
Von Neumann and Wiener’s answers have in common that they prior­
itize the signal or analogue dimension over the symbolic dimension of 
information:
Von Neumann: Thus, both for the man-made artefact as 
well as for the natural organ, which are supposed to ex­
ercise discrete switching actions, the ‘discrete actions’ 
are in reality simulated on the background of continuous 
processes. ... To restate: the organs that we call digital 
are, in reality, continuous, but the main aspects of their 

ONTOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF INFORMATION
IN THE FIRST CYBERNETICS
74
behaviour are rather indifferent to limited variations of 
the input stimuli...
Wiener: May I speak of the real distinction between the 
digital and the analogical situation? This is a comment 
on what Professor von Neumann has said. . The digital 
element lies in the fact that the things to which we are 
referring are not precise positions but fields of attraction 
which impinge upon one another so that the field where 
there is any substantial indetermination as to whether the 
thing goes to one or the other is as small as possible.21
This is a key point: in the last resort, symbols are always signal, ma­
terial configurations. As Pitts explains, ‘we should speak of physical 
systems in general, not computers’.22 What is the difference between 
a symbol and a signal? The symbol is always two-sided: it is a form that 
is inscribed in matter, but in a conventional way. It is by convention 
that such and such a material configuration—for example, the presence 
of an electric current—refers to such and such symbolic content; for 
example, the value 1 rather than 0. The symbol is inscribed in matter, 
but the matter is indifferent. The matter could be anything and every­
thing, as long as it can function as a medium of inscription. By contrast, 
the notion of a signal carries another type of relation between matter 
and signification, since in the case of the signal, the information is not 
separable from the material configuration (which by convention is sus­
ceptible to finding a new inscription): the information is the material 
configuration and vice versa.
Cyberneticians do not deny that information can function in a 
symbolic way. On the contrary, it is how digital mechanical calculators 
function, as do the lines of communication modelled by Shannon. How­
ever, as in the declarations of the seventh Macy Conference, cyberne­
ticians regularly insist on the fact that this symbolic functioning is only 
a simplification or an abstraction compared to the ‘real’ functioning 
which, on the physical level, operates in an analogical way.
But the seventh Macy Conference also reveals variations in this 
materialist or physicalist stance. Three distinct viewpoints can be 
21
22
Ibid., 20-21.
Ibid., 32.

MATHIEU TRICLOT
75
identified. The most radical physicalist reductionism is found in von 
Neumann, who repeats several times that ‘in reality’ we are dealing 
primarily with the continuous: ‘To conclude, one must say that in almost 
all parts of physics the underlying reality is analogical, that is, the true 
physical variables are in almost all cases continuous, or equivalent to 
continuous descriptions. The digital procedure is usually a human ar­
tefact for the sake of description’.23
23 
Ibid., 27.
24 
Ibid., 50.
25 
Ibid., 48.
26 
David Mindell, Between Human and Machine: Feedback, Control, and
Computing before Cybernetics (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2002), 286.
Wiener expresses a more pragmatic position, which consists of 
explaining that we can choose the ‘code’ according to the situation: ‘I 
say that the whole habit of our thinking is to use the continuous where 
that is the easiest and to use the discrete where the discrete is the 
easiest. Both of them represent abstractions that do not completely fit 
the situation as we see it. One thing that we cannot do is to take the full 
complexity of the world without simplification of methods.’24
Pitts introduces a third variation, emphasizing that the opposition 
between digital and analogue is not strictly binary, and that there can 
exist intermediate systems—in particular forms of continuous calcu­
lation at the biological level—which do not however correspond to the 
model of analogical calculators: ‘There is a third between the two, be­
cause they are not opposite. The digital and analogical sorts of devices 
have been defined quite independently and are not logical opposites. ... 
There can be devices which are computing machines which are contin­
uous without being analogous in the sense that the engineer assumes.’25
If we agree that cybernetics defends an original conception of in­
formation, we are left with a question: What is the point? What differ­
ence does it make? Three theoretical sectors are directly concerned by 
this discussion on the nature of information, which can be briefly out­
lined. The first sector is related to the theory of telecommunications. 
We find traces of it in the dispute over priority between Shannon and 
Wiener. Wiener reproached Shannon for having pre-empted the theory 
of communications from a digital conception of the signal, whereas 
Wiener had developed a model of information based on the physics of 
the continuous signal.26

ONTOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF INFORMATION
IN THE FIRST CYBERNETICS
76
The second area concerns the analogy between information 
and entropy. Wiener and von Neumann, in particular, advocated for a 
physicalist interpretation of the formal analogy between entropy and 
the quantity of information, interpreting information as the inverse 
of entropy. Information would then be a measure of the amount of 
order in a physical system, while entropy represents the measure of 
system disorganization. Wiener revisits the Maxwell’s demon thought 
experiment to provide a framework for interpreting information as a 
physical quantity.27
27 Wiener, Cybernetics, 58.
28 
John von Neumann, The Computer and the Brain (Yale: Yale University Press,
2000 [1958]).
29 John von Neumann, ‘First draft of a report on the EDVAC’, IEEE Annals of the 
History of Computing 15, no. 4 (1993), 5.
30 John von Neumann, ‘Probabilistic Logics and the Syntheses of Reliable 
Organisms from Unreliable Components’, in Automata Studies, ed. Claude 
Shannon and John McCarthy (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1952), 43-98.
31 John von Neumann, ‘Letter to Norbert Wiener, November 29th 1946’, in John 
von Neumann: Selected Papers, ed. Miklos Redei (American Mathematical Society, 
2005), 280.
The most significant impact of the conception of information lies 
in the development of computer science around the question of the 
brain-computer relationship, particularly as it appears in von Neu­
mann's work.28 The discussion at the seventh Macy Conference direct­
ly concerns the computer-brain analogy. The history of these debates 
can be summarized as a return to the ‘original sin’ of the first draft of 
a report on the EDVAC, the technical document where von Neumann 
formalized the operations of digital computers. To carry out this for­
malization of logical-mathematical operations, von Neumann relies on 
what he calls ‘E-Elements’: binary automata with a threshold, directly 
inspired by the formal neurons of McCulloch and Pitts’s 1943 article, to 
which he directly refers.29 Von Neumann never ceased to return to this 
shortcut of the ‘E-Elements’—by considering the processes in a digital 
way, the complexity of the real processes is masked. This complexity 
reappears in the failure or the error of calculation. This ‘physics of in­
formation’ gives rise to two scientific programmes: alternative models 
of basic components at the technological level, motivated by the de­
sire to obtain stable behaviour with unstable elements;30 and a focus 
on cellular-level processes in the modelling of living beings, pushing a 
research agenda for artificial life.31

MATHIEU TRICLOT
77
As Andrew Pickering has shown, the machines envisioned by the 
first cybernetics are not so much intended to manipulate representa­
tions, but to act on the world; to orient themselves in a changing envi­
ronment by adapting their ways of doing things according to a goal.32 
In this sense, the model remains that of the living being rather than that 
of the mind manipulating symbols. Cybernetics had in view other kinds 
of computer science and calculation machines, which we can hardly 
imagine today. In essence, cybernetics presents an original conception 
of information, rejecting its reduction to a mere set of symbols. This di­
vision leads to specific research orientations such as artificial life, neu- 
ro-connectionism, and Wiener’s interest in prostheses, which subse­
quently influenced Licklider’s paradigm of ‘man-machine symbiosis’.33
32 
Pickering, The Cybernetic Brain, 5-7.
33 J.C.R. Licklider, ‘Man-Computer Symbiosis’, Transactions on Human Factors 
in Electronics 1 (1960): 4-11.
But what significance can the symbol-signal partition still have to­
day, when the tsunami of machine learning has brought neuroconnec- 
tionist models back to the fore? Apparently, cybernetics has won: the 
parallels between the cyberneticians’ arguments and the approaches 
of machine learning are obvious. Yann LeCun’s team’s demonstration 
of character recognition in 1993 follows the same problem of recog­
nition of incomplete forms as in von Neumann’s ‘General and Logical 
Theory of Automata’ in 1948. But, despite the continuity of the research 
programmes, contemporary machine learning relies on two technical 
conditions that were foreign to cyberneticians. First, the explosion of 
computing power, particularly with the use of GPUs (Graphics Pro­
cessing Units), plays a crucial role. Second, the availability of massive 
amounts of data (referred to as big data) is essential for the effective­
ness of machine learning, without which it loses its supremacy over 
other techniques such as classical AI or statistical processing.
We may wonder if we are not dealing with a ‘revenge of symbols’ 
within the neuroconnectionist paradigms themselves: the models only 
work on the condition of a prior reduction of the world into data, into 
symbolic information. These observations about the technical, eco­
nomic, legal, and political conditions underlying the resurgence of 
cybernetic approaches point to a fundamental difference in machine 
design. Contemporary machine learning is a technique for process­
ing massive amounts of data, whereas cyberneticians envisioned 

ONTOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF INFORMATION
IN THE FIRST CYBERNETICS
78
machines where manipulating representations was secondary to their 
performative abilities. Hence the resurgence of neuroconnectionism 
relies on a considerable shift from the physicalist orientation of cyber­
neticians. This shift remains unexplored and extends beyond the binary 
choice between machine learning and symbolic artificial intelligence.
Politics of information
So far, I have been interested in the impact of the cybernetic concep­
tion of information on technoscientific programmes. However, the 
influence of this conception extends beyond the scientific domain. 
The style of science original to cybernetics offers us a last remark­
able component, in the form of a transposition of arguments about the 
nature of information to the field of politics, particularly developed in 
Wiener’s work.
Here, I must call attention to Wiener’s singular position within the 
cybernetic group, as demonstrated by Steve Heims.34 Multiple com­
peting political orientations emerged from the early days of cybernet­
ics, only to proliferate even more among the subsequent variations that 
followed. For example, Wiener’s programme is diametrically opposed 
to von Neumann’s game-theoretic perspective of calculating optimal 
decisions. It also differs from Bateson and Mead’s intention of employ­
ing cybernetic modelling in the social sciences.
34 Heims, John Von Neumann and Norbert Wiener.
Wiener’s unique stance lies in his refusal to simply ‘apply’ engi­
neering sciences to the social world. He argues that such an applica­
tion is impossible and would amount to a form of fraud. The social, his­
torical world is marked by the singularity of its trajectories and does not 
present the regularity necessary to be subjected to calculation. There 
is something very surprising in this refusal to make cybernetics work 
as a ‘science of government’, departing from the explicit meaning of the 
term ‘cybernetique’ in Ampere. Wiener states that
in the social sciences we have to deal with short statis­
tical runs, nor can we be sure that a considerable part of 
what we observe is not a an artefact of our own creation.
... We cannot afford to neglect [the natural sciences]; nei-

MATHIEU TRICLOT
79
ther should we build exaggerated expectations of their 
possibilities. There is much which we must leave, wheth­
er we like it or not, to the un-‘scientific’ narrative method 
of the professional historian.35
35 
Wiener, Cybernetics, 164.
36 Wiener, The Human Use of Human Beings: Cybernetics and Society 
(London: Eyre and Spottiswoode, 1950), 26.
37 Norbert Wiener, ‘Too Big for Private Enterprise’, in Collected Works with 
Commentaries, Volume IV, ed. Pesi Masani (Basel: Birkhauser Verlag, 1990), 702-3.
Yet, we do find a cybernetic politics in Wiener. What does it entail? It 
involves a strategic use of cybernetic concepts to understand political 
and social issues, rather than a straightforward application. Cybernet­
ics, with its conception of information, provides strategic argumenta­
tive resources, without indulging in a scientistic reduction of the social 
world to engineering sciences.
I present three samples of Wiener’s political use of the notion of 
information. The first and most obvious is his refusal to consider infor­
mation as an immaterial term. Considering information as a physical 
quantity—the opposite of entropy—nurtures in Wiener a form of tragic 
humanism. The world is inevitably going to waste, as the second law 
of thermodynamics indicates that entropy necessarily increases in 
any isolated system. The role of political action, in Wiener’s view, is to 
create and maintain local enclaves of organization and knowledge to 
resist chaos. He says: ‘We are shipwrecked passengers on a doomed 
planet. ... We shall go down, but let it be in a manner to which we may 
look forward as worthy of our dignity.’36
Beyond that, the axiom of the physicality of information leads Wie­
ner to an ecological style of thinking. In his article ‘Too Big for Private 
Enterprise’, he defends the role of public power in managing long-term 
interests that cannot be left in the hands of the ‘first businessman who 
comes along’.37 The Human Use of Human Beings extends this argu­
ment in the form of a critique of the ‘American philosophy of progress’. 
Wiener argues:
We have a good deal of experience as to how the indus­
trialists regard a new industrial potential. . They have 
very few inhibitions when it comes to taking all the profit 

ONTOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF INFORMATION
IN THE FIRST CYBERNETICS
80
out of an industry that there is to be taken, and then 
letting the public pick up the pieces. This is the history of 
the lumber and mining industries, and is part of what we 
have called in another chapter the traditional American 
philosophy of progress.38
38 Wiener, The Human Use of Human Beings, 188.
39 Ibid., 128-29.
This first epistemological-political maxim regarding the materiality of 
information resonates strongly today. It challenges the discourse of 
dematerialization and digital dualism, urging us to scrutinize the ma­
terial, technical, and extractive mediations that underpin information 
systems. If we return to the autonomous car, let us start with rare met­
als, and let us not forget assembly lines and the global division of labour. 
The second of Wiener’s political maxims is encapsulated in the 
statement: ‘Information is not meant to be a commodity’. This can be 
deduced, once again, from the physics of information, as the inverse 
of entropy: information cannot retain its value, it is always a function of 
time and inevitably gains noise. Wiener explains:
What makes a thing a good commodity? Essentially, that 
it can pass from hand to hand with substantial retention 
of its value... Communication is based on a notion allied 
to entropy, known as the amount of information. ... Just 
as entropy tends to increase spontaneously in a closed 
system, so information tends to decrease. . Information 
and entropy are not conserved, and are equally unsuited 
to being commodities.39
Here Wiener mobilizes a line of reasoning that may seem singularly out 
of step with contemporary thinking that would lead to the same con­
clusion. Indeed, contemporary arguments against the commodifica­
tion of information insist on the possibility of information being shared 
without loss of value. But this argument rests precisely on a distinction 
between material and immaterial goods, which is problematic in the 
spirit of the first cybernetics. This being so, this second maxim leads 
to a political perspective critical of intellectual property rights, which 

MATHIEU TRICLOT
81
would not be out of place in contemporary movements in favour of free 
software or the digital commons, for example.
A third maxim, which follows directly from the cybernetic con­
ception of information, can be expressed as a rejection of the ‘myth of 
the robot’. One of Wiener’s major political concerns revolved around 
automation, particularly the idea of automated factories, mentioned at 
the beginning of this article. Wiener engaged with union leaders, pro­
fessional organizations, and political figures. Notably, his conversation 
with Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru emphasized the impor­
tance of intermediate professional training and technical culture.40
40 Norbert Wiener, I am a Mathematician: The Latter Life of a Prodigy (New
York: Doubleday, 1956), 335-56.
41 Wiener, The Human Use of Human Beings, 16.
Wiener feared that computers would facilitate the automation 
of production, leading to a ‘new industrial revolution’ and significant 
job losses. However, his argument goes beyond mere fear of replace­
ment. He posits that the prospect of replacing humans with machines 
ignores the difference between human and mechanical capabilities. 
Humans excel at reasoning in undefined contexts, while machines are 
superior in logical calculation. Thus, the ideal relationship with ma­
chines is one of coupling, or what Licklider termed a symbiosis be­
tween two different beings.
The cybernetic reflection on the computer-brain relationship 
leads to this political position: the objective of replacing humans with 
machines supposes, in reality, a considerable reduction of human ca­
pabilities. Such replacement is only possible due to of the existence of 
‘inhumane uses of human beings’.41 The robot is not dangerous in itself, 
because pure replacement is a myth. It is dangerous because it is put 
at the service of social forces that have an interest in extending the 
inhumane use of human beings. The robot embodies a political and eco­
nomic domination that drastically reduces human potential. Wiener says:
Our view of society differs from the ideal of society 
which is held by many Fascists, Strong Men in Business, 
and Government. ... Such people prefer an organization 
in which all orders come from above, and none return.
The human beings under them have been reduced to the 
level of effectors for a supposedly higher nervous organ­

82 
ONTOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF INFORMATION
IN THE FIRST CYBERNETICS
ism. I wish to devote this book to a protest against this 
inhumane use of human beings.42
What to do with this argument today? This is perhaps one of the places 
where Wiener’s position is most endangered—insofar as the cybernet­
ic programme reaches a new stage, with the emergence of artificial 
entities that possess learning capabilities, exhibit a form of intuition, 
and take a new step forward in the kind of purposeful behaviour that 
machines are capable of producing. In other words, Wiener’s old argu­
ment that robot replacement is a myth because there is a complexity 
in humans that resists the machine seems to be threatened by a novel 
combination of machine learning and big data, that cybernetics could 
not see coming. However, Wiener’s plea prompts us to resist this ver­
tigo, and draws our attention to the human part of AI and the way it 
can only work by enlisting human labour in the loop. Behind the robot, 
there is digital labour: proletarized forms of work, which serve to train 
and monitor AI.
Cybernetics as a ‘counter-discipline’
Returning to cybernetics—the original scene of information technolo- 
gies—allows us to exhume a set of theoretical resources that are chal­
lenged by contemporary configurations. One of the lessons of cyber­
netics may nevertheless lie in the constitution of a ‘counter-discipline’, 
bringing the life sciences and engineering together in a unique manner.
Wiener used the authority of cybernetics to critically analyse the 
new modes of production of American science. Cybernetics promoted 
small democratic collectives, marked by both a high level of individ­
ual and collective information. These collectives ensure, in Bernard 
Stiegler’s vocabulary, the formation of ‘circuits of transindividuation’; 
a requirement for the crisis of the technical milieu to end on other per­
spectives than ‘arch-proletarianization’.
42
Ibid.

MATHIEU TRICLOT
83
Reference
Cardon, Dominique, Cointet Jean-Philippe and Mazieres Antoine. 
‘Neurons Spike Back: The invention of inductive machines and the 
artificial intelligence controversy’. Reseaux 211, no. 5 (2018): 173-220.
Conway, Flo and Jim Siegelman. Dark Hero of the Information Age: In 
Search of Norbert Wiener, the Father of Cybernetics. New York: 
Basic Books, 2005.
Gerovich, Slava. From Newspeak to Cyberspeak: A History of Soviet 
Cybernetics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002.
Heidegger, Martin. Ecrits politiques 1933-1966. Translated and edited by 
Francois Fedier. Paris: Gallimard, 1995.
Heims, Steve. John von Neumann and Norbert Wiener: From Mathematics 
to the Technologies of Life and Death. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1980.
Heims, Steve. Constructing a Social Science for Postwar America, The 
Cybernetics Group, 1946-1953. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1991.
Le Roux, Ronan. Une histoire de la cybernetique en France (1948-1975). 
Paris: Garnier, 2018.
Levi King, Dylan. ‘The Genealogy of Chinese Cybernetics.’ Palladium, 17 
October 1922, https://www.palladiummag.com/2022/10/17/the-ge- 
nealogy-of-chinese-cybernetics.
Licklider, J.C.R. ‘Man-Computer Symbiosis.’ Transactions on Human 
Factors in Electronics 1 (1960): 4-11.
Ligier, Maude and Mathieu Triclot. ‘L’art cybernetique de Nicolas 
Schoffer.’ Paper presented to the third Congres de la Societe 
Fran^aise d’Histoire des Sciences et des Techniques, 6 September 
2008.
McCulloch, Warren and Walter Pitts. ‘A logical calculus of the ideas 
immanent in nervous activity’. Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics 5 
(1943): 115-133.
Medina, Eden. Cybernetic Revolutionaries: Technology and Politics in 
Allende’s Chile. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2014.
Mindell, David. Between Human and Machine: Feedback, Control, and 
Computing before Cybernetics. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University 
Press, 2002.

ONTOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF INFORMATION
IN THE FIRST CYBERNETICS
84
Pickering, Andrew. The Cybernetic Brain: Sketches of Another Future. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2010.
Roudinesco, Elisabeth. L’histoire de la psychanalyse en France: Jacques 
Lacan. Paris: Livre de Poche, 2009.
Shannon, Claude. ‘A mathematical theory of communication.’ Bell System 
Technical Journal 27 (1948): 379-423, 623-656.
Triclot, Mathieu. Le moment cybernetique. Seyssel: Champ Vallon, 2008.
Von Foerster, Heinz. Cybernetics, Circular Causal and Feedback 
Mechanisms in Biological and Social Systems: Transactions of the 
Seventh Conference, March 23-24,1950. New York: Caldwell, 1951.
Von Neumann, John. The Computer and the Brain. Yale: Yale University 
Press, 2000 [1958].
———. ‘First draft of a report on the EDVAC.’ IEEE Annals of the History of 
Computing 15, no. 4 (1993).
———. ‘Letter to Norbert Wiener, November 29th 1946.’ In John Von 
Neumann, Selected Papers, edited by Miklos Redei. American 
Mathematical Society, 2005.
———. ‘Probabilistic Logics and the Syntheses of Reliable Organisms 
from Unreliable Components.’ In Automata Studies, edited by Claude 
Shannon and John McCarthy. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 
1952.
Wiener, Norbert. Cybernetics, or Control and Communication in the 
Animal and the Machine. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2000[1948].
———. The Human Use of Human Beings: Cybernetics and Society. 
London: Eyre and Spottiswoode, 1950.
———. I am a Mathematician: The Latter Life of a Prodigy. New York: 
Doubleday, 1956.
———. ‘A Scientist Rebels.’ The Atlantic Monthly 179, , January 1947, 46.
———. ‘Too Big for Private Enterprise.’ In Norbert Wiener, Collected
works with Commentaries, Volume IV. Edited by Pesi Masani. Basel: 
Birkhauser Verlag, 1990.
Wiener, Norbert, Arturo Rosenblueth and Julian Bigelow. ‘Behavior, 
Purpose and Teleology.’ Philosophy of Science 10, no. 1 (1943): 18-24.

85
Detoxifying Cybernetics: 
From Homeostasis to 
Autopoiesis and Beyond
N. Katherine Hayles
To start, a mystery. By 1970, most academic departments of cybernet­
ics had disappeared, even though many of the ideas from cybernetics 
were still circulating both in both cultural and scientific disciplines. 
Why did they suddenly become defunct? There are various explana­
tions; one is the multidisciplinary nature of cybernetics. Because it en­
compassed many fields, integrating it with academic structures based 
on separate disciplines was difficult. Another factor was the militarism 
and the black box psychology of first wave cybernetics. To explore 
these ideas, I will focus on the figure of Norbert Wiener, who loomed 
large in the period from 1945 to 1960. I will engage specifically with his 
World War II work on an anti-aircraft predictor; he subsequently built 
on this scientific research to expand his view of human behaviour.
As Peter Galison explains in ‘The Ontology of the Enemy: Nor­
bert Wiener and the Cybernetic Vision’, Wiener postulated that there 
were two sorts of adversaries to scientific inquiry.1 One he called the 
Augustinian Devil, which he equated with nature. Nature might resist 
your inquiries, but it does not try to deliberately trick or mislead you. In 
contrast is the Manichean Devil, which he associated with US adver­
saries during World War II, who would use any kind of tactics, includ­
ing lies and deceptions, to prevail in a conflict. As he focused on this 
Manichean Enemy, he pictured it in servomechanical terms, translating 
deception into mechanical actuators that incorporate feedback loops.
1 
Peter Galison, ‘The Ontology of the Enemy: Norbert Wiener and the
Cybernetic Vision,’ Critical Inquiry 21: 1 (Autumn 1994): 228-66.
Thus Wiener envisioned the defensive situation against this Man­
ichean adversary as a human (an anti-aircraft gunner), a calculator and 
a weapon, forged into a single integrated system in which feedback 
mechanisms were crucial. Under stress, humans tend to act repetitive­
ly and therefore predictably. Building on this premise, he built a mech­
anism that would try to predict the evasive manoeuvres of an enemy 1 

86
DETOXIFYING CYBERNETICS
aircraft under fire. To test it, he created two simulated lights on a wall; 
one for a dodging aircraft, and the other for the gunner trying to shoot 
the aircraft down. When he tested this against actual data in which 
gunners were looking for enemy aircraft, the data showed that the 
predictor worked well for a single pilot under different circumstances, 
(that is a single pilot making more than one run) but not for different 
pilots. This was an important realization which he could not capitalize 
on at the time, because the computer power he had available was not 
sufficient for the task. Knowing what we know now about neural nets, 
if one knew that any given enemy pilot tended to act predictably, one 
could use a neural net to build a mechanism that would reliably predict 
the actions of that pilot and any number of others, based on their char­
acteristic manoeuvre patterns. But with the technology Wiener had, he 
was not able to build a predictor that would work in all circumstances. 
In that sense, his research was a failure.
In another sense, however, it allowed him to forge an important 
bridge between humans and feedback mechanisms. In an article he 
published with Arthuro Rosenblueth, a physiologist, and Julian Bigelow, 
an electrical engineer, Wiener proposed that human behaviour could 
be treated like a black box.2 Black boxes are units designed to perform a 
function without an observer knowing what exactly is happening inside 
the box, in contrast to white boxes, which specify the inner mechanism. 
So, he proposed that human behaviour is a black box. Along with col­
leagues such as John von Neumann, Wiener formed a research group 
they called the Teleological Society, which treated human behaviour 
in a purely behaviouristic fashion. In this research group, mechanical 
engineering and neurology were seen as essentially the same field. In 
the above article that he co-published, he drew the conclusion that 
‘the term purposeful is meant to denote that the act or behavior may 
be interpreted as directed to the attainment of a goal’.3 Hence, he was 
connecting purpose with teleology.
2 
Arturo Rosenblueth, Norbert Wiener and Julian Bigelow, ‘Behavior, Purpose,
and Telelogy,’ Philosophy of Science 10.1 (January 1943): 18-24.
3 Ibid., 18.
A theology professor, Richard Taylor, objected, stating that this 
definition of purpose was much too broad. Taylor proposed a count­
er example of a weighted roulette wheel. Was that purposeful?, Taylor 
asked. In response, Wiener and his colleagues made a distinction be­
tween passive devices and active devices. The antiaircraft predictor 

N. KATHERINE HAYLES
87
used feedback, so it was an active device. The weighted roulette wheel 
was a passive device and did not use feedback. Moreover, here they 
reiterated their claim that as objects of scientific inquiry, ‘humans do 
not differ from machines’. Therefore, in their view, human intentionali­
ty does not differ from machine self-regulation. This article marks the 
limits of first-order cybernetics.
In retrospect, we can see what was achieved by this vision, and 
also what was obscured. Obviously, such a mechanistic interpretation 
of human behaviour has many limitations and drawbacks. In the 1980s, 
as World War II faded into history, new visions began to emerge that 
tried to remedy some of these limitations. The period between 1979 
and 1981 was particularly important. Heinz von Foerster’s Observing 
Systems, published in 1981, initiated what is now called second-order 
cybernetics. There is a pun in the title: the observer is observing a sys­
tem, but the observer himself is also a system that can be observed 
in turn. This kind of cycling between what the observer sees and the 
observer himself was typical of second-order cybernetics, which em­
phasized recursivity, the inclusion of the observer into the systemic dy­
namics, and system-environment couplings. This perspective provided 
a basis for a bridge between first-order cybernetics and new ideas that 
were surfacing in the environmental realm, which came to be associat­
ed with second-order cybernetics.
In 1979, James Lovelock published his book Gaia: A New Look at 
Life on Earth, which marks the turn toward an environmental empha- 
sis.4 In Lovelock’s Gaia hypothesis, the earth is seen as a self-regulat­
ing entity in which life forms and environments are tightly coupled into 
a single feedback system. In his book, Lovelock included a chapter on 
cybernetics in which he focused on homeostasis, that is, maintaining 
a stable state, which was crucially important in first-order cybernet­
ics. Lovelock argues that the earth, and all the biological life forms on 
it, constitute a cybernetic system. He has three principal examples to 
illustrate this idea. He points out that the earth’s atmosphere is roughly 
20 per cent oxygen. Oxygen is a reactive gas, therefore earth’s atmo­
sphere is a system far from equilibrium. What keeps it from going to­
ward equilibrium? His argument: the action of biological organisms is 
what maintains the stability of the atmosphere.
4 
James Lovelock, Gaia: A New Look at Life on Earth (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1979).

88
DETOXIFYING CYBERNETICS
A second example is the acidity or alkalinity of the oceans. He 
demonstrates by a series of calculations that the salt content of the 
oceans should be constantly increasing, because as water evaporates, 
the salt has nowhere to go. What actually happens, by contrast, is that 
the salt content remains approximately constant. This could only be the 
case, he argues, because of the action of organisms within the ocean.
In his third example, he notes that, in the four billion years since 
earth was formed, the sun has been constantly growing larger. The 
sun’s heat is therefore increasing, but nevertheless earth systems show 
a maintenance of a steady temperature, even though the sun is much 
hotter that it was four billion years ago. Again, he attributes this tenden­
cy toward a more or less steady temperature to biological organisms.
Finally, to illustrate how organisms could stabilize a system, he 
creates a simulation called Daisyworld. Daisyworld has black daisies, 
and white daisies. When the temperature is cool, the black daisies that 
absorb sunlight, proliferate and are predominant, thus warming the 
planet. When the temperature gets hotter, white daisies, that reflect 
sunlight, begin to take over. In this simple simulation, he illustrates his 
ideas of how biological organisms react with the environment to create 
a homeostatic or steady situation.
We are now ready to trace the transition from the military-indus­
trial emphasis of first-wave cybernetics in the 1940s, ‘50s and ‘60s to 
environmental concerns that began to appear in the 1980s and ‘90s. 
The emphasis here turns from human-machine fusion to biota-envi­
ronmental coupling. This now makes cybernetics about the character­
istics of the living in the context of their environments rather than pre­
dominantly about mechanical fusions. Now we introduce a new thread 
into this tapestry that we are weaving. Huberto Maturana and Francis­
co Varela’s important book Autopoiesis and Cognition: The Realization 
of the Living was published in 1980, right in that crucial period between 
the 1970s and ‘80s.5 One of their central concepts is autopoiesis. Poi­
esis comes from a Greek root meaning ‘to make’; ‘poetry’ comes from 
the same root. Auto, of course, means emerging from the self. Thus 
autopoiesis means self-making or self-organizing. Maturana and Vare­
la sketch a feedback system in which the organization of an organism 
5 Humerto R. Maturana and Francisco J. Varela, Autopoiesis and Cognition: 
The Realization of the Living (Dordrecht: D. Reidel: 1980).

N. KATHERINE HAYLES
89
produces the components, and the components simultaneously also 
produce the organization. This kind of recursivity, they argue, is intrin­
sic to the process of living. Moreover, they weave cognition into this 
idea as well: ‘A cognitive system is a system whose organization de­
fines a domain of interactions in which it can act with relevance to the 
maintenance of itself, and the process of cognition is the actual acting 
or behaving of this domain. Living systems are cognitive systems, and 
living as a process is a process of cognition. This statement is valid 
for all organisms with and without a nervous system’.6 Essentially, they 
argue that cognition is co-extensive with life.
6 Ibid., 13.
7 
Lynn Margulis, Origin of Eukaryotic Cells: Evidence and Research
Implications of a Theory of the Origin And Evolution of Microbial, Plants, and 
Animal Cells on the Precambrian Earth (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1970).
Now we will begin to build out this environmental theme as it 
merges with cybernetics. The next important event is the work of Lynn 
Margulis, a microbiologist, and her 1970 book The Origin of Eukaryotic 
Cells.7 Eukaryotic cells are cells that have a membrane and nucleus. 
Margulis upended conventional ideas about evolution by arguing that 
the origin of eukaryotic cells came about because of a fusion of two 
independent prokaryotic bacteria. Prokaryotic cells are cells that do 
not have a nucleus. Those were the original living cells, but at the end 
of the Archaean period, eukaryotic cells (cells with a nucleus) began to 
appear, which initiated a whole new trajectory in evolution. Margulis ar­
gues that the origin of eukaryotic cells came about when one microbe 
ingested the other; but it was incompletely digested and continued to 
live within its predator. The ingested organism becomes the mitochon­
dria within the nucleated cell, which powers the cell by providing ener­
gy. The two previously independent organisms fused into what today 
we know as the eukaryotic cell. Later, her theory was verified when it 
was determined that mitochondrial DNA is different from the DNA of 
the nucleus, and that the mitochondria reproduce on a schedule differ­
ent from the nucleus of a cell. This established that the mitochondria, 
in fact, have their own separate DNA and hence must have previously 
been independent organisms.
Expanding on this idea, Margulis argues that bacteria are the only 
true individuals. Every organism larger than a single bacteria, in fact 
is a community of organisms. Of course, we know that as humans we 
have a whole microbiome inside us (the gut bacteria) as well as all kinds 

90
DETOXIFYING CYBERNETICS
of other bacteria and viruses that live within our bodies. Margulis ar­
gued that humans, mammals, and every other macro-organism should 
be seen as a community, not as an individual. Moreover, she rejected 
the idea that new species come about primarily through random muta­
tions, as orthodox evolutionary theory maintained. On the contrary, she 
believed that evolution is driven primarily by symbiosis—the joining of 
two or more microbial species. Hence she argued for symbiogenesis 
as the primary driver of evolutionary novelty.
Things really start to get interesting when Margulis discovers 
Lovelock’s work and begins to collaborate with him. Each of these major 
figures contributed something to the other’s ideas. Margulis expand­
ed Lovelock’s archive of biotic-environmental coupling by contributing 
all the ways in which micro-organisms coupled with the environment 
to produce either new organisms or new kinds of situations. She ar­
gued, for example, that photosynthesis, the basis for all life on earth, 
occurred through such an environmental coupling. Photosynthesis in 
plants have its origin in sulphur-eating bacteria, which used the sun’s 
energy to fuel their metabolism. These bacteria fused with plants, giv­
ing plants the ability to use sunlight as energy. Lovelock, for his part, 
provided the basis for an expanded view of evolution. Margulis always 
had a problem extending her arguments beyond micro-organisms to 
macro-organisms. Even today, most biologists do not accept the idea 
that mammals, for example, evolve primarily through symbiosis. Rath­
er they fall back on the received ideas of natural selection and fitness 
criteria. Margulis, I think, has won the day for micro-organisms, but not 
for macro-organisms.
You can see how Lovelock now becomes important for Margulis’s 
leap into macro-organisms, and we see this in her book Microcosmos: 
Four Billion Years of Microbial Evolution, published in 1989.8 Notice the 
time span: we have gone from 1980 to almost 1990, and in those nine 
years, all the interpretations of environment-organism coupling were 
expanded. Here is what Margulis wrote about Lovelock in 1989: ‘Ac­
cording to Lovelock’s ideas, which he calls the Gaia hypothesis, the bi­
ota itself, which includes Homo Sapiens [and you see there the leap to 
macro-organisms] is autopoietic’. Here she is picking up on Maturana 
8 Lynn Margulis and Dorion Sagan, Microcosm: Four Billion Years of Microbial 
Evolution (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997).

N. KATHERINE HAYLES
91
and Varela’s idea of autopoiesis:9 ‘It recognizes, regulates and creates 
conditions necessary for its own continuing survival’. In the second 
edition of the Origin of Eukaryotic Cells in 1993, we find multiple refer­
ences to Lovelock and to autopoiesis, and after that, Margulis typically 
refers to the earth or Gaia as an autopoietic system.
9 Ibid., 266.
10 Dorion Sagan and Lynn Margulis, ‘Gaia and the Evolution of Machines,’ 
Whole Earth Review (Summer 1987): 15-21.
However, there was a problem with the way Maturana and Varela 
defined cognition. You recall that for them, cognition was co-extensive 
with living systems: to live is to cognize. But by making it co-extensive 
with living systems, the concept does not extend to non-living enti­
ties, such as computational media. For this reason, machines tend to 
fade from the picture in autopoietic discourses, which typically focus 
on the relation between biota and the environment (as with Lovelock 
and Margulis). At about the same time, evolutionary explanations, 
among those aware of and persuaded by Margulis, tend toward sym­
biosis for micro-organisms, versus establishment biologists, espe­
cially neo-Darwinists, who focus on natural selection and fitness for 
macro-organisms.
There is one exception to this general tendency, in a brief essay 
that Dorion Sagan and Margulis published in 1985. It is only seven pages 
long and appeared in the successor to the Whole Earth Catalog called 
the Whole Earth Review, which is not a scientific journal.10 Dorion Sa­
gan, son of Margulis and Carl Sagan, became an important co-author of 
many of Margulis’s later publications. In her scientific publications, she 
is listed as the first author and Dorion Sagan as the second. However, in 
this essay, Sagan is the first author. I think this may be significant, indi­
cating that these ideas are really more his than Margulis’s. Sagan (and 
Margulis) recognize in this essay that machines are not self-making 
or self-producing, hence not autopoietic. Machines must have people 
to produce them, maintain them, and so forth. In the terminology of 
Maturana and Varela, they are not autopoietic, they are allopoietic. But 
Sagan argues that they do not need to be autopoietic because they 
evolved by using humans, who are operating as self-maintaining and 
self-reproducing autopoietic organisms.

92
DETOXIFYING CYBERNETICS
Bruce Clarke has emphasized the importance of this essay in what 
he sees as Margulis’s turn toward what he calls neo-cybernetics.11 In 
neo-cybernetic systems theory, we get a combination of the thread we 
have been tracing through Maturana, Varela, Margulis, and Lovelock 
with cybernetic systems, as they appeared in Niklas Luhmann’s social 
systems.11
 12 This constellation emphasizes the hallmarks of second-or­
der cybernetics: recursivity, re-entry, the observer in the system, and 
system-environmental coupling. As an advocate for neo-cybernetic 
systems theory, Clarke asks a question latent in the idea of cognition 
as co-extensive with the process of living. If the earth is considered 
a single entity in which living organisms are tightly coupled with the 
environment, that is, Lovelock’s Gaia hypothesis, could there be a plan­
etary cognition? If you argue that the earth is a single organism and all 
living organisms are cognitive, then you could hypothesize that there 
is something we might refer to as planetary cognition. This represents 
the conclusion that emerges from neo-cybernetic systems theory and 
the culmination of the tapestry woven with threads coming from Love­
lock, Margulis, and Maturana and Varela in second-order cybernetics.
11 
Bruce Clarke, Gaian Systems: Lynn Margulis, Neocybernetics, and the End
of the Anthropocene (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2020).
12 
Niklas Luhmann, Social Systems, trans. John Bednarz, jr. with Dirk Baecker
(Redwood City: Stanford University Press, 1995).
13 
Jerome Y. Lettvin, Humberto R. Maturana, Warren S. McColluch and Water
H. Pitts, ‘What the Frog’s Eye Tells the Frog’s Brain’, Proceedings of the Institute for 
Radio Engineers 47, no. 11 (November 1959): 1940-51.
Now I will turn to some of the fractures in these constellations, 
where the threads become frail or fail to connect. To trace one of these 
fractures, I will go back to Maturana and Varela. Part of their theory is 
that no information from the environment reaches the organism. This is 
highly counter-intuitive. You are reading what I have written, and hope­
fully you are thinking about it, so it seems obvious that information is 
flowing from me to you. But Maturana and Varela argue that an environ­
mental stimulus can only ‘trigger’ an organism’s responses, not cause 
it. This can be traced to the fact that Maturana was a junior co-author of 
a very important biological paper: ‘What the Frog’s Eye Tells the Frog’s 
Brain.’13 The argument of that paper is this much information process­
ing occurs in the frog’s eye itself before it communicates anything to 
the brain. Hence the information coming from the environment is so 
hyper-processed by the organism’s nervous system and way of pro­
cessing information, that it is not accurate to say that the frog reacts to 

N. KATHERINE HAYLES
93
information; rather, information impinges on the frog’s sensory system 
and is then processed in a way specific to the frog. Maturana argues 
that we cannot use causality when we talk about organisms and envi­
ronments; instead we have to assume this triggering rather than direct 
causality. This results in a very strained vocabulary, because causality 
is built into our way of talking from the ground up. If you jettison every­
day vocabulary, if you jettison causality, you really have to go around 
the barn to get in the door. For example, when Maturana and Varela 
talk about language, the primary mode in which humans communicate 
information, they do not call it language, they call it ‘languaging’; that 
is, a process that triggers responses rather than directly causes them.14 
We are ‘languaging’ at present; a vocabulary they devised to remove 
the causal implication that I am directly imparting information to you. 
Instead, in their view, I am creating triggers that impinge on your ner­
vous system, and so you think in ways specific to your experience, your 
sensory systems, and so forth. I am not causing you to do anything. 
Your response—in fact, in their view it would be a mistake to even call 
it a response—is completely determined by your own systems, not by 
anything that I am communicating to you. You can see how convoluted 
this way of thinking and talking quickly becomes.
14 
Humerto R. Maturana and Francisco J. Varela, The Tree of Knowledge: The
Biological Roots of Human Understanding, revised ed. (Boulder: Shambhala, 1992), 210.
I regard this part of Maturana and Varela’s work as mistaken. I 
think I understand where it comes from: the ‘Frog’s Eye’ research. In 
my view, it would be more accurate and sensible to say that information 
is transduced as it moves from the environment to the organism. I grant 
their point that any environmental stimulus is completely transformed 
by the organism’s own sensory system, but nevertheless this transduc­
tion only reconfigures the information; it does not block it altogether. 
This view removes the idea of some kind of absolute barrier existing 
between what is happening in the environment and what is happening 
in the organism. From my point of view, the idea that an organism is in­
formationally closed to the environment is a fracture because it results 
in some very convoluted and unnecessary complications.
Moreover, if you are going to say that there are feedback loops 
between the organism and the environment, and at the same time you 
are saying that no information can move from the environment to the 
organism, you have a problem. Maturana and Varela have tried to say that 

94
DETOXIFYING CYBERNETICS
the organism is open to material and energy exchanges but not to informa­
tion. But then, flows of information and their transformations are crucial 
both in first and second-order cybernetics, so the result is a kind of 
incoherence in the way different parts of the constellation interact with 
one another.
If we go back to first-wave cybernetics, we may ask: What made 
first-wave cybernetics possible? Otto Mayr has looked into this exten­
sively in his book The Origins of Feedback Control.15 He goes back to 
the Greeks, who knew about self-regulating mechanisms. They used 
self-regulating mechanisms on water flow, for example. Moving into 
the nineteenth century, engineers created thermostats and gover­
nors on steam engines—all feedback devices. Consequently, as Mayr 
shows, feedback mechanisms have been known since antiquity. What 
happened with cybernetics? In the twentieth century, a crucial new ele­
ment was added: the concept of information developed simultaneously 
by Claude Shannon and Norbert Wiener. As Mayr points out, it was 
only in the twentieth century that electrical self-regulation began to 
appear, and that became possible in part because of Shannon’s work 
on quantifying information. What is added to this ancient knowledge 
that makes first-wave cybernetics possible is a concept of quantifi­
able information.
15 
Otto Mayr, The Origins of Feedback Control (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1975).
16 
N. Katherine Hayles, Unthought: The Power of the Cognitive Nonconscious
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2017).
Now we have seen how cybernetics turns from mechanisms to 
organisms, and we have seen an early attempt by Sagan and Margu­
lis to reintroduce machines. Really to reintroduce machines, however, 
we need to heal some of those fractures that appeared. A clue for this 
endeavour is offered by the emergence of the concept of information. 
Instead of making cognition co-extensive with life, which leaves ma­
chines out of the picture, we can begin with a definition of cognition 
that includes machines, because it highlights information flows. In my 
book Unthought I devised this definition for cognition: ‘Cognition is the 
process of interpreting information in contexts that connect it with 
meaning’.16 This has something in common with Maturana and Varela’s 
ideas. Like them, I see cognition as a process; and like them, I maintain 
that all biological organisms have cognitive capacities. But the difference 
is that this definition also allows computational media to have cognitive 

N. KATHERINE HAYLES
95
capacities. Like biological organisms, computational media interpret in­
formation in contexts that connect them with meaning.
Now we have an integrated framework incorporating humans, 
living nonhuman organisms, and computational media. I call these 
cognitive assemblages. Cognitive assemblages are collectivities, not 
exclusively human, not exclusively organic, through which information, 
interpretations, and meanings circulate. Another way that my view de­
parts from the constellation we have been tracing is the idea that Gaia 
could be a single organism. Of course, by adopting the name of a Greek 
goddess, Lovelock implies personhood for the planet. Personhood in 
turn implies intentionality. Hence if the planet has intentionality, the 
idea of something like planetary cognition naturally arises. Margulis, 
with her background in biology, was initially sceptical of the Gaia ter­
minology, and even though she eventually began using Lovelock’s ter­
minology, she remained somewhat uneasy with it. She is not alone in 
her skepticism. The Gaia terminology has led to all kinds of problems, 
including the reactions of many scientists who do not like this implica­
tion of intentionality and personhood (notwithstanding that Lovelock 
occasionally tried to deal with the scepticism by conceding that the 
earth is not a person, and does not directly manifest intentionality).
My own solution to this difficulty is to focus on cognition. Defining 
it as I do allows a clear distinction between agents and actors, because 
it focuses on a capacity to interpret information. Material processes 
like erosion, breakdown of rocks, and so forth, have agency, but they do 
not perform interpretations or make selections and decisions. Actors, 
by contrast, do make decisions. Actors in this sense include all biologi­
cal organisms as well as computational media. Returning to Lovelock’s 
vision of organisms and the environment as one highly interactive sys­
tem, I agree about the coupling part, but I would also argue that it is 
always the living organisms, not the environment as such, that catalyse 
and direct the changes. Material processes by themselves do not have 
stakes in outcomes; a mountain does not care—indeed, cannot care— 
that it erodes. But organisms do care if they survive, and their drive to 
survive adds direction and intentionality to the changes that occur as 
evolution proceeds. Consequently, I regard the material processes as 
agents, while living organisms are actors. For different reasons, com­
putational media are also actors because they are programmed and 
designed to have specific outcomes and goals—that is, they too have 
intentionality, albeit not in the same way that organisms do.

96
DETOXIFYING CYBERNETICS
Now, instead of symbiosis or symbiogenesis, we have techno­
symbiosis. It incorporates and extends biosymbiosis into the technical 
realm. Like the early essay by Sagan and Margulis on the evolution of 
machines, I argue that machines do evolve, and they evolve through 
incorporating humans into their collectivities. Because this is mutually 
beneficial both to machines and humans, it counts as symbiosis. Hu­
mans have their cognitive capacities extended through cognitive ma­
chines. I can talk to you in China from Los Angeles precisely because 
I have a cognitive machine that I am hooked up to, and you have the 
cognitive machine that you are hooked up to, so a coupling can occur 
between us.
We can observe biota and environmental couplings of the kind 
that Lovelock emphasized. We also now have human and machine cou­
plings, and environments are increasingly co-constructed between hu­
mans, machines, and the natural world. These environments include 
not only couplings between biota and the world, but also couplings be­
tween humans, computational media and the environment. Moreover, 
we, as humans, benefit from the computational media we create—in- 
creasingly so as computational media interpenetrate virtually all of our 
technical infrastructures. And computational media obviously benefit 
from our constructions, because we humans are what bring them into 
existence, maintain them, supply energy to them, and so forth. This 
mutual benefit is what I mean by technosymbiosis.
Part of this argument depends on the idea that machines have 
interpretive possibilities; machines interpret information from their en­
vironment. Using the terminology of Jakob von Uexkull, I would say ma­
chines have Umwelten, or world-horizons.17 Uexkull, of course, argued 
that living organisms all have specific world views. The frog, for ex­
ample, thinks and perceives like a frog, which is dramatically different 
from how a human perceives. Today, computational media also have 
inputs and outputs. Even stand-alone computers have a vision of the 
world they construct through their relatively narrow and deterministic 
inputs. Once we begin to move into computational networks that have 
sensors and actuators, it becomes even clearer that they perceive the 
world through their sensors, and they act on the world through their 
17 
Jakob von Uexkull, A Foray into the Worlds of Animals and Humans with a
Theory of Meaning, trans. Joseph D. O’Neil (Minneapolis: University Of Minnesota 
Press, 2010).

N. KATHERINE HAYLES
97
actuators, so they have their own Umwelten, which are distinctive to 
them and different from us—although overlapping with humans in ways 
that allow us to communicate with them and form cognitive assem­
blages that include them.
Now we can speculate about a third-wave of cybernetics that 
includes insights from first-order cybernetics, for example, mecha­
nistic couplings of the kind that Wiener talked about. It also includes 
second-order cybernetics (specifically Maturana and Varela, as well as 
Margulis and Lovelock) so it focuses on couplings between the observer 
and the environmental system dynamics. In addition, the new constella­
tion, tentatively called third-order cybernetics, incorporates the co-evo­
lution of humans and machines into an integrated cognitive framework.
Third-order cybernetics opens new possibilities for research and 
development both in cybernetics and in environmental programmes. 
For example, the Australian National University wanted to establish a 
multidisciplinary school—not just a department, an entire school. They 
chose to name the new entity the School of Cybernetics. It is radically 
multidisciplinary, including environmentalists, computer specialists, 
biologists, activists, etcetera. Thus, we begin to see how the events that 
we have been tracing allow a fusion between the idea of human-ma­
chine feedback, and human-environmental feedback, extended to the 
entire biosphere, which now also includes technosymbiosis between 
humans and computational media, all coming together in an integrat­
ed framework. I think these possibilities opened by technosymbiosis 
and cognitive assemblages are going to reinvigorate interest in cyber­
netics. The fusion of cybernetics with environmental concerns offers 
potent new possibilities for research, analysis, and perhaps most im­
portantly, interventions. I would not be surprised if this idea, appealing 
on many levels in our age of environmental crises, spread very quickly. 
This is what I call ‘detoxifying cybernetics’ through redefining its col­
lectivities and refocusing its mission through its environmental and 
computational concerns.
In conclusion, we went from antiaircraft designs, of the kind 
Wiener was working on, to environmental problems and solutions. 
We went from symbiosis between organisms, which Margulis empha­
sized in symbiogenesis, to technosymbiosis between humans, non­
humans and computational media. As computational media become 
increasingly integrated with human and natural environments, their 
inclusion in a cybernetic approach oriented to analysing and solving 

98 
DETOXIFYING CYBERNETICS
environmental problems is more urgent now than ever. This reorienta­
tion can reinvigorate cybernetic thinking and make significant contri­
butions to our global environmental crises. Realizing the full potential 
of a detoxified cybernetics requires a theory robust enough to over­
come the historical fractures and provide a basis for new challenges 
that will inevitably arise as we humans grapple with the implications of 
computational media, including increasingly powerful and pervasive 
artificial intelligences.

N. KATHERINE HAYLES
99
Reference
Clarke, Bruce. Gaian Systems: Lynn Margulis, Neocybernetics, and the 
End Of the Anthropocene. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press, 2020.
Galison Peter. ‘The Ontology of the Enemy: Norbert Wiener and the 
Cybernetic Vision’. Critical Inquiry 21: 1 (Autumn 1994): 228-66.
Hayles, N. Katherine. Unthought: The Power of the Cognitive 
Nonconscious. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2017.
Lettvin, Jerome Y., Humberto R. Maturana, Warren S. McColluch 
and Water H. Pitts. ‘What the Frog’s Eye Tells the Frog’s Brain’.
Proceedings of the Institute for Radio Engineers 47, no. 11 (November 
1959): 1940-51.
Lovelock, James. Gaia: A New Look at Life on Earth. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1979.
Luhmann, Niklas. Social Systems. Translated by John Bednarz, jr. with 
Dirk Baecker. Redwood City: Stanford University Press, 1995.
Margulis, Lynn. Origin of Eukaryotic Cells: Evidence and Research 
Implications of a Theory of the Origin And Evolution of Microbial, 
Plants, and Animal Cells on the Precambrian Earth. New Haven: Yale 
University Press, 1970.
Margulis, Lynn and Dorion Sagan. Microcosm: Four Billion Years of 
Microbial Evolution. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997.
Maturana, Humerto R. and Francisco J. Varela. Autopoiesis and
Cognition: The Realization of the Living (Dordrecht: D. Reidel: 1980).
———. The Tree of Knowledge: The Biological Roots of Human 
Understanding. Revised edition. Boulder: Shambhala, 1992.
Mayr, Otto. The Origins of Feedback Control. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
1975.
Rosenblueth, Arturo, Norbert Wiener and Julian Bigelow. ‘Behavior, 
Purpose, and Telelogy’, Philosophy of Science, Vol. 10, No. 1 (Jan., 
1943): 18-24.
Sagan, Dorion and Lynn Margulis, ‘Gaia and the Evolution of Machines,’ 
Whole Earth Review (Summer 1987): 15-21.
Uexkull, Jakob von. A Foray into the Worlds of Animals and Humans with 
a Theory of Meaning. Translated by Joseph D. O’Neil. Minneapolis: 
University Of Minnesota Press, 2010.


101
James Lovelock, Gaia, 
and the Remembering of 
Biological Being
Dorion Sagan
The occasion of the passing of James Lovelock (1919-2022) provides 
us the luxury of attempting to look back on the life, not only of a great 
scientist, but of the major object of his intellectual attention, the life of 
the biosphere, whose status as (to quote David Bowie) a space oddi­
ty, he discovered. The Gaia hypothesis was a response to the search 
for extraterrestrial life, specifically NASA’s Viking mission of robotic 
landers to see if there were life on Mars. Self-described as an engi­
neer and inventor more than a scientist, Lovelock invented the electron 
capture device, an extremely sensitive chemical detector that found 
human-made industrial products (such as DDT and PCB toxins) in re­
mote regions of Earth, helping to spur Rachel Carson’s cride c&ur, the 
1961 book Silent Spring, itself a spur for the environmental movement. 
Introduced by my father, Carl Sagan, with whom he shared an office at 
the NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, to my mother, Lynn 
Margulis, who was interested in the composition of Earth’s early atmo­
sphere, the two, Lovelock and Margulis, went on to develop the Gaia 
theory, which explored how Earth’s biosphere, far from being a plan­
et with some life on it, was a giant thermodynamic system away from 
chemical equilibrium. Lovelock’s idea for detecting the presence of life 
in space—which, inverted, revealed that Earth had a living body, a kind 
of planetary physiology—depended on his studies which showed and 
continued to show multiple chemicals in Earth’s atmosphere that exist­
ed in concentrations orders of magnitude out of chemical and thermo­
dynamic equilibrium. But they were there. Methane, butyl mercaptan 
and many organic compounds should disappear in our atmosphere 
steeped in reactive oxygen (O2), they should react and disappear. But 
they do not. Because life put them there, and continues to put them 
there, replenishing its reactive compounds.
But how? Who? Microbial ecologist Margulis pointed to the 
gene-trading bacteria, with their many forms of metabolism, or met­
abolic virtuosi, as she put it. They completed chemical cycles and 

JAMES LOVELOCK, GAIA, AND THE
REMEMBERING OF BIOLOGICAL BEING
102
produced the atmosphere; the oxygen-rich atmosphere with its redox 
gradient. The cyanobacteria, evolving to use the hydrogen in water 
(H2O) as a source of electrons for photosynthesis, released O2, loosing 
free radicals in to the world. Anaerobic life, primarily archaea, suffered 
and died, while some survived by taking refuge in the anoxic muds. 
Oxidized iron, Margulis pointed out, such as that from which the iron 
for cars in Ontario and Michigan is mined, shows evidence for global 
oxidation some two billion years ago. Ozone (O3) also arose from the 
surfeit of water-using green life. The very planet’s blue colour, Love­
lock pointed out, was the result of the light-scattering properties of 
oxygen atoms loosed by energetically lustful life. The collaboration 
between the atmospheric chemist and the microbial ecologist was es­
pecially fruitful. An example of this is Margulis’s identification of the 
source of the persistence of methane, which immediately reacts with 
oxygen to become carbon dioxide and water in Earth’s atmosphere. It 
is produced by methanogens, considered methanogenic bacteria at 
the time, and now usually classified as archaea. In termites and cows, 
helping to digest the refractory cellulose of wood and grass in anaer­
obic environments, symbiotic microbial communities produced meth­
ane, as did prokaryotes in seaside expanses called microbial mats. The 
metastable atmosphere of Earth was like part of the body, in this case 
inside-out relative to mammals, with the circulatory system on the out­
side rather than the inside. Whereas Lovelock characterized Gaia as an 
organism, Margulis differed, pointing to the datum that no organism 
completely recycles its own material waste. Gaia is better character­
ized as planetary life form; a body, yes, but subtler than an organism, 
it produces waste mostly as heat, the end product of metabolism that 
cannot be used by any living organisms. Like all lifelike and living cy­
cling systems it produces entropy, in thermodynamics, a measure of 
the spread of energy.
That Carl Sagan, who was suspicious of the grand claims that 
Earth itself was alive, knew of Gaia, is apparent from his first sole-au­
thored book, Planetary Exploration (1970). In the book, based on his 
Condon lecture at Portland University on his ex-wife’s birthday, Sagan 
takes the reader on a thought experiment on how to detect life on other 
planets. If one approaches a planet relatively closely, one might notice 
life by the shadows of structures that would seem quite unlikely geo­
logically (for example, the stilt-like feet of animals). Even from further 
out, the perspicacious observer could detect, say, the lights of cities 

DORION SAGAN
103
at night, while from astronomic distances one might still be able to re­
ceive electromagnetic messages. But, Sagan says, without mentioning 
Gaia by name, the best evidence might be the unexpected presence 
of methane in an oxygen-rich atmosphere; the clearest message of 
life on Earth might be, he drily jokes, an unintended consequence of 
‘bovine flatulence’.
Leaving aside that cows belch almost all their methane from the 
other end, the point is well taken. Gaia’s inside is our outside. ‘She’ 
could be detected spectroscopically by extraterrestrials, say mar­
tians, with our level of scientific chemical voyeurism. Alas, Mars’s at­
mosphere was found, prior to the landing of Viking’s robotic landers, 
to have an atmosphere almost completely of carbon dioxide, showing 
no obvious chemical signs of life, let alone a planetary surface steeped 
in it. Like many of science’s great discoveries, Gaia was not directly 
sought, or supported by funding agencies, but discovered serendipi­
tously. In retrospect one might argue that Gaia, the notion that Earth 
is no more a rock with some life on it than you are a skeleton infested 
with cells, may be considered the most striking result of NASA space 
exploration, as well as SETI, the search for extraterrestrial intelligence. 
Life is an open thermodynamic system in space, transforming the solar 
gradient between the sun and space, primarily through the advanced, 
sensitive natural nanotechnics of water-using photosynthesis, into the 
redox potential of Earth’s highly energized, because continuously oxy­
gen-supplied, biosphere. Lovelock, with Marguilis, probably deserved 
a Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for their work. More important, 
however, is the intellectual and affective sequelae of the scientific idea 
that our planet is a living body, of which we are in no way a key part. 
Lovelock’s thought experiment, that Mars did not harbour life because 
its atmosphere was in chemical and thermodynamic equilibrium, turns 
out to be right.
However, and although my Gaian matchmaker was not thinking 
directly of Lovelock when he said this, that aging British scientists tend 
to go a bit dotty in their later years, an argument can be made that 
Lovelock did not fully appreciate the consequences of the Gaia theory 
he helped spawn. Carl Sagan said this to me in a conversation about 
a review of a book by Fred Hoyle, the astronomer who precisely pre­
dicted the means by which helium turns to carbon atoms inside stars, 
and who termed the term big bang, but believed life and the universe 
might both be eternal. Hoyle argued that bacteria and viruses existed 

JAMES LOVELOCK, GAIA, AND THE
REMEMBERING OF BIOLOGICAL BEING
104
throughout space, further suggesting that Mars’s rusty regolith might 
be the product of Pedobacterium, an iron-oxidizing bacterium, and that 
the odds of life evolving on the Earth, or at all, were incalculably small.
With his deep insight that the atmosphere is as highly organized 
and unexpected as a beehive or a sandcastle on the beach, Lovelock’s 
notion of planetary chemical disequilibrium as a way of detecting life 
on a planet, matured from a hypothesis of life regulating the planet’s at­
mospheric chemistry, to, with Margulis, a theory recognizing microbes 
as the main actors. The ‘bovine flatulence’ that might alert aliens to 
life’s terrestrial presence is in fact from methanogens, archaea that 
have survived from the Archean Eon prior to the build-up of oxygen on 
the planet and iron and uranium oxides in the fossil record. As men­
tioned, Margulis differed from Lovelock in describing Earth life as an 
organism. But although the metaphorical matrix spurred on by look­
ing at life as an organism—later Lovelock would say that deforesta­
tion and industry are destroying Gaia’s ‘skin’—could be fruitful, it also 
overreached, for example, when Lovelock compared Earth to being an 
old lady on dialysis who needed human help, that is, geoengineering. 
Margulis told me that Lovelock excused such overreach by saying that 
if people thought of Earth as an organism, they would be less likely to 
destroy it. There was something of Mother Mary in it. But given the 
treatment of women in a patriarchal society—or even of female-asso­
ciated symbols, such as in the secret Cold War Air Force Project A119 
to detonate a nuclear device on the moon, of which my father was 
apprised—the Soviets had a similar plan—the notion seems doubtful. 
‘Love your mother’, said my mother’s T-shirt, over an image of Earth 
from space, in a smiling photo of her from the 1970s. But Gaia is not a 
mother or an organism, but something stranger, an alien body, based 
on the metabolism, gene-trading, and symbioses of prokaryotes, that 
we are just beginning to understand. His later works, playing with no­
tions of planetary medicine and technological salvation, culminate in 
Novacene (2019), where Lovelock suggests he knows that only Earth 
in the cosmos is alive. The comment is suggestive, even exemplary 
of, the general anthropocentrism that renders the aliens of Star Trek 
as humans; a self-centredness which shows up too in the bloating of 
our individual fears of death into worries over the death of the planet.
The theory of Gaia is, in a sense, an autobiography of a planet; an 
autobiography told by very small part of the vast nexus of life, with its 
estimated thirty million species, not including the prokaryotes, which 

DORION SAGAN
105
trade genes so often, and do not reproduce sexually so do not conform 
to the traditional biological species concept, which like the rest of hu­
man knowledge must take into account the provinciality, the particu­
larity of human observers. The genesis of Gaia was thermodynamic but 
its description by Lovelock was cybernetic. Certainly there are loops, 
feedbacks, responses by sensing living matter, which are not just re­
active. The growth of algae and trees in the sun produces volatiles 
that not only signal in nonhuman chemical languages but also serve as 
nuclei for raindrops, making a loop between the growth of organisms 
under the sun and the production of clouds and rain blocking the sun’s 
light and adjusting the shutters, as it were, of life’s more-than-human 
home. Cybernetics was attractive at the time of the early development 
of Gaia because it linked the mind-like loops of sensing machines to the 
real minds, or awarenesses, of organisms. In retrospect Lovelock and 
Andrew Watson’s Daisy World model, which showed in principle how 
coloured daisies could cool a planet showered with increasing ener­
gy from its star (by, for example, white daisies growing and reflecting 
more light as the sun’s luminosity increased), can be said to have mim­
icked mind, fooling mechanist scientists—men that denied that plane­
tary thermoregulation was possible without human-like intelligence or 
communication between organisms, or aeons of evolution by natural 
selection. Simple cybernetic feedback, modelling growth within a tem­
perature range, which even some non-living thermodynamic systems 
can do, suffices in principle, without natural selection, to thermoreg­
ulate a planet. But cybernetic descriptions, linked with computers, ul­
timately became a sterile path. In Novacene, Lovelock, who once in 
Nature, in an article titled ‘Life Span of the Biosphere’, calculated that 
Gaia would end in secular biological hellfire when it ran out of carbon 
dioxide to counter the increasing luminosity of the sun, argues that AIs 
may be needed to calm Earth’s anthropic fever. But philosopher Yuk Hui 
seems right to me when he says, in an interview with Anders Dunker, 
that ‘when we think of humans and the Earth as a cybernetic system, 
we have already lost the world’, and then goes on to talk about Heideg­
ger and the forgetting of being. The most cited scientist by Heidegger 
is Jakob von Uexkull, who, as a scientist, shamanized himself into what 
it must feel like to be other organisms, including, famously, (as Deleuze 
and Guattari reprise) a tick. Heidegger argued that nonhuman animals 
are ‘poor in world’. But maybe not, maybe not at all. I would argue that 
every organism may have a world, a full world, an idios kosmos, as well 

JAMES LOVELOCK, GAIA, AND THE
REMEMBERING OF BIOLOGICAL BEING
106
as a koinos kosmos insofar as it interacts with members of its own and 
other kinds. The terms are those of Greek philosopher Heraclitus, the 
first referring to our private worlds, as when we dream, the second, 
to the world we share. The thermodynamic dissipative spaces where 
living beings find their homes—necessarily using energy, taking in 
substrate, and producing waste—encompass a feeling of being alive, 
if not freedom to move, act, and be. Other beings may have worlds as 
rich, and in some cases richer, than our own. In the nineteenth centu­
ry, Samuel Butler argued that microbes (our ancestors), far from being 
unfeeling automatons, have their own sensations and little purposes, 
and their own technics, or ‘tool-kits’ as he put it. Their activities, their 
technics, over hundreds of millions of years, created bodies. ‘We don’t 
remember’, Butler (whom Gregory Bateson described as ‘Darwin’s 
most able critic’) says, ‘when first we grew an eye’. Living being is rich, 
on Earth and perhaps elsewhere throughout the cosmos. Our present 
infatuation with technology may be terminal, but the present techno­
logical malaise may also be growing pains, as were, for example, the 
situations encountered with the calcium ions that toxified Archaean 
marine protists, eukaryotic cells on the line to the ancestors of animals, 
including us. The calcium ions, in some cases, were stockpiled extra- 
cellularly, jump starting the evolution of microscopic marine exoskel­
etons, which it is theorized may sometimes, after falling to the ocean 
floor, become subducted, greasing the skids of continental plates.
Unlike in human society, where particulate pollution, which blocks 
light by day, incrementally cooling, but more than makes up for it by 
increasing temperatures at night (when particles reradiate solar and 
Earth-absorbed energy), profligately damaging waste is not a feature 
of the smoothly entropy-producing Gaian living nexus, about one-third 
the age of the universe dated from the Big Bang. Indeed, our own bodies, 
insofar as we age, seem to show a kind of unconscious physiological 
wisdom, one that evolved in clades of organisms that tend to overgrow 
their environments, thus exposing them to mass die-offs via predation, 
starvation, and infection. Gaia is more than cybernetic; it is autopoiet- 
ic, self-producing, as are its constituent cellular members. We would 
do well to remember this biological being, which far transcends our 
computer models (although, as mentioned, even some of these may 
effectively pass a version of the Turing Test). Cybernetic thinking (even 
though IPCC models do not incorporate Gaian living feedbacks into 
their supercomputer models) as an adequate description of the real 

DORION SAGAN
107
biosphere is failing. We need to have more respect for the unknown, 
for the metabolically diverse microbial life from which Earth life comes, 
and from a small subsection of which we and our brains evolved, and in 
whose ecosystems we are embedded.
When I asked Margulis how scientists can claim to predict the 
climate when I do not even know how I will feel after eating lunch at a 
restaurant, she said ‘no one knows’. She also surmised that the major 
evidence for humankind remaining in the fossil record will be a very thin 
layer of iron, ‘from the cars’. A little humility is a good thing, whether on 
the question of life existing throughout the cosmos on untold planets, 
or its being confined to our pale blue dot, quickly becoming a pinpoint 
as we move away from our privileged realm. As the example of those 
toxic calcium ions that must be exported across cell membranes by 
marine eukaryotic cells suggests, we humans are not the first to make 
a mess of things. Elements necessary for life include cosmically com­
mon carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, phosphorus, and sulphur. El­
ements partly under Gaia’s planetary control include calcium, original­
ly a toxin to marine eukaryotic cells, but eventually stockpiled outside 
multiple forms of algae as exoskeletons, such as those produced by 
Emiliania huxleyii in the English Channel, sometimes growing in blooms 
so large that they are visible by satellite as white submarine clouds. 
Their intricate skeletons look like Venetian blinds, and may be used 
accordingly, adjusting incoming levels of light. Gaian theorizers have 
suggested that the gas dimethyl sulphide, released by the microbes, 
may serve as nuclei for the formation of raindrops, thus establishing a 
link between growth of massive blooms of plankton in the hot sun and 
subsequent cooling by clouds. Gaian control does not appear to have 
arisen from processes that are top-down, let alone ones involving non­
living computer chips. The multibillion-year complexity and ecological 
recycling of Gaia, the transition of calcium waste into bones and shells 
and skulls, of toxic O2 into a vibrant atmosphere, and so on, came about 
not through ape overseers but by countless individual actions; a bil- 
lions-year reign of sensuous anarchies, a more-than-human ecological 
being maintained by countless autopoietic actions, intentional and not. 
Let us not forget our biological being.

JAMES LOVELOCK, GAIA, AND THE
REMEMBERING OF BIOLOGICAL BEING
108
Note
This article was commissioned by the Research Network for Philoso­
phy and Technology and first appeared on the website of Technopha- 
ny—A journal for philosophy and technology in April 2023.


Part II: Territories

111
Cybernetics in Britain
Andrew Pickering
Cybernetics was invented in the 1940s, around the time of World War 
II. In 1948 Norbert Wiener defined it as the science of communication 
and control, describing it as a synthesis of ideas about information, 
digital computing and feedback.1 These fields have since developed 
in very different ways in different times and places. In this essay I ex­
plore an important but relatively little known version of cybernetics 
that grew up in Britain, and which was organized especially around 
ideas of feedback.1 2
1 
Norbert Wiener, Cybernetics, or Control and Communication in the Animal and
the Machine (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1948).
2 For extensive discussion and full documentation of what follows, see Andrew 
Pickering, The Cybernetic Brain: Sketches of Another Future (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 2010).
I will start with the distinctive worldview or ontology that has 
characterized British cybernetics, and with related issues of power 
and control that interest many people. Then I will talk about the early 
days of cybernetics in Britain which focused on the brain as well as 
robotics and psychiatry, and I will try to clarify the contrast between 
cybernetics and mainstream AI. After that, I can look at the extension 
of cybernetics into fields like management and the arts. Most of my 
examples are historical, but in the last section I will talk about some 
neo-cybernetic work on our relations with the environment that relates 
to the problems of the Anthropocene. Finally I will connect the story of 
British cybernetics to what Yuk Hui suggestively calls cosmotechnics.
Ontology
The easiest way to get at what is special about British cybernetics is 
to talk about its ontology, by which I mean its overall vision of what 
the world is like. This hinges on questions of knowability and unknow­
ability. Conventional sciences, like physics, take it for granted that 
the world is knowable and that we will sooner or later find out what it 
is made of—quarks, black holes, the double helix of DNA, and so on.

112
CYBERNETICS IN BRITAIN
That is the ontology or worldview of modern science and of Western 
common sense; an ontology, we could say, of knowability. That is what 
we teach our children. Cybernetics went in the opposite direction. In 
1959, Stafford Beer, the founder of management cybernetics, defined 
cybernetics as the science of exceedingly complex systems, mean­
ing systems that are either so complex we will never fully understand 
them, or systems that are lively and always changing so that we can 
never pin them down. The key point then is, that unlike the convention­
al sciences, cybernetics did not aim at producing positive knowledge 
about the world. Instead it was about getting along, we could say, with 
an unknowable and unmasterable universe. More prosaically, it was 
about adaptive systems—systems that can somehow come to terms 
with the unexpected.
Seen from this angle, cybernetics can seem almost magical—how 
can we operate in an unknowable world?—but the examples that fol­
low explore some ways in which the cyberneticians brought this vision 
down to earth with a surprising and diverse array of practices, projects 
and artefacts. The sheer variety of these projects is one thing I want to em­
phasize. Before we get to the examples, I will make two important points.
First, in its emphasis on exceedingly complex systems, cyber­
netics foregrounded performance—action in the world, doing things— 
rather than knowing, so that a key feature of cybernetic projects and 
artefacts was, what I call, performative experimentation—trying things 
out to find out how the world will respond, and then responding to 
that—a kind of looping and spiralling back and forth that I call a dance 
of agency.3 We will see this looping movement played out in many dif­
ferent ways in what follows.
3 Andrew Pickering, The Mangle of Practice: Time, Agency, and Science 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995).
Second, I want to think about the political critique of cybernetics. 
Ever since Wiener called cybernetics a science of control, critics have 
fixated on this word ‘control’. Do we need a science of control? Aren't 
we controlled more than enough already? These questions are fair 
enough in respect of Wiener’s vision of cybernetics, which grew out of 
engineering control mechanisms like the domestic thermostat, which 
tries to keep the temperature fixed and under control, come what may. 
But we should note that this sort of control is just impossible in the 

ANDREW PICKERING
113
case of exceedingly complex systems—we can never, so to speak, dic­
tate terms to them. As I said, the best we can do with such systems 
is get along with them, hopefully drawing them into our activities in 
a non-hierarchic process, which another cybernetician, Gordon Pask, 
suggestively called ‘conversation’. Control in British cybernetics meant 
conversation. The moral is thus that critics of cybernetics should be 
positively interested in this distinctive branch of British cybernetics, as 
a way to elaborate the field’s most valuable features without propping 
up an authoritarian state and its institutions.
The brain
In his 1956 book, Thinking by Machine: A Study of Cybernetics, Pierre de 
Latil identified a group he called ‘the four pioneers of cybernetics’.4One 
of them was Norbert Wiener, a mathematician. The other three were 
brain scientists. One of them was American; Warren McCulloch, the 
chair of the famous Macy meetings. The other two were Englishmen 
who worked in mental hospitals; Grey Walter and Ross Ashby. Cyber­
netics was, then, originally a science of the brain, and that is what I 
want to think about now.
4 
Pierre de Latil, Thinking by Machine: A Study of Cybernetics (London:
Sidgwick and Jackson, 1956).
5 W. Ross Ashby, ‘Design for a Brain,’ Electronic Engineering 20 (December 
1948): 379-83.
The key point is that although cybernetics was about the brain, it 
had an unusual understanding of what the brain is and what it does. We 
usually think of brains as organs of cognition and representation—of 
knowing—and that is the idea that has dominated mainstream AI from 
the computer programs of the mid-1950s to the neural nets of today. 
So it is important to stress that cybernetics went in a very different di­
rection from conventional AI in terms of its understanding of the brain. 
As Ashby put it in 1948, ‘the brain is not a thinking machine, it is an 
acting machine; it gets information and then it does something about 
it’.5 The initial goal of British cybernetics was precisely to understand 
the brain as an acting machine, and it did this by building electrome­
chanical models of the brain. This was the cybernetic counterpart to 
writing programmes in conventional AI. In line with the unconventional 
ontology of unknowability, the primary function of the cybernetic brain 

114
CYBERNETICS IN BRITAIN
was understood as that of exploring and adapting to the unknown, and 
Walter and Ashby both built devices that did that.
First Walter. He is famous for the machines he built in 1948, gen­
erally referred to as ‘tortoises’ or ‘turtles’ because of their physical ap­
pearance. They were small mobile robots, which used a photocell to 
locate and home in on lights, while going into a back-and-forth motion 
to get around any obstacles they encountered. The key point about 
them is that they exemplified the cybernetic focus on performance 
rather than knowledge. They did not try to map and understand their 
environment, which is how conventional AI-robots work. Instead, they 
explored their worlds of lights and obstacles in real time and reacted to 
whatever turned up. The ‘intelligence’ of the tortoises thus depended 
on feedback from the world and a sort of embodied looping through 
the world rather than inner computation. Before we move on, it is worth 
mentioning that they inspired the very successful tradition of situated 
robotics re-invented by Rodney Brooks at MIT in the 1980s.
More important to the development of British cybernetics in the 
long run is Ashby’s model brain, which he called the ‘homeostat’, and 
featured in his 1952 book, Design for a Brain.6 Like the tortoise, the ho- 
meostat also explored its world, though it did it electrically rather than 
physically, and it went one step further in reconfiguring its own inner 
workings in response to what it found there. I should now explain how 
that worked.
W. Ross Ashby, Design for a Brain (London: Chapman and Hall, 1960 [1952]).
The homeostat was an electro-mechanical device that turned 
electrical inputs into outputs. In isolation, a single homeostat was in- 
ert—it did not do anything. But Ashby experimented on combinations 
of homeostats, in which one homeostat could be thought of as a brain 
and the others as its environment. When several homeostats were 
connected together, feedback loops were set up, and the combination 
of homeostats might turn out to be stable—meaning that the currents 
within them tended to zero—or unstable—with the currents tending to 
grow. If the set-up was unstable, a stepping switch within each homeo- 
stat would move to the next position, randomly changing the param­
eters of the circuit, and this process would continue until a condition 
of stable equilibrium was found. The homeostat was thus what Ashby 
called an ‘ultrastable machine’—a machine that, whatever the initial con­
ditions, would come into a situation of balance with its surroundings.
6

ANDREW PICKERING
115
What can we say about this? I think of a multi-homeostat set-up as 
an ontological theatre, a material model of the overall cybernetic worl­
dview, as I described it at the beginning. The homeostat-brain knew 
nothing of its world in a cognitive sense; instead it explored the world 
performatively via its electrical outputs and reacted adaptively to the 
inputs that came back to it. So, if you want to grasp the ontology of cy­
bernetics, just think of a bunch of interacting homeostats and you’ve 
got the picture. The subsequent history of cybernetics in Britain can be 
seen as one of variations and elaborations of this homeostat-ontology, 
as I will try to show in the rest of this essay. The centrality of the homeo- 
stat and homeostat-like couplings is what distinguishes most clearly 
between British cybernetics and other branches of cybernetics as they 
developed elsewhere.
To continue our exploration of cybernetics, we can stay with the 
brain for a while. Ashby built an adaptive system, the homeostat, and 
called it a brain. Ten years later, two other cyberneticians, Stafford Beer 
and Gordon Pask, reversed the logic and argued that any adaptive sys­
tem found in nature was, in some sense, already a brain. Beer’s favour­
ite example was a pond, a body of water. His point was that the ecosys­
tem of a pond is adaptive, in that the balance of species within it reacts 
constructively to changes in its environment, just like the homeostat. 
This idea is at the root of Beer and Pask’s incredibly imaginative bio­
logical computing project, which aimed to entrain living systems as 
controllers of human organisations—as, for example, managers of a 
factory. Get rid of the human managers and plug in a pond instead, that 
was the idea! This project fizzled out, alas, in the early 1960s, not due 
to any problem of principle, but because of the practical difficulty of 
getting ecosystems to care about the key variables of factories.
From a different angle, Ashby’s image of the homeostatic brain 
fed into a radical approach to psychiatry. In contrast to biological and 
psychoanalytic approaches to madness, in the 1950s Gregory Bateson 
associated schizophrenia with his famous double-binds. These were 
situations in which children and parents could find no satisfactory way 
to go on, which Bateson analogized to homeostats becoming locked in 
pathological oscillations, leading to madness. In the 1960s, R. D. Laing 
and his colleagues put this vision to work at Kingsley Hall in London, 
where psychiatrists and the patients lived communally together. The 
idea of the anti-psychiatry movement, as it was called, was to do away 
with orthodox treatments like shock therapy and drugs. Instead the 

116
CYBERNETICS IN BRITAIN
psychiatrists would latch onto otherwise uncommunicative patients 
in any way they could find—in animal games of fighting and biting, for 
example—in the hope of breaking up double binds and finding new 
equilibria. Like homeostats, the expectation was that the psychiatrists 
as well as the mad would be themselves transformed in this process 
of open-ended exploration, becoming new kinds of selves—the mad 
teaching the sane to go mad, as Laing put it. Again, an enormously 
imaginative project.
So: brain science, an alternative approach to AI, robotics, psychi­
atry, biological computing—this starts to convey some of the range and 
diversity of British cybernetics that I am trying to get at. Now we can go 
beyond the brain, starting with social science.
Beyond the brain: organisations and management
From the 1960s onwards, Stafford Beer pioneered the extension of 
cybernetics to understanding and designing social organisations. Bi­
ological computing had been a first step in that direction, but Beer’s 
later work focused on what he called the Viable System Model (VSM), 
which is still an important approach to management today. Modelled 
on the human nervous system, the VSM divided organisations in to five 
levels, running from production through planning to higher manage­
ment, all linked via feedback loops. The most dramatic implementation 
of the VSM was to the entire Chilean economy in the early 1970s under 
the Allende regime, brought to a premature end by the Pinochet coup 
in 1973.7 The point I want to emphasize here is that the links between 
the levels of the VSM (as well as the links to the organisation’s envi­
ronment) were supposed to be homeostat-like, centred on repeated 
give and take between levels until some sort of agreed equilibrium was 
reached—a process of ‘reciprocal vetoing’ as Beer called it, just like that 
modelled by Ashby’s homeostats. Management, for example, could 
propose changes in production to the planning level, but the planners 
could then evaluate those changes and propose different ones back to 
management, and so on, repeatedly around all of the feedback loops.
7 See also Eden Medina, Cybernetic Revolutionaries: Technology and Politics 
in Allende’s Chile (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2014).

ANDREW PICKERING
117
I stress this because it bears on the questions of power and con­
trol I mentioned at the start. Project Cybersyn (the Chilean applica­
tion of the VSM) was criticized as technocratic, but these homeostatic 
couplings were intended to diffuse power and decision-making sym­
metrically throughout the organisation. The contrast here is with the 
top-down structure of conventional management, in which orders flow 
downwards without any return feedback from below—as, for instance, 
in British universities today. As Beer put it, the VSM aimed to maximize 
organisational freedom.
Beers’s later work, up to his death in 2002, focused on ways of 
organising these homeostatic interactions between levels. He began 
by inviting managers and union leaders to his office to drink whisky 
after work on Friday afternoons, hoping the alcohol might lead to an 
openness to change. Subsequently he devised a process that he called 
‘syntegration’, in which decision-makers were assigned to the edges of 
a notional geometrical figure—an icosahedron—and discussions alter­
nated over several days between the vertices of the diagram, just like 
a constellation of homeostats bouncing off one another. There are two 
points worth noting here. First, the figure is symmetrical and has no 
privileged centre. Beer thus regarded syntegration as a perfect form 
of democracy (unlike, say, conventional committees with chairmen and 
fixed agendas).
Second, syntegration also points to a key cybernetic variable 
known as ‘variety’. Variety is a measure of the number of different 
states a system can be in. Thus Ashby’s standard configuration of four 
homeostats had relatively low variety and could reach equilibrium in a 
short time. But Ashby showed in the 1950s that as variety increases, the 
time to reach equilibrium increases exponentially, quickly becoming 
greater than the age of the universe. This has always been a problem 
in experiments in radical democracy. By all accounts, attempts in the 
1960s in the USA and Europe to organize fully democratic institutions 
foundered on the impossibility of reaching collective decisions except 
by the exhaustion of the participants—the same problem turned up 
in the Occupy movement more recently. Letting everyone argue with 
everyone else all the time just does not work.8 Syntegration’s great 
8 
Andrew Pickering, ‘Islands of Stability: From Cellular Automata to the
Occupy Movement,’ Zeitschrift furMedien- andKulturforschung 14, no. 1 (2014): 
121-34.

118
CYBERNETICS IN BRITAIN
achievement was to reduce variety and solve this problem by its geo­
metrical arrangement, without imposing any sort of hierarchy (unlike 
conventional political arrangements—elections, for example).
The arts
Another important line of cybernetic development up to the present 
has been in the arts.9 Another cybernetician, Gordon Pask, was a key 
figure here, beginning with his Musicolour machine in the early 1950s. 
The input to Musicolour was an improvised musical performance 
which the machine then used to modulate a light show in real time as a 
multimedia light and sound experience. Musicolour’s key feature was 
that it was an exceedingly complex system within Beer’s definition. Its 
internal parameters varied in use so that it was impossible to master it 
cognitively. Instead of a linear relation between sound input and light 
output, the machine would adapt to each performance as it took place 
and eventually it would ‘get bored’, as Pask put it. It would cease, for 
example, to respond to repetitive inputs, thus encouraging the human 
performer to adapt in turn to the machine and try something new. Then 
the machine would get bored again, and so on and so on, back and forth 
between the human and the machine.
9 
See also Andrew Pickering, ‘Cybernetic Art,’ to appear in The Bloomsbury
Encyclopaedia of New Media Art, ed. Charlie Gere (London: Bloomsbury, 
forthcoming).
Again, we have here a version of the multi-homeostat set-up in 
which the human performer explores and adapts open-endedly to the 
unknowable machine and vice versa—now as a work of art. And again 
we can think of Musicolour as ontological theatre, showing us the fun­
damental ontology of cybernetics in action. I often think of cybernet­
ic artworks as ontological pedagogy, teaching us in a nonverbal way 
about the ontology of unknowability.
Whole traditions of cybernetic art have grown up, especially since 
the 1960s. Just to stay with Pask, he devised an interactive theatre in 
which the audience could collaborate with the performers in struc­
turing the development of a play, and in 1968 he exhibited a dynamic 
sculpture called the Colloquy of Mobiles at the famous Cybernetic Ser­
endipity exhibition in London. The Colloquy featured five interacting 

ANDREW PICKERING
119
robots that communicated like multiple homeostats via light and 
sounds. Pask also made an important contribution to the development 
of interactive architecture in the design of Cedric Price's Fun Palace 
in London in the early 1960s. Though it was never actually built, the Fun 
Palace was designed as a public building that would be reconfigurable in 
use, responding to different patterns of use but also getting bored, like 
Musicolour, and thus encouraging people to find new uses and activities; 
new ways to be.
The environment
My examples so far have been historical. We can finish with something 
closer to the present, and important for the future. I have been writing 
recently about neo-cybernetic approaches to the environment—floods, 
farming and wildfires—and I will say a bit about this.10 11
10 Andrew Pickering, ‘Poiesis in Action: Doing without Knowledge’ in Weak 
Knowledge: Forms, Functions, and Dynamics, ed. Moritz Epple et al. (Frankfurt: 
Campus Verlag, 2019), 61-84; Andrew Pickering, ‘Acting With the World: Doing 
Without Science,’ to appear in Beyond the Anthropocene: Climate Crisis, New 
Ontologies and Alternatives to the Anthropocentric Modernity, special issue of 
e-cadernos CES, ed. Antonio Carvalho and Mariana Riquito, forthcoming 2023;
Andrew Pickering, Acting with the World: Floods, Farming, Fires and Spirits (in 
prep.).
11 Gregory Bateson, ‘Conscious Purpose Versus Nature,’ in To Free a 
Generation: The Dialectics of Liberation, ed. David Cooper (New York: Collier, 
1968), 34;49; Gregory Bateson, Mind and Nature: A Necessary Unity (Cresskill, NJ: 
Hampton Press, (2002 [1979]).
12 
Rachel Carson, Silent Spring (New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1962).
In the late 1960s, Gregory Bateson—who I mentioned earlier in 
connection with schizophrenia—became very concerned with the en­
vironmental crisis.11 His basic idea was simple; the environment is itself 
an exceedingly complex system that we can never fully understand or 
master. That means, according to Bateson, that targeted environmen­
tal interventions might work on some level, but might also have bad 
unexpected consequences. In the 1960s, one would think, for exam­
ple, of Rachel Carson’s famous book, Silent Spring, on how agricultural 
pesticides killed pests but turned out to poison songbirds too.12 Today 
we might think about the Anthropocene more generally, for example, 
the way in which burning fossil fuels serves to generate power, but also 
leads to climate change and global warming as an unwanted spin-off.

120
CYBERNETICS IN BRITAIN
Having identified the basic problem, Bateson’s solution was 
simply that we should learn to think differently and just abandon our 
dreams of mastering nature. But I think cybernetics enables us to go 
further and imagine different patterns of action as well as thought. As 
our previous examples suggest, this would involve the same sort of 
back-and-forth experimentation with the environment that we have 
already been looking at, regarding the model of Ashby’s homeostats 
searching for collective equilibrium, and I can run through just one ex­
ample to see how this can go.13
13 Lisa Asplen, ‘Going with the Flow: Living the Mangle in Environmental 
Management Practice,’ in The Mangle in Practice: Science, Society and 
Becoming, ed. Andrew Pickering and Keith Guzik (Durham, NC: Duke University 
Press, 2008), 163-84; James Rice, ‘Further Beyond the Durkheimian Problematic: 
Environmental Sociology and the Co-Construction of the Social and the Natural’, 
Sociological Forum 28, no. 2 (2013): 236-60; Andrew Pickering, ‘Wicked Problems 
and the Cybernetic Method,’ to appear in Critical Studies of Complexity: Theories, 
Notions, Translations and Normativity, ed. Pablo Jensen and Fabrizio Li Vigni 
(Editions Materiologiques, 2023); Andrew Pickering, Acting with the World: 
Floods, Farming, Fires and Spirits (in prep.).
The giant Glen Canyon Dam was completed on the Colorado River 
in the USA in 1963 to control the flow of water and generate electrici­
ty. But its unintended consequence was to degrade the river’s down­
stream ecosystem (which includes the famous Grand Canyon). Sand­
banks started to disappear and local species were threatened with 
extinction. The question was, what could be done about that? The out­
line of a solution first appeared in 1983, when Lake Powell, above the 
dam, was in danger of overflowing. In desperation, engineers released 
large amounts of water through the dam, in effect staging an artificial 
flood on the river. This flood turned out to have a surprisingly beneficial 
effect, rebuilding sandbanks and their associated ecosystems.
This effect was only temporary—the sandbanks began to erode 
again soon afterwards—but led to the establishment of the Glen Can­
yon Dam Adaptive Management Program (AMP) which continues to 
the present. The AMP consists of periodically staging more artificial 
floods on the river, finding out how the downstream ecosystem reacts, 
and modifying later floods in the light of that—another dance of agen­
cy. And I want to make two points about this programme. First, it is 
distinctively cybernetic. In place of the command-and-control stance 
that Bateson criticized, we find the multi-homeostat model again, with 
the dam operators and the river searching together, open-endedly and 

ANDREW PICKERING
121
performatively, for collective equilibrium. And second, the AMP works, 
in an interesting sense.
The AMP is not a permanent solution to environmental degrada­
tion. Sandbanks still erode between floods. But it turns out that they 
can be more or less maintained if the artificial floods on the Colora­
do are timed to coincide with natural floods on two other rivers that 
join the Colorado below the dam. The trick is that the artificial floods 
carry along the sediment brought down by the natural floods, and this 
is what rebuilds the sandbanks. I am struck by the fact that this syn­
chronisation couples the actions of the human dam operators tightly 
with the actions of the rivers, in a kind of choreography of agency, a 
regularisation of the dance of human and non-human agency I talked 
about before.
This choreography interests me a lot as a different way to inter­
act with the environment; a way of acting with nature, accommodating 
ourselves ourselves to it and going along with it, in sharp contrast to 
the linear acting on the world which has got us into so much trouble in 
the Anthropocene. I believe this homeostatic tuning into nature and 
the environment points to an important way forward in the evolution 
of cybernetics.
Cosmotechnics
I have been reviewing the very wide-ranging history of British cybernet- 
ics—from robots and schizophrenia, to adaptive architecture and the 
Colorado River—with the homeostat and the ontology of unknowability 
as the defining thread. To close, I want to summarize what we have 
seen from a different angle, by thinking about Yuk Hui’s conception of 
what he calls cosmotechnics.14 The point of this word, I think, is to sug­
gest that technology is not a universal category. That is not to say that 
one cannot find things that can be called ‘technology’ at all times and 
places, but that different forms of technology (techniques, technics) 
hang together with different cosmologies or ontologies, as I have been 
calling them. Different ontologies feed into different technological 
14 Yuk Hui, The Question Concerning Technology in China: An Essay in 
Cosmotechnics (Falmouth: Urbanomic Media: 2016).

122
CYBERNETICS IN BRITAIN
paradigms and vice versa. Joseph Needham, for example, the great 
historian of science and civilisation in China, distinguished between 
Confucian and Daoist styles of engineering.15 The latter sought some­
how to go with the flow in line with the fluidity of the Dao itself, and is 
exemplified in the ancient Dujiangyan Dam on the Min River in China, 
which acts differently depending on the volumes of water flowing past it. 
Confucian engineering, according to Needham, sought instead to act on 
rivers by the familiar tactic of building dykes and levees to control them.
15 Joseph Needham, Science and Civilisation in China, Vol 4, Physics and 
Physical Technology, Part III, Civil Engineering and Nautics (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1971), 234-50.
16 Andrew Pickering, ‘Beyond Design: Cybernetics, Biological Computers and 
Hylozoism’, Synthese, 168 (2009): 469-91.
I want to say that cybernetics illustrates very nicely the cosmo- 
technical inner connection of technology and ontology, in fact coming 
down on the Daoist side of Needham’s contrast. We could say that cy­
bernetics and its ontology of unknowability is part of a very different 
cosmotechnical paradigm from the command-and-control paradigm 
in modern science and engineering and its ontology of knowability and 
controllability.
The clearest example of this is the cybernetic biological comput­
ing project, which, as I said, aimed to draw the open-ended liveliness 
of biological systems into the human world of management. The stark 
contrast here is with conventional computing, which depends not on 
the liveliness of matter, but the opposite: taming and domesticating 
silicon chips right down to the atomic level and then writing computer 
programmes to instruct them in precisely what to do.16 These two para­
digms thus diverge profoundly at the level of hardware: ponds vs chips. 
And one could say much the same about the contrast between antipsy­
chiatry, which entailed no hardware at all, and mainstream psychiatry, 
with its scalpels, electroshock machines, and psychoactive drugs.
But to make the contrast hinge on hardware alone is to create a 
problem, since my other cybernetic examples in fact used much the 
same hardware as their enframing counterparts. Cybernetic robots, 
say, used many of the same components as AI robotics. The adap­
tive management of the Colorado likewise depended on waterflows 
through the same Glen Canyon Dam which created the ecological 
problem in the first place. What can we say about that?

ANDREW PICKERING
123
The point, I believe, is that in thinking about cosmotechnics we 
should not focus exclusively on hardware but also on how the hard­
ware is arranged. Different arrangements of the same hardware con­
jure up, we could say, different worlds and ontologies. The sensors and 
actuators of AI-robots are configured to map and respond to a know­
able world, while the same components in cybernetic robots serve to 
explore and respond to the unknown. We thus need to think here of a 
foreground/background gestalt switch in which one ontology or the 
other is brought to the fore through the artful design of technological 
assemblages. This is how to think about cosmotechnics, even when 
material technologies are themselves the same.
So much for technology. One final thought about cosmology. I 
have been talking about the cybernetic ontology of unknowability and 
contrasting it with the scientific ontology of knowability. But it is worth 
saying that beyond this contrast, the cybernetic ontology has many 
positive affinities with nonmodern, non-Western and mystical cos­
mologies. I just mentioned cybernetics’ affinity with Daoism, and the 
British cyberneticians themselves made many similar connections. In 
his work on schizophrenia, for example, Gregory Bateson collaborated 
with Alan Watts, the great popularizer of Buddhism in the West, and 
Watts in turn drew on cybernetics in his explanations of Buddhist con­
cepts. The very notion of unknowability connects directly to mystical 
experience of the infinite, and Stafford Beer drew on this in arguing for 
the existence of God. Beer was likewise fascinated by the mystical fig­
ure called the enneagram, which he found repeated many times in the 
syntegration diagram. He was fascinated by Indian philosophy, too, and 
besides working as a management consultant, he studied and taught 
tantric yoga.
In the end, then, thinking about cosmotechnics can take us a very 
long way, from the down-to-earth projects and artefacts of British cy­
bernetics, into distinctly non-British cosmologies, worldviews and reli­
gions. This emphasizes, for me, just what a strange and wonderful field 
British cybernetics has been.

124
CYBERNETICS IN BRITAIN
Reference
Ashby, W. Ross. ‘Design for a Brain’. Electronic Engineering 20 
(December 1948): 379-83.
———. Design for a Brain. London: Chapman & Hall, 1960 [1952].
Asplen, Lisa. ‘Going with the Flow: Living the Mangle in Environmental 
Management Practice’. In The Mangle in Practice: Science, Society 
and Becoming. Edited by Andrew Pickering and Keith Guzik, 163-84. 
Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2008.
Bateson, Gregory. ‘Conscious Purpose Versus Nature’. In To Free a 
Generation: The Dialectics of Liberation. Edited by David Cooper, 
34-49. New York: Collier, 1968.
———. Mind and Nature: A Necessary Unity. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press, 
2002 [1979].
Carson, Rachel. Silent Spring. New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1962.
de Latil, Pierre. Thinking by Machine: A Study of Cybernetics. London: 
Sidgwick and Jackson, 1956.
Hui, Yuk. The Question Concerning Technology in China: An Essay in 
Cosmotechnics. Falmouth, Urbanomic Media, 2016.
Medina, Eden. Cybernetic Revolutionaries: Technology and Politics in 
Allende’s Chile. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2014.
Needham, Joseph. Science and Civilisation in China, Vol. 4, Physics 
and Physical Technology, Part III, Civil Engineering and Nautics. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1971.
Pickering, Andrew. ‘Acting With the World: Doing Without Science’. To 
appear in Beyond the Anthropocene: Climate Crisis, New Ontologies 
and Alternatives to the Anthropocentric Modernity, special issue of 
e-cadernos CES, edited by Antonio Carvalho and Mariana Riquito 
(forthcoming 2023).

ANDREW PICKERING
125
———. Acting with the World: Floods, Farming, Fires and Spirits. In prepa­
ration.
———. ‘Beyond Design: Cybernetics, Biological Computers and 
Hylozoism’. Synthese 168 (2009): 469-91.
———. ‘Cybernetic Art’. To appear in The Bloomsbury Encyclopaedia 
of New Media Art. Edited by Charlie Gere. London: Bloomsbury, 
forthcoming.
———. The Cybernetic Brain: Sketches of Another Future. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2010.
———. ‘Islands of Stability: From Cellular Automata to the Occupy 
Movement’. Zeitschrift furMedien- andKulturforschung 14, no. 1 
(2014): 121-34.
———. The Mangle of Practice: Time, Agency, and Science. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1995.
———. ‘Poiesis in Action: Doing without Knowledge’. In Weak Knowledge: 
Forms, Functions, and Dynamics. Edited by Moritz Epple et al., 
61-84. Frankfurt: Campus Verlag, 2019.
———. ‘Wicked Problems and the Cybernetic Method’. To appear in 
Critical Studies of Complexity: Theories, Notions, Translations and 
Normativity. Edited by Pablo Jensen and Fabrizio Li Vigni. Editions 
Materiologiques, forthcoming 2023.
Rice, James. ‘Further Beyond the Durkheimian Problematic: 
Environmental Sociology and the Co-Construction of the Social and 
the Natural’. Sociological Forum 28, no. 2 (2013): 236-60.
Wiener, Norbert. Cybernetics, or Control and Communication in the 
Animal and the Machine. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1948.


127
Cybernetics Across
Cultures: The Localization 
of the Universal
Slava Gerovitch
The history of cybernetics is a story of crossing cultural, political, and 
disciplinary boundaries. Cybernetics, or the science of control and 
communication in the animal and the machine, was articulated in the 
1948 book of the same title by Professor of Mathematics at the Massa­
chusetts Institute of Technology, Norbert Wiener. A display of Wiener’s 
historical photographs and documents is placed in the hall of the MIT 
Mathematics Department, not far from my office.
Wiener’s work on cybernetics draws on his wartime research on 
anti-aircraft gun control. He designed and built an anti-aircraft predic­
tor, a feedback-operated servomechanical device for predicting the 
trajectory of an enemy airplane. This function was usually performed 
by human gun-pointers and gun-trainers, and Wiener’s device would 
therefore ‘usurp a specifically human function’.1This work led Wiener to 
the far-reaching analogy between the operation of servomechanisms, 
feedback-based control devices, and human purposeful behaviour. 
In 1943 Wiener, physiologist Arturo Rosenblueth, and engineer Julian 
Bigelow, jointly published an article in which they suggested that pur­
poseful human behaviour was governed by the same feedback mecha­
nism that was employed in servomechanisms.1 2 Combining terms from 
control engineering (feedback), psychology (purpose), philosophy (te­
leology), and mathematics (extrapolation), they constructed a classif- 
icatory scheme of behaviour equally applicable to human action and 
machine operation.
1 Norbert Wiener, Cybernetics, or Control and Communication in the Animal 
and the Machine (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1961 [1948]), 6.
2 Arturo Rosenblueth, Norbert Wiener, and Julian Bigelow, ‘Behavior, Purpose 
and Teleology’, Philosophy of Science 10 (1943): 18-24.

128
CYBERNETICS ACROSS CULTURES
Cyberspeak between human and machine
In his book Cybernetics, Norbert Wiener further generalized these 
ideas and introduced a new, ‘universal’ language, which I call cyber­
speak. It tied together a diverse set of human-machine metaphors. Cut­
ting across various disciplines—computing, information theory, control 
theory, neurophysiology, and sociology—cybernetics described living 
organisms, control and communication devices, and human society in 
the same cybernetic terms: information, feedback, and control.
Travelling across the Atlantic Ocean to Europe and then to the So­
viet Union, cybernetics changed its guise multiple times: it appeared 
at different times and places as an instrument for devising sophisticat­
ed weapons, a theoretical underpinning for the freedom of speech, a 
method for designing intelligent machines, a model for describing the 
functioning of the human brain, a vehicle of interdisciplinarity, and a 
tool for reforming the theoretical apparatus of a wide range of life and 
social sciences with formal models from mathematics and computing. 
At times it was filled with strong ideological messages, at other times 
it was presented as allegedly politically neutral. Every time cybernetics 
crossed a new cultural, political or disciplinary boundary, its connota­
tions were questioned, and new ones attached.
The universalist aspirations of cybernetics and artificial 
intelligence
One particularly salient example of cyberneticians’ universalist aspi­
rations is the design of computer programmes capable of carrying out 
some human cognitive tasks, known as artificial intelligence (AI). The 
aspiration of AI is to grasp the universal principles of thought in order 
to implement them in a computer. In 1984, Patrick Winston articulated 
the goals of AI research as follows: ‘Artificial Intelligence excites peo­
ple who want to uncover principles that all intelligent information pro­
cessors must exploit’.3 At the same time in the Soviet Union, a budding 
AI community formulated its own goals, which sounded remarkably 
3 Patrick Winston, Artificial Intelligence (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1984 
[1976]), 2-3.

SLAVA GEROVITCH
129
similar: ‘to understand how the human being thinks, what are the mech­
anisms of thought’.4 On both sides of the Iron Curtain, AI research was 
understood as a search for fundamental principles of human thinking.
4 Mikhail S. Smirnov, ed., Modelirovanie obucheniia i povedeniia (The model­
ling of learning and behaviour) (Moscow: Nauka, 1975), 3.
5 
John McCarthy, ‘Programs with Common Sense’, in Semantic Information
Processing, ed. Marvin Minsky (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1968), 403-9.
6 Clifford Geertz, ‘Common Sense As a Cultural System’, in Local Knowledge: 
Further Essays in Interpretive Anthropology (New York: Basic Books, 1983), 76.
7 Ibid., 92.
Both American and Soviet scientists believed that there existed 
a general, universal, ahistorical mechanism of human thought. Yet as 
these scientists themselves belonged to different cultures, they had 
distinct, culturally specific intuitions about human thinking. The ‘hu­
mans’ whom they took as universal categories were, in fact, people 
who belonged to specific cultures. Their AI models thus reflected the 
specificity of their cultures.
Everyday practice in the USA and the USSR
Everyday practice in any society is based on commonly accepted pat­
terns of behaviour—actions perceived as typical and normal—and also 
on various strategies of handling daily situations, known as common 
sense. John McCarthy famously called AI systems ‘programmes with 
common sense’, implying that a fundamentally universal common 
sense knowledge underlies human thinking.5 As the anthropologist 
Clifford Geertz suggested, however, common sense is ‘historically 
constructed and... subjected to historically defined standards of judg­
ment. It can. vary dramatically from one people to the next. It is, in 
short, a cultural system’.6 Geertz warned against ‘sketching out some 
logical structure [that common sense] always takes, for there is none’, 
thus unfortunately undermining McCarthy’s basic premise.7
Everyday practice serves as a mediator for the constant exchange 
of cultural symbols, and shapes the cultural vocabulary for any given 
group. For Americans during this period, everyday experiences ranged 
from reading The New York Times to watching political debates on 
television to shopping at supermarkets that stocked a great variety of 
products. Soviet people’s everyday experience looked quite different.

130
CYBERNETICS ACROSS CULTURES
They never read The New York Times, never watched political debates, 
and never had a problem choosing which brand to buy. They read Pra­
vda and underground literature, sat at Party meetings, and stood in 
lines at food stores. What seemed typical and normal to them looked 
peculiar and exotic to Americans, and vice versa. Yet even if common 
sense is not universal, AI models do tell us something—if not about the 
fundamentals of human thinking in general, then perhaps about spe­
cific cultural constructions of common knowledge.
Cultural influence manifests itself not only through typical pat­
terns of behaviour and strategies of everyday life, but also through lan­
guage, via the metaphors by which we live and think, including thinking 
about thought itself.8 In this essay, I discuss the different cultural met­
aphors for thought prevalent among American and Soviet intellectuals 
and explore their connections with specific AI systems. I argue that 
deep cultural factors lie beneath the considerable differences in the 
approaches to AI developed by American and Soviet scholars. While 
looking for general principles of thinking and behaviour, AI specialists 
actually implemented their own cultural stereotypes in their models.
8 George Lakoff and Mark Johnson, Metaphors We Live By (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1980).
Different cultural metaphors for freedom: choice vs creativity
If we consider such an everyday situation as shopping, the main prob­
lem for American customers is how to make the right (one may say, 
‘healthy’) choice among an appealing variety of foods and goods. The 
ability to make the right choice is also a very important part of academ­
ic training in the United States. College students choose most of their 
courses from a great variety of courses being offered; routine mul­
tiple-choice tests require selecting one right answer among several 
possibilities. Election ballots list multiple candidates for every office.
By contrast, most everyday situations in the Soviet Union left 
the citizen no choice at all. Higher education curricula prescribed a 
fixed, pre-determined sequence of courses for every major. The only 
choice students had was in selecting a preferred athletic activity. Mul­
tiple-choice tests were rare. Instead, the student was required to spell 

SLAVA GEROVITCH
131
out all the intermediate steps, and if the algorithm was inefficient (or 
simply different from the one in the textbook), the grade was lowered, 
even if the answer was correct. Election ballots always included only 
a single candidate, to simplify political choices. And finally, the Soviet 
way of shopping posed a different sort of problem for the customer. 
The problem was not what to choose, but how to find anything at all. 
With the shortage of many foods and household items, sought-after 
products could be obtained only via back channels. An ordinary Soviet 
citizen had to create a unique, long chain of informal social interactions 
through a network of friends, relatives, friends of relatives, and rela­
tives of friends, so that a desired washing machine or a television set 
could be found at the other end.9
9 
See Alena Ledeneva, Russia’s Economy of Favours: Blat, Networking and
Informal Exchange (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998).
10 
Jerome Bruner, Beyond the Information Given: Studies in the Psychology of
Knowing (New York: Norton, 1973), 151.
11 Andrei Brushlinskii, ‘Pochemu nevozmozhen “iskusstvennyi intellect ”’ (Why 
‘artificial intelligence’ is impossible), Voprosy filosofii (Problems of philosophy) no.
2 (1979): 62.
Cognitive psychological theories developed by American and 
Soviet scholars reflected the different cultural values of choice and 
creativity. The American cognitive psychologist Jerome Bruner, for ex­
ample, described concept attainment as a process whose every step 
‘can be usually regarded as a choice or decision between alternative 
steps’.10 11
 Bruner’s work showcased the ‘cognitive revolution’ in psychol­
ogy, closely associated with the work of the American AI pioneers Her­
bert Simon and Allen Newell, who placed choice at the heart of their 
‘heuristic search’ model of intellectual activity.
The Soviet psychologist Andrei Brushlinskii, by contrast, rejected 
the idea that thinking involved a choice among pre-existing alterna­
tives. He argued that true thinking must produce a new alternative: 
‘Actual live thinking, for example, solving a task or a problem, always 
takes the form of prediction of an initially unknown, future solution. 
This prediction... makes the act of choosing among alternative solu­
tions unnecessary’.11
AI specialists in the Soviet Union and in the United States some­
times drew on psychological theories, and sometimes psychologists 
drew on AI models. More habitually, however, AI specialists ignored 
psychologists’ findings, believing that knowledge should flow from AI 

132
CYBERNETICS ACROSS CULTURES
to psychology, not the other way around.12 When AI and psychology 
agreed, this often happened because they both relied on the same cul­
tural stereotypes.
12 Newell and Simon, for example, prophesied in 1958 that ‘within ten years 
most theories in psychology will take the form of computer programs, or of quali­
tative statements about the characteristics of computer programs’; Allen Newell 
and Herbert Simon, ‘Heuristic Problem Solving’, Operations Research 6, no. 1 
(1958): 7-8. In 1970, Allen Newell described AI as ‘theoretical psychology’, whose 
role was to generate problems for experimental psychologists to study; see Allen 
Newell, ‘Remarks on the Relationship Between Artificial Intelligence and Cognitive 
Psychology’, in Theoretical Approaches to Non-numerical Problem Solving, 
ed. Ranan B. Banerji and Mihajlo D. Mesarovic (Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1970), 
363-400.
13 Herbert A. Simon, ‘A Behavioral Model of Rational Choice’, The Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 69, no. 1 (February 1955): 100.
14 
Hunter Crowther-Heyck, Herbert A. Simon: The Bounds of Reason in
America (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2005), chap. 3.
Bureaucratic man: striving for control of the social environment
One of the pioneers of American AI, Herbert Simon, explicitly referred 
to everyday experience when arguing that at the centre of intellectual 
activity was an act of choice:
None of us is completely innocent of acquaintance with 
the gross characteristics of human choice, or of the 
broad features of the environment in which this choice 
takes place. I shall feel free to call on this common ex­
perience as a source of the hypotheses needed for the 
theory about the nature of man and his world.13
Simon drew on a wide array of mathematical theories that offered 
various formalizations of choice in well-structured environments— 
econometrics, game theory, operations research, utility theory, 
and the statistical decision theory—which his biographer Hunter 
Crowther-Heyck has termed ‘the sciences of choice’.14 All these the­
ories assumed the act of choice to be free and rational: an individual 
acted upon the environment, but the environment did not affect the 
individual’s goals or preferences.

SLAVA GEROVITCH
133
Simon also borrowed from another set of disciplines: sociology, 
social psychology, anthropology, and political science. These ‘scienc­
es of control’, by contrast, emphasized the malleability and docility of 
an individual, subjected to group and societal pressures and moulded 
by his social environment. The ‘administrative man’ of the sciences of 
control seemed utterly incompatible with the ‘economic man’ of the 
sciences of choice.
Drawing on both the sciences of choice and the sciences of 
control, Simon developed a theory of ‘bounded rationality’. One could 
solve complex problems by reducing them to a limited set of alter­
natives and choosing rationally among them. Belonging to an orga­
nization limited an individual’s choices and thus made rational deci­
sion-making possible.
In his 1956 paper, ‘Rational Choice and the Structure of the Envi­
ronment’, Simon used the metaphor of a maze to introduce a mathe­
matical model describing how an organism could meet a multiplicity of 
needs, making a sequence of rational choices at branch points, based 
on incomplete information.15 This was not merely a convenient descrip­
tion. Extrapolating from his personal experience to the whole of hu­
manity, Simon regarded a sequence of rational choices as a ‘universal’ 
model, a philosophy of life:
15 Herbert A. Simon, ‘Rational Choice and the Structure of the Environment’, 
Psychological Review 63, no. 2 (1956): 129-38.
16 
Herbert A. Simon, Models of My Life (New York: Basic Books, 1991), 360, 363.
A philosophy of life surely involves a set of principles.
... Principles can provide a book of heuristics to guide 
choice at life’s branch points, a thread to keep one on 
the right path in the maze. . In this chapter, I have been 
describing my life, and also my personal life philosophy, 
but I have also been describing the life of Everyperson.16
In the 1950s and 1960s, Simon and Allen Newell developed the heu­
ristic search approach, which quickly became the dominant paradigm 
for American AI research. According to their model, problem solving 
activity consisted in finding a path from the initial to the goal state 
within the problem space. This space looked like a branching tree or 
a labyrinth; at every step of the process, the problem solver had to 

134
CYBERNETICS ACROSS CULTURES
choose one of the alternatives—one of the branches that diverged at 
the point of choice. In the absence of complete information about the 
labyrinth, or if the labyrinth was too large to make a feasible calcula­
tion, Newell and Simon suggested using heuristics—rules of thumb— 
to help make the right choice. They believed that labyrinth search 
was a universal model of intelligence and considered their computer 
programme, the ‘General Problem Solver’, to be a general ‘theory of 
human problem-solving’.17
17 
Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon, ‘GPS, a Program that Simulates Human
Thought’, in Computers and Thought, ed. Edward A. Feigenbaum and Julian 
Feldman (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1963), 279.
18 
Crowther-Heyck, Herbert A. Simon, 214.
19 Livia Polanyi, Telling the American Story: A Structural and Cultural Analysis 
of Conversational Storytelling (Norwood, NJ: Ablex, 1985), 140 (emphasis original).
As Simon and Newell’s conceptualization of human behaviour grew 
increasingly formal, the model situations they were drawing on became 
increasingly circumscribed and regulated; from semi-independent 
decisions by workers in big organizations, to semi-automatic actions 
of machine-bound operators in air defence control centres, to chess 
players’ limited repertoire of permissible moves. In various computer 
implementations of the heuristic search model—the theorem-proving 
Logic Theorist, a chess-playing programme, and the ‘universal’ General 
Problem Solver—Newell and Simon tended to focus on situations with 
complete, unambiguous, computer-friendly descriptions.
Newell and Simon redefined the problem of choice: they no longer 
spoke of ‘making decisions’, but rather about ‘solving problems’. If the 
decision-maker could consider different goals, the problem-solver had 
to focus on the assigned problem. Decisions turned into ‘a less conten­
tious, less political, process of allocating “processor time” to different 
tasks. Choices were now less decisions about which set of values to 
accept and more decisions about what set of data to process’.18 Pol­
itics was reduced to technology: the liberal aspiration to control and 
purposefully transform the environment turned into a purely technical 
task of simplifying search in a labyrinth.
When elaborating her cultural ‘grammar’ of American storytell­
ing, the anthropologist Livia Polanyi emphasized ‘control’ as one of the 
most important categories of American life. ‘Proper people’ as they are 
portrayed in everyday conversations, are those who ‘can control the 
world sufficiently to be happy and have power’.19 In the Soviet case, 

SLAVA GEROVITCH
135
by contrast, your social environment was something that could po­
tentially control you, rather than something you could control. If one 
constructed a Soviet cultural grammar, this description could probably 
be rephrased as ‘proper people are those who can sufficiently escape 
control by the world to be happy’. The independent-minded intelligen­
tsia’s everyday struggle for intellectual autonomy was translated, in a 
formalized and abstracted form, into Soviet AI models.
The Soviet controversy over ‘thinking machines’
The idea that computers that could perform intellectual tasks stirred 
serious controversy in the Soviet Union in the early 1950s. In the para­
noid Cold War context, scientific and technological innovations coming 
from the West were often viewed with great suspicion. In reaction to 
the popular discussions of ‘thinking machines’ in the West, the Soviet 
press condemned this idea as both a potential technological threat and 
an ideological subversion. Soviet journalists berated the capitalists for 
their hidden agenda to substitute a robot for a striking worker and to 
replace a human pilot who refused to bomb civilians with an ‘indiffer­
ent metallic monster’. Soviet philosophers, for their part, attacked the 
idea of ‘thinking machines’ as both ‘idealistic’ (detaching thought from 
its material basis in the brain) and ‘mechanistic’ (reducing thought to 
computer operations). Soviet critics lumped all controversial uses of 
computers under the rubric of ‘cybernetics’ and labelled this field a 
‘reactionary, idealistic pseudo-science’. Despite its glaring logical 
contradictions—cybernetics was portrayed as both idealistic and 
mechanistic, utopian and dystopian, technocratic and pessimistic, a 
pseudo-science and a dangerous weapon of military aggression—the 
campaign had a serious impact on Soviet research. As a result of the 
media frenzy, work on ‘thinking machines’ became ideologically unac­
ceptable, and early Soviet computer applications were limited to sci­
entific calculations.20
20 On the Soviet anti-cybernetics campaign, see Slava Gerovitch, From 
Newspeak to Cyberspeak: A History of Soviet Cybernetics (Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 2002), chap. 3.

136
CYBERNETICS ACROSS CULTURES
Soviet cybernetics: a movement for reform
The anti-cybernetics campaign did not dampen the interest of Soviet 
scientists in computer systems that could perform intellectual tasks. 
All of the first large electronic digital computers in the Soviet Union 
were installed at defence research institutions, which were relative­
ly protected from ideological pressure and also gave their employees 
access to most recent Western publications. Early Soviet champions 
of cybernetics and AI largely came from these institutions. The mathe­
matician Aleksei Liapunov led the computer programming department 
at the Division of Applied Mathematics of the Mathematical Institute of 
the Soviet Academy of Sciences in Moscow. This division (after 1966, 
the Institute of Applied Mathematics) performed calculations for the 
Soviet nuclear weapons and rocketry programmes. These calculations 
were double-checked against the results obtained at Computer Centre 
No. 1 of the Ministry of Defence, where the computer specialist Anatolii 
Kitov was in charge of research and development. In 1955, taking advan­
tage of the thawing political climate after Stalin’s death, Kitov and Liapun­
ov teamed up with the leading mathematician for the nuclear weapons 
programme, Sergei Sobolev, and published an article in the journal Prob­
lems of Philosophy, in which they publicly dismissed ideological charges 
against cybernetics and effectively legitimized research in this field.
As the cybernetics movement grew in strength, it brought under 
its umbrella all sorts of mathematical models and computer applica­
tions in ‘cybernetic biology’, ‘cybernetic physiology’, ‘cybernetic lin­
guistics’, ‘cybernetic economics’, and many other fields. In 1960 Nor­
bert Wiener attended a conference in Moscow and became an instant 
star. Party leaders became interested in computer technology and the 
prospects it opened for the socialist economy.
The pendulum of Soviet public attitudes toward ‘thinking ma­
chines’ swung in the other direction.21 The Soviet press began extolling 
the intellectual abilities of the computer, portraying it as an all-powerful 
magical tool for solving any problem. Articles entitled ‘“Thinking” Ma­
chines’ and ‘Bordering on Science Fiction’ mushroomed on the pages 
of newspapers and popular magazines. Journalists quickly dismissed 
21 
On the Soviet cybernetics movement, see Gerovitch, From Newspeak to
Cyberspeak, chaps. 4-6.

SLAVA GEROVITCH
137
the previous ideological critique by claiming that it applied only to cap­
italist society:
If in the capitalist world the introduction of ‘thinking’ ma­
chines means the growth of unemployment, exploitation 
of workers, and fear of the future, in a socialist society, 
by freeing people from hard, uninteresting work, ma­
chines would provide an opportunity to focus on some­
thing lofty and joyful—to think, to create, and, in particu­
lar, to create new ‘thinking’ machines.22
22 lu. Petrovskii, ‘Na grani fantastiki’ (Bordering on science fiction), Znanie-sila 
(Knowledge is power) no. 7 (1956): 23-24.
23 
Programme of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Adopted by the
22nd Congress of the C.P.S.U. October 31, 1961 (Moscow: Foreign Languages 
Publishing House, 1961), 66.
24 Viktor D. Pekelis, ‘Chelovek, kibernetika i bog’ (The human, cybernetics, and 
God], Nauka i religiia (Science and religion) no. 2 (1960): 27.
25 Aksel I. Berg, ‘Problemy upravleniia i kibernetika’ (Problems of management 
and cybernetics) (1961), in Berg, Izbrannye trudy (Selected works) vol. 2 (Moscow: 
Energiia, 1964), 87 (emphasis original).
The new 1961 Programme of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union 
proclaimed that ‘cybernetics, electronic computers and control sys­
tems will be widely applied in production processes in industry, build­
ing and transport, in scientific research, planning, designing, account­
ing, statistics, and management’.23 The Soviet media began calling 
computers ‘machines of communism’.24
Despite the media hype, the Soviet government showed little in­
terest in supporting AI research. The leaders of the cybernetics move­
ment distanced themselves from AI aspirations, trying to cultivate an 
image of the computer as an efficient tool, rather than an autonomous 
agent. The chairman of the Cybernetics Council of the Soviet Acade­
my of Sciences, engineer admiral Aksel Berg, publicly proclaimed that 
electronic computers ‘will be increasingly providing help to man, but 
will never replace him and will never think’.25 Computer time remained 
in short supply, and supervisors did not look favourably on computer 
programmers’ attempts to divert valuable computational resources to 
investigate problems that aroused their own intellectual interest.
The tenuous position of Soviet AI was reflected in the language. 
The phrase ‘thinking machines’ was always put in quotation marks to 
stress its metaphorical meaning. The very term ‘artificial intelligence’ 

138
CYBERNETICS ACROSS CULTURES
remained controversial, and researchers avoided it. They preferred 
more neutral-sounding vocabulary, such as ‘cybernetic psychology’, 
‘the study of information processes’, or ‘heuristic programming’.26
26 Evgenii I. Boiko et al., ‘Kibernetika i p roblemy psikhologii’ (Cybernetics and 
problems of psychology), in Kibernetiku—na sluzhbu kommunizmu (Cybernetics in 
service of communism), ed. Aksel I. Berg, vol. 5 (Moscow: Energiia, 1967), 314-50.
27 Veniamin Pushkin, Psikhologiia i kibernetika (Psychology and cybernetics) 
(Moscow: Pedagogika, 1971), 204.
28 
Aleksandr Kronrod, Besedy o programmirovanii (Conversations about com­
puter programming) (Moscow: URSS, 2001), 168, 139.
The freedom not to choose
In 1964, when the mathematician Dmitrii Pospelov and the psychologist 
Veniamin Pushkin brought together computer specialists and psychol­
ogists interested in AI for a regular colloquium at the Moscow Power 
Engineering Institute, they named their field ‘psychonics’. The psycho- 
nics group directly challenged the Simon-Newell model of thinking and 
put forward an alternative approach.
The term ‘psychonics’ was formed by analogy with bionics. While 
specialists in bionics hoped to imitate the ‘design’ of living organisms in 
engineering systems, Pospelov and Pushkin aspired to use psycholog­
ical knowledge to construct intelligent computers. Pushkin conducted 
a number of eye-movement tracking studies of chess players and con­
cluded that each player constructed a different mental model of the 
position on the board, rather than searching for the solution in a pre­
set problem space. He asserted that the human problem space is not 
initially structured like a tree, and that the process of finding a solution 
involves creating a new problem space rather than ‘pruning useless 
branches’, as in the Newell-Simon labyrinth model.27
Soviet AI specialists disliked the labyrinth model not for its inef­
ficiency, but for its departure from their cultural expectations. Even 
without knowing the conceptual origins of the General Problem Solver, 
they associated it with the ‘bureaucratic apparatus’ of labyrinth search. 
While some followed Newell and Simon’s logic and asserted that ‘the 
human being thinks by exhaustive search’, many others suggested al­
ternative models, for example, thinking as a chain of associations.28
Pushkin and Pospelov conceptualized thinking not as a search, but 
as a reflection of and on the problem. They argued that the descriptions 

SLAVA GEROVITCH
139
of the current situation and of the goal are often formulated in different 
terms. In the case of chess, for example, the initial position is described 
in terms of the location of specific pieces on the board, while the goal 
state—a checkmate—requires a higher-level description involving the 
inability to move the checked king. The human chess player must be 
able to go back and forth between low-level and high-level descrip­
tions, that is, to build and manipulate various mediating models of the 
situation. Pushkin and Pospelov argued that situation modelling, rather 
than labyrinth search, was the basic intellectual procedure: ‘Among all 
the existing words and notions used to describe productive thinking, 
the most adequate, the most suitable is the Russian word soobrazhe- 
nie (reflection/imagination). ... The solution reflects the situation, based 
on the images or models of its elements’.29
29 
Dmitrii Pospelov and Veniamin Pushkin, Myshlenie i avtomaty (Thinking and
automata) (Moscow: Sovetskoe radio, 1972), 140-141 (emphasis added).
30 Ibid., 139.
31 For a historical overview, see Dmitrii Pospelov, Situatsionnoe upravlenie: 
teoriia i praktika (Situational control: theory and practice) (Moscow: Nauka, 1986), 
254-58.
For Pospelov and Pushkin, human creativity manifests itself in 
abandoning the old labyrinth, re-conceptualizing the problem, and 
constructing a new problem space. For example, one cannot construct 
four equilateral triangles out of six matches if one seeks the solution 
on a plane. Constructing a new labyrinth of solutions—in the three-di­
mensional space—would produce the answer.30
While Newell and Simon started with a ready-made structure of 
the problem, Pushkin and Pospelov suggested that structuring the 
problem was an essential intellectual step in finding a solution. Building 
an adequate model of the situation was more important than powerful 
search algorithms. Pushkin and Pospelov proposed a semantic lan­
guage for formal descriptions of the situation at various levels of gen­
erality and developed a system for building relational situation models. 
Pospelov and his team implemented this approach in computer sys­
tems for controlling loading operations in a sea port and other indus­
trial operations, which combined technological and human elements.31
Pospelov and Pushkin’s critique of the labyrinth theory echoed 
the Soviet cultural perception of choice as a restraint on creativity. For 
Eastern bloc intellectuals, the rigidly structured labyrinth of choices 
offered by the government seemed overly restrictive. Some chose to 

140
CYBERNETICS ACROSS CULTURES
emigrate. Some, like Pospelov and Pushkin, chose to expose the lim­
itations of choice-driven behaviour and to create new problem spaces.
An intellectual under an oppressive regime: striving for 
autonomy
Soviet intellectuals developed sophisticated strategies for living under 
surveillance. Recent studies of Soviet intelligentsia undermine the Cold 
War stereotypes of the Soviet scientist as either blindly supporting or 
passively resisting government policies.32 A more typical figure would 
be a physicist working on nuclear weapons during the day, and reading 
underground literature at night.33 Interested in results, the government 
allowed the scientists some intellectual license, as long as it was limit­
ed to their subject of study. The historian David Holloway called nuclear 
weapons laboratories ‘islands of intellectual autonomy’.34 One theoret­
ical physicist later recalled:
32 See Osiris vol. 23: Intelligentsia Science: The Russian Century, 1860-1960, 
ed. Michael D. Gordin, Karl Hall and Alexei Kojevnikov (2008).
33 
Stanislav Rassadin, Kniga proshchanii (A book of farewells) (Moscow: Tekst,
2004), 217.
34 David Holloway, ‘Physics, the State, and Civil Society in the Soviet Union’, 
Historical Studies in Physical and Biological Sciences 30, no. 1 (1999): 175.
35 Mark Azbel, quoted in ibid., 187.
Physicists constituted a privileged caste, an aristocracy. 
There were fewer controls on our freedom than on those 
of any other member of Soviet civil[ian] society. The only 
laws we felt restricted by were those relating to the con­
ventions of scientific work. Relatively speaking, we were 
free people.35
Mathematicians and computer specialists working on defence proj­
ects enjoyed a similar privileged status. As priests in a temple of the 
all-powerful goddess, the Computing Machine, they created their own 
dominions of intellectual autonomy in the climate-controlled, limit­
ed-access rooms housing mammoth-size computers of the first gen­
eration. The mathematicians Izrail Gelfand and Mikhail Tsetlin, of the 
defence-research-oriented Institute of Applied Mathematics, used 

SLAVA GEROVITCH
141
their portion of intellectual freedom to engage in a study of the central 
nervous system.
In 1958, Gelfand and Tsetlin organized an informal regular seminar 
on mathematical models in physiology.36 Neurophysiologists tradition­
ally assumed that various nodes within the central nervous system co­
ordinated their activity via a complex system of interconnections. This 
assumption, however, baffled mathematicians: in a large system, the 
number of connections would grow so rapidly that any mathematical 
model would become too complex. Tsetlin and Gelfand, by contrast, 
proposed a model in which every node regarded the activity of all the 
other nodes as changes in its environment. They showed that individ­
ual nodes did not have to interact directly but could merely observe 
changes in their environment and follow a simple adaptive algorithm, 
minimizing their interactions with the environment. This resulted in 
purposeful behaviour of the system as a whole, if one defined purpose 
as minimization of the system’s interaction with its environment. In this 
model, purposeful behaviour of the whole system did not require great 
complexity from its subsystems. All individual parts acted very simply: 
they tried to avoid interaction, rather than to build complex coordina­
tion networks. Gelfand and Tsetlin called this adaptive mechanism the 
‘principle of least interaction’:
36 Viacheslav Vs. Ivanov, ‘Iz istorii kibernetiki v SSSR. Ocherk zhizni i deia- 
tel’nosti M.L. Tsetlina’ (From the history of cybernetics in the USSR: an outline 
of life and work of M. L. Tsetlin), in Ocherki istorii informatiki v Rossii (Essays 
on the history of informatics in Russia), ed. Dmitrii A. Pospelov and Iakov I. Fet 
(Novosibirsk: OIGGM SO RAN, 1998), 568.
37 Mikhail Tsetlin, Automaton Theory and Modeling of Biological Systems, 
trans. Scitran (New York: Academic Press, 1973), 150-52.
At each moment, the subsystem solves its own ‘partic­
ular’, ‘personal’ problem—namely, it minimizes its inter­
action with the medium; therefore, the complexity of the 
subsystem does not depend on the complexity of the 
entire system. ... our mathematical models allow us (to 
a certain degree) to imagine the interaction of the nerve 
centers without considering the complex system of links 
and the coordination of their activity.37

142
CYBERNETICS ACROSS CULTURES
The peculiar definition of purposeful behaviour as the minimization of 
the system’s interaction with its environment clearly resonated with 
the Soviet intelligentsia’s drive to preserve maximum intellectual au­
tonomy. Tsetlin argued that his model of the nervous system had the 
advantage of non-individualized control: there was no need to tell ev­
ery node in the system what it was supposed to do; the system used its 
freedom of manoeuvre to self-organize under most general conditions. 
At a lecture before the Physiological Society in February 1965, Tsetlin 
explicitly brought up a comparison of free and forced labour to high­
light the advantages of self-organization:
The work of prisoners is more expensive than that of free 
men, even though the former are much worse fed and 
clad, and they work no less. The point is not only that the 
efficiency of prisoners is lower, but that a prisoner must 
be fed, clad, and watched by someone else. With a free 
person the matter is different: ... my manager ... doesn’t 
have to think when to change my shoes or linen or what 
to do with my children.38
38 Ibid., 125
39 Murray Eden, ‘Foreword’, ibid., xi.
The MIT biophysicist Murray Eden once remarked: ‘One wonders 
whether it is a reflection of cultural or social differences that Tsetlin 
chose to study cooperative phenomena in choosing “expedient” be­
haviour, while American game theory focuses on competition among 
the players’.39 Tsetlin’s model, strictly speaking, was not a mathematical 
implementation of socialist ideals. It reflected the intelligentsia’s pecu­
liar position within the Soviet system, in which ‘cooperative phenom­
ena’ emerged out of individuals’ efforts to escape control by the envi­
ronment (the state) or by other individuals (‘people’s patrols’). Eden’s 
suggestion of the social and cultural roots of different approaches to 
game theory, however, is worth exploring in greater detail.

SLAVA GEROVITCH
143
Individualistic games of capitalism
In 1926, the Hungarian-born American mathematician John von Neu­
mann developed an axiomatic formalization of two-person, zero-sum 
games with a finite number of ‘strategies’ (complete plans of the game). 
It was based on the Western concept of social interaction as a com­
petition between self-interested, rationally calculating, yet cautious 
opponents.
Von Neumann proved the minimax theorem, asserting the exis­
tence of an optimal ‘mixed’, or randomized, strategy for each player, 
which would minimize the maximum loss, and would guarantee that 
each wins the ‘value of the game’. He believed that the minimax strat­
egy captured some fundamental aspect of human rationality: ‘Any 
events—given the external conditions and the participants in the situ­
ation (provided that the latter are acting of their own free will)—may be 
regarded as a game of strategy if one looks at the effect it has on the 
participants’.40
40 Von Neumann (1928), quoted in Robert J. Leonard, ‘From Parlor Games to 
Social Science: Von Neumann, Morgenstern, and the Creation of Game Theory, 
1928-1944’, Journal of Economic Literature 33 (June 1995): 735.
41 Steve J. Heims, John von Neumann and Norbert Wiener: From Mathematics
to the Technologies of Life and Death (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1980), 296.
Von Neumann’s biographer Steve Heims has traced von Neu­
mann’s formalism to his perception of the world as filled with ruthless 
competitors who viewed all the other players as cunning enemies:
His temperament was conditioned by the harsh political 
realities of his Hungarian experience. The recommended 
style of ‘playing the economic game’, the emphasis on 
caution, on calculation of expected consequences, the 
whole utilitarian emphasis aptly expresses the charac­
teristic ideals of the middle class in capitalist societies.41
In 1944, von Neumann and his collaborator, the Austrian-born Ameri­
can economist Oskar Morgenstern, expanded the original conceptual 
framework of game theory to treat problems of economics in their book, 
Theory of Games and Economic Behavior. They explicitly challenged 
deterministic decision-making enshrined in neoclassical economics 
and presented the ‘solution’ of an economic game as a probabilistic 

144
CYBERNETICS ACROSS CULTURES
‘stable set’ of possible apportionments of payoff among the players. As 
the historian Philip Mirowski has argued, they treated mixed strategies 
as ‘a representation of the stochastic nature of thought itself’ and ef­
fectively turned minimax strategizing into ‘the very epitome of the ab­
stract rationality’.42 Mirowski has further suggested that von Neumann 
and Morgenstern came to believe that game theory could ‘simulate the 
behavior of any opponent and therefore serve as a general theory of 
rationality’, and that in their writings ‘game theory and artificial intelli­
gence tended to blur together’.43
42 Philip Mirowski, ‘When Games Grow Deadly Serious: The Influence of the 
Military on the Evolution of Game Theory’, in Economics and National Security, 
supplement to History of Political Economy 23, ed. Craufurd Goodwin, (Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press, 1991), 237.
43 
Philip Mirowski, ‘What Were von Neumann and Morgenstern Trying to
Accomplish?’ in Towards a History of Game Theory, supplement to History of 
Political Economy 24, ed. E. Roy Weintraub (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 
1992), 125, 127.
44 Quoted in Mirowski, ‘When Games Grow’, 251.
Among the indeterminism celebrated by von Neumann and Mor­
genstern, one thing remained stable throughout: the rules of the game. 
Fixing the rules of the game not only made it possible to derive pow­
erful formal results in game theory. It also provided an anchor for the 
notion of rationality: the world was too complex for deterministic anal­
ysis, but it still followed rules, so a stochastically equipped mind could 
still calculate an optimal set of strategies.
American defence analysts asserted that ‘the significance of 
game theory as a decision tool is that it eliminates guessing an op­
ponent’s intentions’.44 While guessing seemed the opposite of ratio­
nal problem-solving to American analysts, it was often the only option 
available to an intelligent decision-maker in the Soviet Union.
Collective games of socialism
Scholars studying Soviet science in the late Stalinist and Khrushchev 
periods have remarked on the ritualistic patterns of behaviour in the 
scientific community. Whether scientists were engaged in public dis­
cussions of the philosophical and ideological meaning of their disci­
pline, or tried to jump on the bandwagon of a fashionable intellectual 
trend, they had to play a game according to the unspoken rules of the 

SLAVA GEROVITCH
145
public behaviour of a Soviet scientist.45 Ritual critique of ideological 
enemies, skilful manipulation with suitable quotes from Marx or Le­
nin, and ingenious translation of scientific terminology into an ideolo­
gy-laden language, were among the indispensable strategies of Soviet 
science. The outcome of debates over the validity of scientific theories 
often depended on the discussants’ abilities to play the game.
45 Alexei Kojevnikov, ‘Rituals of Stalinist Culture at Work: Science and the 
Games of Intraparty Democracy circa 1948’, The Russian Review 57 (January 1998): 
25—52; Nikolai Krementsov, Stalinist Science (Princeton: Princeton University 
Press, 1997), esp. 239-48; and Gerovitch, From Newspeak to Cyberspeak.
46 
Tsetlin, Automaton Theory, 6.
The play was complicated by the uncertainty over the rewards and 
punishment for specific strategies. Frequent swings in the direction of 
Stalinist ideological campaigns often left slow thinkers stuck with old, 
outdated slogans and made them vulnerable to attack. Those scien­
tists who could not properly decipher ‘signals’ from above were often 
perplexed about the rules and direction of the most recent campaign.
The fundamental uncertainties of Soviet social games were re­
flected in Mikhail Tsetlin’s theory of collective games of automata. 
An automaton is a mathematical model of a finite state machine that 
changes its state according to its transition diagram and the current 
input. Tsetlin interpreted an automaton as an agent acting in an en­
vironment that randomly penalized or rewarded specific behaviours. 
Unlike the classic von-Neumann-type games, Tsetlin studied games 
in which the automata faced a world filled with uncertainty. He wrote:
It should be noted that the automaton games are dis­
cussed here from a viewpoint that differs from the one 
accepted in game theory. Indeed, it is normally assumed 
in the latter that the game is defined by a system of 
pay-off functions previously known to the players. ... We 
thought it interesting to consider games played by finite 
automata having no a priori information about the game, 
and being forced to shape their strategies for each suc­
cessive replay in the course of the game itself.46
In Tsetlin’s games, ‘the players have practically no information about 
the game. They are ignorant of the number of other players involved, of 
the situation at any particular moment and even of what kind of game 

146
CYBERNETICS ACROSS CULTURES
they are actually playing’.47 Tsetlin informally compared his model of an 
agent operating in an environment with unknown and changing rules 
to a ‘little animal in the big world’.48 His friend, cybernetic neurophys­
iologist Nicholas Bernstein, used a similar metaphor to describe the 
fundamental uncertainties of intellectual activity: ‘To use a metaphor, 
we might say that the organism is constantly playing a game with its 
environment, a game where the rules are not defined and the moves 
planned by the opponent are not known’.49
47 
Viktor Varshavskii and Dmitrii Pospelov, Puppets Without Strings, trans. A.
Kandaurov (Moscow: Mir, 1988), 97.
48 
Tsetlin, Automaton Theory, 132.
49 
Nicholas Bernstein, The Co-ordination and Regulation of Movements
(Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1967), 173.
50 
Varshavskii and Pospelov, Puppets Without Strings, 100.
Tsetlin discovered that in a changing environment in which the 
probabilities of penalties and rewards varied over time, the most suc­
cessful were the automata that did not have too many states. In other 
words, if the rules of the game constantly changed, it was not a good 
idea for the automaton to remember too much of its own history. The 
more dynamic the environment, the shorter was the optimal depth of 
the automaton’s ‘memory’.
In his study of collective ‘distribution games’, Tsetlin presented 
a thinly veiled commentary on the economic strategies of individu­
als under socialism. First, he considered a game in which a group of 
automata competed for resources (rewards or payoffs) by choosing 
different strategies. He designed automata that were completely un­
aware of the relative strengths of different strategies, but would even­
tually settle on the optimal strategy by reacting to rewards from their 
environment. Tsetlin showed, however, that their average gain could be 
increased if the automata played a game-theory version of socialism; a 
game with a ‘common fund’, in which all gains and losses of individual 
automata were summed up and then shared equally among them. The 
drawback was that the common fund camouflaged the link between 
individual contribution and reward and thus placed greater demands 
on the memory capacity of individual automata. One could ‘reap the 
benefits of a common fund procedure starting from a certain level of 
complexity’ of automata memory, he concluded, ‘if the memory capac­
ity is below this threshold, the introduction of a common fund reduces 
the average gain’.50

SLAVA GEROVITCH
147
In informal discussions, Tsetlin mockingly translated this rule 
into the cliched parlance of the Soviet ideological discourse as ‘the 
negative effect of [wage-]levelling and inadequate consciousness [of 
workers]’.51 Indeed, the Soviet press often blamed the low quality of 
consumer products on workers’ ‘low level of consciousness’. Soviet 
propaganda routinely called on the workers to raise their conscious­
ness and to work harder for a common fund. Tsetlin provided a math­
ematical formalization of this ideological dogma, calculating the pre­
cise memory capacity (‘consciousness level’) needed to find an optimal 
strategy in a game with a common fund.
51 Ibid., 101.
52 Ibid., chap. 3.
53 Ibid., 102.
54 Evgenii L. Feinberg, ‘Dlia budushchego istorika’ (For a future historian), in 
On mezhdu nami zhil: Vospominaniia o Sakharove (He lived among us: memoirs 
about Sakharov), ed. Boris L. Altshuler et al. (Moscow: Praktika, 1996), 679.
Tsetlin’s colleagues turned his result into a fundamental principle 
of human thinking and behaviour. Viktor Varshavskii and Dmitrii Pos­
pelov interpreted memory capacity as a general measure of intellectual 
ability.52 They correlated one’s ‘intellectual level’ with the ability to find 
an optimal strategy in a game in which gains and losses were not ex­
plicitly tied to one’s immediate actions but were produced at a higher 
level of organization. They concluded that ‘capitalism is more profit­
able when the management system is simple and socialism is more 
profitable when the management system is elaborate’.53 The writings of 
Soviet AI specialists paradoxically combined a thinly veiled critique of 
socialist redistribution and a peculiar definition of intellect as the ability 
to find an optimal strategy of living under socialism.
The notion of a game with unknown or changing rules was very 
familiar to the liberal intelligentsia. They played a cat-and-mouse game 
with the Soviet government, constantly challenging the fuzzy boundar­
ies of permissible discourse. While Soviet laws ostensibly proclaimed 
many democratic freedoms, the actual practice was to suppress any 
significant dissent by placing it under the vague rubric of ‘anti-Soviet 
activity’. Engaging in an open political protest would mean violating 
the most expedient strategy of behaviour under socialism: to minimize 
one’s interactions with the political environment. Entering in a direct 
confrontation with the authorities was a flagrant violation of the ‘prin­
ciple of least interaction’.54

148
CYBERNETICS ACROSS CULTURES
Two central metaphors of AI: rats vs butterflies
Two metaphors capture crucial differences in the cultural stereotypes 
of thought and behaviour reflected in AI systems implemented in the 
Soviet Union and the United States. Life as a maze—a labyrinth in which 
we must find the right path—became the central metaphor for Amer­
ican AI. The metaphor of a labyrinth evoked the behaviourist pattern 
of B.F. Skinner’s experiments on rats running T-shaped mazes and the 
popular American cultural image of the ‘rat race’. In 1950 Claude Shan­
non designed a mechanical mouse that navigated a labyrinth in search 
of a metal ‘cheese’. Herbert Simon’s study of administrative behaviour, 
in turn, took rats running mazes as a paradigmatic case: ‘A simplified 
model of human decision-making is provided by the behaviour of a 
white rat when he is confronted, in the psychological laboratory, with 
a maze, one path of which leads to food’.55 Simon insisted that the lim­
ited knowledge and intellectual capacities of a rat better reflected the 
constraints on human rationality than the assumption of divine omni­
science and perfect rationality: ‘We need a less God-like and more rat­
like chooser’.56
55 Simon (1945), quoted in Crowther-Heyck, Herbert A. Simon, 112.
56 Simon (1954), quoted ibid., 6.
57 Varshavskii and Pospelov, Puppets Without Strings, 77.
For Soviet AI specialists, the central metaphor for decision-mak­
ing was not the search in a fixed labyrinth, but the flight of a butter­
fly, charting its flight trajectory through random streams of air. Viktor 
Varshavskii and Dmitrii Pospelov described a system that simulated 
the behaviour of a moth hunted by a bat. When the bat was too close 
and the moth could not fly away, the moth started dashing around in a 
chaotic flight:
The chaotic flight is a series of passive falls with folded 
wings, sharp turns, loops and dives. In other words, the 
moth follows a trajectory which makes it more difficult 
for the bat to predict its location from one moment to 
the next. We should mention that in experiments the 
chaotic flight strategy saved the moth’s life 70 percent 
of the time.57

SLAVA GEROVITCH
149
A butterfly fluttering in a chaotic current of life and trying to escape a 
predator—this image was all too familiar to Soviet scientists, trying to 
preserve their intellectual autonomy.
American and Soviet AI specialists were seeking out general prin­
ciples: universal, timeless mechanisms of thinking and behaviour. Their 
generalizations, however, were based on culturally conditioned cases. 
The examples that American and Soviet scientists had at their disposal, 
were, in fact, culturally specific patterns of social organization and de­
cision-making. When trying to grasp universality, AI models manifested 
just the opposite: the specificity of cultural patterns.
Without knowing it, science often speaks with a national accent. 
Cultural symbolic systems can manifest themselves in scientific ideas 
as clearly as in literature or art. In their simulations of human thinking, 
AI systems truly reflect both mechanisms of reason and patterns of 
irrationality, individual creativity and social stereotyping, human nature 
and human culture.
Note
This article is a shortened and revised version of Slava Gerovitch, ‘Ar­
tificial Intelligence with a National Face: American and Soviet Cultural 
Metaphors for Thought’, in The Search for a Theory of Cognition: Early 
Mechanisms and New Ideas, ed. Stefano Franchi and Francesco Bi- 
anchini (Amsterdam: Rodopi, 2011), 173-194.

150
CYBERNETICS ACROSS CULTURES
Reference
Berg, Aksel I. ‘Problemy upravleniia i kibernetika’ (Problems of manage­
ment and cybernetics). In Berg, Izbrannye trudy (Selected works) vol. 
2. Moscow: Energiia, 1964.
Bernstein, Nicholas. The Co-ordination and Regulation of Movements. 
Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1967.
Boiko, Evgenii I. et al. ‘Kibernetika i problemy psikhologii’ (Cybernetics 
and problems of psychology). In Kibernetiku—na sluzhbu kommu- 
nizmu (Cybernetics in service of communism), edited by Aksel I. 
Berg, vol. 5, 314-50. Moscow: Energiia, 1967.
Bruner, Jerome. ‘The Process of Concept Attainment’. In Bruner, Beyond 
the Information Given: Studies in the Psychology of Knowing. New 
York: Norton, 1973.
Brushlinskii, Andrei. ‘Pochemu nevozmozhen “iskusstvennyi intel- 
lekt ”’ (Why ‘artificial intelligence’ is impossible). Voprosy filosofii 
(Problems of philosophy) no. 2 (1979): 50-64.
Crowther-Heyck, Hunter. Herbert A. Simon: The Bounds of Reason in 
America. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2005.
Feinberg, Evgenii L. ‘Dlia budushchego istorika’ (For a future historian).
In On mezhdu nami zhil: Vospominaniia o Sakharove (He lived among 
us: memoirs about Sakharov), edited by Boris L. Altshuler et al., 
652-711. Moscow: Praktika, 1996.
Geertz, Clifford. ‘Common Sense As a Cultural System’. In Geertz, Local 
Knowledge: Further Essays in Interpretive Anthropology. New York: 
Basic Books, 1983.
Gerovitch, Slava. From Newspeak to Cyberspeak: A History of Soviet 
Cybernetics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002.
Heims, Steve J. John von Neumann and Norbert Wiener: From 
Mathematics to the Technologies of Life and Death. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 1980.
Holloway, David. ‘Physics, the State, and Civil Society in the Soviet 
Union’. Historical Studies in Physical and Biological Sciences 30, no. 
1 (1999): 173-92.
Ivanov, Viacheslav Vs. ‘Iz istorii kibernetiki v SSSR. Ocherk zhizni i deia- 
tel’nosti M.L. Tsetlina’ (From the history of cybernetics in the USSR: 
an outline of life and work of M. L. Tsetlin). In Ocherki istorii informa­
tiki v Rossii (Essays on the history of informatics in Russia), edited by 
Dmitrii A. Pospelov and Iakov I. Fet, 556-80. Novosibirsk: Oiggm so 
ran, 1998.

SLAVA GEROVITCH
151
Kojevnikov, Alexei. ‘Rituals of Stalinist Culture at Work: Science and the 
Games of Intraparty Democracy circa 1948’. The Russian Review 57 
(January 1998): 25-52.
Krementsov, Nikolai. Stalinist Science. Princeton: Princeton University 
Press, 1997.
Kronrod, Aleksandr. Besedy o programmirovanii (Conversations about 
computer programming). Moscow: URSS, 2001.
Lakoff, George and Mark Johnson. Metaphors We Live By. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1980.
Leonard, Robert J. ‘From Parlor Games to Social Science: Von Neumann, 
Morgenstern, and the Creation of Game Theory, 1928-1944’. Journal 
of Economic Literature 33 (June 1995): 730-61.
McCarthy, John. ‘Programs with Common Sense’. In Semantic 
Information Processing, edited by Marvin Minsky, 403-9. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1968.
Mirowski, Philip. ‘What Were von Neumann and Morgenstern Trying to 
Accomplish?’ In Towards a History of Game Theory, supplement to 
History of Political Economy 24, edited by E. Roy Weintraub, 113-47. 
Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1992.
———. ‘When Games Grow Deadly Serious: The Influence of the Military 
on the Evolution of Game Theory’. In Economics and National 
Security, supplement to History of Political Economy 23, edited by 
Craufurd Goodwin, 227-55. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 
1991.
Newell, Allen. ‘Remarks on the Relationship Between Artificial 
Intelligence and Cognitive Psychology’. In Theoretical Approaches 
to Non-numerical Problem Solving, edited by Ranan B. Banerji and 
Mihajlo D. Mesarovic, 363-400. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1970.
———. and Herbert A. Simon. ‘GPS, a Program that Simulates Human 
Thought’. In Computers and Thought, edited by Edward A.
Feigenbaum and Julian Feldman, 279-93. New York: McGraw-Hill, 
1963.
Newell, Allen, and Herbert Simon. ‘Heuristic Problem Solving’. 
Operations Research 6, no. 1 (1958): 1-10.
Osiris vol. 23: Intelligentsia Science: The Russian Century, 1860-1960, 
edited by Michael D. Gordin, Karl Hall and Alexei Kojevnikov (2008).
Pekelis, Viktor D. ‘Chelovek, kibernetika i bog’ (The human, cybernetics, 
and God). Nauka i religiia (Science and religion) no. 2 (1960): 25-30.

152
CYBERNETICS ACROSS CULTURES
Petrovskii, lu. ‘Na grani fantastiki’ (Bordering on science fiction). Znanie- 
sila (Knowledge is power) no. 7 (1956): 17-24.
Polanyi, Livia. Telling the American Story: A Structural and Cultural 
Analysis of Conversational Storytelling. Norwood, NJ: Ablex, 1985.
Pospelov, Dmitrii. Situatsionnoe upravlenie: teoriia i praktika (Situational 
control: theory and practice). Moscow: Nauka, 1986.
Pospelov, Dmitrii, and Veniamin Pushkin. Myshlenie i avtomaty (Thinking 
and automata). Moscow: Sovetskoe radio, 1972.
Programme of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Adopted by the 
22nd Congress of the C.P.S.U. October 31, 1961. Moscow: Foreign 
Languages Publishing House, 1961.
Pushkin, Veniamin. Psikhologiia i kibernetika (Psychology and cybernet­
ics). Moscow: Pedagogika, 1971.
Rassadin, Stanislav. Kniga proshchanii (A book of farewells). Moscow: 
Tekst, 2004.
Rosenblueth, Arturo, Norbert Wiener and Julian Bigelow. ‘Behavior, 
Purpose and Teleology’. Philosophy of Science 10 (1943): 18-24.
Simon, Herbert A. ‘A Behavioral Model of Rational Choice’. The Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 69, no. 1 (February 1955): 99-118.
———. Models of My Life. New York: Basic Books, 1991.
———. ‘Rational Choice and the Structure of the Environment’.
Psychological Review 63, no. 2 (1956): 129-38.
Smirnov, Mikhail S., ed. Modelirovanie obucheniia i povedeniia (The mod­
elling of learning and behaviour). Moscow: Nauka, 1975.
Tsetlin, Mikhail. Automaton Theory and Modeling of Biological Systems.
Translated by Scitran. New York: Academic Press, 1973.
Varshavskii, Viktor, and Dmitrii Pospelov. Puppets Without Strings.
Translated by A. Kandaurov. Moscow: Mir, 1988.
Winston, Patrick. Artificial Intelligence. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 
1984 [1976].

153
Cybernetics, Communism, 
and Romanticism: Cybernetic 
Thinking in the Polish People’s 
Republic and in the 
Pre-Cybernetic Era
Michal Krzykawski
For the worldwide community of readers and scholars interested in 
science fiction literature, futurology, and technology, the juxtaposi­
tion of the words ‘cybernetics’ and ‘Poland’ brings to mind one name: 
Stanislaw Lem. Those with a penchant for philosophy might point to 
Summa Technologiae, Lem’s treatise on science and technology, orig­
inally published in 1962, where cybernetics provides the framework 
for his argument. As Joanna Zylinska, the translator of the book into 
English, has it, ‘Summa has lost none of its intellectual vigor or critical 
significance’.1 The epistemological limits of Lem’s empirical approach 
to biological, technological, and social phenomena notwithstanding, 
his futurologist observations are still worth discussing in light of to­
day’s advancements in artificial intelligence and, more broadly, in the 
so-called emergent technologies.
1 
Stanislaw Lem, Summa Technologiae, trans. Joanna Zylinska (London,
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2013).
In this contribution, however, I offer a different take on the cy­
bernetic moment in Poland, focusing on the political and scientific re­
ception of cybernetics under communist rule. From this historical per­
spective, Lem’s oeuvre is of lesser importance. In fact, for the state’s 
apparatus, he was just a famous sci-fi writer.
My argument consists of two parts. In the first, I discuss the re­
ception of cybernetics in the Polish People’s Republic and the interde­
pendence of science, economics, and ideology, with special emphasis 
on Oskar Lange’s economic cybernetics and comments on the first 
issue of the journal Postgpy cybernetyki (Cybernetic progress) pub­
lished in 1978. In the second part, I go back to the pre-cybernetic era 
and discuss Bronislaw Trentowski’s Stosunek filozofii do cybernetyki 1 

154
CYBERNETICS, COMMUNISM, AND ROMANTICISM
czylisztukirzqdzenia narodem (The relation of philosophy to cybernet­
ics as the art of governing a nation). Trentowski was a romantic and lib­
eral philosopher who introduced the term ‘cybernetics’ into the Polish 
language one hundred years before cybernetics gained its momentum 
with Norbert Wiener’s seminal Cybernetics: Or Control and Commu­
nication in the Animal and the Machine, originally published in 1948. I 
suggest that the meaning of cybernetics as discussed by Trentowski 
at the very beginning of industrial revolution in this part of Europe can 
open a new perspective on the question of governance in the context 
of the relationship between artificial intelligence and political power.
Cybernetics and dialectical materialism
The Polish People’s Republic, just to recall some basic historical facts, 
was a socialist one-party state with a unitary Marxist-Leninist govern­
ment headed by the Polish United Workers’ Party. The country existed 
from 1947 to 1989 and was a satellite country in the Soviet sphere of 
interest. When reconsidering the adventures of (Western) cybernetics 
in this context, we notice two kinds of tension: on the one hand, the ten­
sion between cybernetic thinking and dialectical materialism, either as 
the state’s official philosophy or as philosophical method; on the oth­
er hand, the tension between the scientific reception and the political 
reception of cybernetics, in the situation where some of the scientists 
who developed cybernetic theories and described themselves as ‘cy­
berneticists’ were scientific workers holding high functions in the Party.
It is often repeated that cybernetics, together with advancements 
in mathematics from the 1930s, were firmly rejected by the propaganda 
in the Soviet Union under the Stalinist era.2 As Slava Gerovitch points 
out, ‘in 1954 the Short Philosophical Dictionary [still] defined cybernet­
ics as a “reactionary pseudoscience” and “an ideological weapon of 
imperialist reaction’’’.3 The status of cybernetics radically changed af­
ter Stalin’s death in 1953 and with the beginning of Nikita Khrushchev’s 
era. As Gerovitsh continues:
2 
Benjamin Peters, How Not to Network a Nation: The Uneasy History of the
Soviet Internet (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2016), 30-32.
3 
Slava Gerovitch, From Newspeak to Cyberspeak: A History of Soviet
Cybernetics (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2002), 4. This dictionary was trans­
lated into Polish and published a year later.

MICHAL KRZYKAWSKI
155
By the late 1950s, cybernetics was recognized as an 
innocent victim of political oppression and ‘rehabilitated’ 
along with some of the political prisoners of the Stalin­
ist regime. Soviet cybernetics emerged as a movement 
for radical reform of the Stalinist system of science. It 
gained wide popularity, and in the early 1960s it was 
written into a new Party Program and hailed as a ‘science 
in the service of communism’. By the late 1960s, however, 
cybernetics began to lose intellectual content and turn 
into a fashionable trend.4
4 Ibid., 4.
5 
Piotr Sienkiewicz and Jerzy S. Nowak. ‘Szescdziesi^t lat cybernetyki i
polskiej informatyki’ (Sixty years of cybernetics and polish computer science), 
Zeszyty Naukowe Warszawskiej Wyzszej Szko/y Informatyki, 3(3): 9-24.
6 Stanislaw Boguslawski, Henryk Greniewski and Jerzy Szapiro, ‘Dialogi o 
cybernetyce’ (Dialogues on cybernetics), Mysl filozoficzna (Philosophical thought) 
4 (1954): 158-212.
It is within this historical context, as pertaining to the Eastern bloc, that 
cybernetic thinking is brought to the fore in the Polish People’s Repub­
lic, both in scientific and political circles. Moscow’s political shadow 
notwithstanding, the Polish reception of cybernetics followed its own, 
intellectually independent path, although it still took place in a world 
where, just like in the whole Eastern bloc, research activities received 
very little financial support.5
In 1954, ‘Dialogi o cybernetyce’ (Dialogues on cybernetics), a fif- 
ty-page article by Stanislaw Boguslawski, Henryk Greniewski and Jerzy 
Szapiro, was published in the journal Mysl filozoficzna (Philosophical 
thought), the main Polish philosophical journal of the Stalinist peri- 
od.6 Although the article was published in the section ‘The Ideological 
Face of Imperialism’, its aim was to thoroughly assess the meaning of 
Wiener’s book, rather than to reject cybernetics as a ‘pseudoscience’. 
The authors appreciate Wiener’s contribution to the mathematical 
analysis of the processes of automatic regulation, but are rather re­
luctant to subscribe to the growing popular belief that cybernetics is 
a ground-breaking scientific theory with great philosophical implica­
tions. More importantly, they point out that the advancements in cy­
bernetics in relation to the transmission of information and computer 
programming are compatible with the Marxist conceptual apparatus.

156
CYBERNETICS, COMMUNISM, AND ROMANTICISM
It would be difficult, and not very productive, to draw a sharp line be­
tween ‘ideology’ and ‘science’ in this stance related to Wiener’s book. 
The ‘Dialogues on cybernetics’ rather shows how scientists could live, 
publish, and communicate under the real socialism.
In his 1964 lecture titled ‘Cybernetics and the Dialectic Material­
ism of Marx and Lenin’, the German philosopher and logician Gotthard 
Gunter points out that ‘there is no doubt cybernetics has since about 
1960 arrived in Marxist countries in full splendor’.7 Cybernetics was 
not considered a threat to the official philosophical doctrine but, on 
the contrary, an opportunity to re-examine certain positions of Marx­
ism-Leninism from a different angle. At the same time, communist 
propaganda in Poland made cybernetics a synonym for rationalization 
and technoscientific progress. Sluzewiec, the former industrial area in 
Warsaw, even saw the creation of Cybernetics Street, not to mention 
Computer Street, Progress Street, Rationalization Street and Invention 
Street, in accordance with the Six-Year Plan, that is, the centralized plan 
adopted in 1950 which concentrated on developing the heavy industry 
sector in the Polish People’s Republic. Incidentally, Sluzewiec’s former 
factories have today been replaced by the headquarters of transna­
tional companies, and the area has been transformed into one of the 
biggest office basins in Europe—but those streets still exist.
7 Gotthard Gunther, ‘Cybernetics and the Dialectic Materialism of Marx and 
Lenin’ in Computing in Russia: The History of Computer Devices and Information 
Technology Revealed, ed. Georg Trogemann, Alexander Y. Nitussov and Wolfgang 
Ernst (Braunschweig: Vieweg Verlag, 2001), 317-32.
Putting aside this ideological drift of cybernetics, it is remark­
able how many academics and engineers, particularly those working 
in technological universities, were attracted by cybernetic ideas. In 
1962, the Polish Cybernetics Society was founded on the initiative of 
the mathematician and logician Henryk Greniewski, the economist Os­
kar Lange, and the mathematician Stanislaw Turski. The Society had 
branches in several Polish cities and counted more than 1000 mem­
bers ten years later. A press note on the foundation of the Society was 
published in The New York Times in June 1962. It is worth quoting as it 
shows the nature of the tension between science and politics that con­
ditioned the reception of cybernetics in the Polish People’s Republic:

MICHAL KRZYKAWSKI
157
Fig. 2: Article from The New 
York Times, 3 June 1962, p. 
16; transcribed by the author.
Cybernetics Society Is Formed 
in Poland in a Policy Reversal
Warsaw, May 27. A Polish cy­
bernetics society was founded last 
week in Warsaw.
In scientific circles the event, 
coinciding with the tenth anniver­
sary of the Polish Academy of Sci­
ences, was regarded as a success 
of the progressive scientific spirit 
in Poland.
Cybernetics deals with compar­
ative studies of the control system 
formed by the nervous system 
and brain and mechanico-electric 
communications systems, such as 
computers. In Eastern European 
scholarly circles it is symbolic of all 
that was missing in the Stalin era.
[...] The spectacular develop­
ment of data processing and com­
puting techniques has persuaded 
Communist authorities to take 
the new science seriously. But 
scholarly sources report that it is 
still treated gingerly in orthodox 
quarters.
The same is said to be true of 
econometrics, the analysis and 
evaluation of massed data by 
means of special statistical meth­
ods and devices, and also of linear 
programming researchers and ad­
vanced sociological theory.
The works of post-war Polish 
sociologists, heavily influenced by 
methods developed in the United 
States, are being translated and 
read in the Soviet Union. But they 
are not yet published there, accord­
ing to authoritative informants.
Economics and other social sci­
ences are still regarded as ‘sensi­
tive subjects’ in Eastern Europe 
because they unavoidably touch 
on political matters. New ideas 
in these disciplines also disturb 
Communist theorists, who are ex­
pected to believe that the Marxist 
dialectic explains everything about 
human society.
Prof. Adam Schaff of Warsaw 
University, who is regarded as 
the voice of Polish science in top 
Communist party circles, seeks to
define the line between freedom 
and political ‘responsibility’ for his 
colleagues.
He has just published a criti­
cism of what he calls the ‘mania’ in 
Poland for poll-taking, market re­
search and other forms of modern 
sociological inquiry. Six months 
ago, addressing Communist sociol­
ogists in Prague, Professor Schaff 
said that as serious scientists they 
had no choice but to make use of 
the new techniques developed in 
the West.
In learned circles Professor 
Schaff s seeming about-face was 
read as a warning that the present 
progressive mood in Polish sci­
ence was outrunning its political 
possibilities.
However, Wladyslaw Bienkows- 
ki, a former Minister of Education 
and once an intimate of Wladyslaw 
Gomolka, the Communist leader, 
responded with a stinging rebuttal.
‘Social practice is impossible 
without information,’ he wrote. 
He attacked ‘one-sided propagan­
da’ as archaic. ‘Practical men need 
empirical information in order to 
act,’ he said.
M. Bienkowski concluded with 
the advice to ‘some professors’ that 
it would be wiser to come to terms 
with sociology.
The advice was well-regarded 
among leaders of Polish science 
who attended the tenth anniver­
sary celebration of the Academy 
of Sciences.
However, M. Gomolka sounded 
a different note. He said the Com­
munist party expected scientists to 
shape their research programs to 
the policies laid down at a Central 
Committee meeting in March, at 
which a big leap forward in indus­
trial technology was demanded.
‘Absolute priority must be given 
to the kind of research that plain­
ly points to economic benefits,’ he 
said.
Cybernetics and, more generally, the nascent information sci­
ence, were at the same time dismissed and felt to be a necessity. On 
the one hand, the self-perpetuating propaganda machine still found 
the diffusion of cybernetics and ‘Western’ innovations an uncomfort­
able match with the ideological version of Marxist doctrine. On the 
other hand, cybernetics as ‘the new science’ was believed to be able 
to optimize the socialist planned economy in accordance with some 
elementary economic principles.

158
CYBERNETICS, COMMUNISM, AND ROMANTICISM
Oskar Lange’s Economic Cybernetics
In this respect, Oskar Lange’s theory of economic cybernetics is of cru­
cial importance. A researcher in mathematical economics, a member 
of the Central Committee of the Polish United Workers’ Party, and the 
first president of the Polish Cybernetic Society, Lange (1904-1965) de­
veloped a theoretical model of a socialist economy, taking into account 
some mechanisms of the market but refuting the narrow idea of the 
self-regulating market. Contrary to Friedrich Hayek and the Austrian 
school of economics, Lange contended that it was fully possible to 
monitor supply and demand in a centrally-planned economy. While his 
book On the Economic Theory of Socialism (published in 1938 during 
a stay in the USA), he puts Marxian economics and neoclassical eco­
nomics together, his Introduction to Economic Cybernetics (1965) was 
meant to combine cybernetics and economics to defend the state- 
planned economy:
From the very onset of the development of the political 
economy, economists were engaged in problems which 
we define today as cybernetic problems. They were 
dealing with the processes of regulation and control of 
processes consisting of mutually related elements be­
fore such problems appeared in other fields of study—in 
technology and biology—and long before they were 
formulated in general theoretical terms in a new sci- 
ence—cybernetics.8
8 
Oskar Lange, Introduction to Economic Cybernetics, trans. Jozef Stadler
(Oxford: Pergamon Press: 1970), 1.
9 Matteo Pasquinelli, ‘How to Make a Class: Hayek’s Neoliberalism and the
Origins of Connectionism’, Qui parle 30, no. 1 (2021), 161.
Just as Hayek uses the armamentarium of cognitive sciences to make 
the idea of the self-regulating market natural and universal,9 it can be 
argued that Lange uses the armamentarium of cybernetics to develop 
a model of socialist economy and to reframe cybernetic thinking with a 
view to support the dialectical processes of development as pertaining 
to dialectical materialism. Drawing on ‘the scientific socialism of Marx 
and Engels’ and Keynessian state-administrated capitalism, Lange 

MICHAL KRZYKAWSKI
159
rejects the idea of the market as a self-regulating system. He argues 
that ‘scientific socialism was the first to expand the principle of con­
scious management of social processes as its basic historical task’.10 It 
is then possible for him to use the concepts such as regulation, man­
agement, and stability in different philosophical and political settings. 
In a nutshell, grounding in dialectical materialism his original descrip­
tion of what a cybernetic system looks like, he offers an abstract model 
of the effective model of a socialist economy.
Oskar Lange, Introduction to Economic Cybernetics, 2.
From an economic point of view, the relevance of Lange’s ap­
proach to cybernetics consists in his demonstration that economic 
models based on cybernetic thinking can be effectively used for an­
alysing the dynamics of the economic processes. In this respect, his 
economic cybernetics is also a cybernetic economics. From a phil­
osophical viewpoint, however, the concept of the whole is central to 
this approach, but reconsidered in strict relation to the dialectical pro­
cesses of its development. According to dialectical materialism, Lange 
says, there are material systems, and their elements are linked by 
cause-and-effect chains. To understand how these systems operate, 
it is necessary to distinguish their properties from the properties of the 
elements they consist of. In other words, these systems have their own 
regularities of operation that cannot be fully explained by the laws of 
operation of the particular elements. Lange defines these systems as 
wholes. Explaining the philosophical assumptions behind his approach 
to economic cybernetics, he offers a wide range of examples of such 
wholes; chemical compounds in relation to the physical aggregates of 
elements, living matter in relation to physical and chemical systems, 
animal organisms in relation to individual cells of living matter, psychic 
processes in relation to the biological properties of the organism, final­
ly social formations in relation to the biopsychological properties of hu­
man organisms. What is new in this rather typical cybernetic vision of 
wholes and of their primacy over their elements, is Lange’s contention 
that all changes within wholes have a dialectical character. Therefore, 
another key element to understanding the effective maintenance of the 
proper operation of the whole is the notion of contradiction. Contradic­
tions, Lange argues, appear in each system constituted as a whole and 
their appearance causes a transformation that leads to the disappear­
ance of the resulting contradictions. This transformation breeds new
10

160
CYBERNETICS, COMMUNISM, AND ROMANTICISM
contradictions that consequently bring about a new transformation in 
and of the system. In a nutshell, the systems constituted as wholes 
are subject to permanent change. All these changes take place in a 
specific direction, which means that they constitute a process of de­
velopment; specific wholes combine into more complex systems, and 
these systems acquire new properties that they did not have before.
In his approach to the system, Lange seeks to overcome mechan- 
icism and ‘metaphysical finalism’. By the latter he means any system of 
thought requiring a reference to the substance—such as the life force, 
elan vital, the soul, or the spirit of a nation or of an epoch—assumed 
decisive for the emergence of the wholes with their new properties. 
Mechanistic approaches also fail to explain this emergence, as they 
are based on the belief that a whole is a simple sum of all its parts. Put 
simply, if mechanism misidentifies the wholes with their properties, fi- 
nalism tends to explain them by referring to entities whose existence 
cannot be empirically proved. By challenging these two explanations, 
Lange’s economic reinterpretation of cybernetics intended to enable 
an understanding of the whole in light of the process of dialectical de­
velopment. It was also meant to resituate dialectical materialism and 
to provide what was known as the scientific socialism of Marx and En­
gels with an up-to-date scientific foundation stemming from statistics 
and mathematical economics, but accompanied by a deeper historical 
and socio-philosophical reflection that was directly related to the place 
where he chose to live.
From a ‘philosophy of contemporary existence’ 
to a theory of everything
The first issue of the quarterly Postgpy cybernetyki (‘Progress in cy­
bernetics’, published by the Polish Cybernetics Society (PCS) from 1978 
to 1993), still had much to do with the tension between the cybernet­
ic understandings of the system and the socialist reality, even though 
the latter was no longer that of the 1960s, when the PCS was founded. 
Under the rule of Edward Gierek, the First Secretary and the leader of 
the Polish People’ Republic between 1970 and 1980, known for opening 
the country to new Western ideas and loosening censorship, Poland 
underwent massive industrialization, which substantially improved liv­
ing and working conditions. The title of the quarterly was a verbatim 

MICHAL KRZYKAWSKI
161
repetition of the Proceedings of the First International Congress of Cy­
bernetics published in 1969 in London.11
11 John Rose, the editor of this peculiar publication admits that some ‘some­
what fatuous contributions were included in order to bring to the surface certain 
undesirable accretions’. He adds that ‘a mature science has to live and cope with 
those who are trying to jump on the bandwagon and use it as a vehicle for their 
exuberant claims’. Quoted in Young, ‘Machine Intelligence’, 261.
12 
Edward Kowalczyk, ‘Cybernetyka filozofig wspolczesnej egzystencji’
(Cybernetics as a philosophy of contemporary existence), Post$py cybernetyki 
(Progress in cybernetics) 1 (1978): 7-10. All translations from Polish are my own.
13 Ibid., 6.
14 
This title directly refers to the paper delivered by Louis Challier at the pre­
viously mentioned congress of cybernetics; Challier described cybernetics as the 
‘science of sciences and the safeguard of men’. Cited in John F. Young, ‘Machine 
Intelligence’, Nature 230 (26 March 1971): 261.
The aim of the quarterly was ‘to publish the results of theoret­
ical research, experimental research and theoretico-experimental 
research in the field of technological, biological, medical and social 
cybernetics’.11
 12 The editorial committee also welcomed ‘articles includ­
ing thorough analyses related to issues of control, coordination and 
management in physical, biological, medical, economic, sociological 
and pedagogical processes’.13 Topics could be suggested either by the 
editorial committee or by the state institutions and authorities.
In the opening article, titled ‘Cybernetics as a Philosophy of Con­
temporary Existence’,14 the minister of communication, Edward Kow­
alczyk, said:
If anyone reflects on the development of human living 
conditions on earth, they must notice that, with the 
growing number of the world’s inhabitants, with the 
increase in social consciousness and with the extended 
impact of economic activity on the natural environment, 
there is an urgent need to look at the ensemble of rela­
tions taking place in human society at a general scale.
The need to ensure equal conditions for social existence, 
to use natural resources in a more rational way, to stop 
the process of environmental degradation and to en­
noble interpersonal relations at various scales of this 
problem requires methods of thinking and acting that 
combine so-called common sense, which is inherent to 

162
CYBERNETICS, COMMUNISM, AND ROMANTICISM
human beings, with scientific problem solving and scien­
tific tasks. Such methods are offered by cybernetics.15
15 
Kowalczyk, Progress in Cybernetics, 7.
16 
Ibid., 8.
17 Marian Mazur, Cybernetyczna teoria ukladowsamodzielnych (A Cybernetic 
theory of autonomous systems), (Warsaw: PWN, 1966).
18 Marian Mazur, Cybernetyka i character (Cybernetics and character), (Warsaw: 
PWN, 1976).
Kowalczyk’s call for rethinking the socialist economy can be interpret­
ed as a grave concern about the large-scale ecological devastation 
caused by state socialist productivism (which, incidentally, did not 
differ much from its capitalist counterpart, criticized by the degrowth 
movement under the name of ‘growthism’ today), if not as a veiled cri­
tique of the system prioritizing the increase in steel and coal produc­
tion with no attention for what is defined today as ‘external cost’.
Some context is needed to understand the high hopes, at the 
time, for cybernetics, as 'the new science', to offer scientific problem 
solving methods with a view to overcoming this productivist fever and 
the crudeness of communist thinking. Cybernetics was expected to 
produce a change in scientific practices, understood not only as the 
production of knowledge, but also as ‘an immediate productive force’, 
especially through a better understanding of nature and a new under­
standing of the system.16
In a way, cybernetics could be read as a new kind of humanism, 
which seemed to challenge Marx’s theory of the mode of produc- 
tion—which was considered the key factor in creating social relations 
and raising social consciousness, and the central idea to his human­
ism. The truth, however, is that by the end of the 1970s, cybernetics 
was already becoming a theory of everything and losing its theoreti­
cal relevance. There was a growing tendency to take cybernetics for 
the new philosophy that could describe all social, cultural, biological 
and psychological phenomena by means of simple models. Consid­
er Marian Mazur, specialized in electrothermics, and the author of a 
theory of autonomous systems and of the qualitative theory of infor- 
mation,17 who tried to explain the functioning of the psyche through a 
cybernetic typology of what he called ‘the character’ (1976).18 Under the 
pretext that it is possible to ‘organize’ human characters according to 

MICHAL KRZYKAWSKI
163
their ‘parameters’, Mazur defined cybernetics as ‘a psychology for the 
twenty-first century’. Another example is Jan Tr^bka, a neurologist who 
developed an original neuropsychiatric explanation of consciousness 
through cybernetics but ended up combining neurocybernetics, gno­
sis, and chaos theory.19
19 Jan Tr^bka, Mozg a swiadomosc (The Brain and consciousness) (Krakow- 
Wroclaw: Wydawnictwo Literackie, 1983).
20 As Andre Gorz famously put it after the fall of the Berlin Wall, commonly 
associated with the fall of the Eastern bloc, ‘as a system, socialism is dead. As 
a movement and an organized political force, it is on its last legs. All the goals it 
once proclaimed are out of date. The social forces which bore it along are disap­
pearing’. Gorz, Capitalism, Socialism, Ecology, trans. Chris Turner (London: Verso 
Books, 2012), 6.
21 Piotr Sienkiewicz and Jerzy S. Nowak, ‘Szescdziesi^t lat cybernetyki i 
polskiej informatyki’ (Sixty years of cybernetics and polish computer science), 
Zeszyty Naukowe Warszawskiej Wyzszej SzkotyInformatyki 3, no. 3 (2009): 13.
All in all, instead of becoming ‘a philosophy of contemporary exis­
tence’ for a better organized socialist world, cybernetics got absorbed 
by automatic control and robotics on the one hand and by informatics 
on the other, long before the fall of socialism, as a system but also as 
a political force.20 Contemporary complex systems and their industrial 
applications largely correspond to the theoretical assumptions of the 
first cybernetics, although their architects might be unfamiliar with 
the history of cybernetics and its promises, which had spread over the 
world and taken quite unexpected local forms.
It can therefore be said that the reception of cybernetics in Po­
land took place in two fields independent of each other; in what is now 
referred to as STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathemat­
ics), where cybernetic methods were successfully introduced, and 
in the field of SHS (social and human sciences), where cybernetics 
sometimes inspired too-far reaching extrapolations under the pretext 
of seeking to overcome the specialization of science and to unify scien­
tific methods. Commenting on these extrapolations, Sienkiewicz and 
Nowak point to ‘the glaring examples of ‘cybernetization’ of the human 
and social sciences’.21 Nevertheless, they suggest that the fascination 
about cybernetics might ultimately have triggered the development of 
many disciplines in the field of mathematics and engineering.

164
CYBERNETICS, COMMUNISM, AND ROMANTICISM
From the pre-cybernetic era to 
contemporary digital automata and beyond
Is there anything we can learn from the Polish (mis)understandings of 
cybernetics when addressing the question as formulated by Yuk Hui: 
How might the cybernetic movement contribute ‘to the new form of 
thinking that is urgently needed to understand and reorient our digital 
earth’? Bronislaw Trentowski, the Polish romantic and liberal philoso­
pher who introduced the word cybernetics into the Polish language in 
1843, and who developed a pre-cybernetic approach to cybernetics, 
can help with this task.
Born in 1809, Trentowski is known for his attempt to build a ‘na­
tional philosophy’. He subscribes to the Polish messianist movement 
and to the struggle for the national independence from the period when 
the Polish territory was split between Prussia, the Habsburg monarchy 
and Russia.22 Trentowski developed his messianist national philoso­
phy through a contentious dialogue with German idealism, especially 
through a critical engagement with Hegel’s speculative philosophy. He 
introduced the term cybernetyka (‘cybernetics’ in Polish) in the book 
with the translated title, The relation of philosophy to cybernetics as the 
art of governing a nation. In this book cybernetics is defined as ‘a diffi­
cult art of governing the nation’ and is intimately bound to philosophy.23 
Philosophy, Trentowski says, ‘relates to cybernetics in the field of poli­
tics as much as philosophy relates to theology in the field of religion’.24 
Just like religion is the source for philosophy and theology, ‘politics is 
the always fresh source for philosophy and cybernetics’.25
22 
See the section ‘Polish Messianism’ in the Wikipedia entry
‘History of philosophy in Poland’, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ 
History_of_philosophy_in_Poland#Polish_Messianism.
23 
Bronislaw Trentowski, Stosunekpolitykido cybernetyki, czylisztukirzqdze-
nia narodem (The relation of philosophy to cybernetics as the art of governing a 
nation) (Poznan: Ksi^garnia Jana Konstantego Zupahskiego, 1843), 9, https://kpbc. 
umk.pl/dlibra/doccontent?id=258132.
24 
Ibid., 194.
25 
Ibid., 12.
Trentowski borrowed the term cybernetyka from French physicist 
Andre-Marie Ampere, recognized as the founder of electro-dynamics, 
who used the neologism cybernetique (‘cybernetics’ in French) in 1834 
in his classification of the sciences. By cybernetics, Ampere meant the 
art of government; he considered cybernetics as a part of his political 

MICHAL KRZYKAWSKI
165
theory. When Wiener used the term cybernetics in 1948, with reference 
to its Latin form, gubernator (the root of the English word ‘governor’)— 
he was unaware of the fact that it had been already used in that con- 
text.26 In The Human Use of Human Beings, he says: ‘I found later that 
the word had already been used by Ampere with reference to political 
science, and had been introduced in another context by a Polish scien­
tist, both uses dating from the earlier part of the nineteenth century’.27
26 
Flo Conway and Jim Siegelman, Dark Hero of the Information Age: In Search
of Norbert Wiener, the Father of Cybernetics (New York: Basic Books, 2005), 
e-book.
27 
Norbert Wiener, The Human Use of Human Beings: Cybernetics and Society
(London: Free Association Books, 1989), 15.
28 Distinguishing between tyranny, aristocracy, a republic and constitutional 
monarchy in relation to the question of political freedom, Trentowski advocates for 
the constitutional monarchy, where the ruler is not a tyrant but respects the people and 
is able to govern them, which amounts to dealing with all parties disputing each other.
Trentowski takes over Ampere’s idea that cybernetics is to a na­
tion what strategy is to an army, and extends this thought within his 
own philosophical project. He builds his political philosophy on the dis­
tinction between radicalism and historicism. The radical stance trans­
lates into revolutionary methods and tends towards the deification of 
the human self in a world where human institutions—such as state, 
language, and religion—are subject to permanent change. By contrast, 
the historicist stance is based on belonging to a tradition; it rejects 
revolution and comes from the idea of a transcendent god.
Trentowski’s reasoning is dialectical. He argues that there is 
a constant contradiction between these two stances and that their 
tension makes constant progress possible. Put simply, radicalism, as 
a thesis, represents a tendency towards the future and fosters new 
ideas, whereas historicism, as an antithesis, is the conservative force 
that counters the change. If historicism compels radicalism to give up 
new ideas that go too far, radicalism remains progressive because it 
compels historicism to give up the most obsolete ideas. Trentowski 
considers political philosophy in terms of a synthesis. The function of 
political philosophy would be to develop a critical look at the unilater­
alism related both to radicalism and historicism.
Neither a radicalist nor a historicist, Trentowski seems to suggest 
that it is necessary to manoeuvre between these two extremities de­
pending upon a given situation.28 It is precisely in this context that he 
introduces the term cybernetics, and discusses the relation between 

166
CYBERNETICS, COMMUNISM, AND ROMANTICISM
cybernetics and philosophy. He uses the term ‘cybernet’, that is, ‘a good 
ruler’. In his view, cybernetics refers to a practical action depending 
upon circumstances, whereas philosophy offers general principles. If 
philosophy tends to work out a synthesis on a theoretical and concep­
tual level—taking into account radicalism and historicism—cybernetics 
appears as something more pragmatic; it is supposed to manoeuvre 
within these two extremities as pertaining to real political conflicts. 
Because human reality is subject to perpetual change and constantly 
forms itself, to govern a nation means to act in a dynamic situation. 
This is why philosophy is necessary, Trentowski seems to suggest, as 
it offers concepts that make it possible to understand these dynamics. 
Discussing the function of cybernetics in relation to philosophy, Tren- 
towski defines the cybernet as a ‘birth attendant’; cybernetics assists 
the formation of the nation or, in more general terms, the formation 
of humanity. In a nutshell, cybernetics pragmatically helps to bring 
the best philosophical ideas to the political fore, whereas philosophy 
shows the space of possibilities and paves the way towards the future. 
This is not to say that philosophy prevails over cybernetics, because 
cybernetics is responsible for making real decisions here and now and, 
in this respect, is even more important than philosophy. However, it is 
still the task of philosophy to show the best way toward the future.
In this respect, Trentowski’s conservative take on dialectics might 
be refreshing today, if we only put aside his penchant for constitutional 
monarchy, which does not seem to have much relevance today. His 
pre-cybernetic approach to cybernetics encourages us to reassess 
the political significance of cybernetics after cybernetics, when ‘to 
govern’ and ‘to control’ become interchangeable in a social reality po­
tently shaped by digital automata (large language models, common­
ly referred to as artificial intelligence, or AI). These automata are no 
longer cybernetic, as they are based on the mechanisms of learning, 
rather than on the mechanisms of self-regulation. If Trentowski is right 
in saying that politics is ‘the always fresh source’29 for philosophy and 
cybernetics (as a difficult art of governing a nation), this means that 
the question about philosophy after artificial intelligence as a technol­
ogy simulating cognitive processes will not let us progress far, until we 
reclaim the positive meaning of self-governance in relation to nations, 
29 Trentowski, Stosunek polityki, 12.

MICHAL KRZYKAWSKI
167
territories, regions, groups and individuals, challenging the idea of ‘au­
tonomous’ technology.
We lose the ability to think and act on our own if we do not know 
how to govern ourselves, and we lose this knowledge not because dig­
ital automata count much faster than we do, but because we do not 
know the rules of their algorithms as real autonomous and embodied 
subjects, but rather as abstract ‘minds’ considered the property of the 
physical wired brain processing information. If we selectively read 
Trentowski from the vantage point of the era of AI, whose builders and 
ideologues tell us that it is ‘unstoppable’,30 the relation of philosophy to 
cybernetics would mean this: It is the task of philosophy to address the 
question of the subtle yet fundamentally political difference between 
automation and autonomy; it belongs to cybernetics to anticipate the 
moment when learning digital automata become ungovernable and to 
reverse or stop their development, instead of falling prey to the ‘this is 
unstoppable’ ideology.
30 Sam Altman, ‘Moore’s Law for Everything’, 16 March 2020, https://moores. 
samaltman.com/.
31 Doug Hill, ‘Foreword’, in Norbert Wiener, Cybernetics or Control and 
Communication in the Animal and the Machine (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2019), x.
32 Wiener, Cybernetics, 40.
‘I am compelled to say that it is a very slight hope’, Norbert Wie­
ner said, responding to a common belief shared by his followers, who 
hoped that cybernetics was the way to better understand humans and 
society.31 ‘The devaluation of the human brain’ bound to the industrial 
revolution has been going beyond the limits of what Wiener perhaps 
could imagine.32 What is at stake here, however, is not the limits of 
imagination, but the condition of possibility of political life. This is why 
it is useful to step back from the current computational mania and to 
revisit the political meaning of cybernetics in the pre-cybernetic era, 
with a view to developing a political philosophy of the learning post-cy­
bernetic digital automata, able to address the questions that too many 
contemporary AI philosophers do not touch with a ten-foot pole.
In this respect, Oskar Lange’s forgotten attempt to put cybernet­
ics and dialectical materialism together, still has a potential to highlight 
the political meaning of cybernetics. The intention is not to go back to 
the old discussion between the proponents of the planned economy 
and the market system, but rather, to question the limit beyond which 

168
CYBERNETICS, COMMUNISM, AND ROMANTICISM
computational technology becomes ungovernable. As Gotthard Gun­
ther pointed out: ‘It is true that dialectic materialism has been used as a 
tool by one of the most powerful political movements in history but it is 
ludicrous to believe that it has been invented only to serve extraneous 
economic or social force’.33 Socialist scientists and philosophers did 
not try to show that cybernetics complies with dialectical materialism 
only because ideological pressure made them do so. Even though this 
ideological pressure did exist, and in spite of Moscow’s political shad­
ow, they knew that the basic assumptions of dialectical materialism, 
which deals with non-formal problems, cannot be dismissed by any 
scientific statement coming from the formal sciences. This is because 
the theory of dialectics, as Gunther has it, ‘is [of] a higher logical order 
than any formal-mathematical logic a particular scientific discipline 
may apply’.34 We should therefore ask, with a view to a cybernetics for 
the twenty-first century, how a reconsideration of the theory of dialec­
tics might overcome the classic two-valued logic in logical positivism, 
which destroys the very notion of subjectivity and can pose a threat to 
human autonomy when applied to learning digital automata.
33 Gunther, ‘Cybernetics and Dialectic Materialism’.
34 Ibid.
Note
This project has received funding from the European Commission as 
part of the H2020 MSCA-RISE programme under grant agreement No. 
101007915. This project has received funding from the Polish state bud­
get under the program ‘International Co-Financed Projects’.

MICHAL KRZYKAWSKI
169
Reference
Altman, Sam. ‘Moore’s Law for Everything’. On Sam Altman’s website. 16 
March 2020. https://moores.samaltman.com/.
Boguslawski Stanislaw, Henryk Greniewski and Jerzy Szapiro ‘Dialogi 
o cybernetyce’ (Dialogues on cybernetics). Mysl filozoficzna 
(Philosophical thought) 4 (1954): 158-212.
Gerovitch, Slava. From Newspeak to Cyberspeak: A History of Soviet 
Cybernetics. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2002.
Conway, Flo and Jim Siegelman. Dark Hero of the Information Age: In 
Search of Norbert Wiener, the Father of Cybernetics. New York: 
Basic Books, 2005.
Gorz, Andre. Capitalism, Socialism, Ecology. Translated by Chris Turner. 
London: Verso Books, 2012.
Gunther, Gotthard. ‘Cybernetics and the Dialectic Materialism of Marx 
and Lenin’. In Computing in Russia: The History of Computer Devices 
and Information Technology Revealed, edited by Georg Trogemann, 
Alexander Y. Nitussov and Wolfgang Ernst. Braunschweig: Vieweg 
Verlag, 2001.
Hill, Doug. ‘Foreword’, pp. ix-xix. In Norbert Wiener, Cybernetics 
or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine. 
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2019.
Kowalczyk, Edward. ‘Cybernetyka filozofig wspolczesnej egzystencji’ 
(Cybernetics as a philosophy of contemporary existence). Post$py 
cybernetyki (Progress in cybernetics) 1 (1978): 7-10.
Lange, Oskar. Introduction to Economic Cybernetics. Translated by Jozef 
Stadler. Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1970.
Lem, Stanislaw. Summa Technologiae. Translated by Joanna Zylinska 
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2013.
Mazur, Marian. Cybernetyczna teoria ukiadowsamodzielnych (A cyber­
netic theory of autonomous systems). Warsaw: Pahstwowy Instytut 
Wydawniczy, 1966.
———. Cybernetyka a charakter (Cybernetics and character). Warsaw: 
Pahstwowy Instytut Wydawniczy, 1976.
Pasquinelli, Matteo. ‘How to Make a Class: Hayek’s Neoliberalism 
and the Origins of Connectionism’. Qui parle 30, no. 1 (2021). doi 
10.1215/10418385-8955836.

170
CYBERNETICS, COMMUNISM, AND ROMANTICISM
Peters, Benjamin. How Not to Network a Nation: The Uneasy History of 
the Soviet Internet. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2016.
Rose, John, ed. Proceedings of the First International Congress of 
Cybernetics. London: Gordon & Breach, 1969.
Sienkiewicz, Piotr, and Jerzy S. Nowak. ‘Szescdziesi^t lat cybernetyki i 
polskiej informatyki’ (Sixty years of cybernetics and polish computer 
science). Zeszyty Nauko we Warsza wskiej Wyzszej Szkoiy In forma tyki 
(Scientific Notebooks of Warsaw School of Computer Science) 3, no. 
3 (2009): 9-24.
Supiot, Alain. The Spirit of Philadelphia: Social Justice Against the Total 
Market. Translated by Saskia Brown. London: Verso, 2012.
Trentowski, Bronislaw. Stosunekpolitykido cybernetyki, czylisztuki 
rzqdzenia narodem (The relation of philosophy to cybernet­
ics as the art of governing a nation). Poznan: Ksi^garnia Jana 
Konstantego Zupanskiego, 1843. https://kpbc.umk.pl/dlibra/doccon- 
tent?id=258132.
Tr^bka, Jan. Mozg a swiadomosc (Brain and consciousness). Krakow: 
Wydawnictwo Literackie, 1983.
Wiener, Norbert. Cybernetics or Control and Communication in the 
Animal and the Machine. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2019.
———. The Human Use of Human Beings: Cybernetics and Society. 
London: Free Association Books, 1989.
Young, John F. ‘Machine Intelligence’. Nature 230 (16 March 1971): 260-61.
Zylinska, Joanna. ‘Translator’s Introduction’, pp. xi-xxi. In Stanislaw Lem, 
Summa Technologiae. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2013.

171
A Brief History of
Chinese Cybernetics
Dylan Levi King
To open a Chinese-language work on urban management or artifi­
cial-intelligence-augmented planning is to encounter a cybernetic 
world that is both familiar and unfamiliar. The transliterated names 
of American and European theorists and thinkers will soon be­
come recognizable, but they will sit alongside names—Chinese, of 
course, but also foreign figures—mostly unknown outside of the Chi­
nese-speaking world, as well as concepts that do not have an obvious 
correlative in translation. This world is not often represented in En­
glish-language accounts of cybernetics.
Beginning from the foundation of the American scientists and 
mathematicians who were involved in the wartime establishment and 
post-war promotion of the field,1 and continuing through the transdis- 
ciplinary fragmentation of the 1960s and 1970s, popular histories of 
cybernetics may have room for experiments beyond the industrialized 
West, but, despite Chinese engagement with cybernetics in theory and 
practice since the 1950s, these works do not offer serious treatments 
of Chinese cybernetics.2 Chinese experiments with and applications 
of cybernetics seem to represent a scholarly lacuna in English. Since 
cybernetics has been embedded so deeply in Chinese popular, sci­
entific, and political thought, scholarly work on other topics has
1 
Yehuda Rav, ‘Perspectives on the History of the Cybernetics Movement: 
The Path to Current Research Through the Contributions of Norbert Wiener, 
Warren McCulloch, and John von Neumann’. Cybernetics and Systems 33, no. 8 
(2002): 779-804, is typical of histories of the field in starting with Norbert Wiener 
(1894-1964), since he coined the term ‘cybernetics’. The other key figures are
Warren McCulloch (1898-1969), pioneer of neural modeling, mathematician John von
Neumann (1903-1957), and Claude Shannon (1916-2001), the theorist who gave us 
what we now call information theory (he is kept out of the title of the article but given 
equal standing in the text).
2 
Ronald R. Kline’s The Cybernetics Moment, or Why We Call Our Age the 
Information Age (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2017), for example, 
mentions cybernetic experiments in the Soviet Union and Chile, but China is only 
referred to in passing as a Cold War rival of the United States. The same is true 
for Thomas Rid’s Rise of the Machines: A Cybernetic History. (New York: W.W.
Norton & Company, 2017). These are popular works on the subject, not necessarily 
pitched at an academic readership, but there is little scholarly work to fill the gap. 

172
A BRIEF HISTORY OF CHINESE CYBERNETICS
touched on the expanded uses of control theory,3 but there are few 
accounts of Chinese cybernetics that spread across disciplines and 
time periods.4
3 I am thinking here of books by Susan Greenhalgh and Xiao Liu. In Just
One Child: Science and Policy in Deng’s China (Berkeley: University of California
Press: 2008), Greenhalgh introduces the idea of ‘sinified cybernetics’, which I 
am expanding on here, in the book’s chapter on missile scientist and population 
control planner Song Jian. Xiao Liu’s Information Fantasies: Precarious Mediation 
in Postsocialist China (Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press, 2019) covers at 
length the adoption of information theory in the culture fever ‘wenhuare’ of the 1980s.
4 
At present, the most ambitious and focused account of Chinese cyber­
netics can be found in Wang Hongzhe and Jiang Yuan, ‘Seeking for a Cybernetic 
Socialism: Qian Xuesen and the Transformation of Information Politics in Socialist 
China’, CAC Editorial 1 (2019): 127-53.
This begs the question: Is there something called ‘Chinese cy­
bernetics’, a discrete technical practice, or should we understand it as 
merely a department of Western cybernetic thought? To make a pitch 
based solely on novel terminology and unfamiliar thinkers will not be 
enough to convince either the sceptic or those who might be open to 
considering the uniqueness of Chinese cybernetics. This essay is, rath­
er than a definitive answer to the question, simply an invitation to go 
a few layers deeper; to scan through the recent history of cybernetic 
thought and consider the implications of its role in Chinese politics and 
culture (and also to think about the influence of Chinese politics and 
culture on cybernetic thought).
My account of Chinese cybernetics begins in familiar territory. 
The figure of Qian Xuesen, who laboured alongside his fellow cyber­
neticists in the American defence establishment, will be our guide. He 
will take us from early cybernetic experiments in rocket guidance and 
firing controls, back to China, where his involvement in the state scien­
tific apparatus and close contact with the leadership of the Communist 
Party of China reveals the cybernetic basis of events as diverse as the 
Great Leap Forward, the management of marketization during the Re­
form and Opening, the 1983 Strike Hard Campaign, and the introduc­
tion of restrictive family planning policy.
Unwrapping Qian’s theoretical contributions to cybernetics in 
the form of systems engineering, metasynthetic wisdom, and open, 
complex, giant systems, provides an entry point to unfold what seems 
to be a distinctly Chinese form of cybernetic thought and concep­
tion of cybernetics. Qian’s detour into parapsychology is sometimes 
dropped from other accounts of his life, perhaps out of a sense of 

DYLAN LEVI KING
173
embarrassment, but it is included here as it provides important insights 
in to his later work. The account closes with the state’s response to 
the COVID-19 pandemic, which offers an opportunity to see Chinese 
cybernetics in an advanced state. It also provides an opening to evalu­
ate the successes and failures of Chinese cybernetics since the 1950s.
A Chinese Norbert Wiener?
Cybernetics in China does not begin or end with Qian Xuesen. There is 
a prehistory, of course, that includes Li Yurong, the brilliant mathema­
ticians of Tsinghua, who welcomed Norbert Wiener to the country in 
1936;5one could even count the engineers of clockwork devices in pre­
modern China as part of this history. Qian, however, is a key figure, given 
that he was present at the wartime moment in American cybernetics and 
carried his version of that particular technical practice back to China.
5 Wei Hongsen, ‘Norbert Wiener at Qinghua University’, in Chinese Studies in 
the History and Philosophy of Science and Technology, ed. Dainian Fan and Robert 
S. Cohen (Dordrecht: Springer, 2013), 447-51.
6 
Iris Chang, Thread of the Silkworm (New York: Basic Books, 1999), 112.
Born in 1911, Qian was the son of a provincial official who took up 
a post in the government of the Republic of China. Qian went to the 
capital’s top schools. His first love was locomotives, followed by an 
interest in aeroplanes. In 1935 he received a Boxer Indemnity Scholar­
ship funded by the US government, and jumped at the chance to study 
aeronautical engineering. After a brief stint at MIT, he left for the West 
Coast to join Caltech’s Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory and work 
under theoretician Theodore von Karman.
Those who recall their time with Qian in Pasadena and Cambridge 
describe him as a genius. He rubbed shoulders with luminaries like Jack 
Parsons, who would fall to the occult, and Frank Malina, who would be 
lured away by utopian communism. Qian, meanwhile, cut a conven­
tional figure. He held himself aloof from worldly affairs. He was an en­
gineer; he built what he was asked to build, without too much concern 
for what uses it might be put to. He worked as diligently for Franklin 
Roosevelt and Harry Truman as he did—once the Americans ejected 
him—for Mao Zedong and Deng Xiaoping. In 1945, he met Wernher von 
Braun in Bavaria; they spoke about wind tunnels.6 The only reason the 
US generals trusted a ‘resident alien’ to come along on the Nazi debrief 

174
A BRIEF HISTORY OF CHINESE CYBERNETICS
was that he was disinterested, but not disloyal. In his five years working 
with the highest levels of military clearance, there was never even a 
rumour of espionage.
In 1949, the FBI checked up on Qian. Their job was to smear him as 
a communist, but they could not find much. With Caltech professors, 
finding a cause was usually easy enough; attendance at the wrong 
Young Democrats function or a favourable opinion of Stalin expressed 
to a friend would suffice. Qian, though, spent his free time at home 
with his wife and young son, and was not known for sharing political 
remarks of any sort. Caltech chemist Gustav Albrecht admitted in an FBI 
interview that he tried to sell his Chinese colleague on the Soviet worker’s 
utopia, but recalled Qian reacting with a ‘typical aloof oriental attitude’.7
Federal Bureau of Investigation, ‘Tsien Hsue-Shen’ FOIPA No. 1126972-000, 26.
His work with the government was itself a twist of fate. Within a 
year of Qian’s arrival, late in 1936, the military and their contractors 
turned up at Caltech, answering the call to discreetly ensure the coun­
try was on a par with the German military. When war was declared, 
funding poured into Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory at the Cali­
fornia Institute of Technology (GALCIT) from the military, and his work 
was deemed indispensable to the American war effort. Qian found him­
self among the scientists and strategists who had, in the final years 
of the war, worked on crafting military-industrial policy for future con­
flicts. He worked with von Karman on an ambitious classified report 
for the Army Air Forces Scientific Advisory Group; titled Toward New 
Horizons, it extrapolated a radical vision of what aerial warfare might 
look like decades in the future. He had access to classified defence 
projects, a seat on the US Air Force Scientific Advisory Board, and a 
gig consulting on the Manhattan Project.
The agents tailing Qian as he meandered around Pasadena in his 
Buick could not have known much about this classified work. Their job 
was to rebalance the post-war political order; Hoover and McCarthy 
had begun rooting out suspected communists and their sympathizers. 
At Caltech, the investigation focused on Sidney Weinbaum, a member 
of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. A Ukrainian Jew who had fled the Bol­
sheviks in the 1920s, Weinbaum was accused of having concealed his 
membership of the Communist Party of the United States (CPUSA) to 
receive clearance for wartime defence contracts. Weinbaum and Frank 
Malina were comrades, and it was Malina who had introduced Qian 
7

DYLAN LEVI KING
175
to Weinbaum.8 It was the sort of connection McCarthy’s agents were 
trained to sniff out.
8 
Chang, Silkworm, 82.
9 
While this term, ‘systems engineering’, has some overlap with the engineer­
ing management field of systems engineering, it has come to mean something 
closer to what is referred to in English as ‘systems cybernetics’, which refers to 
the marriage of control theory, second-order cybernetics, systems theory, and 
information theory. In Angela Xiao Wu’s look at communication theory in China 
(‘Journalism via Systems Cybernetics, The Birth of the Chinese Communication 
Discipline and Post-Mao Press Reforms’, History of Media Studies 2 (2022)), she 
suggests that the terms ‘systems engineering’ and ‘systems cybernetics’ can be 
used interchangeably.
After the FBI knocked on his door in the summer of 1950, Qian 
tendered his resignation to Caltech and made ready to return to China. 
Even his FBI files detailed that he was never a fellow traveller, but he 
could predict the treatment he would receive regardless. When the Im­
migration and Naturalization Service got wind that Qian was planning 
to leave, they detained him based on testimony from informants that he 
had joined CPUSA in 1938. Qian and his family were kept in legal limbo 
for five years. The Americans feared that Qian would carry his knowledge 
of ballistic missiles offto China or the Soviet Union, so they wanted to 
put him on ice until his knowledge became obsolete. But his knowledge 
of American defence technology—probably less sophisticated than that 
already possessed by the Soviet's People's Commissariat for Internal 
Affairs (NKVD)—was secondary to his abilities. During the years of qua- 
si-house arrest, he began a dive into the novel field that would undergird 
his work in decades to come: cybernetics.
He had first been exposed to Wiener’s theories of cybernetics 
in his aerospace work. It was how missiles were guided: a controller 
receives information about velocity and pitch, sends information to 
servomechanisms to make changes, and then receives updated in­
formation in a feedback loop. Engineering Cybernetics, a book Qian 
wrote during his detention and published in 1954, theorized control of 
complex and interrelated systems. His conception of engineering cy­
bernetics, or systems engineering (xitong gongcheng) as it came to be 
known, was not merely an application of cybernetics to engineering, 
but an engineering science that subsumed control theory altogether.9
In the end, his limbo was resolved when the Americans traded 
Qian in a prisoner exchange in late 1955. One of the greatest minds of 
the US defence establishment was swapped for eleven pilots captured 
by the People’s Liberation Army in Korea.

176
A BRIEF HISTORY OF CHINESE CYBERNETICS
Advising a nuclear China and the Great Leap Forward
Qian Xuesen's return to China was as unwittingly well-timed as his arrival 
at Caltech. The ideological reform movement that targeted previous re­
turnees had died down. The Science Planning Commission of the State 
Council made use of his assistance in putting together a twelve-year 
programme for scientific development.10 11
 Qian knew that China’s priority 
had to be nuclear weapons and a ballistic missile to deliver them. He told 
the leadership that they needed two bombs—the atomic bomb and the 
intercontinental ballistic missile—and one satellite. The Soviet Union had 
supported the construction of a reactor in Gansu to enrich uranium, and 
eventually gave tentative support for a weapons programme. They passed 
along rockets, as well as plans for their first-generation RDS-1 nuclear war- 
head.11 Soviet engineers had used plans lifted by communist agents from 
the same Anglo-American programme that Qian had consulted on.12 So­
viet support soon dried up, however. The Second Taiwan Straits Crisis in 
1958 rattled Nikita Khrushchev. With visions of Chairman Mao sending a 
Tupolev bomber equipped with a doomsday device over Taipei and trig­
gering Armageddon, he ordered a pause on nuclear assistance.13
10 Qian was nominally in charge of aeronautical work at the Institute of 
Mechanics, but his advisory work took precedence. Many of Qian’s recommenda­
tions were contained in a text he submitted to the Science Planning Commission 
of the State Council, outlining proposals for building a national aerospace indus­
try, but he consulted on other aspects, as outlined in Zhang Jiuchun and Zhang 
Jiuchun, ‘Guihua kexue jishu, 1956-1957 nian kexue jishu fazhan yuanjing guihua de 
zhiding yu shishi’ (Planning science and technology: the formulation and imple­
mentation of the 1956-1957 long-range plan for scientific and technological devel­
opment), Zhongguo kexueyuan yuankan 34, no. 9 (2019): 983. His ideas for the plan 
went far beyond the modest suggestions of Chinese and Soviet experts. He had 
a direct hand in writing ballistic missiles, computers, semiconductor technology, 
wireless control systems, automation, and atomic energy into the plan; see He 
Zuoxiu, ‘Qian Xuesen yu shi’er nian kexue guihua’ (Qian Xuesen and the twelve- 
year programme for scientific development), Kexue shibao (Science times), 19 
September 2011.
11 Shen and Xia, ‘Between Aid and Restriction’, 97.
12 
Pondrom, The Soviet Atomic Project, 224.
13 Shen and Xia, ‘Between Aid and Restriction’, 110.
To take up the slack, the Chinese government sanctioned tri- 
al-and-error approaches. The efforts of Qian and his colleagues were 
successful; the first bomb went off in 1964. That was not yet enough. 
Two years later, they strapped a nuclear warhead to a Dongfeng-2 me­
dium-range ballistic missile, launched it from a pad in Inner Mongolia, 
and struck a test site in Xinjiang, a testament to the skill of Chinese 

DYLAN LEVI KING
177
control theorists.14 Qian’s role in helping China develop the bomb is 
still widely celebrated, but concurrent events would serve to give him 
a black mark in the history books.
14 Minor, ‘China’s Nuclear Development Program’, 573.
15 
For a discussion of those theories as deployed by Chinese agronomists,
see Zhu Xianling, Ding Zhaojun and Hu Huakai. ‘The Deep Plowing Movement of 
the “Great Leap Forward”’. In Agricultural Reform and Rural Transformation in 
China since 1949, edited by Thomas DuBois and Huaiyin Li, 74-100 (Leiden: Brill 
Academic, 2016)
16 
Qian Xuesen’s 1958 article for Science for the Masses (Kexue dazhong)
is titled ‘Looking ten years into the future—after the outline for development of 
agriculture is realized’ (‘Zhanwang shi nian—nongye fazhan gangyao shixian yihou’. 
The title of the article makes clear that these were predictions for the future, but 
this aspect was downplayed when it was reprinted.
The Great Leap Forward was underway at the same time. Today, it 
is not a period typically associated with scientific progress, but at the 
time, the Leap was tied to the technological Marxist utopianism of the 
Twelve-year Plan, faith in the potential of central industrial planning, 
and, through Qian, cybernetic projects. The Great Leap Forward was 
based on two central projects: mass mobilization for industrial prog­
ress, and optimization of agricultural production. Its industrialization 
efforts proceeded from the idea that bottlenecks could be eliminat­
ed with mobilization. The Great Leap Forward’s agricultural schemes, 
meanwhile, drew on scientific theories; Chinese agronomists devised 
‘deep ploughing’, while experiments in animal husbandry were under­
written by Trofim Lysenko’s genetic theories.15
In a 1958 article, Qian proposed a series of advances that he be­
lieved could be made in agriculture within the next ten years. The future, 
he said, would see artificial weather modification, industrial process­
es introduced to farming, biomass fuel solving the energy shortages, 
a healthier diet via advances in algae farming, and a systemic under­
standing of solar energy boosting agricultural productivity.16 The article 
closed with a diagram drawing on Qian’s ideas about systems engineer­
ing. He illustrated agriculture as a complex, holistic system, with solar 
energy connected through agriculture and industry to food, culture, and 
clothing. It is clear that Qian saw the Great Leap Forward as a potential 
revolution in the application of technology—including cybernetics and 
systems theory—to economic, social, and cultural problems.
The realities of the Great Leap Forward are now infamous. In the 
countryside, Lysenkoist schemes led to chronic soil infertility, and 
crops were occasionally left to rot on the field. Peasants starved on 

178
A BRIEF HISTORY OF CHINESE CYBERNETICS
collective farms. It is also obvious now that Qian, despite being occa­
sionally pressed into catching flies and digging latrines, did not have 
access to a full picture of what was going on. In Beijing, Qian instead 
watched computers arriving from the Soviet Union and Chinese sci­
entists taking their first steps toward reverse engineering these ma- 
chines.17 He even helped send mathematician Hua Luogeng to introduce 
critical path organizational techniques to factories and farms as part of 
a short-lived science of operations research and linear programming 
movement.18 The interest in and application of operations research, 
points to another technical characteristic of the Great Leap Forward 
period, which was seeking solutions to practical issues in agriculture, 
or other aspects of state planning, through the marshalling of statistics 
in new computer systems. While this fell by the wayside during the Cul­
tural Revolution,19 the approach—seeking statistical rationality and ratio- 
nales—appeared again in later systems engineering experiments.
17 Audette, ‘Computer Technology in Communist China, 1956-1965’, 657.
18 Fu, ‘Yunchouxue zai Zhongguo de zaoqi chuanbo (1956-1965)’ (The early 
spread of operations research in China (1956-1965)), 1. For a less technical dis­
cussion of operations research and linear programming during the Great Leap 
Forward, cf. Swetz, ‘The ‘Open-Door’ Policy and the Reform of Mathematics 
Education’, 463-65.
19 Hudecek, ‘Hua Loo-Keng’s Popularization of Mathematics and the Cultural 
Revolution’, 88.
20 Wang, ‘The Making of an Intellectual Hero’, 358. For Chinese-language dis­
cussion of the controversy that still surrounds Qian and the Great Leap Forward 
see ‘Qian Xuesen lao xiansheng ji buxu wenguoshifei, ye buxu daoqian’ (Respected
It was the start of a pattern that would play out repeatedly 
throughout Qian’s career in China; from his place at the centre, the 
political structure appeared to have a level of organization and capac­
ity that simply did not play out in the rest of the country. Moreover, 
the main force guiding how scientific proposals were interpreted and 
carried out was not the voice of Qian or his colleagues, nor sophis­
ticated cybernetic feedback loops, but Maoist political discipline. To 
Qian, the centralization of agricultural production did not mean cadres 
demanding unfeasible quotas, but a rational system to facilitate early 
experiments in fertilizer distribution, and in the use of advanced weath­
er forecasting to direct nationwide crop planting. Qian found himself 
dragged into the propaganda effort when major newspapers printed a 
misleading excerpt from an article he had written about ten-year pros­
pects for agricultural reform.20 They selectively clipped a line stating that 

DYLAN LEVI KING
179
productivity had not yet reached its possible ‘ideal’ peak and spun it into 
the ongoing campaign for cadres to be more ruthless in their enforce­
ment of The Leap policies. As a result, he came to be forever associated 
in the minds of some with the excesses of the period.21
Within a year, the policies of The Leap began to be ignored by 
commune cadres, and then officially reversed by the central author­
ities. The operations research specialists went back to work in the 
defence industry. Officials abandoned schemes for the centralization 
of agricultural planning and cybernetic management. Control over ag­
ricultural policy was ceded to the pragmatists led by Liu Shaoqi and 
Deng Xiaoping. Their agricultural policy was one of decentralization, 
with farmers allowed to do what they liked once state quotas were 
filled—a policy not suited to central planning, cybernetic or otherwise. 
But the pragmatist programme did not last much longer than The Leap. 
Within a year of Liu and Deng returning to prominence, the Socialist Ed­
ucation Movement kicked into high gear. The pragmatists were tarred 
as ‘right-deviationists’. Experimentation was out of fashion.
The importance of Qian to the defence programme and the sup­
port of Zhou Enlai sheltered him from the worst of it.22 He managed to 
dodge the fate of criticism, struggle sessions, and hard labour met by 
many of his colleagues during the Cultural Revolution. When an armed 
struggle broke out between technicians and scientists at the Seventh 
Ministry of Machine Building—which served as the headquarters of 
the ballistic missile programme—he had the luxury of staying home.23 
Publicly, he went silent in these years. Qian’s name appeared only spo­
radically in the newspapers, announcing political appointments or at­
tached to advances in the space programme. In his collected writings 
there is a gap between a 1965 article on space exploration and a for­
mulaic September 1976 memorial to Chairman Mao.24
teacher Qian Xuesen has no need to conceal his errors nor ask for forgiveness) 
and Li, ‘Shuohua shangren’ (Hurting people with his words by supporting the Great 
Leap Forward: another side of Qian Xuesen).
21 
Becker, Hungry Ghosts, 77.
22 I. Chang, Thread of the Silkworm, 248.
23 Hua, ‘Wenge zhong de Qian Xuesen’, 12.
24 The first was the 1965 article ‘Dui suowei “renlei lvxing de jixian” de yijian’ 
(Opinions on the so-called limits of human travel) in a popular scientific maga­
zine; the second was ‘Zhongshen bu wang Mao zhuxi de qinqie jiaohui’ (Always 
remember Chairman Mao’s instructions), which appeared in Renmin ribao 
(People’s daily).

180
A BRIEF HISTORY OF CHINESE CYBERNETICS
Cybernetics and opening up
By the time Qian Xuesen returned to the public eye in the late 1970s, 
he had turned again to the promise of cybernetics. State cybernetics 
projects had never been possible before. Political instability pre-empt­
ed any attempts to overcome China’s limited computing power; an­
tagonism toward any ideas associated with the Soviet Union, the 
standard-bearer for socialist cybernetics, made the idea politically 
dangerous. By 1978, though, Deng had tamed the chaos.
Qian went to work spreading the gospel of systems engineering. 
He worked with his protege, the Soviet-educated missile guidance ge­
nius Song Jian, on a revised edition of Engineering Cybernetics. The 
new release took into account developments since 1954 in information 
theory, control theory, systems theory, operations research, and man­
agement science. In a 1978 article for state media, Qian described sys­
tems engineering as the ‘technology of organizational management’ 
(zuzhi guanli de jishu).25 In Qian’s conception, systems engineering was 
a system that sat above applied science (jishu kexue), encompassing 
cybernetic theory, information theory, systems theory, and operational 
research, and foundational science (jichu kexue), built from systemat­
ics (xitongxue).26 He touted it as a holistic and comprehensive method 
to chart and optimize the relationship of elements within a complex 
system. He advocated for systems engineering to regulate nationwide 
industrial and agricultural production.
25 Qian, ‘Zuzhi guanli de jishu—xitong gongcheng’ (A technology for organiza­
tional management—systems engineering).
26 This was outlined in a 1986 speech for a seminar on systems engineering. 
See Qian, ‘Wo dui xitongxue de renshi licheng’ (My journey of understanding with 
systems theory).
27 M. Chang, ‘The Thought of Deng Xiaoping’, 381.
His timing was impeccable. Deng Xiaoping and his loyalists were 
already laying the groundwork for the theoretical modifications that 
would be the dawn of a new age of scientism. In March of 1978, Deng 
proclaimed in a speech for the National Conference on Science that 
science and technology were among the primary productive forces 
and that the goal of his socialism was to develop those forces.27 This 
was a major repudiation of the Maoist line upheld by the Gang of Four, 

DYLAN LEVI KING
181
which held that the development of productive forces—labour, the ma­
chinery of production, and human expertise—was not desirable with­
out changing the social structure created by production itself. If the 
economic relationships were undesirable, so was development itself, 
and any pragmatic argument in its favour made you a political enemy. 
The economic base of productive forces remained subordinate to the 
relations of production, which were themselves subordinate to the su­
perstructure, made up of politics, law, culture, and scientific thought.
Deng reversed this to say that the productive forces, including 
scientific inquiry and technological progress, were what drove society. 
The productive forces could be developed without concern about the 
relations of production, and scientific progress could be liberated from 
the constraints of ideology. A series of books and articles followed, 
with theorists advancing the idea that science and technology could be 
considered philosophical systems that did not need to be subordinated 
to political theory.28 Deng called on ‘mental workers who serve social­
ism’ to return to work and contribute to building the nation.29
28 The theoretical direction of these works often came from the Chinese 
Dialectics of Nature Research Association, proposed by Chinese Academy of 
Sciences members in 1977, then founded at the direction of Deng Xiaoping in 1978. A 
sinified dialectics of nature became the language with which to formulate a new phi­
losophy of technology. The group relaunched Newsletter of Dialectics of Nature (Ziran 
bianzhengfa tongxun) as a forum for philosophical discussion of science and technol­
ogy. The journal, which had not been published since 1966, did not abandon a Marxist 
materialist foundation but ventured a philosophy of technology that allowed, after 
Deng Xiaoping’s ruling of it as a primary productive force, independence from—or even 
supremacy over—politics. The Chinese Dialectics of Nature Research Association’s 
publication became a forum for thinkers like Yuan Deyu, who published his landmark 
‘Technology is an independent object of study’ (‘Jishu shi yige duli de yanjiu duixiang’) 
in the journal in 1982. Throughout the early 1980s, other journals, conferences, and 
research associations were launched to host discussions of the philosophy of technol­
ogy. Cybernetic thought infected many of these discussions, as Academy of Sciences 
members absorbed ideas from lectures given by Qian at conferences and the Central 
Party School between 1979 and 1982. For an overview of these works on the philos­
ophy of technology, see Gao and Zou, ‘Philosophy of Technology in China’. For Qian’s 
role in the immediate post-1978 writing on the philosophy of technology, see Wei, ‘Qian 
Xuesen goujian xitonglun de jiben shexiang’ (Qian Xuesen’s basic considerations in the 
construction of systems theory), and ‘Fenxiang yi Qianxuesen zhidao women jinxing 
xitonglun yanjiu de ruogan wangshi’ (Recalling some past events in Qian Xuesen’s 
leadership in conducting systems research).
29 Deng, ‘Zai quanguo kexue dahui kaimushi shang de jianghua’ (Speech at the 
opening ceremony of the National Conference on Science).

182
A BRIEF HISTORY OF CHINESE CYBERNETICS
Calculating the one-child policy
The depoliticized mood was right and Qian Xuesen had the theoretical 
tools, but finding the computers to run these projects on was still a prob­
lem. In his 1978 article, Qian concluded with a note that any attempts 
to actually implement systems engineering would require ‘incredibly 
powerful computers’. Only a handful of computers in the country fit that 
description; several dated Soviet mainframe computers and indige­
nous derivatives,30 IBM supercomputers illegally acquired by the Peo­
ple’s Bank of China,31 Control Data Corporation (CDC) mainframes pur­
chased in the late 1970s through European middle-men, and—after the 
Sino-American detente—supercomputers purchased directly from Uni­
versal Automatic Computer (UNIVAC) and IBM.32 The defence industry, 
and in particular the Seventh Ministry where ballistic missile guidance 
systems were designed, had both computers and cybernetics experts.
30 
Audette, ‘Computer Technology in Communist China, 1956-1965’, 660.
31 Wang Hongzhe, ‘Manchang de dianzi geming’ (The long electronic revolu­
tion: the computer and red China’s technological governance, 1955-1984), 288.
32 
Maier, ‘Computer Science and Information Technology in the People’s
Republic of China’, 374.
33 Greenhalgh, ‘Missile Science, Population Science’, 258.
The number of prominent Chinese cyberneticists had grown by 
this time; researchers like Song Jian, Chen Hanfu, Guan Zhaozhi, Yang 
Jiachi, Li Guangyuan, Han Jingqing, and Guo Lei had kept pace with 
their foreign peers. They had managed to come up with parallel ad­
vances in ballistic missile guidance and fire-control systems. But their 
research was restricted to the military and the space programme, while 
Soviet, American, and British cyberneticists had been called on to ap­
ply their ideas to economic planning and organizational management.
1978 not only brought and end to Cultural Revolution strife and 
Maoist political discipline, and a rehabilitation of scientific expertise, 
but also sharp cuts to the defence budget. This meant that defence sci­
entists suddenly had to justify their relevance. They found their cause 
in the prospect of cybernetics for planning social systems.
In late May of 1978, a delegation of Chinese cyberneticists—this in­
cluded Yang Jiachi, Chen Hanfu, and Song Jian—visited Helsinki for the 
Seventh Triennial World Congress of the International Federation of Au­
tomatic Control.33 It was the first time since 1964 that a Chinese delegation 
had attended, and they discovered what they had been missing out on.

DYLAN LEVI KING
183
At the congress Song Jian made the acquaintance of Huibert 
Kwakernaak, a Dutch cyberneticist that had fallen under the influence 
of the Club of Rome, a trans-national anti-natalist alliance founded by 
Italian industrialist Aurelio Peccei and British former Organisation for 
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) science policy advi­
sor Alexander King. Kwakernaak’s 1977 paper ‘Application of Control 
Theory to Population Policy’ makes reference to Edward Goldsmith’s 
population alarmist and anti-industrialization tract from 1972, A Blue­
print for Survival, as well as to Mankind at the Turning Point: The Second 
Report to The Club of Rome by Eduard Pestel and Mihajlo D. Mesa- 
rovic.34 Song Jian took note of the idea of combining cybernetics and 
population control.
34 Kwakernaak, ‘Application of Control Theory to Population Policy’, 359, 377.
35 For an account of Republican Era (1912-1949) family planning in theory 
and practice, see Mirela David, ‘Free Love, Marriage, and Eugenics’ and ‘Female 
Gynecologists and Their Birth Control Clinics’.
36 White, China’s Longest Campaign, 23.
37 Population control thinking among scientists and other members of the 
elite went into hibernation in Maoist China. Ma Yinchu, who attempted in 1957 to 
introduce what he called xin renkoulun (new population theory) was attacked as 
a Malthusian and supporter of eugenics. He was rehabilitated in 1979, just before 
family planning policies were introduced.
Three decades of communism in China had not extinguished the 
anti-natalist tendency that had consumed the elite since the New Cul­
ture Movement at the close of the Qing Dynasty (1644-1911).35 Pro-natal- 
ist policies only held sway for a few years in the 1950s before the party 
answered the calls of the All-China Women’s Federation to provide con- 
traception.36 After 1978, population panic came back in full force, with 
a number of journals and conferences launched.37 It seems clear from 
the way that Song Jian writes about population growth that he was sci­
entifically convinced, but also viscerally disgusted by surplus humanity:
In 1957, Mao Zedong said ironically: ‘In terms of child 
births, human beings seem to be least capable of con­
trolling themselves and there does exist a situation of 
anarchism...’ ... In 1964, seven years after Mao’s remarks, 
the second census showed an increase of another 100 
million, making a total of 700 million. Soon the ‘Cultural 
Revolution’ came. By 1969, even before people could 
extricate themselves from chaos and agony, an increase 

184
A BRIEF HISTORY OF CHINESE CYBERNETICS
of another 100 million people was recorded. By 1974, the 
total reached 900 million. During that time, people lived 
in confinement, yet they were completely free to indulge 
themselves in reproductive capability.38
38 
Song, ‘Systems Science and China’s Economic Reforms’, 2.
39 These are among the works mentioned in Song Jian’s early work on cyber­
netic population planning, including Song, ‘Cong xiandai kexue kan renkou wenti’, 
Song and Yu, ‘On stability theory of population systems and critical fertility rates’, 
and Song, Kong, and Yu, ‘Population System Control’.
40 Song, Kong, and Yu, ‘Population System Control’, 12.
41 Greenhalgh, ‘Missile Science, Population Science’, 243.
He recalls from his 1978 visit that he was ‘extremely excited’ and ‘de­
termined to try’ new cybernetic methods for population control. He 
did not have access to anything as sophisticated as the global simu­
lations commissioned from MIT for The Limits to Growth, so he began 
by plotting population growth on Seventh Ministry computers using 
data pulled from state databases. He gathered cybernetics experts 
from within the Seventh Ministry and the larger military-industrial eco­
system and began applying ideas from Qian’s systems engineering. 
Many of them came from the limited collection of cybernetic popula­
tion scholarship he brought back from Helsinki, which included Kwak- 
ernaak’s paper, as well as J. H. Pollard's Mathematical Models for the 
Growth of Human Populations and A.J. Coale’s The Growth and Struc­
ture of Human Populations: A Mathematical Investigation.39
His work involved finding ‘the feedback mechanism of [the] popu­
lation system’, its parameters, and how to achieve optimal control.40His 
conclusion, based on a model that took into account ‘studies of natural 
resources, the level of socioeconomic development, living standards, 
and ecological equilibrium’ was that the target population for China 
should be seven hundred million. The only way to get there within a 
decade was by restricting all women to a single child. Once he had 
a sound mathematical model, Song Jian, the cyberneticists, and Qian 
went to state planners with a plan to apply systems engineering to the 
problem of population growth. It was easy to sell those planners on 
the conclusions arrived at by their model.41 The alternative would be 
runaway population numbers, impeding modernization and economic 
growth. China began to implement the one-child policy in 1980.

DYLAN LEVI KING
185
What happened next was a chaotic social experiment that ex­
posed just how hard it was to build a cybernetic political apparatus, 
especially one functioning on the level of a great power numbering 
hundreds of millions. As with The Leap, there was an extreme dichot­
omy between the level of institutional control that scientific planners 
assumed, as opposed to what the institutions were actually capable 
of. On the ground, enforcement varied widely between localities, with 
some jurisdictions following the rules to the letter and others compar­
atively lax. In some areas, women were forced into having abortions 
or to use of contraceptives like IUDs. Some women opted to give birth 
to ‘black children’—unregistered, hidden, or adopted out—with many 
unable to gain the household registration (hukou) that would allow 
them access to schools, medical services, or good jobs.42 They slipped 
through the cracks of a system that could not actually enforce its pre­
rogatives, nor update effectively in response to feedback.
42 For two discussions of this problem, nearly three decades apart, see 
Jowett, ‘China: The One, Two, Three, Four and more Child Policy’, and Vortherms, 
‘China’s Missing Children’.
43 
Jiang and Liu, ‘Low Fertility and Concurrent Birth Control Policy in China’, 556.
44 
Whyte et. al, ‘Challenging Myths about China’s One-Child Policy’, 153. Given the
lack of reliable demographic data for the 1960s and 1970s, a rough range is offered.
The violence and coercion needed to carry out the one-child pol­
icy might be enough to conclude that it was a failure, at least from a 
humanitarian point of view. But perhaps things look different from the 
perspective of the family planning officials in the landlocked central 
province of Shaanxi, or from that of a demographer, isolated in his of­
fice in Beijing. Did they see the number of births go down? Yes. The 
total fertility rate declined.43 However, despite the population panic 
that seized Song Jian and state planners, China’s total fertility rate had 
already peaked somewhere between ten and fifteen years prior.44 It 
is hard to isolate how much of the decline was wrought by increasing 
urbanization, rising prosperity, and an enforced end to the communal 
lifestyles of the work unit and commune. The contributions of the one- 
child policy to keeping birth rates low were just one factor in a mess of 
statistical noise. Nevertheless, the party faithfully adhered to the one- 
child policy with only slight modifications for the next thirty-five years. 
They did so even as China’s fertility rate rapidly declined, dropping 

186
A BRIEF HISTORY OF CHINESE CYBERNETICS
below replacement in 1990,45 and continued to fall thereafter—on par 
with Asian neighbours with no equivalent policy.
45 Ibid, 146.
46 Hesketh, Li, and Zhu, ‘The Consequences of Son Preference and Sex- 
Selective Abortion in China and Other Asian Countries’, 1374.
47 Shi and Kennedy, ‘Delayed Registration and Identifying the ‘Missing Girls’ in 
China’, 3.
48 Short and Zhai, ‘Looking Locally at China’s One-Child Policy’, 375; Liu, ‘The 
Quality-Quantity Trade-Off’, 568.
Despite a ban on sex-selective abortions, this rule was often skirt- 
ed.46 Even with the addition to the census of the millions of children 
that went unregistered under the one-child policy, China was left with 
a massive gender disparity.47 If this was systems engineering applied 
to governing a great power, it was a failure. Cybernetic regulation of a 
system requires accurate sensors. Regulating family planning required 
a large amount of accurate and comprehensive data, but, as the mil­
lions of unregistered births showed, the sensors were broken.
Likewise, effectors in the system were not reliable. In the case of 
the ‘black children’, mothers knew they could escape surveillance by 
simply giving birth in another jurisdiction, or perhaps paying a bribe. 
The existence of a child might be noted in the databases of some state 
organs but not others. Now that the population problem has changed 
to a lack of births, and the system’s goal was to boost them, the inef­
fectiveness of the effectors is even more apparent. There are no known 
control signals to send into the system to coax fertility to increase. Lat­
er relaxations to the one-child policy had nothing to do with the chang­
es in fertility rate, but were the result of particular groups or regions 
demanding leniency.48 All this only played out in the decades after the 
proposals of Song and his colleagues had been adopted; in the mean­
time, the cyberneticists were expanding their reach ever further.
Systems engineering and reform
Soon after his political victory with the one-child policy, Song Jian was 
called on to apply his systems engineering expertise to the task of re­
forming state price controls. Even as China’s economy opened up, the 
prices of over a hundred products and commodities were not allowed 
to float, but had their price set by the state. His team, made up of some 
of the same cyberneticists from the population scheme, established a 

DYLAN LEVI KING
187
model for the gradual relaxation of that control. Prices for more than 
two hundred items in forty-five categories were fed into a model:
114 equations, among them 19 equations in time series 
of dynamics, 43 for state description, and 52 for equi­
librium. There are defined 142 structural parameters, 
including 43 endogenous and 20 exogenous variables 
and three types of policy control variables: purchasing 
and retailing prices, rate of wage increases, and taxation. 
The interdependent relationships among different vari­
ables constitute a large-scale dynamic system. Having 
reached stable operation, the system now is permanent­
ly resident in a large computer database and ready for 
running at any time.49
49 Song, ‘Systems Science and China’s Economic Reforms’, 1-7.
50 Song, ‘Xitong gongcheng he xin jishu geming’ (Systems engineering and the 
new technology revolution), 5.
51 Gu, ‘Cultural Intellectuals and the Politics of the Cultural Public Space in 
Communist China (1979-1989)’, 404.
Song Jian called for more. In a landmark 1984 article in People’s Dai­
ly, ‘Systems engineering and the new technology revolution’ (Xitong 
gongcheng he xin jishu geming), he laid out a vision for systems en­
gineering to take the place of all decision-making processes.50 In the 
ideal scenario, the government would create a central authority to man­
age the entire cybernetic apparatus and train specialized technicians to 
staff it. The leadership was open to these ideas. Song Jian was steadily 
promoted. In 1985, he was put in charge of the State Science and Tech­
nology Commission and was appointed to the State Council a year later.
Cybernetic ideas began to spread to an increasingly wide au­
dience. The reformist think tanks developed by Politburo Standing 
Committee members Hu Yaobang and Zhao Ziyang promoted sys­
tems engineering too. Even before Song Jian’s price control modelling, 
He Weiling, a member of the influential China Rural Development Is­
sues Research Group, started publishing works calling for cybernet­
ic thought as a way to revamp state planning and make it compatible 
with private markets.51 He co-authored two books on the topic with 
Deng Yingtao, son of the reform skeptic Deng Liqun: Jingji kongzhilun 

188
A BRIEF HISTORY OF CHINESE CYBERNETICS
(Economic cybernetics) and Dongtai jingji xitong de tiaojie yu bianhua 
(The adjustment and evolution of dynamic economic systems).
Jin Guantao, affiliated with the Journal of Dialectics of Nature, 
had a surprise hit with Kongzhilun yu kexue fangfalun (Cybernetics and 
scientific methodology), co-authored with cyberneticist Hua Guofan 
in 1983, introducing cybernetics to a popular audience, and inviting 
contemplation of methodological implications that he would make use 
of in a work published a year later, with his wife, Liu Qingfeng: Xing- 
sheng yu weiji—lun Zhongguo fengjian shehui de chao wending jiegou 
(Prosperity and crisis: on the ultrastable structure of Chinese feudal 
society). This book applied systems engineering and computer model­
ling to Chinese history and was widely read among intellectuals.52 Jin’s 
methods and his conclusion—a conception of China as an ‘ultrastable 
system—spread to the popular press and helped spark a ‘three the- 
ories’—information theory, systems theory, control theory or cyber­
netics—fever among the Chinese intellectual elite and consumers of 
middlebrow popular science magazines.53
52 
‘He shang and the plateau of ultrastability’, 6.
53 Wang and Jiang, ‘Seeking for a Cybernetic Socialism’, 150; Liu, ‘Ershi shiji 
Zhongguo kexuezhuyi de liang ci xingqi’ (The two rises of scientism in China), 44.
54 According to a PSB study, panic about street crime was almost unanimous 
in urban centers. For reporting on PSB polls see Ge, Di-er deng gongmin: gong- 
heguo di-yi ci yanda (Second-class citizen: the Republic’s first strike hard cam­
paign), 15, and Tanner, ‘State Coercion and the Balance of Awe’, 97.
55 Hoffman, ‘Programming China’, 6.
56 For an account of legal systems engineering in theory and practice, see 
Xiong, ‘Fazhi xitong gongcheng yu shehui xitong gongcheng’ (Legal systems engi­
neering and social systems engineering).
Apart from population planning and price controls, the most con­
sequential early adoption of systems engineering turned out to be 
within the Public Security Bureau (PSB). Through the late 1970s and 
early 1980s, there were widespread concerns that urban crime in the 
wake of Reform and Opening had made the cities less safe.54 The PSB 
began to establish what they called ‘comprehensive management of 
public security’.55 This was an idea fortified with ideas from Qian’s own 
conception of the more general social systems engineering (shehui 
xitong gongcheng) and the more specific legal systems engineering 
(fazhi xitong gongcheng), essentially applying his ideas on systems en­
gineering to law enforcement.56

DYLAN LEVI KING
189
The PSB began experimenting with systems engineering meth­
odology in the 1983 Strike Hard (yanda) campaign, launched to counter 
a wave of street crime and gangsterism.57 A beat cop in Beijing’s Ch- 
aoyang District could feed information about sources of social disor­
der back to his station, where the chief could organize a pre-emptive 
strike or launch a deterrence campaign.58 That information—names of 
offenders still at large, possible accomplices, intelligence on the meth­
ods used by criminal elements—could be sent further up the PSB chain 
of command, then distributed back again. The mission statement of 
the Strike Hard campaign lays it out like this:
57 The logic of various forms of ‘comprehensive management’ (zonghe zhili)
is explained in Yan, ‘‘Yanda’ xingshi zhengce de lixing shendu’ (A rational review of 
‘strike hard’ on crime policy).
58 Tanner, ‘State Coercion and the Balance of Awe’, 97; Wong, Police Reform in 
China, 98; Trevaskes, ‘Severe and Swift Justice in China’, 24.
59 Zhong-gong zhongyang, 2011.
60 
Wong, Police Reform in China, 273; Tai, ‘Casting the Ubiquitous Net of Information
Control’, 240.
The practical experience of recent years proves that only 
through organization on multiple fronts, a concerted pol­
icy of executing legal measures in a manner that is ‘hard, 
fast, and sweeping’, and unforgivingly striking against 
criminal elements can we deter crime, educate and save 
young people that have lost their way, and better carry 
out comprehensive management of public security. ... We 
must take a sweeping approach to rounding up criminal 
elements that have not yet made themselves known, as 
well as criminals that have already offended.59
The chaotic Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 helped to spur mas­
sive investment and collaboration with multinational firms to equip the 
fragmented police system with computer network technology. By 1994, 
before widespread consumer access to the internet, the PSB started to 
be knit together through what would become known after 1998 as the 
Golden Shield project (jindun gongcheng), which had access to tele­
communications data, customs records, and tax information through 
rudimentary networked government programmes.60

190
A BRIEF HISTORY OF CHINESE CYBERNETICS
The present-day programme of advanced information technolo­
gy, artificial intelligence, multiple surveillance networks, and big data 
integration has many sources, not all of them indigenous. But the debt 
owed to Qian's theories of legal systems engineering is acknowledged 
by thinkers in the field.
A detour into the metaphysical
As he entered his eighties, Qian Xuesen embarked on a period of 
theorization that created the foundation for the next generation—the 
present generation—of systems cybernetics in China. He proposed a 
complete reorganization of human thought that managed to integrate 
extrasensory perception, an alternative scientific method, and a cyber­
netic theory of everything.
In the late 1980s, Qian had already organized information theory, 
systems theory and control theory under systems engineering. He pro­
posed a more general classification of science and technology into a 
dozen departments, including mathematics, systems science, the arts, 
and somatic science. Each department was linked to the foundation 
layer of Marxist philosophy through bridges; social science, systems 
science, and cognitive science, for example, were linked to Marxism 
through, respectively, historical materialism, systems research, and 
epistemology. Each department could also be classified by theoreti­
cal foundation, technical basis, and applied technology.61 This was an 
attempt to break out of scientific reductionism by bringing the social 
sciences and natural sciences together. Qian also included within his 
reorganization space for somatic science (renti kexue)—more directly 
translated as ‘human body’ science—which included paranormal phe­
nomena like extrasensory perception and telekinesis.62 Qian’s detour 
into metaphysical investigation is crucial to his thought in the 1980s 
and 1990s, but, like his contributions to the Great Leap Forward, were 
usually elided or misunderstood.
61 
Qian, ‘Wo dui xitongxue de renshi licheng’ (My journey of understanding with
systems theory).
62 
Qian, Yu, and Dai, ‘A New Discipline of Science’, 5.
The final years of the Cultural Revolution saw the official rehabili­
tation of traditional Chinese medicine and the emergence of folk heal­
ers promoting exceptional abilities in qigong, a method of cultivating, 

DYLAN LEVI KING
191
managing, and projecting qi, or vital force. During Reform and Opening 
the tension between these pseudoscientific phenomena and the new 
scientism had to be resolved—and it was Qian and scientists at the 
Institute of Mechanics that led the way. As early as 1978, qigong mas­
ters were invited to the institute to test what was going on physically 
when they cast their blasts of qi. In 1979, Qian took notice of a story 
circulating in the national media about a boy in Sichuan that could hold 
an envelope up to his ear and read letters written on a card inside, and 
began backing experiments with what was called ‘extraordinary func­
tion’ (teyi gongneng).63 From his position within the scientific estab­
lishment, particularly his posts at the National Association for Science 
and Technology and Commission for Science, Technology and Industry 
for National Defence, Qian enthusiastically promoted research into so­
matic science.64
Qian's interest in the extraordinary abilities of qigong became 
slightly suspect within China after the vicious reaction in the early 
1990s to the popular explosion of affiliated new religious movements, 
including Falun Gong, and their penetration into elite Party circles. A 
vigorous sceptic movement did not have much time for Qian’s attempts 
to prove telepathy was real (in addition to those experiments, he also 
wrote frequently about UFOs). But he was not alone; the 1980s saw 
many attempts to connect advances in quantum theory with the para­
normal, as Qian and other somatic science researchers did, and his 
interest in telepathy and telekinesis was shared by the CIA and Sony's 
parapsychology-focused Extra Sensory Perception and Excitation Re­
search (ESPER) Lab.
For American intelligence and Japanese researchers, as well as 
Qian, research into parapsychology was conducted for potential appli­
cation in control systems. Extrasensory perception held promise as a 
means of human interface with digital, wireless information systems. In 
her chapter on Qian in Information Fantasies, Xiao Liu writes, ‘The two 
strands [extrasensory perception and wireless technology] converged 
around the cybernetic logic of incorporating humans into the real-time 
information circuits’.65
63 
Qian Xuesen’s inquiries into these ‘extraordinary functions’ was contro­
versial at the time and has remained a curiosity to later commentators. For an 
account of Qian and his paranormal investigations, see Zhang, ‘Qian Xuesen ceng 
yi dangxing danbao, renti teyi gongneng shi zhende’.
64 Ownby, Falun Gong and the Future of China, 63-64.
65 Liu, Information Fantasies, 40.

192
A BRIEF HISTORY OF CHINESE CYBERNETICS
The interest in somatic science and extraordinary functions is 
what pushed Qian to attempt to rewrite scientific thought in his model 
of qualitative-to-quantitative meta-synthesis. What he proposed was a 
method of synthesizing qualitative and quantitative observations. This 
was an attempt to unify the natural and social sciences, since his mod­
el of analysis included social phenomena, qualitative experience, and 
scientific method. In the context of somatic science, an observation—a 
man can, by applying touch, soften the metal stem of a spoon to the 
point that it can easily bend—is made based on subjective experience, 
which is then integrated with quantitative data (the quantitative data 
will not necessarily support or prove the qualitative observation). This 
subverted the scientific method of hypothesis, experimentation, anal­
ysis, and conclusion. Qian explained this idea in a 1993 paper co-au­
thored with Yu Jingyuan of the Institute of Information and Control and 
Dai Ruwei of the Institute of Automation:
Empirical hypotheses (judgment or conjecture) are put 
up which cannot be proved by rigorous scientific meth­
ods. ... Their accuracy can be checked on models built 
from empirical data and reference material, with hun­
dreds and thousands of parameters. . Through quanti­
tative calculation and repeated collation, a conclusion is 
finally reached. This conclusion is the best to be found 
at this stage of knowledge of reality. This is quantitative 
knowledge arising from qualitative understanding.66
66 Qian, Yu, and Dai, ‘A New Discipline of Science’, 5.
67 Gu and Tang, ‘Some Developments in the Studies of Meta-Synthesis 
System Approach’, 173-74; Tang, Li, and Liu, ‘State-of-The-Art Development of 
Complex Systems and Their Simulation Methods’, 275-278; frequent Qian collab­
orator Dai Ruwei explains the idea at length (and the uses it can make of artificial 
and human intelligence) in ‘‘Renji jiehe’ de dacheng zhihui’ (The great wisdom of 
‘human-machine’ hybrids).
Qian came up with a model to implement this new method, which he 
called, in his own English translation, the ‘Hall for Workshop on Me- 
ta-synthetic Engineering’. A proposition is fed into the model, then in­
tegrated with quantitative data, interdisciplinary expert opinion, and in­
formation analysis software or other artificial intelligence.67 He termed 
the knowledge created through this qualitative-to-quantitative method 

DYLAN LEVI KING
193
‘meta-synthetic wisdom’—sometimes described as ‘great wisdom’, or 
dacheng zhihui.68 This was the only knowledge capable of grasping 
what Qian called ‘open, complex, giant systems’.
68 
For one of the few descriptions in English of this idea, see Liu, Information
Fantasies, 83.
69 Qian, Yu, and Dai, ‘A New Discipline of Science’, 5.
70 For examples of these ideas in modern management science, see Guo, Liu, 
and Guo Qin, ‘Research on the Hall for Workshop of Meta-Synthetic Engineering 
for Solution to Complicated Problem of Strategy Decision’, and Tang, Li, and 
Liu, ‘State-of-The-Art Development of Complex Systems and Their Simulation 
Methods’.
71 For an example of Qian’s idea of dacheng zhihui applied to urban planning 
and smart cities, see Song, Zhu, and Tong, ‘Qian Xuesen dacheng zhihui lilun shi- 
jiao xia de chuangxin 2.0 he zhihui chengshi’ (Looking at Innovation 2.0 and smart 
cities from the perspective of Qian Xuesen’s great wisdom).
To understand all of these ideas together, Qian suggested the hu­
man body as an example. It is an ‘open’ system, since it exchanges en­
ergy, information, and material with the outside world; it is a ‘complex’ 
system because of the level of complexity found not only in its basic 
composition but also within its subsystems; and it is ‘giant’ because 
of the number of subsystems it contains. To return to the proposition 
of someone bending a spoon, meta-synthetic wisdom is produced 
through integrating quantitative physical data, contributions from 
experts in—taking Qian’s own list—‘physiology, psychology, Western 
medicine, traditional Chinese medicine, Qigong, psychokinesis, etc.’, 
and analysis with information and computing technology.69 Since the 
human body is an open system, the analysis must also take into ac­
count ideas from physics, political science, and ecology.
The Hall for Workshop on Meta-synthetic Engineering, meta-syn- 
thetic wisdom, and open, complex, giant systems are concepts invisi­
ble in English, except in the occasional machine-translated academic 
paper, but they have become as influential in Chinese high-tech social 
governance discourse as Qian’s work from the 1970s and early 1980s.70 
The idea of synthesizing human and artificial intelligence lends itself 
particularly well to and informs thinking on smart cities, the ‘urban 
brain’, and AI- and surveillance-enabled urban management.71
What Qian’s theories provide, beyond another take on systems 
cybernetics, is a way to integrate the immaterial within hard systems. 
Just as telekinesis can be integrated into a study of the human body, 
concepts like spiritual civilization can be reconciled with analysis of 

194
A BRIEF HISTORY OF CHINESE CYBERNETICS
social systems. Qian’s theories reinforced the party’s guiding ideolog­
ical principles of the Three Represents, elevated to official ideology in 
2002, the Scientific Outlook on Development, made official in 2007.
The balance of science and power
When the Chinese state made its turn to systems cybernetics a lit­
tle more than four decades ago, they started from zero. Theoretical 
guidance for engineers plotting population trajectories on defence 
industry computers was minimal. The technological tools for the pub­
lic security system’s comprehensive management lagged behind the 
theory by ten or fifteen years. When Qian died in 2009, his theoret­
ical future of virtual reality information interfaces and guidance by 
artificial intelligence-augmented meta-synthetic knowledge, was still 
mostly speculative.
Theory and technology have advanced. Investment in so-called 
fourth industrial revolution technologies for governance has increased. 
The re-centralization of state power since 2011 is made possible by, 
and is in service of, advances in big data, surveillance, and artificial 
intelligence. Unlike in Qian’s time, research and development is not re­
stricted to state institutions but can be devolved to tech giants. Firms 
like Alibaba are building the cybernetic future; Hikvision develops the 
technologies required for the social credit city. Advances in Tel Aviv, 
Toronto, or Tsukuba can be purchased or pirated, and marketing cyber­
netic governance tools tested in China is a profitable side-line.
Looking back across the last half century, though, the success of 
China’s cyberneticists is unclear; at worst, the programmes were total 
failures with a massive human cost. The whole logic of cybernetics 
had been that the system would be able to update in response to the 
local information that policies and officials encountered. This simply 
did not happen.
Political attempts at cybernetic planning, both in China and else­
where, have rarely overcome the problem of limited sensors and weak 
effectors. This was the case with the one-child policy. Obtaining granu­
lar nationwide fertility information is theoretically possible, but to pull it 
off would require mass mobilization and unanimous participation, or a 
technological solution so invasive and coercive that it would be easier 
to grow people in pods. Building in tolerance for unregistered births will 

DYLAN LEVI KING
195
necessarily be speculative. Once the numbers are out by millions, mon­
itoring is no longer effective, and if the numbers start coming down 
rapidly—as the nationwide fertility rate did around 1997—only accurate 
sensing would allow for adjustment. The system suffered, too, from 
weak effectors. Distributed enforcement of the one-child policy across 
local governments and agencies led to uneven enforcement. The ef­
fect of the one-child policy on the birth rate was likely negligible, com­
pared to other factors, like urbanization.
Now, as state planners see plummeting birth rates and hope to 
induce families to welcome up to three children, the same issues re­
main: it is possible to obtain information, although confirming its accu­
racy is difficult; and sending information back into the system to affect 
change is unreliable. The obsession with statistics and models looks 
similar to the Great Leap Forward and Song Jian’s cybernetic family 
planning solutions. But unlike those periods, we are in a state where 
mobile internet technology and surveillance are ubiquitous, artificial 
intelligence has entered the scene, bureaucratic information sharing 
has improved, and there are mechanisms to integrate private with gov­
ernment data. This has not sharpened sensors so much as inundated 
them. Even with high-quality data and enormous computing power to 
sort through it all, there remains the problem of figuring out how to find 
the key signals, and what to do with them.
The summertime lockdown in Shanghai is the most obvious re­
cent example of these failures. An investigation by city health officials 
concluded that the Omicron variant of the Coronavirus had been al­
lowed to spread from a quarantine hotel in the Xujiahui Residential Dis­
trict because of negligence by health officials. By that point in the pan­
demic, a later investigation concluded, many staff members were only 
going through the motions. The virus was spread from asymptomatic 
travellers through the hotel’s ventilation system, then made the jump to 
sanitation workers. It was not noticed until the standard testing regime 
in neighbouring districts identified a spike in cases. When the health 
system began picking up positives during their routine tests, phone 
screens across the city turned yellow and red, confining people to their 
residential compounds or homes. By the 5th of April, twenty-five million 
people in the city were under some form of lockdown.
Surveillance had been compromised by human negligence. Health 
code applications developed by Tencent, Alibaba Group, and a handful 
of other firms gave the government powerful tools to watch over the 

196
A BRIEF HISTORY OF CHINESE CYBERNETICS
state of affairs, but they differ from contact tracing in most countries, 
in that they do not rely on a Bluetooth ping but pull data from a central 
server running algorithms to determine the likelihood of exposure to 
confirmed or suspected cases. When it was reliable, it only prompted 
the algorithm to respond according to its zero-Covid programming— 
people exposed to the virus, whatever their symptoms, social obliga­
tions, mental state, or access to the necessities of life, must be com­
pletely isolated. The sensors trained on a narrow slice of public health 
seemed to have given local authorities tunnel vision.
As food shortages and mass disapproval mounted, and the ef­
fects of paralyzing the third largest city in the world worked through 
into the national and global economy, the problem for authorities be­
came how they might extricate themselves from the situation. In the 
end, they did not. As with the one-child policy, irrational and ineffective 
policies were left to drag on.
While every effort has been made since the beginning of Reform 
and Opening to isolate and elevate science and technology, and bend it 
to fit the political model, criticism of systems cybernetics has become 
nearly impossible. Science and technology provide legitimacy, and it 
has accrued not to the pilots at the controls of the vast machine, but to 
the engineers and navigators, and to the algorithms themselves.

DYLAN LEVI KING
197
Reference
Audette, Donald G. ‘Computer Technology in Communist China, 1956­
1965’. Communications of the ACM 9, no. 9 (September 1, 1966): 
655-61. https://doi.org/10.1145/365813.365816.
Becker, Jasper. Hungry Ghosts : Mao’s Secret Famine. New York: Henry 
Holt, 1998.
Chang, Iris. Thread of the Silkworm. New York: Basic Books, 1999.
Chang, Maria Hsia. ‘The Thought of Deng Xiaoping’. Communist and 
Post-Communist Studies 29, no. 4 (1996): 377-94. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/s0967-067x(96)80022-5.
Coale, Ansley Johnson. Growth and Structure of Human Populations: 
A Mathematical Investigation. Princeton: Princeton University 
Press,1972.
Dai Ruwei. ‘“Renji jiehe” de dacheng zhihui’ (The great wisdom of ‘hu­
man-machine’ hybrids). Moshishibie yu rengongzhineng (Pattern 
recognition and artificial intelligence) 7, no. 3 (1994): 181-90.
David, Mirela. ‘Free Love, Marriage, and Eugenics: Global and Local 
Debates on Sex, Birth Control, Venereal Disease and Population in 
1920s-1930s China’. Doctoral dissertation, New York University, 2014. 
https://www.proquest.com/openview/63919370a5ed17e85e841c- 
6b76eff8fa/1.
———. ‘Female Gynecologists and Their Birth Control Clinics: Eugenics in 
Practice in 1920s-1930s China’. Canadian Bulletin of Medical History 
35, no. 1 (2018): 32-62. https://doi.org/10.3138/cbmh.200-022017.
Deng Xiaoping. ‘Zai quanguo kexue dahui kaimushi shang de jianghua’ 
(Speech at the opening ceremony of the National Conference on 
Science). Zhongguo gaige xinxiku (Chinese reform database). 12 
December 2003. http://www.reformdata.org/1978/0318/5158.shtml. 
The original speech was delivered on 18 March 1978.
Ding Liting. ‘Qian Xuesen lao xiansheng ji buxu wenguoshifei, ye buxu 
daoqian’ (Respected teacher Qian Xuesen has no need to conceal 
his errors or ask for forgiveness). Aisixiang, 3 March 2011. http:// 
www.aisixiang.com/data/39328.html.
Federal Bureau of Investigation. ‘Tsien Hsue-Shen’. FOIPA No. 1126972­
000. https://archive.org/details/fbi-file-tsien-hsue-shen/FBIFile_ 
Tsien_Part1/. Released under FOIPA on 15 November 2009.
Field, Stephen. ‘He shang and the plateau of ultrastability’. Bulletin of 
Concerned Asian Scholars 23, no. 3 (1991): 4-13. https://doi.org/10.10 
80/14672715.1991.10409710.
Fu Ge. ‘Yunchouxue zai Zhongguo de zaoqi chuanbo (1956-1965)’ (The 
early spread of operations research in China (1956-1965)). Xibei 
daxue xuebao (ziran kexue ban) (Journal of Xibei University (natural 
sciences edition)) 37 no. 5 (2007): 857-60.
Gao Dasheng and Zou Tsing. ‘Philosophy of Technology in China’. 
In Philosophy of Technology: Practical, Historical and Other 
Dimensions, edited by Paul T. Durbin, 133-51. Dordrecht: Springer 
Dordrecht, 1989.
Ge Fei. Di-er deng gongmin: gongheguo di-yi ci yanda (Second-class cit­
izen: the Republic's first strike hard campaign). Chengdu: Chengdu 
press, 1992.

198
A BRIEF HISTORY OF CHINESE CYBERNETICS
Goldsmith, Edward and Robert Allen. A Blueprint for Survival. Bari: 
Laterza, 1972.
Greenhalgh, Susan. ‘Missile Science, Population Science: The Origins 
of China’s One-Child Policy’. The China Quarterly 182 (June 2005): 
253-76. https://doi.org/10.1017/s0305741005000184.
———. Just One Child: Science and Policy in Deng’s China. Berkeley: 
University Of California Press, 2008.
Gu, Edward X. ‘Cultural Intellectuals and the Politics of the Cultural Public 
Space in Communist China (1979-1989): A Case Study of Three 
Intellectual Groups’. The Journal of Asian Studies 58, no. 2 (1999): 
389-431. https://doi.org/10.2307/2659402.
Gu Jifa and Tang Xijin. ‘Some Developments in the Studies of Meta­
Synthesis System Approach’. Journal of Systems Science and 
Systems Engineering 12, no. 2 (2003): 171-89. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s11518-006-0128-4.
Guo Jing, Liu Desheng and Guo Qin. ‘Research on the Hall for Workshop 
of Meta-Synthetic Engineering for Solution to Complicated Problem 
of Strategy Decision’. Applied Mechanics and Materials 198-199 
(2012): 586-90.
He Weiling and Ding Yingtao. Jingji kongzhilun (Economic cybernetics).
Chengdu: Sichuan renmin chubanshe (Sichuan people’s press), 1984.
———. Dongtai jingji xitong de tiaojie yu bianhua (The adjustment and 
evolution of dynamic economic systems). Chengdu: Sichuan peo­
ple’s press, 1985.
He Zuoxiu. 2011. ‘Qian Xuesen yu shi'er nian kexue guihua’ (‘Qian Xuesen 
and the twelve-year programme for scientific development’). Kexue 
shibao (Science times). 19 September 2011. https://news.sciencenet. 
cn/htmlnews/2011/9/252518.shtm.
Hesketh, Therese, Li Lu and Zhu Wei Xing. ‘The Consequences of Son 
Preference and Sex-Selective Abortion in China and Other Asian 
Countries’. Canadian Medical Association Journal 183, no. 12 (2011): 
1374-77. https://doi.org/10.1503/cmaj.101368.
Hoffman, Samantha. ‘Programming China: The Communist Party’s 
autonomic approach to managing state security’. Merics website. 
12 December 2017. https://merics.org/en/report/programming-china.
Hua Xinmin. ‘Wenge zhong de Qian Xuesen’. Ji yi 3 (2008): 1-19.
Hudecek, Jin. ‘Hua Loo-Keng’s Popularization of Mathematics and the 
Cultural Revolution’. Endeavour 41, no. 3 (2017): 85-93.
Huibert Kwakernaak. ‘Application of Control Theory to Population
Policy’. In New Trends in System Analysis: International Symposium, 
Versailles, December 13-17,1976, edited by Alain Bensoussan, 
357-78. Heidelberg: Springer Heidelberg, 1977.
Jowett, John A. ‘China: The One, Two, Three, Four and more Child Policy’.
Focus 41, no. 2 (1991): 32.
Jiang Quanbao and Liu Yixiao. ‘Low Fertility and Concurrent Birth Control 
Policy in China’. The History of the Family 21, no. 4 (2016): 551-77. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/1081602x.2016.1213179.
Jin Guantao and Hua Guofan. Kongzhilun yu kexue fangfalun (Cybernetics 

DYLAN LEVI KING
199
and scientific methodology). Shanghai: Kexue puji chubanshe 
(Popular science press), 1983.
Jin Guantao and Liu Qingfeng. Xingsheng yu weiji—lun Zhongguo fengjian 
shehui de chao wending jiegou (Prosperity and crisis: on the ultrast­
able structure of Chinese feudal society). Changsha: Hunan renmin 
chubanshe (Hunan people’s press), 1986.
Kline, Ronald R. The Cybernetics Moment, or Why We Call Our Age the 
Information Age. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2017.
Li Lu. ‘Shuohua shangren, chuipeng Dayuejin, bu yiyang de Qian Xuesen’ 
(Hurting people with his words by supporting the Great Leap 
Forward: Another side of Qian Xuesen). Aisixiang, 12 December, 2011. 
https://www.aisixiang.com/data/47506.html.
Liu Haoming. ‘The Quality-Quantity Trade-Off: Evidence from the 
Relaxation of China’s One-Child Policy’. Journal of Population 
Economics 27, no. 2 (2013): 565-602. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00148- 
013-0478-4.
Liu Qingfeng. ‘Ershi shiji Zhongguo kexuezhuyi de liang ci xingqi’ (The 
two rises of scientism in China). Ershiyi shiji (Twenty-first century) 4 
(1991): 32-47.
Liu Xiao. Information Fantasies: Precarious Mediation in Postsocialist 
China. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 2019.
Maier, John H. ‘Computer Science and Information Technology in the 
People’s Republic of China: The Emergence of Connectivity’. In 
Advances in Computers, edited by Marshall C. Yovits, 363-442. New 
York: Academic Press, 1988.
Mesarovic, Mihajlo D. and Eduard Pestel. Mankind at the Turning Point: 
The Second Report to the Club of Rome. New York: Dutton, 1974.
Minor, Michael S. ‘China’s Nuclear Development Program’. Asian Survey
16, no. 6 (1976): 571-79. https://doi.org/10.2307/2643520.
Ownby, David. Falun Gong and the Future of China. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2010.
Pollard, John Hurlstone. Mathematical Models for the Growth of Human 
Populations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1973.
Pondrom, Lee G. The Soviet Atomic Project. Singapore: World Scientific, 
2012.
Qian Xuesen. ‘Dui suowei “renlei lvxing de jixian” de yijian’ (Opinions on 
the so-called limits of human travel). Ziran bianzheng fa yanjiu tongx- 
un (Newsletter of dialectics of nature) 3, 1965.
———. ‘Zhanwang shi nian—nongye fazhan gangyao shixian yihou’ 
(Looking ten years into the future—after the outline for development 
of agriculture is realized). Kexue dazhong (Science for the masses), 
1958.
———. ‘Zhongshen bu wang Mao zhuxi de qinqie jiaohui’ (Always remem­
ber Chairman Mao’s instructions). Renmin ribao (People’s Daily), 16 
September 1976.
———. ‘Wo dui xitongxue renshi de licheng’ (My journey of understand­
ing with systems theory). In Xitong kexue jinzhan (The progress of 
systems science), edited by Guo Lei, 2-17. Beijing: Kexue chubanshe 

200
A BRIEF HISTORY OF CHINESE CYBERNETICS
(Science publishing), 2017. This was a speech delivered on 7 January 
1986 for a seminar on systems engineering.
———. ‘Zuzhi guanli de jishu—xitong gongcheng’ (‘A technology for orga­
nizational management—systems engineering’). Wenhuibao (Wenhui 
daily), 27 September 1978.
Qian Xuesen, Yu Jingyuan and Dai Ru-wei. ‘A New Discipline of Science: 
The Study of Open Complex Giant System and Its Methodology’. 
Chinese Journal of Systems Engineering and Electronics 4, no. 2 
(1993): 2-12.
Rav, Yehuda. ‘Perspectives on the History of the Cybernetics Movement: 
The Path to Current Research Through the Contributions of 
Norbert Wiener, Warren McCulloch, and John von Neumann’. 
Cybernetics and Systems 33, no. 8 (2002): 779-804. https://doi. 
org/10.1080/01969720290040830.
Rid, Thomas. Rise of the Machines: A Cybernetic History. New York: W.W. 
Norton & Company, 2017.
Shang Zhicong, Tian Xiteng and Yan Wenyu. ‘The new civic epistemology 
of data proof: A case study of knowledge disputes in the formulation 
of China’s fertility policy’. Cultures of Science 6, no. 1 (2023): 98-112. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/20966083231164845.
Shen Zhihua and Xia Yafeng. ‘Between Aid and Restriction: The Soviet 
Union’s Changing Policies on China’s Nuclear Weapons Program, 
1954-1960’. Asian Perspective 36, no. 1 (2012): 95-122. https://doi. 
org/10.1353/apr.2012.0003.
Shi Yaojiang and John James Kennedy. ‘Delayed Registration and 
Identifying the “Missing Girls” in China’. The China Quarterly 228 
(November 2016): 1-21. https://doi.org/10.1017/s0305741016001132.
Short, Susan E. and Zhai Fengying. ‘Looking Locally at China’s One-Child 
Policy’. Studies in Family Planning 29, no. 4 (1998): 373. https://doi. 
org/10.2307/172250.
Song Gang, Zhu Hui and Tong Yunhai. ‘Qian Xuesen dacheng zhihui 
lilun shijiao xia de chuangxin 2.0 he zhihui chengshi’ (Looking 
at Innovation 2.0 and smart cities from the perspective of Qian 
Xuesen’s great wisdom). Bangong zidonghua (Office automation) 17 
(2014): 7-13.
Song Jian. ‘Cong xiandai kexue kan renkou wenti’ (‘Examining the pop­
ulation problem from the perspective of contemporary science’). 
Guangming ribao (Guangming daily), 3 October 1980.
———. ‘Systems Science and China's Economic Reforms’. IFAC 
Proceedings Volumes 18, no. 9 (1985): 1-7.
———. ‘Xitong gongcheng he xin jishu geming’ (Systems engineering 
and the new technology revolution). Renmin ribao (People’s Daily), 5 
September 1984.
Song Jian and Yu Ching-Yuan. ‘On stability theory of population systems 
and critical fertility rates’. Mathematical Modelling 2, no. 2 (1981): 
109-121.
Song Jian, Kong Deyong and Yu Jingyuan. ‘Population System Control’. 
Mathematical and Computer Modelling 11 (January 1988): 11-16. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/0895-7177(88)90443-8.

DYLAN LEVI KING
201
Swetz, Frank. ‘The “Open-Door” Policy and the Reform of Mathematics 
Education in the People’s Republic of China’. Educational Studies in 
Mathematics 8, no. 4 (1977): 461-78.
Tai, Zixu. ‘Casting the Ubiquitous Net of Information Control: Internet 
Surveillance in China from Golden Shield to Green Dam’. In ICTs for 
Mobile and Ubiquitous Urban Infrastructures: Surveillance, Locative 
Media and Global Network, edited by Rodrigo Jose Firmino, Fabio 
Duarte, and Clovis Ultramari, 237-55. Hershey: Information Science 
Reference, 2011.
Tang Yiming, Li Lin and Liu Xiaoping. ‘State-of-The-Art Development 
of Complex Systems and Their Simulation Methods’. Complex 
System Modeling and Simulation 1, no. 4 (2021): 271-90. https://doi. 
org/10.23919/csms.2021.0025.
Tanner, Murray Scot. ‘State Coercion and the Balance of Awe: The 
1983-1986 “Stern Blows” Anti-Crime Campaign’. The China Journal 
44 (July 2000): 93-125. https://doi.org/10.2307/2667478.
Trevaskes, Susan. ‘Severe and Swift Justice in China’. The British Journal 
of Criminology 47, no. 1 (2006): 23-41. https://doi.org/10.1093/bjc/ 
azl032.
Vortherms, Samantha A. ‘China’s Missing Children: Political Barriers 
to Citizenship through the Household Registration System’.
The China Quarterly, January 2019, 1-22. https://doi.org/10.1017/ 
s0305741018001716.
Wang Hongzhe. ‘Manchang de dianzi geming: jisuanji yu hongse 
Zhongguo de jishu zhengzhi, 1955-1984’ (The long electronic rev­
olution: the computer and red China’s technological governance, 
1955-1984). Doctoral dissertation, The Chinese University of Hong 
Kong, 2014.
Wang Hongzhe and Jiang Yuan. ‘Seeking for a Cybernetic Socialism: Qian 
Xuesen and the Transformation of Information Politics in Socialist 
China’. CAC Editorial 1 (2019): 127-53.
White, Tyrene. China’s Longest Campaign: Birth Planning in the People’s 
Republic, 1949-2005. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2019.
Whyte, Martin King, Wang Feng and Cai Yong. ‘Challenging Myths about 
China’s One-Child Policy’. The China Journal 74 (2015): 144-59. 
https://doi.org/10.1086/681664.
Wang Ning. ‘The Making of an Intellectual Hero: Chinese Narratives of 
Qian Xuesen’. The China Quarterly 206 (June 2011): 352-71. https:// 
doi.org/10.1017/s0305741011000300.
Wei Hongsen. ‘Fenxiang yi Qian Xuesen zhidao women jinxing xitonglun 
yanjiu de ruogan wangshi—chentong daonian jing'ai de Qian lao’ 
(Recalling some past events in Qian Xuesen's leadership in conduct­
ing systems research). Qinghua xiaoyou wang (Qinghua University 
alumni online), 9 November 2009. https://www.tsinghua.edu.cn/ 
info/1856/74106.html.
———. ‘Norbert Wiener at Qinghua University’. In Chinese Studies in the 
History and Philosophy of Science and Technology, edited by Dainian 
Fan and Robert S. Cohen, 447-51. Dordrecht: Springer Dordrecht, 
2013.

202
A BRIEF HISTORY OF CHINESE CYBERNETICS
———. ‘Qian Xuesen goujian xitonglun de jiben shexiang’ (Qian Xuesen’s 
basic considerations in the construction of systems theory). Xitong 
kexuexuebao (Systems science journal) 21, no. 1 (2013): 1-8.
Wong, Kam C. Police Reform in China. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 2011.
Wu, Angela Xiao. ‘Journalism via Systems Cybernetics: The Birth of the 
Chinese Communication Discipline and Post-Mao Press Reforms’. 
History of Media Studies 2 (2022). https://doi.org/10.32376/ 
d895a0ea.182c7595.
Wu, Serena Weiying. ‘Information Anxieties: Popular Imaginations of 
Information in Post-Mao China’. Intercollegiate U.S.-China Journal 2 
(2022).
Xiong Jining. ‘Fazhi xitong gongcheng yu shehui xitong gongcheng’ 
(Legal systems engineering and social systems engineering). Xitong 
gongcheng lilun yu shijian (Systems engineering in theory and prac­
tice) 31, no. 1 (2011): 187-94.
Yan Li. ‘'Yanda' xingshi zhengce de lixing shendu’ (A rational review of 
‘strike hard’ on crime policy). Aisixiang, 21 June 21 2012. https://www. 
aisixiang.com/data/54597.html.
Zhang Jian. ‘Qian Xuesen ceng yi dangxing danbao, renti teyi gongneng 
shi zhende’ (Qian Xuesen used the party spirit to affirm that para­
normal abilities were real). Pengpai xinwen (The paper), 25 July 2015. 
https://www.thepaper.cn/newsDetail_forward_1356238.
Zhang Jiuchun and Zhang Baichun. ‘Guihua kexue jishu: 1956-1957 nian 
kexue jishu fazhan yuanjing guihua de zhiding yu shishi’ (Planning 
science and technology: the formulation and implementation of the 
1956-1957 long-range plan for scientific and technological devel­
opment). Zhongguo kexueyuan yuankan (Journal of the Chinese 
Academy of Science) 34, no. 9 (2019): 982-91.
Zhu Xianling, Ding Zhaojun and Hu Huakai. ‘The Deep Plowing Movement 
of the “Great Leap Forward”’. In Agricultural Reform and Rural 
Transformation in China since 1949, edited by Thomas DuBois and 
Huaiyin Li, 74-100. Leiden: Brill Academic, 2016.

203
Why Did Cybernetics
Disappear from Latin America?
An Incomplete Timeline
David Maulen de los Reyes
Two principal changes of paradigm took place in cybernetic history; 
these were first-order cybernetics in the early 1940s, and second-or­
der cybernetics in the 1970s.1 The first paradigm to consider was for­
mulated by Mexican neurologist Arturo Rosenblueth, working with the 
famous mathematician Norbert Wiener (Fig. 3) and the engineer Julian 
Bigelow. They collaborated in the United States in the 1930s and early 
1940s. After Rosenblueth returned to Mexico in 1944 to a new research 
institution, the Department of Physiology of the National Institute of 
Cardiology (INC), he invited Wiener to join him. Between 1945 and 1949 
he was visited for periods of research and exchange by his teacher
1 First-order cybernetics arose in the 1940s and refers to the first-order 
prediction and design of behaviour and interaction in machines and living beings. 
This approach was directed by a specialist, or a group of specialists, combining 
the sciences of communication, administration and organization, neurology, civil 
engineering, and communication theory, among others. Second-order cyber­
netics, which was already mentioned in Arturo Rosenblueth, Norbert Wiener and 
Julian Bigelow’s ‘Behavior, Purpose and Teleology’, Philosophy of Science 10, no. 1 
(1943): 18-24, would become part of an important discussion by the late 1960s. It 
consists of a process that is no longer unidirectional, from a sender to a receiver. 
In second-order cybernetics the receiver is also part of the process design, which 
is a more heterarchical cybernetic concept.
Fig. 3: Arturo Rosenblueth 
and Norbert Wiener in 
the National Cardiology 
Institute (Instituto Nacional 
de Cardiolog^a), Mexico 
City, 1945. Archive National 
Cardiology Institute Library, 
Mexico.

204
WHY DID CYBERNETICS DISAPPEAR FROM LATIN AMERICA?
Walter Cannon, and by the precursors of cybernetics; Walter Pitts, Ol­
iver Selfridge and Norbert Wiener.
They began to talk about first-order cybernetics, especially in 
what Wiener called the ‘first paper’: ‘Behavior, Purpose, Teleology’ 
published in 1943.2 Wiener followed this with Cybernetics: Or Com­
munication and Control in the Animal and the Machine in 1948, written 
while he was visiting scholar at the Instituto Nacional de Cardiolog^a 
de Mexico (National Institute of Cardiology of Mexico). Wiener said: 
‘All I said in the book (in the basic principles) was in this paper first’. 
This is the first moment in the history of cybernetics in Latin America. 
The second moment came in the late 1960s, when the anthropologist 
Margaret Mead began to talk about the ‘cybernetics of cybernetics’, 
that is, second-order cybernetics. The practical experiences of British 
cybernetician Stafford Beer, in Chile in the 1970s, are a concrete pre­
sentation of the ideas of second-order cybernetics. In the 1970s Mead 
noted that these ideas had already been discussed thirty years earlier; 
but the concepts began to be implemented during the 1970s. This is the 
basic original structure from 1943 (Fig. 4).
Rosenblueth, Wiener and Bigelow, ‘Behavior, Purpose and Teleology’.
Fig. 4: First-order, sec­
ond-order, and so on, of be­
haviour prediction explained 
by Arturo Rosenblueth, 
Norbert Wiener and Julian 
Bigelow in ‘Behavior, 
Purpose, and Teleology’, 
1943. Diagram by the author.
Feed-back 
r(teleo- _ 
logical)
Predictive 
(extrapo- ' 
lative)
First-, 
second etc. 
orders of 
prediction
Purposeful —s
__Non-predictive
(non- 
extrapolative)
Behavior —J
Non
I— Active
Non- 
l__purposeful
(random)
(passive)
L
 Non-feed- 
back 
(non teleo­
logical)
A timeline for cybernetics in Latin America presents itself as an 
incomplete structure—a timeline in progress. In the present case, I will 
try to formulate a specific methodology for talking about the history 
of technology, design science and especially cybernetics in which the 
2

DAVID MAULEN DE LOS REYES
205
equivalences between biological behaviour and technical physical be­
haviour are investigated from a multidisciplinary framework. This will 
involve an interpretation of the sociology of symbolic production, the 
retrospective vision of a timeline where it is possible to identify the 
epistemologies that formulate or motivate the creation of interfaces 
or devices. The device is a conceptual and practical mechanism. It is 
neither only material, nor only conceptual, but both simultaneously: 
it consists of the relationship between the technician and the person 
who receives the inputs, the information. Sometimes, under special 
circumstances, the devices or mechanisms transform into institutions, 
or into social representational systems. Symbolic production would 
change the behaviour of communities, but this is exceptional. One 
example is when a paradigm shift occurs; first-order cybernetics in 
the 1940s and second-order cybernetics in the 1970s changed human 
behaviour, therefore cybernetics is a definition of behavioural design 
into some kind of environment. In the 1940s, it was more unidirectional, 
while in second-order cybernetics it was more heterarchical and less 
centralized. This entire small localized process was located in the glob­
al process, and simultaneously in a dialogue with the global process, 
with effects playing out back and forth between both sides.
‘Why did cybernetics end in Latin America?’ is an open question, 
given that for many people cybernetics ended in the 1970s, when state 
development models stopped predominating as a national government 
model. One primary example, Cybersyn in Chile during the 1970s, was 
the last step in this period of development by the State. When present­
ing this question to other countries, some stated that they continued 
to try to work on cybernetics in the 1980s. This question is an open 
research opportunity for anyone interested in writing a new history of 
this field. The crossed timelines in the diagram are models of learning, 
models of participation, and models of organization. These three ele­
ments will produce a fourth element: the action.
The first step, or first paradigm, is in the 1943 paper by Wiener, 
Rosenblueth and Bigelow mentioned above, where they sketch out a 
structure of behavioural design. In an interdisciplinary network and en­
vironment framework, they show different environmental design steps, 
including the first (and second, and third) orders of behaviour predic­
tion. The name ‘first-order’ arose from the fact that it was the first or­
der of behaviour design, going unidirectionally from the technician to 
the people. In second-order cybernetics, the people who receive this 

206
WHY DID CYBERNETICS DISAPPEAR FROM LATIN AMERICA?
design have also been part of the design formulation process, and they 
have made decisions on the result. This methodology, which has also 
received the name co-op design, is based on an evolved conception 
of feedback. However, second-order cybernetics only entered the his­
tory of cybernetics in a practical way during the late 1960s. The initial 
statement came from ‘Behavior, Purpose, and Teleology’. The idea of 
feedback came from neurological studies. In 1942, while Rosenblueth 
was in the United States, his teacher sent him to give a lecture at the 
Josiah Macy Foundation3 about feedback and circular causality. At this 
time, the Macy Conference did not yet exist as an institution of cyber­
netics in the United States, but the lecture was attended by, among 
others; Warren McCulloch, Margaret Mead, Gregory Bateson, and 
other important cyberneticians of the 1950s. Mead remembered and 
wrote about this thirty years later. As previously noted, though, Rosen- 
blueth went to Mexico in the 1944 to work in a national public neuro­
logical research institution, on the condition that he could invite his 
teachers Walter Cannon and Norbert Wiener. Wiener lived part-time 
in Mexico in the 1940s while working at this institute. They continued 
discussing the same topics, leading to Wiener writing his famous book 
Cybernetics: Or the Control of Communication in Animals and Ma- 
chines.4 The Mexican publisher Enrique Freyman, residing in Paris at 
the time, spurred on publication by promising Wiener that he would 
publish the book upon completion through his publishing house Her­
mann (later they associated with The Technology Press, predecessor 
of MIT Press, and Wiley publishing house). At the same time, within this 
new framework in Mexico, Rosenblueth invited Ramon Alvarez-Buylla, 
a Spanish scientist who lived in Mexico and did neurological research 
in the USSR, to collaborate with them. Alvarez-Buylla was a disciple of 
the precursor of cybernetics Pyotr Anokhin, author of the theory of the 
functional system. They continued the research in Latin America. They 
conversed in French and English, but Rosenblueth insisted that they 
write in Spanish, in order to build a research environment in the region. 
They led the Department of Physiology of the Center for Research and
3 Regarding this historic juncture in 1942, I recommend reviewing Ruth
Guzik’s research, e.g.: ‘Relaciones de un cientifico mexicano con el extranjero: El 
caso de Arturo Rosenblueth’ (Relations of a Mexican scientist with foreigners: The 
example of Arthur Rosenbleuth), RMIE 14, no. 40 (2009): 43-67.
4 
Norbert Wiener, Cybernetics: Or Control and Communication in the Animal
and the Machine (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1948).

DAVID MAULEN DE LOS REYES
207
Advanced Studies (CINVESTAV), an important neurological research 
institute since the 1960s, as it still is today.
At this point, we can begin to discuss devices. The design and 
management of behaviour within a state framework began with the 
president of Guatemala, Jacobo Arbenz, as far back as the early 1950s. 
Arbenz contracted an engineer from New Zealand, William Phillips, who 
invented a new computer that worked with water instead of electricity, 
named the Monetary National Income Analogue Computer (MONIAC), 
used in the Guatamalan National Central Bank. This system allowed 
users to visualize the future of the national economy on screens with 
a greater or lesser amount of water in glasses, and was one of the first 
experiments with the cybernetic control of a national economy.5
5 After Arbenz nationalized natural resources and commodities and 
attempted a land reform, his government was interrupted by a military coup. I 
would like to thank Andres Burbano for informing me of this case on centralized 
planning of the economy using a computer, twenty years before the Cybersyn eco­
nomic predictions.
Another important part of the history of cybernetics in Latin 
America is related to the Hochschule Fur Gestaltung (HfG, the School 
of Design) in Ulm, Germany, in the 1950s. It presented some similarities 
and several crucial differences with the Dessau Bauhaus (1926-1932). 
The United States provided 50 per cent of the funding for HfG Ulm in 
the 1950s, on the condition that the director should not be German. 
The new director was Max Bill, a former Bauhaus student from Swit­
zerland. Bill set out a new policy that 50 per cent of the students and 
50 per cent of the teachers should not be German. The implementation 
of this decision had unpredictable and remarkable consequences. The 
change of this very important school in the 1950s and early 1960s had 
a strong impact on Latin America, India and Japan, when students re­
turned from Ulm to their own countries and created design schools 
or institutional design production practices, adapting the ideas of the 
HfG Ulm to their own economic and cultural contexts. One of the first 
teachers at HfG Ulm was the philosopher Max Bense, director of the 
Information Department from 1954 to 1958. Bense was a theorist with 
his own interpretation of first-order cybernetics, which he imparted 
during his teaching career in HfG Ulm to a large number of Latin Ameri­
can students. The definition Bense gave to cybernetics at this time was 
derived from Charles Peirce’s semiotic theory, from David Birkhoff’s 

208
WHY DID CYBERNETICS DISAPPEAR FROM LATIN AMERICA?
mathematical theory of aesthetics, from Claude Shannon’s information 
theory, and from Wiener’s ideas about first-order cybernetics. Bense 
even invited Wiener to the school as a guest lecturer in 1955. He worked 
only briefly in Ulm, and his classes on cybernetics were continued by 
Horst Rittel from 1958. Rittel is important because with these ideas, he 
began to talk about systemic design, and translated his ideas of cyber­
netics into the design process. After Rittel left HfG Ulm in 1963, the last 
teacher of cybernetics at the school was Abraham Moles.
After Bense moved on from HfG Ulm, he became fascinated with 
the development of the avant-garde in Brazil. He travelled to Bra­
zil frequently in the early 1960s because he considered avant-garde 
neo-concrete art to be a kind of mathematical aesthetic theory. Sub­
sequently, in 1966, one of these neo-concrete artists, Waldemar Cor­
deiro, took up Bense’s ideas, and in 1970 began to do ‘Arteonica’, or 
electronic art, working with computers, without seeing them as mere 
instruments. On the contrary, he thought that information technology, 
as a social and cultural evolution of gestalt theory, was very import­
ant for the relationship between human environments and technology, 
which grew out of Bense’s influence and the exchange with Brazilians 
in the 1960s. Some South American students at HfG Ulm in the 1950s 
included the Brazilian Alexander Wollner, who studied under Bense. In 
the 1960s Wollner used some of the Bense’s ideas to Escola Superior 
de Desenho Industrial (ESDI), the famous design school in Rio de Ja­
neiro. Another HfG Ulm student of this time was the Chilean Eduardo 
Vargas, who also studied under Bense and Rittel, and returned to Chile 
in 1960. Vargas used models of interactional design and the model of 
organization, which was taught in HfG Ulm particularly by Bill, apply­
ing them for designing self-construction housing co-operatives in the 
1960s in the port of Valparaiso. This was a successful interpretation 
of co-op design, in which he was also influenced by the systemic ap­
proach of Christopher Alexander. In 1968, Vargas became the director 
of the Catholic University of Valpara^so TV channel (UCV TV). Perhaps 
the most famous case was the German designer Gui Bonsiepe. After 
studying in HfG Ulm in the 1950s, he became a teacher there during 
the 1960s. After HfG Ulm closed in 1968, Bonsiepe came to Chile with 
the help of the International Labor Organization (ILO) and the Import 
Substitution Program (ISI), under a United Nations (UN) contract, and 
worked at the National Development Corporation (Corporacion de 
Fomento de la Produccion de Chile, CORFO). The UN programmes 

DAVID MAULEN DE LOS REYES
209
bringing a strong influence to bear on the Third World to move their 
economies away from commodities and to focus on industrial technol­
ogy. The work which Bonsiepe did at CORFO was very important for the 
well-known Cybersyn project (1971-73). Further influences included the 
already-mentioned Arteonica by Waldemar Cordeiro, as well as from 
Tomas Maldonado, an Argentinian teacher in HfG Ulm in the 1950s who 
became the rector there during the 1960s. They are influences that go 
in two directions, although the HfG Ulm is the one that influences in a 
more visible way, also, for example, the ideas of the concrete move­
ment of Argentina and Brazil, influenced in their own way the pedagogy 
of Maldonado in the HfG Ulm, or in Bense’s ideas.
Environment
The environment was an important element of cybernetics in the 1940s, 
but became even more significant in the 1960s. The word for environ­
ment in German, Umwelt, has different definitions. It is an important 
element in cybernetics where human beings, and the relationship be­
tween the human being and the different social, technological or cul­
tural environments around them, are the main purpose. Technology is 
only an interface or device between human beings and environment, 
not a principal object. This concept of the environment has different 
roots. For example, Rosenblueth’s lecture at the Macy Foundation in 
New York in 1942, emphasized the importance of technical biological 
and physical behaviour in the environment. The concept also appeared 
in the new curriculum of the Architecture School at the University of 
Chile in 1946. When they interpreted the Bauhaus Dessau curriculum 
of 1928-1930, they defined three concepts of the environment; tech­
nological, social, and natural. During the final period of the HfG Ulm, 
influenced by Jakob von Uexkull’s Umwelt concept, efforts were made 
to change the HfG Ulm into an institute for environmental design re­
search, ultimately to no avail. Following this episode, Maldonado wrote 
a book in 1971 about human beings and social changes concerning 
technology, published in Spanish in Argentina by a publisher created 
by Maldonado in the 1950s, Nueva Vision or NV (the New Vision).

210
WHY DID CYBERNETICS DISAPPEAR FROM LATIN AMERICA?
Network
Argentina saw cybernetics develop through a process similar to that 
in Mexico. The principal figure in Argentine cybernetics of this period 
is Manuel Sadosky, who was an important mathematical and comput­
ing teacher in the 1950s and formed a group of scientists from vari­
ous fields. He began to write about cybernetics in 1951. Following this 
phase, between 1955 and 1966 he began to research computing in the 
main public state university, the Universidad de Buenos Aires (UBA), 
with a cohort of scholars including Rolando Garcia, Ernesto Garcia 
Camarero, Pedro Zadunaisky, Sigfrido Mazza, Julian Araos, Mario Gra- 
dowczyk, Oscar Maggiolo, Amilcar Herrera, Hugo Scolnik and Oscar 
Varsavsky. Together with Hernan Rodriguez Campoamor, Sadosky 
wrote Psychology and Cybernetics, published in Buenos Aires in 1958, 
raising a critique of the technozoism of the concept ‘electronic brain’.6 
Technozoism is a philosophical position configured by those cybernet­
icists who support the existence of thinking, sensitive or emotional au­
tomatons or mechanisms.7 This occurred almost simultaneously with 
Rosenblueth publishing a paper on the same topic, which is cited crit­
ically by Argentine authors. During this period in national universities 
in South America, including Chile and Argentina, the common process 
to study computing was to begin by doing classes within the universi­
ties, then go abroad to do research, followed by buying computers to 
bring to South America for research purposes. These actions led many 
participants to desire to produce such devices for themselves in the 
future. In 1961 work began at UBA with a famous computer imported 
from the UK and named Clementina. The enthusiasm for solving prob­
lems from public and social life, as well as private enterprise, through 
mathematical models, even led to the creation of programming that 
expanded the original capacity of the Ferranti Mercury or Clementina 
computer. One of the main objectives, in addition to education, was to 
create a national agency or national state company dedicated to com­
puting. However, a military intervention in 1966 led to the work at UBA 
being closed down. At this juncture, the scholars decided that rather 
6 Hernan Rodriguez Campoamor and Manuel Sadosky, Psicologfa y ciber- 
netica (Psychology and cybernetics) (Buenos Aires: Siglo XX, 1958).
7 Ibid.

DAVID MAULEN DE LOS REYES
211
than going to Europe or the United States, they would remain in South 
America. Some of the Sadosky cohort went to Chile, others went to 
Peru, and still others went to Venezuela and Brazil. Oscar Varsavsky 
left Argentina and ultimately taught at the Popular Participation Study 
Center (CENTRO) with scientists from Brazil in 1974. There Varsavsky, 
with the support of the United Nations Development Program (UNDP), 
could explain his Numex mathematical model, while Carlos Senna also 
taught the Viable System Model (VSM) used with Cybersyn in Chile.
Sadosky could not continue to work at the university after 1966, 
but he continued working as a private technician. He moved across 
the River Plate to the Department of Computing at the University of 
the Republic in Uruguay. Here we can see an example of this network. 
Amilcar Herrera came from the Sadosky cohort in Argentina to the 
National University of Chile, and edited a publication about the future 
of technology and society with different scholars from Latin America, 
followed by a return to Argentina in 1971. At this time, he did not go 
to Buenos Aires; rather, he came to the well-known semi-private Fun- 
dacion Bariloche in the Andean resort city of the same name. Herrera 
was accompanied by a fellow Argentine scholar from the Sadosky's 
group, Hugo Scolnik, who collaborated with him on a very complex 
model for the future based on data processed by the computer cen­
ter created in Bariloche. The model was called ‘Latin American World 
Model’ (Modelo Mundial Latinoamericano or MML). Scientists such as 
Graciela Chichilnisky participated in this approach. Decades later, be­
ginning in 1997, she would promote the Kyoto protocol, extending the 
1992 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UN- 
FCCC). The MML came from a critical answer to the model ‘The Limits 
of Growth’ formulated by scientists at the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology (MIT), which stated that within forty to fifty years the earth 
could no longer support humanity with the same growth model as in 
the early 1970s. However, the Argentinian scientists and scholars at 
the Bariloche Foundation thought that the MIT model was incomplete 
and lacking in complexity, which led them to create the MML. It states: 
‘We answer North American computing with South American comput­
ing’. The fruit of their efforts was a model with four zones in the world 
and five main factors, which they considered more complex than the 
MIT model, and became very well known in Austria. The Internation­
al Institute for Applied System Analysis (IIASA) Colloquium presented 
this model in 1974. It was translated into German, English and French, 

212
WHY DID CYBERNETICS DISAPPEAR FROM LATIN AMERICA?
but after the Argentine military coup of 1976, the work of the Bariloche 
Foundation stopped. Despite this, in 1978 the UN invited the authors 
of the MML from Bariloche to formulate a new model for calculating 
basic needs. Figure 5 shows one of the models they did for the future 
of Globality in the early 1970s.
Fig. 5: Fundacion Bariloche 
computing centre, and a 
visual representation of the 
Latin American World Model 
(MML) developed and dis­
seminated between 1972 and 
1976. Photos and diagram 
courtesy of Dr Hugo Scolnik.
Second-order
To understand second-order cybernetics, especially in the 1960s or 
1970s, we must understand its concept of heterarchy. The word ‘cyber­
netics’ was coined in 1947 by Arturo Rosenblueth and Norbert Wiener, 
and originally came from the Greek word ‘KuPepvnTiKri’, around the 
fourth century BC, which is also the root of government, organization, 
management, and so on. In the 1960s, British cybernetician Stafford 
Beer used the word ‘heterarchical’, meaning a decentralized model 
wherein people who received the design can decide for themselves.
As a South American reference, we can see that in the Chilean 
context of the 1920s, the movement of the active school raised a con­
cept of heterarchy similar to that of second-order cybernetics. To elab­
orate further, in the 1930s the same teachers from the active school 
movement made graphic visual designs in which they proposed pub­
lic schools as the nodes of a system of social organization that would 

DAVID MAULEN DE LOS REYES
213
administer the territory in a decentralized and participatory manner. 
This approach highlights the importance of first having a type of de­
centralized epistemology, where decisions about the use of technol­
ogy follow after achieving this epistemology. This knowledge was al­
ready clearly stated in Chile in 1936, several decades before Beer used 
the concept of heterarchy at CORFO in 1971. This epistemology from 
the active school with each part of the system can also make decisions 
for itself. Here is the heterarchical model (Fig. 6):
Fig. 6: The decentralized 
administration approach to 
educational reform of the 
active school in Chile in 1928, 
and its projection into the 
territory, is the first great ref­
erence for the local heterar­
chy. In 1936 the ‘nerve group’ 
in Curico (Chile) published a 
visualization of these ideas. 
Diagram courtesy of Leonora 
Reyes Jedlicki.
After the end of World War II, there was a second great exam­
ple before Beer worked in CORFO, when he discussed the VSM as an 
interpretation of second-order cybernetics. This model has three ba­
sic elements; human beings, nature and the social environment, and 
technology. During the 1940s at the new School of Architecture at the 
University of Chile, we can see the three factors in the new curriculum 
for design and architecture studies; human beings (H), nature (N), and 
materials (M). The material gives rise to technological devices, nature 
provides environmental concepts, and from the human being comes 
biology (Fig. 7).

214
WHY DID CYBERNETICS DISAPPEAR FROM LATIN AMERICA?
Fig. 7: The human being, 
nature (the natural and social 
environment), and material 
(technology) were the three 
basic elements of the new 
curriculum of the School 
of Architecture, University 
of Chile, from 1946 to 1963. 
Redrawn by the author from 
the original, the handwritten 
version was published in 
the magazine Arquitecturay 
Construction, Chile 11 (1947). 
The original image, drawn 
by Tibor Weiner, Abraham 
Schapira and Jorge Bruno 
Gonzalez, was presented 
and explained by bio-ar­
chitecture professor Jose 
Garciatello at the sixth 
Pan-American Congress of 
Architecture at the National 
University of Engineering 
(Universidad Nacional de 
Ingeniena, UNI) Lima, Peru 
in 1947.
Since the 1940s, Chilean design students in the National Archi­
tectural School had to study biology for the design of architecture and 
urban planning, and also worked within a heterarchical model. They 
tried to change the institutional direction of common space design for 
planning during the 1950s and 1960s. This meant that once the cyber­
netic project under Beer actually began in the 1970s, there was already 
twenty years of experience within the national institution for public 
development with such ideas, which we can also call second-order 
cybernetics, or at least VSM. When considering the concept of envi­
ronment in the architectural studies programme in the late 1940s, it is 
possible to recognize how they were discussing the concept of envi­
ronment and nature, environment and technology, environment and 
human biology, psychology, community, and other factors, well over 
twenty years before the arrival of Beer in 1971. This concept was further 
developed in the 1950s with the notion of designing a city as a living 
system, which changed urban planning laws in the 1960s and created 
a framework for the next cybernetic work at the National Development 
Agency. An example is the bio-architecture studies from Chile in the 
1940s, where housing is a cell in a biological system (Fig. 8).

DAVID MAULEN DE LOS REYES
215
Fig. 8: Diagram of ‘the basic 
molecule of inhabiting’ within 
the concept of ‘the city de­
signed as a living organism’. 
Drawing by Ricardo Tapia- 
Chuaqui in Tibor Weiner’s 
workshop, at the University of 
Chile in 1946. Image courtesy 
Tapia-Chuaqui/Hola family, 
Beatriz Mella and Alejandro 
Crispiani.
During the 1930s, when Rosenblueth was working with Wiener in 
the United States, he helped Latin American scholars. One such case 
was the Chilean Joaquin Luco, who studied with Wiener and Rosen- 
blueth in 1937 and 1938, and upon returning to Chile in the 1950s found­
ed the new Department of Neurological studies at Catholic University 
Medicine Faculty. The Chilean biology scholar Mario Luxoro was sim­
ilar, since he studied electrophysiology and electron microscopy and 
got a PhD from MIT in 1957. Upon returning to Chile, Luxoro created a 
cellular physiology laboratory (Montemar) in 1965, the same year that 
he helped create the Faculty of Sciences at the University of Chile.
Francisco Varela, one of the co-authors of the autopoiesis theo­
ry of 1970, was a student strongly influenced by Luco at the Catholic 
University School of Medicine in 1964. He continued his studies at the 
new Faculty of Sciences at the University of Chile from 1965 to 1967, 
where he met Humberto Maturana and where he returned to in 1970 to 
become a professor after earning his PhD at Harvard.
During the same timeframe, to continue considering the impact 
of a possible VSM on architecture and state-led urban planning, the 
model of the city designing system in the 1960s in Chile used the same 
framework from the 1940s. This presented the same epistemology of 
the active school for the territory, determining that it should be a system 
with an organic, dynamic structure with decentralization in each part of 
the system. There would be no centralized model, and each part would 
make its own decisions for working. This fundamental epistemology for 
second-order cybernetics is not unidirectional or centralized.

216
WHY DID CYBERNETICS DISAPPEAR FROM LATIN AMERICA?
Maturana was another notable exemplar of the proto-cybernetic 
Chilean scientists who studied in the United States in the mid-twenti­
eth century and invested in the development of an organic state. Mat- 
urana studied at MIT between 1958 and 1960. With the support of Heinz 
von Foerster, he began to work on the problem of how computing can 
approximate neurological or biological systems.
Chile had a similar history to Argentina; in 1958 at National Univer­
sity (later as University of Chile), Guillermo Gonzalez did digital comput­
ing with the name COMEX for experiments at the school. They created 
a department of computing at the National University with scientists 
such as Carlos Martinoya, who in 1958 had proposed to transform the 
Laboratory of Servomechanisms of the Faculty of Engineering into a 
computer centre. Martinoya was an engineer who also studied visual 
perception and biology, and began to teach in the Faculty of Sciences 
in the 1960s, at the time Varela was a student there. In Santiago, Efram 
Friedman was the director of the Computing Centre at the University of 
Chile when they began to study using a German ER-56 computer nick­
named Lorenz. This centre wanted to work on computing parallel with 
what was happening in Argentina with the Sadosky group at the same 
time. In the 1960s, the engineering faculty at University of Chile dedi­
cated 25 per cent of their curriculum for engineers to the humanities 
and social sciences. In 1968, CORFO created the National Company of 
Computing (ECOM). Personnel from the computing department at the 
University of Chile went to CORFO to sign the national cooperation for 
development. When Friedman came from the University of Chile to this 
place, the framework came from CORFO and the National Computing 
Company, along with the Institute for Technology Research supported 
by the UN at first, followed by support from the Chilean government.
Figure 9 records a very notable moment; it originally came from a 
book made by a teacher at the Technical State University (Universidad 
Tecnica del Estado, UTE).

DAVID MAULEN DE LOS REYES
217
Fig. 9: ‘Elements of compu­
tation’, a manual for teaching 
programming to high school 
students developed by 
professors at the Technical 
State University (Universidad 
Tecnica del Estado, UTE) Ines 
Harding and Jaime Michelow 
in 1972, published by the 
University of Chile in 1973.
At this institution in the early 1970s, professors Jaime Michelow 
and Ines Harding created a teaching programme for national secondary 
school education, where public school students had to learn to write 
programmes. In this public school teaching guide made by Michelow 
and Harding, we can see the only IBM 360 unit the national computer 
company had, as well as how they taught students to programme.
This brings us to perhaps the most famous moment in the his­
tory of Chilean cybernetics, when CORFO contracted Beer, who had 
worked in England in the 1960s. When CORFO hired Beer in 1971, his 
company Sigma had already advised Chilean Customs at the port of 
Valparaiso in the use of its new computer implemented in 1960. Beer 
worked as a business advisor during the 1950s and 1960s, specializ­
ing in management, at a time characterized by labour governments, 
large state-owned steel and coal companies, and union involvement in 
decision-making. The following note was made by Stafford during his 
second Chilean period (1971-73): ‘If the gov is the people’ (Fig. 10). Beer 
explained many times the impact of his first meeting with President

218
WHY DID CYBERNETICS DISAPPEAR FROM LATIN AMERICA?
Salvador Allende in 1971, who had also studied medicine. Beer always 
remembers that when he was going to explain that System 5 of the 
VSM was the decision space where he, ‘comrade President’, would be, 
Allende interrupted him and said: ‘System 5, the decision space, where 
the people will be’. This was a way of interpreting Beer’s ‘heterarchy’ 
in a radical way.
Fig. 10: ‘If the gov(ernment) is 
the people’, post-it note writ­
ten by Stafford Beer, placed 
on top of his personal folders 
and files on the Cybersyn 
project (Chile 1971-73) 
donated to Liverpool John 
Moores University. Courtesy 
of The Stafford Beer 
Archive at Liverpool John 
Moores University Special 
Collections & Archives.
The idea of the decentralized system for second-order cybernet­
ics is that each part of the system made self-management decisions, 
which was a principal cybernetic goal. This arose in part from a differ­
ent national production model, because the Workers' United Center 
of Chile (Central Unica de Trabajadores, CUT) made a new deal with 
the government in the 1970s for greater decentralisation in production 
organisation. In 1939 the government and national agencies began to 
create national enterprises and companies with CORFO. By the early 
1970s, though, this tactic changed as the government bought out pri­
vate industries which they deemed strategic for the country, leaving 
them with management responsibilities in many industries. This need 
led them to hire Beer, with the expectation that he could teach them 
how to manage all these national industries with the second-order cy­
bernetic model.
Usually when the socialist cybernetics of the Cybersyn project 
are mentioned, it is associated with the socialist cybernetics of the 

DAVID MAULEN DE LOS REYES
219
USSR or GDR of that time. In general, Soviet cybernetics of the 1960s 
and 1970s had more influence in Cuba, and marginally more in Mexico, 
Venezuela, Argentina, and even Brazil.
After some research about cybernetics in socialist Germany, its 
connections with Latin America are not yet clear.8 In this sense, Cy- 
bersyn was a type of socialist cybernetics of its own interpretation, 
because it was not exactly the same approach that Beer could apply in 
England. Fig. 11 shows a model by Beer in CORFO in 1973, and first ap­
peared in the bulletin of the Institute of Technological Research (Intec) 
belonging to CORFO.
8 Unlike the link with GDR cybernetics, obviously Cuba had a very strong rela­
tionship with the USSR cybernetics, especially in the early 1970s. The difference 
between these two types of ‘socialist cybernetics’ seems to be that in the case of 
the USSR, the cybernetic administration would correspond specifically to spe­
cialized technicians, whereas the objective of Cybersyn was that the workers, and 
even the general population as in the Cyberfolk (a subproject of Cybersyn), would 
manage the system themselves. I thank Slava Gerovitch for this last specification.
Fig. 11: Stafford Beer’s 
viable system model (VSM), 
inspired by the central 
nervous system, applied in 
the Chilean Cybersyn project 
between 1971 and 1973.
Published in INTEC CORFO’s 
Bulletin 4 (1973), courtesy 
of Fernando Portal Archive. 
Image redrawn form the 
original by the author.
1NTEC 4 VI 73

220
WHY DID CYBERNETICS DISAPPEAR FROM LATIN AMERICA?
Beer’s VSM is made up of six parts (environment, System 1, Sys­
tem 2, System 3, System 4, and System 5), and CORFO baptized it as 
the Synco in 1972. As Corfo was the one that coordinated all state com­
panies, Intec also worked within this scheme.
The diagram in Fig. 11 may be the first drawing of the system used 
in CORFO and its subsidiaries such as INTEC or ECOM; it was made 
in 1972. The circle with the letters A, B, C, D, E represents the external 
social and natural environment. The structure with the arrows is a met­
aphorical approximation of the spinal column and nervous system. The 
organs outside (the skin) and inside the human body are System 1 and 
System 2—the devices and interfaces. Information that comes from 
the environment across the skin come to the organs of the system, 
both System 1 and System 2. It then enters the spinal column and trav­
els along the narrow system to the neck. Systems 1, 2 and 3 are in the 
present tense. The function of System 1 is implementation, its admin­
istrative entity is the unit, and its stage in data processing is data entry. 
The function of System 2 is coordination, its administrative entity is the 
department or division, and its stage in a data process is storage. The 
function of System 3 is management control, its administrative entity 
is sub-management, and its stage in a data process is pre-processing 
and exploration.
The neck is System 4, where we have the cerebellum, the neuro­
logical management of the body, and it then goes to the brain where 
the system makes the decisions, constituting System 5. The System 4 
time-horizon is the future, its function in management is intelligence 
and foresight, its administrative entity is research, development and 
analysis, and its stage in a data process is modelling and visualization. 
The time horizon of System 5 is uncertainty in the present and future, 
its function in management is political-regulatory, its administrative 
entity is the management or board of directors, its type of stage in a 
data process is the start of production.9
9 
I am especially grateful for the assistance from Rodrigo Fernandez Albornoz
in synthesizing the viable system model clearly, along with his valuable profes­
sional experience.
With this model of the neurological system, Beer translated these 
concepts to national industrial management. Another example of the 
heterarchical system appears in Fig. 12. Chile is strip, or ribbon, and has 
had a centralized model dating to colonial times (1500-1800). With the 

DAVID MAULEN DE LOS REYES
221
organic model from the 1960s and 1950s, we can see Santiago in the cen­
tre of the country. However, with Arica in the far north and Punta Arenas 
in the far south, we can see other operational cells of the systems.
Fig. 12: General decentralized 
structure from the extreme 
north to the extreme south of 
Chile, for state industry ad­
ministration through real-time 
data transmission and econom­
ic-productive variable predic­
tions. Redrawn from an original 
drawing by Stafford Beer pub­
lished in the Chilean magazine 
Que pasa ? (September 1973).
In 1968, Gui Bonsiepe came from HfG Ulm to Chile with the sup­
port of the International Labour Organization of the UN after studying 
first-order cybernetics with Max Bense and Horst Rittel. With this back­
ground, Bonsiepe arrived at the national agency CORFO in Chile in 1968 
as advisor, and after 1970 was rehired by the government of Chile to 
coordinate the industrial design produced by CORFO. Two other de­
signers, who were former students of the HfG Ulm, came to work with 
Bonsiepe at the National Institute for Development of Technology (IN­
TEC CORFO) in this second stage; Werner Zempt and Michael Weiss. 
Bonsiepe and his team manufactured the Cybersyn project devices for 
Beer, while also applying his background from first-order cybernetics 
to perform his own interpretation between first-order cybernetics and 
the ideas of Beer’s second-order cybernetics during the same time. The 
important paradigm shift implemented by Bonsiepe while working with 
CORFO was the interface concept. Interaction design was crucial in a 

222
WHY DID CYBERNETICS DISAPPEAR FROM LATIN AMERICA?
project about second-order cybernetics, because the design of the in­
teraction is very close to behavioural design with these two definitions 
of first and second order cybernetics. Bonsiepe tried to operate this 
very complex system from the economy, politics, and management.
Bonsiepe focused on aesthetics and interaction design while 
working on Cybersyn (the name is a contraction of cybernetic syner­
gy; it was also known as the Synco project), concentrating on digital 
and analogue interfaces in both two and three dimensions with the 
concept of interaction interface. The visual information design which 
they created offered some examples of the devices created for Cy- 
bersyn. Within this project, there was another project named Checo 
(Chilean economy) focusing on prospectives of stability, which Beer 
developed based on Ashby's idea about calculating variability. These 
applied ideas mean that ‘variety alone absorbs variety’.10 That is, the 
disturbances which a system presents to another system (variety) can 
only be reduced or eliminated through the same or greater variety. At 
that date it was common for economic forecasts (foresight) to be made 
with information several months back, in this project (Checo) it was 
done with information in real time. For that, Ashby’s theory of the re­
quired variety was used, to evaluate the elements that were necessary, 
or were not necessary, to make this future prediction of the economy 
and make decisions in the present with this information, especially with 
the network of state company connections.
10 Beer describes the influence Ross Ashby had on him in Diagnosing the 
System for Organisations (London: John Wiley, 1985).
The group Bonsiepe led in the same agency did the screens in 
which it was possible to see a display of data on the future of the econ­
omy, and the different factors of the country’s productive chain, with 
the production of these complex economy models and variability. In 
this story, it is also important to remember that in the early 1950s there 
was a precedent of Checo in Guatemala with the MONIAC (Fig. 13), 
whose implementation was attempted in a project for natural resource 
nationalization under a social democratic government interrupted by a 
coup d’etat in 1954.

DAVID MAULEN DE LOS REYES
223
Fig. 13: The MONIAC com­
puter designed by the New 
Zealand economist William 
Phillips, used by the Central 
Bank of Guatemala in the 
early 1950s (a computer that 
worked with water). It is a 
distant antecedent of the 
Checo (Chilean economy) 
project. Checo was a com­
ponent part of the 1971-73 
Chilean Cybersyn project. 
The computer in the picture 
is the version of the MONIAC 
used by Phillips at the London 
School of Economics (LSE) in 
1958. Courtesy LSE Library.
In Guatemala, there was an attempt to perform prospectives (pro­
jection of possible future scenarios, especially economic ones) and 
economic management with computing in the national bank for a so­
cial-democratic government. Checo continued this trend twenty years 
later with greater complexity. At the same time, with the same model 
of natural resource nationalization, and promotion of the technology 
industry that would create added value through decentralized models 
of administration, decision-making, and interaction, they began to de­
sign, develop and manufacture the devices in the same country. For in­
stance, the cheaper TV prototype ANTU was used in the Cybersyn proj­
ect Cyberfolk. Cyberfolk was a Cybersyn sub-project that consisted of 
real-time decision-making, in which city residents could vote online on 
the decisions of their municipal council, which also had an eye on pro­
ducing technology within the same country where it was used. The In­
dustry of Radio and Television (IRT), an agency associated with CORFO, 
produced different electronic devices for information technology and

224
WHY DID CYBERNETICS DISAPPEAR FROM LATIN AMERICA?
interaction design during these years. All of this industrial production 
ended in 1973 (Fig. 14).
Fig. 14: Antu television 
manufactured by the 
defunct National Radio and 
Television Company (IRT- 
CORFO) in Arica, Chile, be­
tween 1971 and 1973. It was 
used in the closed circuit of 
the Cyberfolk project, which 
consisted of the inhabitants 
of the cities of Mejillones 
in the north of Chile and 
Tome in the south of Chile 
being able to use the Antu 
television installed in their 
homes to watch meetings 
of the municipal councils 
within their two respective 
cities. When the council was 
about to make a decision, 
the residents of each city 
could vote directly on 
these decisions via remote 
control while watching on 
closed-circuit TV. Part of the 
Cybersyn-CORFO project. 
Photo courtesy of Sebastian 
Concha, Arica City Museum.
At the same time, it must be noted that the Cybersyn project was 
not the only second-order cybernetic project in Chile, since second-or­
der cybernetic projects were part of the spirit of the Unidad Popular era 
(1970-73). For instance between 1971 and 1972, the National Ministry 
for Urban Planning and Housing (MINVU) designed and built a crucial 
building for the UN conference about third world development (UNCT­
AD III), completed in ten months. Normally at that time, such a building 
would take three years, but they did it in ten months using the prospec­
tive (predictive) system with computing, before April 1972, with a Crit­
ical Path Method (CPM) model and with programmes evaluation and 
review technique (PERT) model. Prospective is a management concept 
used in Cybernetics, designating prediction of behavior.
This took place in a heterarchical way, with the engineers teach­
ing the workers how to introduce information every day, and how to 
do the prospective planning for the construction one day in the week. 
Another example was at the National Technology University (UTE), 

DAVID MAULEN DE LOS REYES
225
where Jaime Michelow taught. Between 1968 and 1973 they worked 
on a similar system for a decentralized university management sys­
tem through a telex network coordinated by a central computer in the 
different regions of the country with schools belonging to the UTE. 
These examples illustrate how second-order cybernetics had a lot of 
resonances in this historical moment, where there was a great deal of 
thought given to managing computing in a more effective and decen­
tralized way.
We now come to considering the devices themselves. Before the 
neoliberal policies that began in the 1970s in Chile, the UN support­
ed the development of technology and design education as a tool to 
support third world economies. One of the exceptional cases was the 
agreement of the HfG Ulm with UNESCO in 1965. At the same time, 
many governments of Central American and South American countries 
in general also supported these policies of their own technological de­
velopment in different ways (Argentina, Chile, Mexico, and Cuba, for 
example). These are the devices made in Latin America in the early 
1970s, such as those of the National Development Agency where Bon- 
siepe and other designers were working with young Chilean young Cy- 
berners; they could manufacture calculators, tools, and radio devices.
They tried to move into computing, but the institution’s work was 
stopped with the military coup in Chile in 1973. But, at the same time, 
Sadosky was working as a private citizen after being barred from uni­
versity employment, which led him to make calculator tools in Argenti- 
na—the famous Cifra 311—and another Argentina technician, Juan Salo- 
nia and Hector Muller, separately worked on the creation of computers 
in Cordova city in 1976. At the same time in Chile and as a side story, 
Jose Vicente Asuar created the compute Comdasuar in 1978. Asuar was 
a musician and became one of the first electronic musicians in Chile 
in the 1960s, but he was an engineer as well. Asuar worked in the Uni­
versity of Chile until the military coup in 1973, after which he created 
a computer for technological music in his home due to being banned 
from university work.
On the other side of the continent, for example, the creation of 
the CID-201 computer was very important, at the University of Havana, 
Cuba in 1970; in the 1980s, the Mexican commercial computer Printa- 
form, by Jorge Espinoza-Meireles, was very successful.
Another remarkable parallel story is that of Hellmuth Stuven, 
an engineer with MINVU, who wrote the cybernetic programme for 

226
WHY DID CYBERNETICS DISAPPEAR FROM LATIN AMERICA?
building construction in Chile for UNCTAD III in 1972. He went into ex­
ile in Denmark during the 1970s and early 1980s, after which he worked 
on the design and production of the personal computer named Thor.
In a context similar to the rest of Latin America, in which the 
production of their own technology is not common, but with specific 
conditions that are slightly different from those of Chile, Argentina or 
Mexico, in Cuba during the late 1960s and early 1970s, there was obvi­
ously a strong influence from Soviet cybernetics, but it was not only the 
reference. Cuban specialists also discussed Wiener and Rosenblueth 
as major referents for first-order cybernetics in the 1940s—they wrote 
about this. Cuba founded a cybernetics institute in 1971, where the re­
search Beer produced was extensively discussed. During this time, 
Cuba produced some devices as well, such as the Silna 999 analogue 
computer in 1968, and the CID-201 computer in 1970.
In Mexico, one pioneer in teaching architecture with computers 
in the 1970s was Alvaro Sanchez, who aimed to apply systemic design 
and systemic cybernetic theory in architecture, and in 1977 published 
the book Sistemas Arquitectonicosy Urbanos. Introduction a la teori'a 
de sistemas aplicado a la arquitectura y a la planificacion urbana (Ar­
chitectural and Urban Systems. Introduction to systems theory applied 
to architecture and urban planning). Then, in 1983, Meireles began to 
implement personal computers in his Mexican enterprise Printaform.
The Chilean military coup of 1973 made a clear before-and-after 
line on the national development model. By 1975, the model was strictly 
free trade, and the wide range of state programmes stopped. For exam­
ple, in that period, the ECOM and INTEC disappeared, and since 1980, 
CORFO, according to the new constitution, would never create state 
companies and industries again. Although the change to the neoliber­
al model was later in other Latin American countries, it also stopped 
technological and computer development and production projects in 
Mexico and Argentina in the 1990s.
Another famous reference during this timeframe was the auto­
poiesis model of the already mentioned biologists Maturana and Va­
rela, as presented in their 1972 book, On Machines and Living Beings.11 
Beer was very interested in this model, considering that autopoiesis 
could be used in social models and management, although Varela and 
11 
Francisco Varela and Humberto Maturana, De maquinasy seres vivos (On
machines and living beings) (Santiago de Chile: Editorial Universitaria, 1972).

DAVID MAULEN DE LOS REYES
227
Maturana were not sure about this utilization. Autopoiesis took its 
model from immune system epistemology. Varela explained that the it 
was not merely for reacting to viruses, since the immune system has 
its own system for living and working, making it not only a system re­
acting to external stimulation. It is true that immune systems work with 
external stimulation, since viruses change continually, but the system 
does not exist for only this reason. The basic system of the autopoiesis 
thesis is that the reaction has its own system for living.
By 1974, three years of work had been put into the Maturana and 
Varela's research project. A screen shows a digital visualization of 
the autopoiesis model named Proto-bio (meaning ‘first life’ in ancient 
Greek), developed by the engineer Ricardo Uribe (Fig. 15). The Proto-bio 
came from the autopoiesis epistemology, and explained this theory 
with a moving digital visualization on the first computer they had.
Fig. 15: Digital visualization of 
the behavior of the principle 
of autopoiesis by Francisco 
Varela and Humberto 
Maturna, produced by 
Ricardo Uribe under the 
name of Proto-Bio (first life) 
in 1974. Illustration made by 
the author.
oooooooooo oooooooooo oooooooooo 0000000000 
OOOOOOOOOO OOOOOOOOOO O0OO0OOOOO O OO0OOOOO
OOOOOOOOOO OO000OOOOO OO ©00OOO OO0O000OOO 
oooooooooo 000 
0000 OO© 0 OOO OO© © 0000
OOOOOOOOOO OO0 a OOOO OO© A ©OOO OO© A ©OOO 
0000*00000 OOO OOOO OO©© ©OOO OO00000OOO 
oooooooooo 000000 000 0000000000 0000000000 
oooooooooo oooooooooo oooooooooo oooooooooo 
oooooooooo oooooooooo 0000000 00 oooooooooo 
oooooooooo oooooooooo oooooooooo oooooooooo
OO0OOOOOO 0000 00000 00000 OOOO
OOOO0OOOOO OO000OOOOO OO000OOOOO
OO00000OOO OO© 0©0OOO OO0O000OOO
OO© © ©OOO OO© ©O0OOO OO000O0OOO
OO©OA0©OOO OO©[|A©©OOO OO© A00OOO
OO00000OOO OO00000OOO 00©©©©©000
000000 OOO OOOOOO0OOO OOOOOO0OOO 
oooooooooo oooooooooo oooooooooo 
oooooooooo oooooooooo oooooooooo 
oooooooooo oooooooooo 00 0000000
One indicator of the interest in cybernetics in South America 
during this period was the simultaneous translation and publication of 
Paul Idatte’s Nociones fundamentales de cibernetica/Chaves da ciber- 
netica (Fundamental notions of cybernetics) in both Brazilian Portu­
guese and Spanish in 1972; the Chilean edition was published by the 
University of Chile. It is very significant that between the 1950s and 
the 1970s, in Argentina, Chile, Mexico, Venezuela and Brazil, books on 
cybernetics were translated and published from a very heterogeneous 
perspective, showing its development not only in the United States, but 
also its variants, for example in France, England and the Soviet Union. 
Idatte’s publication is a good example of that situation.
From an even more committed point of view, following the Sep­
tember 1973 military putsch in Chile, the Brazilian cybernetician Carlos

228
WHY DID CYBERNETICS DISAPPEAR FROM LATIN AMERICA?
Senna, following his work on Cybersyn in Chile, moved on to Peru to 
collaborate with the Argentinian computer scientist and mathemati­
cian Oscar Varsavsky and Darcy Ribeiro, Brazilian specialist in educa­
tion, sociology and anthropology, with support from the UNDP in a 1974 
project in which they taught the VSM and second-order model from 
union organizations.
During the 1970s, there were at least three important cybernetic 
models in South America: Beer’s VSM, Amilcar Herrera’s Latin Ameri­
can World Model (MML) at the Bariloche Foundation, and Varsavsky’s 
Numex model in Peru. With the Numex, in addition to the VSM of Beer, 
and the MML of Bariloche, we could count an additional model, since 
the three different models had ongoing discussions with each other to 
look for novel ways and methods. Varsavsky published several books 
focused on the social commitment of scientists and cultural and eco­
nomic development in South America during this period, which came 
out in Chile, Peru, and Argentina. Another very important agent of 
change at that time was the Peruvian engineer Francisco Sagasti, who 
was working on possible technology development in South America 
in the 1970s. Between 1973 and 1980, Sagasti coordinated the Science 
and Technology Policy Instruments project, with the participation of Ar­
gentina, Brazil, Colombia, Mexico, Venezuela, Peru, Egypt, Yugoslavia, 
India and South Korea.
Back in South America, the Chilean architect Jaime Garreton 
published a book in Argentina in 1975 about how to use cybernetics 
in urban planning, which applied the Claude Shannon model for com­
munication. Meanwhile, the researcher Charles Francois founded an 
institution in Argentina in 1976, and in 1997, with support from another 
institute of cybernetics (IAS) in Peru, he published and wrote about the 
history of cybernetics.
One difficult part of the story of cybernetics in Latin America 
during this period comes from the systemic theorist Russell Ack- 
off, who was in Mexico in 1976. He worked extensively with Mexican 
scholars at the National University (Universidad Nacional Autonoma 
de Mexico, UNAM). He adapted a model called Inactivism, Reactivism, 
Prectivism and Interactivism for the Mexican government, but it was 
impossible to put it into practice. At the same time, in 1979, in Mexi­
co, Ackoff’s book Redisenando el futuro (Redesigning the future) was 
translated and published with the Limusa publishing house (published 
before by Wiley in English in 1974). In the same context in Mexico, in 1977 

DAVID MAULEN DE LOS REYES
229
and 1982, the Mexican publisher Fondo de Cultura Economica (FCE) 
translated and published two of Beer’s books: Designing Freedom and 
Decision y control: el significado de la investigation de operaciones y 
la administration (Decision and control: the meaning of operations re­
search and cybernetic management). Then, in 1983, after Ackoff, Beer 
was contracted to design a second model for the Mexican government 
with the VSM. Both Ackoff and Beer said that corruption and bureau­
cracy in Mexico made it impossible to implement these systemic and 
cybernetic models in the government.
In parallel, when Sadosky had to leave the National University 
(University of Buenos Aires, UBA) in Argentina in 1966, one of his main 
breakthroughs came from the department of computing in the univer­
sity where he went to work in Uruguay (Universidad de la Republica, 
UDELAR) until 1973. In Northern Argentina and Southern Brazil, he met 
the young Uruguayan engineer Victor Ganon for discussions about 
Beer’s second-order cybernetics. Ganon went to study computing 
management in London between 1974 and 1975, and after the military 
dictatorship ended in in Uruguay in 1985, he initiated a project to use 
computing in public administration during the return to democracy in 
Uruguay, and convinced the President to hire Beer. Beer was very hap­
py and said Uruguay was his ‘second Chile’, and Ganon became the 
management chief for the new project. Together, a new cybernetic pro­
gramme for government management was developed in collaboration 
with the UNDP and named Cybernetic Uruguay (Urucib). The Urucib pro­
gramme was created to manage national industries for the government, 
since national enterprises and companies continued in Uruguay in the 
1980s. At the present time (2023), software exports are the third-largest 
income source for Uruguay. This process began with the locally produced 
software for Urucib, which was later sold to other countries.
Fig. 16 shows the device made for Urucib by Ganon in the 1980s, 
for which they also had to produce software. This last element, produc­
ing software, made in Uruguay for the Urucib project, and not using an 
imported one, was a task which Beer initially believed to be impossible.

230
WHY DID CYBERNETICS DISAPPEAR FROM LATIN AMERICA?
Fig. 16: Remote control 
used to interact with 
Uruguay Cibernetico at the 
Presidential Management 
Centre, Uruguay. This device 
was a kind of proto-mouse, 
for the exclusive use of 
the President, which is 
why its attached text said: 
‘Presidential Computer 
Attribute’. Images courtesy 
of Victor Ganon.
However, the ultimate product was the first software made in 
Uruguay for export;12 in the 1990s some other countries purchased the 
Urucib model for national industry management. The most successful 
customers were the national government of Nicaragua, and the gov­
ernment of Buenos Aires in Argentina. The Buenos Aires Metropoli­
tan Area has four times the population of Uruguay. The city of Buenos 
Aires alone has as many inhabitants as Uruguay. In this sense, Urucib 
was very successful and was the beginning of the long development 
of computing within a model that, in part, continued to be promoted by 
the state, but it would also have led to neoliberalism and the efficiency 
of private companies. In fact, before President Jorge Batlle stopped 
the Urucib project in Uruguay, Ganon thought that it could be used in 
the new Southern Common Market Mercosur, created in 1990, as a tool 
for exchange and management among partner countries. However, the 
system disappeared from Chile in the 1970s, and disappeared from Ar­
gentina, where the government had a national industry working with 
the University of Chile, in the 1990s. Fig. 17 shows the VSM used by 
the Uruguayan government in the 1980s. However, it is also import­
ant to mention that Urucib has another system element which was not 
included in the original Beer VSM, the Cyberfilter, which was a new 
Uruguayan development (1985-90), which improved the first model of 
the famous Chilean VSM’s Cybersyn (1971-73).
12 Chile abandoned this path in the 1970s; however, Uruguay created and sus­
tained a policy over time with support from the government, businessmen, and the 
Ministry of Public Education. Software exports are now its third source of income, 
with higher numbers than much larger countries such as Brazil or Argentina.

DAVID MAULEN DE LOS REYES
231
Fig. 17: Complete cyber­
netic scheme for Uruguay 
Cibernetico, the viable 
system model with the 
Cyberfiltre, Stafford Beer, 
Uruguay 1987. Courtesy Victor 
Ganon from Urucib archive 
in Montevideo, Uruguay, and 
the Stafford Beer Archive 
at Liverpool John Moores 
University Special Collections 
and Archives authorization 
of use.
The Cyberfilter continued to be used in Colombia in the late 1990s 
by Angela Espinosa, who had studied in England until 1995 with Raul 
Espejo, one of the scholars from the first period of Cybersyn, who used 
this model. Espinosa applied it in Colombia (1995-98) at the national 
audit office. This is notable, because as noted before, Beer and Ackoff 
deemed the systemic cybernetic model for the government impossible 
because of the corruption in Mexico. Nevertheless, Espinosa used it to 
combat the corruption in Colombia in the late 1990s.
In the late 1980s, Varela was working in exile at the National Cen­
tre for Scientific Research, and in the United States, MIT took on the 
ideas from the 1970s about Proto-bio and autopoiesis regarding auton­
omous self-generating living systems (what is known in cybernetics as 
recursion). Varela was working on the structural coupling and the origin 
of meaning in a cellular automation in 1988. From this experience, car­
ried out by Varela with the support of MIT and the CNRS (Centre national 
de la recherche scientifique), the Bittorio was born.
One practical use of the cellular automaton epistemology in Chile 
in the late 1980s was developed by Miguel Giacaman, who used the 
autopoiesis model and the immune system model in a design for an­
ti-virus software or bio-digital architecture, in order to fight the Jeru­
salem virus in October 1987. Giacaman ultimately named his creation 
Virus Detection (Vir-Det). This kind of software was always undergoing 
further development, which meant that it was not only for one kind of 
virus. The Chilean IBM office bought it in 1994 and changed its name 
to Oyster (Fig. 18).

232
WHY DID CYBERNETICS DISAPPEAR FROM LATIN AMERICA?
Fig. 18: Oyster, an ‘eternal’ 
antivirus programme invent­
ed by Miguel Giacaman using 
the logic of autopoiesis and 
the immune system, origi­
nally called Virus Detection 
(Vir-Det) in the late 1980s. 
Image capture from a video 
recording of the production 
process of the Oyster 2.0 in 
1994 for television, made by 
Pablo Rosenblatt; courtesy P. 
Rosenblatt.
Continuing along cybernetic lines of thinking focused on the 
production of communication and information technologies, Giaca- 
man created a Chilean model for the production of Film Master, since 
it was very expensive at the time to buy film master machines from 
other countries.13 This system had major cost advantages, allowing for 
broader use. In this period, the National Universities (University of Chile 
and the State Technical University) no longer worked with the national 
computing industry (ECOM CORFO, 1968-83), the National Technology 
Development Institute (INTEC CORFO, which existed around the same 
time as ECOM), or with other national agencies. The past collaboration 
was what had facilitated projects like Cybersyn, and the formulation of 
autopoiesis and Proto-bio. All this collaboration disappeared after the 
1975 change of economic model. However, from the 1970s Giacaman 
continued alone (or at least without institutional network support) with 
epistemological research for the use of technology and science, and 
was successful in the late 1980s with a kind of cellular automata. From 
a systemic point of view, Giacaman continued to develop the ideas of 
Autopoiesis in a practical way, until he managed to structure a para­
digm shift in bio-digital architecture, but without the institutional en­
vironment of his predecessors, which limited the projection of these 
discoveries in the long term. For example, in the following years, Chile 
lost the opportunity to be a pioneer in the global antivirus industry.
13 The film master is the basis for the production and reproduction of digital 
barcodes.

DAVID MAULEN DE LOS REYES
233
In the late 1990s, Miguel de Icaza in Mexico created the desk en­
vironment for Linux, Gnome. This was followed by a project from the 
Colombian model of management with second-order cybernetics, cre­
ated by Raul Espejo, an engineer from the original Cybersyn project 
in Chile working in England with Espinoza. During the last twenty to 
fifty years, Uruguay software exports have been an exception in Latin 
America, given the predominance of revenues from commodities after 
all the national industries disappeared in the 1970s. Uruguay began to 
build this capacity in the 1980s, with the outlook common in national 
development to consider programmes that can run for anything be­
tween five and twenty years. Meanwhile, in the local interpretation of 
neoliberalism, national projects with a timeframe of above two years 
are not as frequent as they were before. The long-term framework 
helped give rise to the Ceibal Plan by Nicholas Negroponte to provide 
every public school student in Uruguay with a computer using the Li­
nux system.
Another approach to cybernetic network frameworks in Latin 
America was designed in 2013 with the Union of South American Na­
tions (UNASUN), which tried to create a fibre-optic internet in order 
to create greater independence from US-based networks. However, 
UNASUN gradually disappeared with the end of the so-called pink 
wave of governments (with President Correa in Ecuador, Morales in 
Bolivia, Mujica in Uruguay, and Rousseff in Brazil, to name a few exam­
ples), and the independent internet project remained unfinished.
Around 2022, the Syntesis Binational Corporation from Chile and 
Argentina took a fresh approach to 1970s second-order cybernetics 
and elaborated their concepts of relational cybernetics. They raised 
the concept of the environment used (in second-order cybernetics, 
and even in the first-order cybernetics in the 1940s) as an object out­
side the body and organism, and said that the environment was not an 
object or a thing. What they meant is that environment is another kind 
of natural, social and or cultural identity. According to the Syntesis Bi­
national Corporation, relationships are what need to be designed, not 
interactions, giving rise to different interpretations of development 
and sustainability.
This is the final point of this overview. Latin American cybernetics 
exists inside an organic definition of state and production, but there 
are two kinds of modernity models, as well as two kinds of cybernetic 
definitions and praxis. Questions arise within each context. The VSM 

234
WHY DID CYBERNETICS DISAPPEAR FROM LATIN AMERICA?
in second-order cybernetics insists on the need for unique contextual 
interpretations in order to create management models. The main ob­
jective for this type of vernacular or regional cybernetics is the inter­
action between the human being and the environment, and the differ­
ent kinds of technologies are the devices, since using technology and 
producing technology are absolutely different things. This difference 
arises from contextual variations, as well as the fact that techniques for 
using technology constitute a type of technology in themselves. In this 
triangle, different kinds of interpretation for this environment are need­
ed. The open question for us, both within Latin America and outside of 
it, is about the present use of this story and, as has already happened 
in the past, about its possibility of being complementary with stories 
from other contexts; that is, how can we use this past, and look for the 
possible futures of cybernetics.
Note
A first version of this article was published in AI & Society 37, no. 3 
(2022): 1293-1.

DAVID MAULEN DE LOS REYES
235
Reference
Beer, Stafford. Diagnosing the System for Organisations. London: John 
Wiley, 1985.
———. ‘The Viable System Model: its provenance, development, meth­
odology and pathology.’ The Journal of the Operational Research 
Society 35, No. 1 (January 1984): 7-25.
Guzik, Ruth. ‘Relaciones de un cientifico mexicano con el extranjero: El 
caso de Arturo Rosenblueth’ (Relations of a Mexican scientist with 
foreigners: The example of Arthur Rosenbleuth). RMIE 14, no. 40 
(2009): 43-67.
Rodnguez Campoamor, Hernan and Manuel Sadosky. Psicolog^a y ciber- 
netica (Psychology and cybernetics). Buenos Aires: Siglo XX, 1958.
Rosenblueth, Arturo, Norbert Wiener and Julian Bigelow. ‘Behavior, 
Purpose and Teleology’. Philosophy of Science 10, no. 1 (1943): 18-24.
Varela, Francisco and Humberto Maturana. De maquinasy seres vi­
vos (On machines and living beings). Santiago de Chile: Editorial 
Universitaria, 1972.
Wiener, Norbert. Cybernetics: Or Control and Communication in the 
Animal and the Machine. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1948.


237
Life-in-formation: Cybernetics 
of the Heart
Daisuke Harashima
To reflect on the issues of modern technology and humanity and to re­
alize a better relationship between them, we must fundamentally re-ex­
amine today’s predominantly mechanistic civilization and overcome its 
limitations. In this contemporary world of technology, where humans 
are treated as if they were information processing machines, people’s 
hearts, and the meaning and value of their life, have been alienated and 
ruthlessly suppressed. Breaking through this difficult situation is an ur­
gent challenge for contemporary thought. To achieve this, a biological 
informatics that reinterprets information as significance (i.e. meaning 
and value) for the living being would be welcome. Cybernetics for the 
twenty-first century should indeed become such an informatics.
The task of cybernetics for the twenty-first century is to recover 
the meaning and value of life that has been suppressed by the tech­
nological condition. But the classical cybernetics proposed in the 
mid-twentieth century was, on the contrary, precisely the theoretical 
foundation of that mechanistic information technology. However, as I 
will explain, a hint to overcome the modern technological condition is 
hidden within classical cybernetics; it has the potential to open up a 
biological worldview. What is important for twenty-first century tech­
nology, is to carve a path from a mechanistic worldview to a biological 
worldview from within. Through biological informatics, it involves re­
covering the meaning and value of life, and saving the hearts of people. 
I will now proceed to articulate the prospects regarding the initial step 
in this direction.
First of all, cybernetics for the twenty-first century should focus 
on life. ‘£^’ (seimei) is a Japanese word that means ‘life’, but we can 
interpret it literally as ‘living a life’ (^^£55, inochi wo ikiru). Then, 
who is living a life? I am living my life, of course. At the same time, how­
ever, I feel deep inside myself ‘a life is living my life’. When I take care 
of this feeling of life, I find myself in a peaceful and compassionate 
mood. An egoistic self descends lower and lower, and a great warmth 
rises up from within a heart. It is a small heart, yet it is a heart of infinite 

238
LIFE-IN-FORMATION CYBERNETICS OF THE HEART
sadness (A'&L<^, kanashimi), of sorrow (ML<fr, kanashimi) and love ( 
Su^, kanashimi ).1 Cybernetics for the twenty-first century must be 
cybernetics of the heart. I learned this notion of cybernetics from two 
neocyberneticians in Japan: Toru Nishigaki, who founded fundamental 
informatics, and Nami Ohi, who is researching a developmental model 
of psychic systems from the standpoint of fundamental informatics.2
Looking back, I was brought up with the notion that the twentieth 
century was a century of war, but the twenty-first century must be a 
century of peace. Today, it is still up to us to accomplish this, though it 
may seem like we are moving away from our goal. Cybernetics for the 
twenty-first century must be a cybernetics of peace too. This does not 
mean that peace can be achieved if we had some advanced cybernetics
1 In English, ‘sadness of sorrow’ may sound redundant, and ‘sadness of love’ 
may sound contradictory. The Japanese word ‘fr&L^-’ (kanashimi) generally cor­
responds to the English words ‘sadness’ or ‘sorrow’, but in reality, this Japanese 
word is polysemous and can also mean affection or a kind of ‘love’, although it is 
not very common in that sense today. The subtle nuances of ‘fr&L^-’ are some­
what expressed by the choice of kanji characters used to write it. Kanji characters 
frequently used for this are ‘M’ (hi), ‘s’ (ai), and ‘S’ (ai). When written as ‘ML^-’ or ‘ 
sL^,’ it generally means ‘sorrow’, and there is also a compound word ‘Ms’ (hiai) 
that specifically means ‘sorrow’. The character ‘M’ represents the feeling of a 
heart (^, kokoro; the lower part of the character) being torn apart (^, hi; the upper 
part of the character), heartbreaking, and the word ‘ML<^’ is commonly used to 
express the sadness resulting from experiences of loss. However, ‘M’ also carries 
the meaning of compassion. ‘s’ (ai) also means not only sorrow but also compas­
sion. It shares the same sound as ‘S’ (ai), which means love, and the word ‘sft^-’ 
(awaremi) signifies compassion. The words ‘ML^-’ and ‘sL<^’ already have conno­
tations that resonate with compassion and love. In Japanese, the word ‘S’ is com­
monly read as ai and means love, and occasionally, although not very common, 
‘kanashimi’ is also written as ‘SL^-’, signifying affection or a kind of love. In this 
usage, there is an underlying sentiment that somehow resonates with the sadness 
or sorrow of ‘kanashimi’. I believe that the emotional state of ‘fr&L^-’ (sadness), 
which underlies both ‘M’ (sorrow) and ‘S’ (love), becomes an important research 
topic for the twenty-first century cybernetics of the heart. Nami Ohi, mentioned 
later in this text, is already researching, through a neocybernetics approach, how 
the sadness of sorrow stemming from experiences of loss can develop into the 
sadness of compassionate love by recovering its meaning. You might also want 
to refer to Seiichi Takeuchi, ‘Kanashimi’ no Tetsugaku (Philosophy of ‘Kanashimi’) 
(Tokyo: NHK Publishing, 2009). As pointed out there, it is worth noting that the 
Japanese philosopher Kitaro Nishida, in the early twentieth century, argued that 
the inception of philosophy should not be ‘wonder’, as philosophers have often 
stated, but rather it should arise from ‘Ms’ (sorrow). See also note 34.
2 Toru Nishigaki, Kiso Jouhougaku I, II, III (Fundamental informatics) (Tokyo: 
NTT Publishing, 2004, 2008, 2021); Nami Ohi, ‘Imi no kaifuku ni yoru soushit- 
su-taiken no kachi no hanten: shinteki-system no hattatsu-model’ (Meanings recov­
ery enables us to survive loss experiences: a model proposal of psychic systems 
development process), Shakai Jouhougaku (Socio-informatics) 8, no. 1 (2019): 49-64. 

DAISUKE HARASHIMA
239
to control our minds, bodies, societies, and environments, so that the 
world is peaceful; that is the opposite approach to my cybernetics of 
the heart. What I mean is a process of the growth of the heart, to sur­
vive the questions to which we must find answers as we live together, 
comforting and encouraging each other to live. Can we control such 
a process of the heart with materialistic or mechanistic technology? I 
do not think that we can. Then, what can technics do in this process? 
I hope that honest consideration of these questions will become the 
ethos of cybernetics for the twenty-first century.
Put plainly, just because we become materially rich does not mean 
that we also gain spiritual wealth, and vice versa. We must distinguish 
between these two orders. When the order of the material is applied to 
the spiritual, the heart is suppressed. However, this was precisely the 
approach of classical, twentieth-century cybernetics and of modern 
technology. Reflecting on this, we must reopen the informational or 
biological possibilities that were latent in classical cybernetics. How 
can the heart of love and peace be nurtured and realized? This is the 
question of cybernetics of the heart.
The term cybernetics was coined from the Greek word kyber- 
nete, to steer, which implies that the purpose of cybernetics was, in 
the first place, to study how the living being survive in its environment, 
like a steersman sailing in rough seas. However, cybernetics is usu­
ally thought of as the technology to mechanize living organisms, and, 
in fact, has been applied in just this way under modern technological 
conditions. But that is not what cybernetics is supposed to be. I would 
argue instead that cybernetics is a study of living life. In other words, it 
suggests an approach that opens up a biological worldview from with­
in this modern mechanistic worldview. I hope that cybernetics for the 
twenty-first century will become steering technics to help us survive 
our passage of life. It is not technology, but, as I will argue, it is a tech­
nics for observing the significance of each individual living system ob­
served from the perspective of a cosmic system of life, corresponding 
to the significance of everything in a world observed from within each 
individual living system. Throughout this essay, I will explain what this 
complex description means.

240
LIFE-IN-FORMATION CYBERNETICS OF THE HEART
Classical cybernetics: mechanism and enframing
Cybernetics is an information systems theory founded by Norbert 
Weiner in the mid-twentieth century, based on which contemporary 
information technology has been developed. It aimed at an integrated 
science of the living being and the machine, as indicated in the title 
of Wiener’s book Cybernetics: Or Control and Communication in the 
Animal and the Machine.3 It is a theory of control and communication 
for systems to achieve their objectives in their uncertain environments. 
In other words, it is a mathematical model of how animals do this. A 
mechanism of feedback allows machines to simulate the purposive 
behaviours of animals; a system compares a predictive model of its 
environment with fed-backed information about the consequences of 
its output, which returns as the next input, in order to optimize its be­
haviour and get closer to achieving its objectives. A machine equipped 
with a feedback mechanism is able to adapt to changes in its environ­
ment and complete its tasks automatically. It can be said that this ma­
chine collects information that is useful for its purpose from its envi­
ronment. In other words, for the cybernetic system, the world is a world 
of valuable things, in terms of the usefulness for its purpose.
3 Norbert Wiener, Cybernetics: Or Control and Communication in the Animal 
and the Machine (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1948).
4 Yuk Hui, Recursivity and Contingency (London: Rowman & Littlefield, 2019).
Here lie two problems of cybernetics: mechanism and enframing 
(Gestell). It is a critical task for cybernetics for the twenty-first century 
to recognize and overcome both. Mechanists believe that the living be­
ing is a machine. Cybernetics blurs the distinction between the living 
being and the machine from the perspective of mechanistic systems 
theory; it considers both as feedback machines. Modern science has 
been divided into two opposing positions on the understanding of life: 
vitalism and mechanism. Organicism and systems theory have tried to 
reconcile them. It is said that cybernetics completed this reconciliation 
in the form of a triumph of mechanism.4 This aspect of cybernetics as 
mechanism conceals a crucial possibility for the future of cybernetics: 
the possibility to open up the mechanistic modern science to a biolog­
ical perspective. My vision of cybernetics for the twenty-first century 
is in this direction. I will elaborate on this later.

DAISUKE HARASHIMA
241
But first, let me explain the other issue: enframing. Martin Heide­
gger used this term to describe the essence of modern technology 
(moderne Technik) in the mid-twentieth century.5 The essence of tech­
nology is to drive human beings to regard the world as an inventory of 
assets that should be effectively utilized. From this perspective, na­
ture is nothing but a resource to be exploited. According to Heideg­
ger, enframing technology is the result of Western metaphysics since 
Plato and Aristotle. Cybernetics completed this process. He said that 
cybernetics is the end of philosophy and the beginning of Western 
European civilization’s world dominance,6 meaning, the technological 
dominance of the world. Human beings under modern technological 
conditions experience the environmental world as a world consisting 
of useful things.7 Human beings, who observe the world as a stock of 
natural resources to be exploited, are themselves living in such a world 
and are, of course, themselves regarded as human resources to be 
exploited. This does not mean that there are only useful things in the 
world, but rather that anything that is not related to the binary choice 
of useful or useless does not appear within that world. In other words, 
how the experiential world is constructed is determined in this way by 
technology of enframing. In this light, the modern information society 
opened up by cybernetics and the global capitalist system supported 
by modern technology could be seen as the expected results of human 
beings driven by the enframing technology. People live their days ex­
ploiting themselves as resources, constantly calculating their own use­
fulness. We can say that cybernetics, with its probabilistic concept of 
5 Martin Heidegger, The Question Concerning Technology and Other Essays, 
trans. William Lovitt (New York: Garland, 1977).
6 Martin Heidegger, On Time and Being, trans. Joan Stambaugh (New York: 
Harper & Row, 1972); see also Hui, Recursivity and Contingency.
7 I use the term ‘environmental world’ to indicate that it is a world wherein 
a living being lives but the life of the living being constructs the world itself. The 
environmental world is neither the real world that is independent of the living 
being, nor the ideal world that is created by and within the living being. Second- 
order cybernetician Heinz von Foerster said that we are living in our environ­
ment, but the environment is invented by us. Biologist Jakob von Uexkull’s con­
cept of Umwelt grasps this well, and it is usually translated into Japanese as W 
W^- (kansekai) or W^W^- (kankyousekai), which literally means ‘environmental 
world’. See Heinz von Foerster, ‘On constructing a reality’, in Understanding 
Understanding: Essays on Cybernetics and Cognition (New York: Springer, 2003); 
Jakob von Uexkull, A Foray into the Worlds of Animals and Humans: With a Theory of 
Meaning, trans. Joseph D. O’Neil (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2010).

242
LIFE-IN-FORMATION CYBERNETICS OF THE HEART
information, provided a theory for calculating usefulness. It is import­
ant that cybernetics for the twenty-first century rethink the concept of 
information. I will discuss this in more detail later.
Reflecting on the modern anthropocentrism that led to spiritual 
decadence and to the environmental crisis, we are seeking new values 
that reposition human beings in the cosmos. Considering the notion 
of technology of enframing, however, it seems that modernity, which 
has been called anthropocentric, in fact has been technologocentric 
above all.8 It is as if human beings are miserable machines enmeshed 
in a gigantic network of machinery spanning the entire universe, bound 
by mechanical laws and forced to work according to orders to serve 
the machine. In such a cosmology, the living being is reduced to a set 
of cybernetic data-processing algorithms; the distinction between the 
living being and the machine disappears, and the concept of life is elim­
inated from the theory. Nevertheless, human beings still believe they 
are doing all of this voluntarily, as if it were anthropocentric. Techno­
logical singularity theorists and transhumanists would predict such a 
technologocentric future as if it were inevitable, and ever more likely to 
become a reality. However, the cosmology underlying such thinking is, 
in fact, groundless. Technological universalism is nihilism. As Yuk Hui 
argues, it is an urgent task for cybernetics for the twenty-first century 
to relativize the cosmology of modern technology and open up differ­
ent possibilities.9
8 
Heidegger’s question concerning technology as enframing (Gestell) in the
context of critique of Western metaphysics resonates with Jacques Derrida’s 
critique of the logocentrism of Western metaphysics; Jacques Derrida, Of 
Grammatology, trans. Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 2016). In view of this, I use the term ‘technologocentric’ here. 
Technocentrism does not necessarily means technologocentrism, because 
technocentrism can have different forms, as Yuk Hui’s concept of technodiversity 
indicates. See Yuk Hui, The Question Concerning Technology in China: An Essay in 
Cosmotechnics (Falmouth: Urbanomic, 2016/2019).
9 Hui, Recursivity and Contingency.
Although we, modern human beings, seem to be driven by tech­
nology at the level of our unconscious self-understanding, something 
else seems to be at work that has been driving us deeper inside, even 
deeper than technology. That is life. I argue that life, and making sense 
of the feeling of life, is the critical step for cybernetics for the twen­
ty-first century. Indeed, technology acts on how our experiential world 
of significance is constructed, but, at a deeper level, the driving force 

DAISUKE HARASHIMA
243
behind the construction of the world itself is at work, and that is life. To 
sense it, to listen to it, to observe it—this is the decisive step for cyber­
netics for the twenty-first century. In fact, this step was already taken 
in classical twentieth-century cybernetics, and has gradually been re­
alized in neocybernetics since the late twentieth century. I would like to 
suggest a vision for cybernetics for the twenty-first century, referring 
to such new cybernetics, especially neocybernetic thinking in Japan, 
which I myself have been working on.
A future cybernetics that is not enframing touches something that 
drives human beings even more deeply than technology. It touches 
life-in-formation: cybernetics of the heart. Heidegger, against modern 
technology, invoked the ancient Greek notion of techne.10 11
 Is life here 
the same as techne, or not? What about, for example, Dao in Chinese 
thought, or the inhuman in Jean-Frangois Lyotard’s sense, as referred 
to by Hui?11 There are many to compare. This is an important question, 
but I have to refrain from going into it at this time. I hope that this life 
is at least in some small way global, and we can acquire a concept of a 
global system that values the heart of life-in-formation. There are many 
issues to be addressed in order to achieve this goal, but in the hope of 
contributing to such a vision, I would like to start by sharing my views 
on neocybernetics, especially from the standpoint of fundamental in­
formatics, which has been addressing the question of discovering the 
biological possibilities latent in cybernetics, which at first glance ap­
pears to be extremely mechanistic. Fundamental informatics has also 
been seeking to contribute to the invention of future technics, respect­
ing the history of Western civilization as the background for modern 
technology, while reflecting on the understanding of technology in Ja­
pan since its modernization, and reconsidering their differences.
10 
Heidegger, The Question Concerning Technology.
11 
Hui, The Question Concerning Technology; Hui, Recursivity and
Contingency.
As Nishigaki puts forward, if we are to face the question of infor­
mation technology and human beings, we should not see the computer 
as mere a tool for computation, but rather see its underlying logic and 
cosmology of Hellenism and Hebraism; we should not just understand 
them conceptually, but look into the historical context and civilization­
al significance; we should see, with the eyes of the heart, the spirit of 
those who espouse the logos and the heartache of those who need 

244
LIFE-IN-FORMATION CYBERNETICS OF THE HEART
technologies of mobility and ubiquity because of dispersion.12 The 
meaning of the same computational machine is quite different when it 
is an ideal universal logic machine invented out of desperation for help 
and when it is a convenient calculator that was merely imported. The 
modern Japanese understanding of technology—which was introduced 
in the nineteenth century as something universal in a superficial sense 
through separating it from religion—has not faced such questions at 
an existential level, and thus has suppressed the hearts of those living 
in traditional cosmologies until today. There have been many such dif­
ferences and tragedies on earth. I learned from Hui’s cosmotechnics 
and Nishigaki’s fundamental informatics a way to open up richer pos­
sibilities for diverse future technics by rethinking technology from a 
cosmological perspective.
12 Toru Nishigaki, ‘Saishukougi: La Mancha no Jouhougakusha’ (The last lec­
ture: informatics researcher of La Mancha), memorial lecture, The University of 
Tokyo, 2013.
13 Heinz von Foerster, Understanding Understanding; Humberto Maturana 
and Francisco J. Varela, Autopoiesis and Cognition: The Realization of the Living 
(Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1980); Ernst von Glasersfeld, Radical Constructivism:
A Way of Knowing and Learning (London: Routledge, 1995); Niklas Luhmann, 
Social Systems, trans. John Bednarz, Jr. with Dirk Baecker (Stanford: Stanford 
University Press, 1995); Bruce Clarke and Mark B. N. Hansen, eds., Emergence and 
Embodiment: New Essays on Second-Order Systems Theory (Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press, 2009).
Material observation and informational observation
Let me first review just one important matter regarding the shift from 
classical cybernetics to neocybernetics that is relevant here: the no­
tion of observation. Weiner’s cybernetics developed into a new phase 
around the 1970s: neocybernetics. It includes Heinz von Foerster’s 
second-order cybernetics, Humberto Maturana and Francisco Vare­
la’s autopoiesis, Ernst von Glasersfeld’s radical constructivism, at a 
later stage, Niklas Luhmann’s social systems theory, and the recent 
works of Bruce Clarke and Mark B. N. Hansen, who proposed the term 
neocybernetics.13 Toru Nishigaki’s fundamental informatics can be also 
included in neocybernetics.
There are various differences between classical cybernetics and 
neocybernetics, but the decisive one that I would like to focus on here 

DAISUKE HARASHIMA
245
is that the concept of observation has been deepened. This means that 
there are two modes of observation in the new systems theory. On the 
one hand, a system is observed as an object by an observing subject 
from outside the system. On the other hand, a system is recursively 
observing itself observing. In classical cybernetics, the observer ob­
serves the system objectively from outside. In other words, it observes 
what input the system receives, how it is processed internally, and 
what output it produces. In neocybernetics, by contrast, the observer 
also observes how the system itself observes its own world.
Actually, classical cybernetics was already concerned not with 
the problem of how to control a system as an object, but how a system 
itself manages to achieve its goal within its uncertain environment.14 
This suggests that cybernetics can study how the world looks from 
within the living being, not only by observing it as an object of obser­
vation from outside, but also by observing it observing itself and its 
environment. The development of this biological insight is an important 
achievement of neocybernetics. The step taken in terms of the notion 
of observation is expressed simply in von Foerster’s term second-or­
der cybernetics, and in the title of his book Observing Systems.15
Wiener, Cybernetics.
Heinz von Foerster, Observing Systems (Seaside, CA: Intersystems, 1981).
We have to note, however, that there is still room for misunder­
standing in the concept of second-order observation. That an observing 
subject observes another system’s observation as its object of obser­
vation from outside the system means, in a sense, that one is observing 
the observing system. But that is not what second-order observation 
means here; it is in fact nothing other than first-order observation redi­
rected to the observation of another observing system. In short, it does 
not change the mode of observation itself. Observing the world from the 
perspective of living beings is a different mode of observation.
From the perspective of the living being, its own environmental 
world is not a world as an object of observation independent of itself as 
observing subject, but a world observed including the observer itself. 
The living being constructs its own world through living, while living in 
it. However, the environmental world is not the same as a world that 
is constructed idealistically or solipsistically by the subjective con­
sciousness of a living being. Although the lived environmental world is 
a world that the living being has constructed through its life, it is also 
14
15

246
LIFE-IN-FORMATION CYBERNETICS OF THE HEART
a world in which the living being is always already living as a particular 
being in the world: the self that exists in the world and the self that 
constructs the world. This self does not refer to a private, individual, or 
conscious ego. The being-in-the-world-self and the constructing-the- 
world-self are identical but different; it is living in a world constructed 
by itself. This recursive self-productivity and self-referential ambiguity 
occurs in the lived observation.
The distinction between the two modes of observation is the re­
markable shift from classical cybernetics to neocybernetics; observa­
tion in which the observing subject objectifies the system as an object 
of observation, and observation as the living process of construction of 
its world to live in. By observing the system from both perspectives, it 
becomes possible to observe the living being as a system in two ways: 
mechanistically and biologically. In other words, the living being can be 
observed as an algorithm of data processing and as a lived process of 
constructing its world. The former observes the inputs, outputs, and 
internal processing of the system, while the latter observes the world 
as it is experienced by the living being here and now, constructing the 
world itself. I call these two modes of observation ‘material observa­
tion’ and ‘in-formational observation’.16 The observation in classical 
cybernetics, in which a system is observed as an object, is a material 
observation, or a mechanistic worldview. By contrast, the observation 
of the construction of the world of the living being is an in-formational 
observation, or a biological worldview. These two modes of observa­
tion are fundamentally different.
16 Daisuke Harashima, ‘Kaisouteki jiritsusei no kansatsukijutu wo meguru 
media approach’ (Media approach to observation-description of hierarchical 
autonomy), in Kisojouhougaku no Frontier (The frontier of fundamental informat­
ics), ed. Toru Nishigaki (Tokyo: The University of Tokyo Press, 2018): 137-157.
Materially open and in-formationally closed system
Rather than simply reject cybernetics, how can we respect the future 
vision latent in cybernetics itself? Here, I provide a sketch of biolog­
ical cybernetics, referring to the arguments of Hideo Kawamoto and 
Toru Nishigaki. Kawamoto introduced autopoiesis theory to Japan, and 
has continued to explore it in his own unique direction. Nishigaki has 

DAISUKE HARASHIMA
247
reconsidered the concept of information from the viewpoint of life, and 
has founded and continues to explore fundamental informatics. They 
can both be placed within the theoretical paradigm of neocybernetics. 
However, it seems to me that they are both somewhat distinct in the 
way they respect life, compared to other neocyberneticians. Precisely 
for this reason, I feel a deep sympathy for them, and I think of their 
works as keys to cybernetics for the twenty-first century. Of course, 
an important feature of neocybernetics is that it amounts to cybernet­
ics from the perspective of the living being, and it generally involves 
profound considerations of life. This should give us a clue to the idea 
of biological cybernetics.
First, let me briefly explain how autopoiesis was introduced to 
Japan by Kawamoto, for here lies a key point to understand neocy­
bernetics as biological cybernetics. Kawamoto, who translated Ma- 
turana and Varela’s Autopoiesis into Japanese, classified systems 
theory into three generations in order to contextualize autopoiesis. 
According to Kawamoto, the first generation is an equilibrium open 
system of homeostasis, the second is a non-equilibrium open system 
of self-organization, and the third is an operationally closed system of 
autopoiesis.17 Based on Kawamoto's classification, Nishigaki pointed 
out that the first and second generations are necessary conditions for 
the living system, but only the third generation is considered a suffi­
cient condition.18
17 Hideo Kawamoto, Autopoiesis: Daisan-sedai System (The third-generation 
system) (Tokyo: Seidosha, 1995).
18 
Nishigaki, Fundamental Informatics, vol. 1, 67.
Autopoiesis is a theoretical systems model originally proposed 
by biologists Maturana and Varela as a natural scientific definition of 
the living being, that is, without presupposing, as some vitalists do, 
any material components unique to the living being. It did not seek a 
material component, but an organization—namely a relation among 
the components of a system—that is unique to the living being. The 
living being here refers to the biological and life-scientific organism, 
of which the cell is the smallest unit. Kawamoto’s classification of the 
three generations of systems means that there are three different no­
tions of the organization, and the first and second generations—that is, 
the homeostasis of equilibrium open systems and the self-organization 

248
LIFE-IN-FORMATION CYBERNETICS OF THE HEART
of non-equilibrium open systems—can be said to be necessary con­
ditions for the living system. But what can be said to be a sufficient 
condition was only formulated in the third generation: the autopoiesis 
of operationally closed systems.
We can observe the homeostasis of the first-generation system 
in, for example, the ability of a living being to keep the condition of its 
internal environment constant, despite changes in its external en­
vironment. However, this ability is not unique to the living being, for 
we can also observe it in a machine with a feedback mechanism. We 
can observe the self-organization of the second-generation system 
in, for example, the morphogenesis or ontogenesis of a living being. 
However, this is not unique to the living being either, for we can also 
observe it in non-biological physical phenomena such as crystalliza­
tion. By contrast, the autopoiesis of the third-generation system is, 
according to autopoiesis theory, unique to the living being. Autopoie­
sis means self-production, which is not about self-reproduction or ho­
mogenization, but about making oneself by oneself, that is, a recursive 
self-production process in which the product of the producing process 
comes back to produce the producing process itself. Autopoiesis the­
ory claims that this is unique to the living being. In autopoiesis theory, 
a system produced by itself is called an autopoietic system, in con­
trast with a system produced by others, which is called an allopoietic 
system. Machines, including any product of modern technology, are 
allopoietic systems as long as they have external designers who pro­
duced them. For example, even though artificial intelligence is capable 
of machine learning, it is still allopoietic, because its learning methods 
are determined by its external producers.
In this classification, the first and second generations are both 
open systems, but the third generation of autopoiesis is an operation­
ally closed system. That the autopoietic system is closed is misleading, 
if we do not distinguish between the two modes of observation of the 
material and the informational, because it would be strange, from the 
physicochemical point of view, for the living being to be a closed sys­
tem. This is precisely because, as the classification itself indicates, the 
living being must be an open system, as it is homeostatic and self-or­
ganizing. The living being is a materially open system with input and 
output, as is evident in its metabolism. What does it mean, then, that it 
is nevertheless an operationally closed system? This is not a contra­
diction, and we can see the operational closure not through material 

DAISUKE HARASHIMA
249
observation but through informational observation. In short, the living 
being is a materially open and informationally closed system.
In the case of the first and second generations, when we observe 
a system informationally, we are actually observing its inputs and out­
puts, and its internal processing, from outside the system as an ob­
ject of observation, that is, as an informationally open system. In other 
words, we are in effect only observing it materially. This is the mecha­
nistic systems theory. However, if we distinguish between material and 
informational observations, we can see that the living system is both 
materially open and informationally closed.19
19 Harashima, ‘Media approach’.
20 Daisuke Harashima, ‘Ikirareta imo to kachi no jikokeisei to jiritsusei no 
guuzen’ (Self-formation of lived meaning and contingency of autonomy), in 
Autonomy in the Age of Artificial Intelligence, ed. Shigeo Kawashima (Tokyo: Keiso 
Shobo, 2019): 69-94.
What does it mean that a system is informationally closed or 
open? The informationally closed system is autonomous, because the 
way it operates is self-produced. By contrast, the informationally open 
system is heteronomous, because the way it operates is instructed by 
others. The autonomous operation is internally formed, not instruct­
ed from outside, so it is called closed. By contrast, the heteronomous 
operation is instructed from outside, so it is called open. To put it an­
other way, the informationally closed system autonomously produces 
its own responses to a given stimulus, while the informationally open 
system heteronomously responds to an external stimulus.
From informational observation, we see that for closed systems, 
there can be freedom, contingency, and becoming. Conversely, the 
operation of the informationally open system is determined, so if there 
is uncertainty, it is only probabilistic. There may be many possibilities, 
but there is no pure contingency open to real changes. Open contin­
gency, when described as a system, applies to the informationally 
closed system.20
We can see this in the difference between the regularities of the 
living being and the machine. We can observe regularity in the be­
haviour of the living being, not because it moves according to some 
given rules, but rather because it produces a provisional rule-like pat­
tern as a result of its viable performance. This pattern is the nomos 
of the autonomous system—the pattern is produced as a result of its 
recursive operation in living through contingency. The generation of 

250
LIFE-IN-FORMATION CYBERNETICS OF THE HEART
patterns in the living being occurs in the reverse order to that in the 
machine, in which rules are developed from a set of rules predeter­
mined from outside. Seen retrospectively, classical cybernetics is not a 
study of how to reduce the living being into the machine. Rather it looks 
at how the living being can reduce its overwhelmingly unpredictable 
environment into something more consistent, and thus more condu­
cive to its survival, generating mechanical and regular patterns in that 
environment. This leads to the informational observation of the living 
being as an autonomous system.
We need to change our perspective from material observation to 
informational observation in order to observe the operation of the in­
formationally closed system. When we observe a materially open sys­
tem, we are observing it from outside. By contrast, when we observe 
an informationally closed system, we are observing it from within its 
operation itself. To put it more precisely, when we are observing it, 
there is no inside or outside. That we observe it from within its opera­
tion itself does not mean that there is a boundary in time or space that 
we observe from inside of it. When we separate the inside from the 
outside, we are already observing it as a materially open system. To 
explain it metaphorically, when we draw a circle, observing the drawing 
process from the perspective of the process itself is the observation of 
the informationally closed system. There is no inside or outside in the 
process of drawing a circle. It is only as a result of this drawing process 
that a circle is left, of which we can say that it has an inside or outside. 
It is, so to speak, a material trace of the process. The observation of the 
materially open system looks at this trace.21
21 
Kawamoto explains the difference between the open system and the
closed system in detail using the metaphor of running around the playground. See 
Kawamoto, Autopoiesis, 174.
22 Harashima, ‘Media approach’.
Note that the materially closed system here means that we can 
observe neither the input nor the output of the system, and it is irreg­
ular and unpredictable. However, without the two observations, we 
cannot discern whether its irregularity and unpredictability are due to 
the observer’s lack of knowledge, or to the autonomy of the system.22 In 
other words, we cannot distinguish the irregularity and unpredictability 
of the machine from that of the living being. For example, artificial intel­
ligence is sometimes unpredictable, even to the people who made it.

DAISUKE HARASHIMA
251
To take another example, there is an aesthetic sensibility that finds the 
malfunction or unpredictable movement of the machine interesting. 
Something like a vital force seems to overflow from the place where the 
machine deviates from the rules. One might think that the machine, like 
the living being or nature, is unpredictable and autonomous. However, 
the two observations allow us to discern the difference between the 
unpredictability of the mechanical object and that of the living being. 
Technology has its own unpredictability, but it is different from living 
contingency. There remains, of course, some incomprehensibility in a 
system as an object, but that incomprehensibility is due to the limita­
tions of the observing subject, who is a human being. That is different 
from the incomprehensibility of the living being that comes from its 
being an informationally closed system. Regarding the aesthetics of 
imperfection or failure, although that imperfection or failure can be ob­
served as if the vital force is overflowing from deviation, this is the way 
we see it through material observation; the ‘mechanistic worldview’. 
Through informational observation, such a vital force is not disorder, 
but rather it reveals its vitality, which is the order of the biological. To 
see this, is what I call here ‘the biological worldview’. With the two 
modes of observation, material and informational, we can see both the 
mechanistic and the biological worldviews.
By distinguishing between material and informational observa­
tions, we can see the living being not only as a materially open system 
but also as an informationally closed system, that is, as an autonomous 
and autopoietic system. The living being has two aspects: mechanis­
tic and biological. In the new cybernetics, the living being is observed 
as a materially open and informationally closed system. The informa­
tional closure is intrinsic to the creativity of the living being. However, 
without the two modes of observation, the openness and closure are 
incompatible. In classical cybernetics, or in first- and second-gener­
ation systems theories, the living being is observed as an open sys­
tem. This means that these systems theories observe the living being 
as an open system both materially and informationally; they observe 
the living being as a heteronomous system. This is why classical cy­
bernetics is a mechanical systems theory that blurs the distinction 
between the living being and the machine. If we look at society and 
ecosystems through this mechanistic worldview, we see people as 
parts of a machine of society, and nature as a stock of resources to 
be exploited—in short, a cybernetics of enframing. By contrast, what

252
LIFE-IN-FORMATION CYBERNETICS OF THE HEART
would society and ecosystems look like in the new cybernetics, in 
which we see not only the heteronomous aspect of the living system, 
but also its autonomous autopoietic aspect, through both material 
and informational observation?
Life information
Among the new cybernetics, Toru Nishigaki’s fundamental informatics 
has explored biological cybernetics with a particular emphasis on the 
notion of observation.23 Although I cannot introduce the entire theory 
here, I would like to refer to two ideas that help us to envision cybernet­
ics for the twenty-first century. The first is Nishigaki’s concept of infor­
mation, which takes into account the difference and relation between 
the living being and the machine. The second is his systems model, 
of the human being as an ambiguous system that is autonomous and 
heteronomous.
23 
Nishigaki, Fundamental Informatics, vol. 1, 8-11.
24 Toru Nishigaki, Seimei to Kikai wo tsunagu chi (Tokyo: Kyoto University of 
the Arts and Tohoku University of Art and Design Press Geijutsu Gakusha, 2022). 
Translated by Toru Nishigaki as The Wisdom to Bridge the Gap between Lives and 
Machines: An Introduction to Fundamental Informatics (2013), https://digital-nar- 
cis.org/nishigaki_pdf/introductionToFI1_v1.pdf, 15; original emphasis.
First, the concept of information. Let us approach this from a bio­
logical perspective in order to delve into the informational observation 
and the biological worldview. The mathematical concept of informa­
tion, the probabilistic concept of information as entropy/negentropy 
in Claude Shannon’s communication theory and Wiener’s classical cy­
bernetics, are mechanistic concepts of information from material ob­
servation. By contrast, the biological concept of information is aimed 
at grasping more fundamental information from which such mecha­
nistic concepts of information were derived. According to Nishigaki, 
information is fundamentally ‘something that brings about significance 
to a living thing’, and it is internally formed through the survival of the 
living being.24 This fundamental information is called ‘life information’. 
In fundamental informatics, social information like linguistic signs, and 
mechanical information like digital data, are all considered as trans­
duced from the life information.

DAISUKE HARASHIMA
253
The living being lives in its environmental world constructed by 
itself as it lives its life. The environmental world is of lived significance 
to the living being. In other words, everything in the experiential envi­
ronmental world has its own significance within the teleological nexus 
of significance to the living being to live. Through living its life, the 
experiential world of the nexus of significance to itself is construct­
ed. This significance is the fundamental information, life information. 
The living being, through living, lives in the world of lived significance 
that it itself constructs as it lives, and on the ground of this world, it 
takes another step in its life. Therefore, Nishigaki, referring to Gregory 
Bateson, also defines information as ‘a pattern by which a living thing 
generates patterns’.25
25 Ibid., 4, original emphasis.
26 
Gregory Bateson, Steps to an Ecology of Mind: Collected Essays in
Anthropology, Psychiatry, Evolution, and Epistemology (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 2000).
27 
Nishigaki, Fundamental Informatics, vol. 1, chap. 1; vol. 2, chap. 1; vol. 3,
chap. 3.
This self-referentially, self-generating nature of information is 
largely described in Bateson’s concept of information, as ‘a difference 
that makes a difference’.26 However, there is one crucial difference 
between Bateson’s concept of information and Nishigaki’s: life. Nishi- 
gaki’s concept of information emphasizes the living being as the ob­
server-constructor. In other words, it is not a subject who observes an 
object from outside, but a living being who constructs its own world 
while living within it, for which a difference makes a difference. Life 
information is significant to a living being, irreplaceable and unique. In 
addition, the living being is a living being that constructs its own world 
of significance while living within it. Therefore, information is ‘a pat­
tern by which a living thing generates patterns’. The phrase ‘by which 
a living thing’ is a simple expression of the cosmology that forms the 
background of this concept of information. In short, living life is the 
ground for in-formation.
Information is fundamentally significance internally formed 
through living life. Fundamental informatics calls this life information, 
and classifies three categories of information: life information, social 
information, and mechanical information. The latter two are generated 
from life information.27 Life information acts as primitive affect of vital 

254
LIFE-IN-FORMATION CYBERNETICS OF THE HEART
activities and has not yet been cognized by consciousness or articulat­
ed through language. When people attempt to convey life information 
to others, they express it through gestures, images, words, and more; 
a combination of symbols and their associated meanings is generated, 
and this is referred to as social information. The generation of social 
information is fundamentally achieved through communication on the 
scene. Individuals attempt to convey the meaning and value of their 
own lived life information through their own social efforts. Such ges­
tures, images, and words always involve the individual’s embodiment 
and affect, their lived meaning and value. The symbols and their asso­
ciated meanings of social information are fundamentally inseparable. 
Mechanical information is the abstraction of social information, leaving 
only the symbols. As communication using social information becomes 
stable, even transmitting only symbols like written text across time and 
space, can convey a certain degree of meaning. Through abstraction 
into mechanical information, the inseparable aspects of lived meaning 
and value in social information become latent and are then re-enact­
ed by the interpreter. For example, even if you cannot read or write 
Japanese, you might still be able to copy Japanese characters without 
understanding their meaning, and when people who understand Japa­
nese read those characters, they will be able to make sense from those 
symbols. Based on the same principle, today’s artificial intelligence can 
perform various tasks in natural language processing (NLP), such as 
text generation, solely through the manipulation of symbols, without 
understanding their meaning. The condition that enables such opera­
tions is the abstraction of social information into mechanical informa­
tion, which allows the processing of symbols independently from their 
lived meaning and value.
Life information, social information, and mechanical information 
are continuous, but fundamentally, information is produced as life in­
formation and then transduced into social information, which is further 
abstracted into mechanical information. This is in the reverse order of 
the major approach to symbols and meanings in contemporary artifi­
cial intelligence research and robotics. The well-known frame problem 
and symbol grounding problem ask how we are able to attach mean­
ings to, or generate meanings from, meaningless symbols that are 
mechanical information. This implies the premise that there are first 
meaningless symbols, and then meanings are attached to or generated 
from them. This order of questioning is inverted, from the perspective 

DAISUKE HARASHIMA
255
of the order of transduction of information in fundamental informatics; 
first there are meanings, and then symbols are transduced from them. 
This reversal of the order is similar to the reversal of the mechanist and 
biological perspectives on the patterns of the living being discussed 
earlier. In fundamental informatics, the mechanical is positioned within 
the biological system in the form of transduction from life information 
to mechanical information. The machine and the living being are under­
stood in terms of information from an integrated perspective. This is 
not identification of the machine and the living being, but rather trans­
duction of life information to mechanical information.
Under the technological condition of classical cybernetics, the 
information society has increasingly been emphasizing mechanical 
information only. The academic world is no exception. After the linguis­
tic turn in the twentieth century, various turns have been proposed to 
overcome its limitations. From the standpoint of fundamental informat­
ics, we would expect an informatic turn, in the sense that it sheds light 
not only on social and mechanical information, but also on life infor­
mation. But in fact, what has been happening so far is the opposite; a 
false informatic turn in the sense of a turn towards mechanical infor­
mation. This is precisely what Heidegger meant by the completion of 
Western metaphysics through cybernetics, the end of philosophy, and 
world domination by Western European civilization. Following Nishi- 
gaki, I argue that the task of cybernetics for the twenty-first century is 
to achieve the real informatic turn toward life information.28 Among the 
potential research subjects, we could think of the unconscious, affect, 
and embodiment, but in a different way from mechanistic approaches. 
Within the mechanistic development of classical cybernetics, there are 
many approaches today where the unconscious, affect, and embodi­
ment are researched as forms of information processing. But what I 
expect from cybernetics for the twenty-first century is research that 
takes life information into account, rather than focusing exclusively on 
mechanical information, as is the case in technological universalism.
28 Toru Nishigaki, Jouhougakuteki Tenkai (The informatic turn) (Tokyo: 
Shunjusha), 2005.
So far, I have introduced the concept of information in fundamen­
tal informatics; ‘something that brings about significance to a living 
thing’, and ‘a pattern by which a living thing generates patterns’. I would 
like to go a little further here into the construction of the environmental

256
LIFE-IN-FORMATION CYBERNETICS OF THE HEART
world of the living being as a biological cybernetic system. When we 
say that information is ‘something that brings about significance to a 
living thing’, and the living being lives in its own environmental world 
of such significance, some might wonder if this is not the same as en­
framing, since it is cybernetics that confines human beings to a world 
of useful things. However, biological cybernetics differs from enfram­
ing cybernetics in a crucial respect: the observer’s point of view. To 
whom is the useful thing of use? Enframing conceals this question. 
This is why enframing is totalizing, and why technology is superficially 
universalizing. To say that something is universally useful, premises an 
observer observing the whole world as an object from outside as the 
basis for value judgment. Enframing technology conceals this, provid­
ing a loophole for pretending to be a transcendent observer to beings 
in the world that would never be able to take such a point of view, such 
as a person, a community, or a machine.
Neocybernetics, which emphasizes the viewpoint of the observer 
as a living being, does not start from this premise, because from the 
viewpoint of a living being, it is impossible to observe the whole world 
from outside that world. Rather, it starts from observing the world as 
it is observed by an observer living in the world. That is to say, each 
living being is living in its own environmental world of significance. In 
each of those worlds, countless other living beings are also living, each 
constructing its own world, and each living being is living in that world: 
a pluralistic world. Neocybernetics asks how this is constructed. In this 
sense, it asks what it is, if not technology, that is constructing my world. 
This is a question of the human being, of life living itself.
Hierarchical autonomous communication system
The ‘self’ (@B, jiko) of ‘self-producing system’ (BSB^^, jikosanshut- 
sukei) and ‘autonomous system’ (§W^, jiritsukei) is ambiguous in na­
ture. In Japanese, it is known that the word ‘§’ (ji) contains both mean­
ings of this ambiguity: ‘what was done voluntarily’ (frf ft'B, mizukara) 
and ‘what has turned out to be’ (fc®f ft'B, onozukara ).29The Japanese
29 
Seiichi Takeuchi, Flower Petals Fall, but the Flower Endures: The Japanese
Philosophy of Transience (New English Edition), trans. Japan Publishing Industry 
Foundation for Culture (JPIC) (Tokyo: JPIC, 2019), 32.

DAISUKE HARASHIMA
257
word ‘§^’ (shizen orjinen), which is now usually used as a translation 
of the word ‘nature’, expresses this ambiguity as well, and also means 
absolute contingency beyond human control. These complex conno­
tations help us understand that the self-producing system, or the au­
tonomous system, is not simple self-identification or self-regulation, 
but rather superimposition of self and other—an ambiguous system of 
autopoiesis and allopoiesis, or of the autonomous and the heterono- 
mous—and also that it is contingent. Life is living deep inside myself. I 
feel that I am living, while life inside myself lives by itself.
In fundamental informatics, the human being—this ambiguous be­
ing of autonomy and heteronomy—is described in a systems model: the 
hierarchical autonomous communication system (HACS).30 In this light, 
let us step onto the path of a new cybernetic approach to life-in-forma­
tion working deeper inside than technology.
30 
Nishigaki, Fundamental Informatics, vol. 2, chap. 1; vol. 3, chap. 3.
In the HACS model, human beings as living social beings are con­
sidered to be autonomous systems, because they are living beings, but 
they are also considered to be heteronomous systems, because they 
are living under social norms. This is an antinomy between autonomy 
and heteronomy. But if we consider the two modes of observation, we 
can comprehend this ambiguity not as a mere contradiction, but as a 
description of the same human being from two different observations; 
human beings are observed as autonomous systems from the per­
spective of the psychic system, and as heteronomous systems from 
the perspective of the social system. In this way, we can observe human 
beings as HACS in which the psychic system and the social system, while 
both are autonomous, overlap hierarchically and operate correlatively.
Let us consider the hierarchical and autonomous correlative op­
eration of HACS in a more concrete example: a situation in which two 
people are communicating, that is, two psychic systems and one social 
system are operating as HACS. The psychic system is an autonomous 
system, a kind of autopoietic system composed of thoughts that pro­
duce thoughts; it can also produce, as by-products of its operation, 
expressions such as gestures, spoken words, and written words, that 
is, materials for communication. Now, when a psychic system produc­
es such an expression, it becomes a perturbation for another psychic 
system. Of course, since the psychic system is autonomous, it does not 
receive the expression in the same way a machine receives a signal as 

258
LIFE-IN-FORMATION CYBERNETICS OF THE HEART
input, but the expression can bring forth some changes in the environ­
ment of the system, disturbing its operation; the system continues its 
autonomous operation while itself compensating for the disturbance, 
and can produce an expression as a by-product of this operation. This 
expression then affects the first system as another perturbation, and 
the first system continues to operate under the disturbance, produc­
ing another expression as a by-product of its operation. Thus, commu­
nication occurs. Suppose that such communication continues to be 
produced. At this point, if we focus on this communication production 
process, we can observe a recursive process in which produced com­
munication produces communication. What we have observed here is 
an autonomous system that consists in a different phase from the psy­
chic systems: a social system. In the HACS model, the psychic systems 
as lower systems, and the social system as a higher system, operate 
hierarchically and autonomously.
When the operation is observed informationally, the lower sys­
tem is operating as a self-producing autonomous system, but when 
observed materially, it is producing by-products, a chain of production 
that results in communication (composed of those by-products). The 
recursive process of communication production operates as an au­
tonomous system when its operation is observed informationally: this 
is the higher system. Thus, by observing from multiple viewpoints, we 
can observe the lower and higher systems operating as HACS.
When we observe the lower system from the perspective of the 
higher system, we observe the lower system as if it were an allopoi- 
etic heteronomous system that produces some materials that serve 
as components for the higher system. When we observe its operation 
informationally, the lower system is operating as an autopoietic auton­
omous system, but since, from the viewpoint of the higher system, the 
lower system is observed as an object from outside, the autonomous 
operation of the lower system cannot be observed from the perspec­
tive of the higher system. On the other hand, the higher system is itself 
an autopoietic system, meaning that anything not participating in the 
network of the communication production process is not a compo­
nent of the system; no hierarchical relation can be established with 
any system that does not produce materials for communication. Put 
differently, being a lower system means that some constraint from the 
higher system is at work. In the case of human society, this constraint 
can be morality, or another form of power. Of course, it is possible to 

DAISUKE HARASHIMA
259
change the constraint from the bottom up, since the components of the 
higher system are produced by the lower systems. But being hierarchi­
cal means that there is always already some constraint at work. This 
asymmetry brings about complex theoretical problems, but needless 
to say, it has also caused human beings anguish and tragedy.
It is sometimes said that modern technology blurs the distinction 
between the living being and the machine. From the informational ob­
servation, machines in modern technology are nothing but allopoietic 
heteronomous systems, which should be clearly distinct from the liv­
ing being. Why does the distinction between the living being and the 
machine seem so blurred? In light of the HACS model, this is because 
it is impossible to identify whether a lower system is informationally 
autonomous or heteronomous, from the viewpoint of its higher system. 
Modern technological information processing machines are capable 
of producing materials for communication, which are the components 
for the social system. From the viewpoint of the social system, such 
machines are observed to have become members of society and are 
given the same status as humans. From the viewpoint of the social sys­
tem, information processing machines are observed as a kind of pseu­
do-autonomous system or what constitutes, what Mark Hansen calls, 
‘provisional closure’.31 In cybernetics for the twenty-first century, how 
to position such machines that interact with humans and produce ma­
terials for social communication, and how to develop and implement 
them in society while understanding distinctions and relationship with 
humans, are already important issues.
31 Mark B. N. Hansen, ‘System-Environment Hybrids’, in Emergence and 
Embodiment, ed. Bruce Clarke and Mark B. N. Hansen (Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press, 2009): 113-142.
The lower system of HACS, despite being observed as a het- 
eronomous system by the higher system, is an autonomous system 
when observed informationally from within the operation of the lower 
system itself. HACS consists of the correlative operation of the higher 
and lower autonomous systems. This means that the machine, which 
is a heteronomous system, cannot be a lower system of HACS. This 
critical distinction becomes blurred when we observe the lower sys­
tem only from the viewpoint of the higher system, because from that 
perspective, we can only observe the lower system as an object of the 
material and mechanistic observation, from outside. If we consider 

260
LIFE-IN-FORMATION CYBERNETICS OF THE HEART
only the social system, the distinction between the human being and 
the machine becomes blurred. However, in HACS, where autonomous 
systems constitute a hierarchy, the living being and the machine are 
clearly distinct from each other from the informational and biological 
perspective, and the machine is not positioned as the lower system 
of HACS. A society in which humans are treated like machines, or ma­
chines are treated like living things, is impossible in the cosmology rep­
resented in the HACS model.
Then, where is technology, or technics more broadly, positioned 
in the HACS model? The answer is: the media.32 In fundamental infor­
matics, the media have two major functions. The first is information 
processing, storage, conversion, and transmission. This is what is gen­
erally referred to as ‘media’ in media studies. The second is to help the 
hierarchical and autonomous operation of the higher and lower sys­
tems. This is a mechanism for coordinating the successive occurrence 
of communication.33 The important point here is that media help the 
succession of correlative operations of the higher and lower systems 
as HACS, in other words, it provides empirical norms and knowledge 
about the values of HACS, for example, what kind of lower system be­
haviour can be compatible with its correlative operation in the high­
er system. This is actualized in a form that is accessible to the lower 
system: selective criteria, legal rules, archives of cases, and so on. It 
is, so to speak, a trace of the patterns left by the history of the hierar­
chical and autonomous operation of the higher and lower systems. In 
this way, HACS will continue to operate self-referentially. Of course, 
since HACS are autonomous systems, they transform contingently. 
The values of the higher system and the values of the lower system 
change at the rhythms of their respective timescales, and the media 
also change accordingly. Since HACS are autonomous systems, they 
do not operate according to a given set of rules, and their media do not 
provide such rules, but just a record of patterns that have been empir­
ically viable through the history of the operation of the HACS. Situated 
32 Harashima, ‘Media approach’.
33 This notion of media in fundamental informatics developed based on Niklas 
Luhmann’s concept of communication media, especially Erfolgsmedien (suc­
cess media). See Takehiko Daikoku, ‘Media’ no Tetsugaku (Philosophy of ‘media’), 
(Tokyo: NTT Publishing, 2006); Nishigaki, Fundamental Informatics, vol. 1, chap. 3; 
vol. 2, chap. 1; vol. 3, chap. 3; Niklas Luhmann, Die Gesellschaft der Gesellschaft 
(Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1997), chap. 2.

DAISUKE HARASHIMA
261
in an environment that fluctuates contingently, HACS operate not only 
according to their past knowledge and the data recorded in its media, 
but also flexibly and heuristically, and the result of its operation is then 
left as media again.
In short, the media are technics that help HACS continue their 
hierarchical operation. This means that the media act on the constraint 
from the higher system to the lower system. The media technics help 
the hierarchical operation of the HACS, by regulating the constraint. 
Technics as media affects how the human experience as a social be­
ing is constructed. The essence of technics as media is to help the 
hierarchical operation of HACS by acting on the construction of the 
environmental world of significance to the system.
Although the social constraint, on which the media act, con­
strains the thoughts of the psychic systems, it does not construct the 
worlds of fundamental significance to human beings. Life living itself 
constructs the world of significance. This means that, although tech­
nics as media acts on how the human experience as a social being is 
constructed, the condition making the construction itself possible, is 
life. The higher and lower systems, helped by the media, correlatively 
operating, each transforms autonomously and self-productively, and 
its dynamic is life-in-formation.
Thus it becomes clear that enframing cybernetics conceals two 
things. The first is the already mentioned criterion of value judgments, 
namely the observer observing the higher system. The second is the 
existence of the lower system. Enframing cybernetics conceals the 
observation of the autonomous system that constructs the world of 
significance. After all, the cybernetic system of enframing is a high­
er system that observes the living being as a heteronomous system, 
and modern technology is its medium. It lacks the informational ob­
servation making sense from the viewpoint of the living being (the 
lower system). In short, enframing cybernetics conceals the fact that 
there exists hierarchical autonomy. Hierarchical autonomy makes it 
obvious that there are two points of view, not one. In this context, we 
can interpret what Heidegger pointed out about cybernetics and en­
framing as meaning that the first- and second-generation systems in 
the paradigm of classical cybernetics are all about enframing. If we try 
to understand social systems and global ecosystems with a systems 
theory on the basis solely of informationally open systems, without dis­
tinguishing two modes of observation, we end up with enframing. The 

262
LIFE-IN-FORMATION CYBERNETICS OF THE HEART
aforementioned example, the distorted image of mechanistic society, 
is typical of such understanding of human societies and human beings 
as social beings only from the viewpoint of the social system. This is 
why I have emphasized the importance of the two modes of observa­
tion, and the importance of the notions of life information and HACS in 
the new cybernetics.
Cybernetics for the twenty-first century
The critical task for cybernetics for the twenty-first century is to ob­
serve an even higher system than social systems, because social sys­
tems are constrained by higher global systems. Today, the dominant 
global system is global capitalism, whose symbolic values are econom­
ic growth and technological innovation. Modern technology, which is 
essentially enframing, is global capitalism’s medium, under which the 
heart of life is being suppressed and under threat of being reduced 
or even eliminated. To realize other values, different from those of the 
global system, is the key to cybernetics for the twenty-first century; to 
realize different global systems that will save the heart of life in crisis. 
What we should strive for is a global system that respects life. Respect 
for life here does not mean survival, life support, or immortality from 
the material and mechanistic point of view; these could even lead to the 
suppression of the heart of life. The contradictory ideal of realizing the 
growth of the informational and biological heart through material and 
mechanistic manipulations would lead to such a consequence. Rather, 
respect for life here means respecting the values of systems that take 
care of life-in-formation observed informationally and biologically. It is 
a way to live as human beings as HACS to realize a correlative hierar­
chical autonomy among psychic systems, social systems, and a global 
system that takes as its values respect for life; a way of life in which we 
can live autonomously and, as it is, fit with the values of the higher sys­
tem of life. In other words, we will be able to observe the significance 
of each individual living system observed from the perspective of a 
cosmic system of life, corresponding to the significance of everything 
in a world observed from within each individual living system.
Is it possible to bring about such a transformation of a global sys­
tem, and the correlative transformation of psychic systems through 
changes in social institutions or technological innovations? This is the 

DAISUKE HARASHIMA
263
wrong way to frame the question. Rather, cybernetics for the twen­
ty-first century is about the gradual growth and salvation of each in­
dividual heart, no matter how long it takes. Then the global system will 
also transform little by little. It may take a tremendous amount of time. 
It is a long way, but it is a modest way. It can only be undertaken indi­
vidually; not by following a prescribed way of doing things, but through 
living one’s own life. We must answer our own questions ourselves, 
because the heart is autonomous, it is self-producing. This is a problem 
in the realm of life. As an informationally closed system, a living system 
in neocybernetics, the process of the heart is not something that can 
be controlled in accordance with mechanical laws, but happens sin­
gularly; it is an informationally closed system, not an informationally 
open system like a machine. Nevertheless, the material and mecha­
nistic realm does have an important role for the process of the heart. 
We must strive to keep living beings materially alive until the wish is 
fulfilled. Modern technology has been accused of taking time away 
from human beings. We can say that this is because the process of 
the heart takes a tremendous amount of time. Material technics must 
make this time, and it must be sustainable. I suggest that cybernetics 
for the twenty-first century should be a technics that can maintain the 
compatibility of living beings’ informational and material aspects, by 
making physical time for them to make their lived history, and to sustain 
their life until the correlative transformation is realized.
Technology acts on the construction of the environmental world 
in which a human being lives as a social being. However, what the new 
cybernetics, such as fundamental informatics, has argued is that, at 
a deeper level than technology, life living is the ground for the con­
struction of the world of significance to a living being: life-in-formation. 
Taking care of this, we will realize that every little thing in the world as 
it appears is precious and makes life alive: the nature of the self, by 
itself. Taking care of this heart would be an important step for cyber­
netics for the twenty-first century. This is a growth. But this is not a 
calculable growth, like economic growth as a measure for the global 
capitalist system. This is a growth of the heart. This is not to deny mate­
rial growth, but to affirm informational growth. Affirming informational 
observation does not deny material observation, and vice versa. Af­
firming the material observation does not deny the informational ob­
servation. However, we cannot observe the informational when we are 
observing the material, and we cannot observe the material when we 

264
LIFE-IN-FORMATION CYBERNETICS OF THE HEART
are observing the informational. The two observations must be super­
imposed. As a reflection on the technological civilization of classical 
cybernetics, which tend to overemphasize the mechanistic develop­
ment based on material observation, I suggest, from the standpoint 
of the new cybernetics, that we should affirm the importance of the 
biological growth of the heart, based on informational observation; dis­
tinguishing between the mechanistic and biological orders, we should 
value the singularity of life.
This is a step, growth, not in a progress toward a determined des­
tination, but rather in a process of becoming aware of the here and 
now. Informational observation is the realization that the self is, as it 
is, self-producing and autonomous. In other words, it helps us remove 
the constraints that we, as living systems, do not really need to be at­
tached to. This does not mean that we are free from material constraint 
or power; that is a matter of the material. But regardless of whether 
we achieve such liberation or not, we realize that living beings are au­
tonomous. If we blur the fundamental distinction between the orders 
of the material and the informational, it seems as if there is a trade-off 
between constraint and autonomy; and if we premise that we are not 
autonomous as long as we are not liberated, then this premise would 
suppress the autonomy of the heart, of natural life, which everyone is 
living by itself. Informational observation, observing this autonomy, is a 
step towards the process. Biological autonomy is not a goal, but a start­
ing point. Informational observation does not make the material world 
disappear. It does not make the constraints of social and global systems 
disappear, nor does it enable us to deliberately manipulate them. It just 
means that we can observe and take care of life-in-formation, which is 
the dynamic of the social and global systems transforming. It may be 
small, but it would provide us with the power to live, encouraging us 
to live together. Cybernetics of the heart, or steering technics for us to 
survive our passages of life, will help us to make this step.34
34 In relation to this concluding paragraph, Yuk Hui suggested in a dialogue 
with me that it might be possible to interpret in this way the tanka (Japanese short 
poem) of the Japanese philosopher Kitaro Nishida (1870-1945): ‘AttA=tt = 4'0t 
^^<^^^r<^^^^^r<^0’ (hito wa hito / ware wa ware nari/ tonikaku ni/ ware 
yuku michi wo / ware wa yuku nari), which could translate to ‘People are people, 
I am I, in any case, I will go the path I go’ (Kitaro Nishida, Nishida Kitaro Kashu 
(Kitaro Nishida Poem Collectoin), ed. Kaoru Ueda (Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten, 2009), 
46). This tanka, created by Nishida in 1934, is known today for being inscribed on

DAISUKE HARASHIMA
265
a monument placed beside a pedestrian path in Kyoto called ‘Tetsugaku no michi’ 
(Philosopher’s Walk), where he used to take walks while deep in thought. I cannot 
delve into it here, but I believe that Hui’s insight raises an important question, if, 
as Hui suggests, we interpret that the tanka in relation to the conclusion, ‘AttA = 
lim’ (people are people, I am I), implies not self-centred individualism or egoism, 
but a state of being where each person is autonomous, and yet ‘m^r<^^mi^r<^ 
0’ (I will go the path I go) also signifies that the path of the other is itself the path I 
ought to take or hope to take. It is a profound state of mind or disposition that can 
be deeply appreciated. It not only reminds us of Nishida’s concept of ‘absolutely 
contradictory self-identity’, but also naturally compels us to think about his unfath­
omable emotions, his philosophizing from the deep ‘sorrow’ (Ms, hiai) within the 
tumultuous journey of life (also refer to note 1). In the context of this essay, there is 
another important issue that should be highlighted about Nishida. It is a question 
that constitutes the background for the very topic of cybernetics for the twen­
ty-first century: the question of overcoming modernity. Nishida, who was one of 
the prominent Japanese thinkers in the first half of the twentieth century, was a 
pioneer of modern Japanese philosophy and is also regarded as the founder of 
the well-known (or notorious) Kyoto School. If we, today, endeavour to overcome 
modernity, it is inevitable that we will have to confront the Kyoto School, who, 
a century ago, earnestly faced the same question, but ultimately ended up with 
the serious failure of what Hui referred to as ‘metaphysical fascism’. See Hui, The 
Question Concerning Technology.

266
LIFE-IN-FORMATION CYBERNETICS OF THE HEART
Reference
Bateson, Gregory. Steps to an Ecology of Mind: Collected Essays in 
Anthropology, Psychiatry, Evolution, and Epistemology. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2000.
Clarke, Bruce and Mark B. N. Hansen, eds. Emergence and Embodiment: 
New Essays on Second-Order Systems Theory. Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press, 2009.
Derrida, Jacques. Of Grammatology. Translated by Gayatri Chakravorty 
Spivak, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2016.
Hansen, Mark B. N. ‘System-Environment Hybrids’, in Emergence and 
Embodiment, ed. Bruce Clarke and Mark B. N. Hansen, 113-142. 
Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2009.
Harashima, Daisuke. ‘Kaisouteki jiritsusei no kansatsukijutu wo meguru 
media approach’ (Media approach to observation-description of 
hierarchical autonomy), in Kisojouhougaku no Frontier (The frontier 
of fundamental informatics), ed. Toru Nishigaki, 137-157. Tokyo: The 
University of Tokyo Press, 2018.
———. ‘Ikirareta imo to kachi no jikokeisei to jiritsusei no guuzen’ (Self­
formation of lived meaning and contingency of autonomy), in 
Autonomy in the Age of Artificial Intelligence, ed. Shigeo Kawashima, 
69-94. Tokyo: Keiso Shobo, 2019.
Heidegger, Martin. On Time and Being. Translated by Joan Stambaugh. 
New York: Harper & Row, 1972.
———. The Question Concerning Technology and Other Essays.
Translated by William Lovitt. New York: Garland, 1977.
Hui, Yuk. The Question Concerning Technology in China: An Essay in 
Cosmotechnics. Falmouth: Urbanomic, 2016.
———. Recursivity and Contingency. London: Rowman & Littlefield, 2019. 
Kawamoto, Hideo. Autopoiesis: Daisan-sedai System (The third-genera­
tion system). Tokyo: Seidosha, 1995.
Luhmann, Niklas. Social Systems. Translated by John Bednarz, Jr. with 
Dirk Baecker. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1995.
———. Die Gesellschaft der Gesellschaft. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1997.
Maturana, Humberto and Francisco J. Varela, Autopoiesis and Cognition: 
The Realization of the Living. Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1980.
Nishida, Kitaro. Nishida Kitaro Kashu (Kitaro Nishida poetry collection). 
Edited by Kaoru Ueda. Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten, 2009.

DAISUKE HARASHIMA
267
Nishigaki, Toru. Kiso Jouhougaku (Fundmental informatics) I, II, III. Tokyo: 
NTT Publishing, 2004, 2008, 2021.
———. Jouhougakuteki Tenkai (The informatic turn). Tokyo: Shunjusha, 
2005.
———. ‘Saishukougi: La Mancha no Jouhougakusha’ (The last lecture: 
informatics researcher of La Mancha), memorial lecture, The 
University of Tokyo, 2013.
———. Seimei to Kikai wo tsunagu chi. Tokyo: Kyoto University of the Arts 
and Tohoku University of Art and Design Press Geijutsu Gakusha, 
2022. Translated by Toru Nishigaki as The Wisdom to Bridge the 
Gap between Lives and Machines: An Introduction to Fundamental 
Informatics (2013), https://digital-narcis.org/nishigaki_pdf/introduc- 
tionToFI1_v1.pdf.
Ohi, Nami. ‘Imi no kaifuku ni yoru soushitsu-taiken no kachi no hanten: 
shinteki-system no hattatsu-model’ (Meanings recovery enables us 
to survive loss experiences: a model proposal of psychic systems 
development process). Shakai Jouhougaku (Socio-informatics) 8, no. 
1 (2019): 49-64.
Takehiko, Daikoku. ‘Media’ no Tesugaku (Philosophy of ‘media’). Tokyo: 
NTT Publishing, 2006.
Takeuchi, Seiichi. ‘Kanashimi’ no Tesugaku (Philosophy of ‘Kanashimi’). 
Tokyo: NHK Publishing, 2009.
———. Flower Petals Fall, but the Flower Endures: The Japanese 
Philosophy of Transience (New English Edition). Translated by Japan 
Publishing Industry Foundation for Culture (JPIC). Tokyo: JPIC, 2019.
von Foerster, Heinz. Observing Systems. Seaside, CA: Intersystems, 1981.
———. Understanding Understanding: Essays on Cybernetics and 
Cognition. New York: Springer, 2003.
von Glasersfeld, Ernst. Radical Constructivism: A Way of Knowing and 
Learning. London: Routledge, 1995.
von Uexkull, Jakob. A Foray into the Worlds of Animals and Humans: With 
a Theory of Meaning. Translated by Joseph D. O’Neil. Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 2010.
Wiener, Norbert. Cybernetics: Or Control and Communication in the 
Animal and the Machine. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1948.

268
Biographies

269
Brunella Antomarini
teaches aesthetics and contemporary philos­
ophy at John Cabot University, Rome. She has 
a multidisciplinary education in contempo­
rary epistemology, aesthetics, anthropology 
and post-humanism. Her current research 
concerns the analysis of the common func­
tions of the organic body and the retroactive 
machine through an epistemological conver­
gence of different views, such as pragmatism, 
cybernetics, and systems theory. Among her 
books are: Le macchine nubili (2020); Thinking 
Through Error (2012); The Maiden Machine: 
Philosophy in the Age of the Unborn Woman 
(2013); and Aesthetics in Present Future. The 
Arts in the Technological Horizon (co-au­
thored, 2013). She is the editor of Yuk Hui’s 
book Pensare la Contingenza: La rinascita del­
la filosofia dopo la cibernetica (Rome, 2022).
Slava Gerovitch
teaches history of mathematics at MIT. He 
holds two PhDs; one in philosophy of science 
(from the Institute for the History of Natural 
Sciences and Technology, Moscow, and one 
in history and social study of science and 
technology (from MIT's Science, Technology 
and Society programme). He has written 
extensively on the history of Soviet mathe­
matics, cybernetics, cosmonautics and com­
puting. He is the author of From Newspeak to 
Cyberspeak: A History of Soviet Cybernetics 
(2002), which won an honourable mention for 
the Vucinich Book Prize for an outstanding 
monograph in Russian studies; Voices of the 
Soviet Space Program: Cosmonauts, Soldiers, 
and Engineers Who Took the USSR into Space 
(2014); and Soviet Space Mythologies: Public 
Images, Private Memories, and the Making 
of a Cultural Identity (2015), the winner of the 
Gardner-Lasser Aerospace History Literature 
Award and a finalist for the Historia Nova 
Prize for the best book on Russian intellectual 
and cultural history.
Daisuke Harashima
is a Research Associate of the Future Ro­
botics Organization at Waseda University, 
Tokyo. He writes and teaches on humanities 
and technics in contemporary information 
societies from the perspective of fundamental 
informatics and new cybernetics, with a focus 
on the differences between living beings 
and machines as systems, to reflect on the 
modern technological condition and to realize 
new values based on respect for life. His 
books include Critical Words: Media Theory 
(2021, in Japanese), Autonomy in the Age of Ar­
tificial Intelligence: Reconstructing the Basic 
Concept for the Future (2019, in Japanese), 
and Frontiers of Fundamental Informatics: 
Can Artificial Intelligence Have Its Umwelt? 
(2018, in Japanese), and he has published in 
the journals Gendai Shiso and Eureka. He is 
the translator of Yuk Hui’s Recursivity and 
Contingency (2022) and co-translator of Tim 
Ingold’s Being Alive (2021) in Japanese.
Yuk Hui
is Professor of Philosophy at Erasmus Uni­
versity Rotterdam where he holds the Chair 
of Human Conditions, and a professor at the 
City University of Hong Kong. He wrote his 
doctoral thesis under Bernard Stiegler at 
Goldsmiths College, London and obtained his 
Habilitation in philosophy from Leuphana Uni­
versity, Germany. Hui is the author of several 
monographs that have been translated into 
a dozen languages, including On the Exis­
tence of Digital Objects (2016), The Question 
Concerning Technology in China:—An Essay 
in Cosmotechnics (2016), Recursivity and 
Contingency (2019), Art and Cosmotechnics 
(2021) and forthcoming Machine and Sover­
eignty (2024). Hui is co-editor of 30 Years after 
Les Immateriaux: Art, Science and Theory 
(2015) and editor of the issue Philosophy after 
Automation (Philosophy Today, Vol.65. No.2, 
2021), among others. Hui has been the conve­
nor of the Research Network for Philosophy 
and Technology since 2014 and a juror of the 
Berggruen Prize for Philosophy and Culture 
since 2020.
N Katherine Hayles
is Distinguished Research Professor of 
English at the University of California, Los 
Angeles and the James B. Duke Professor of

270
Literature Emerita at Duke University, and 
teaches and writes on the relations of litera­
ture, science and technology in the twentieth 
and twenty-first centuries. She has published 
eleven books and over a hundred peer-re­
viewed articles, and her research has been 
recognized by a Guggenheim Fellowship, two 
National Endowment for the Humanities Fel­
lowships, a Rockefeller Residential Fellowship 
at Bellagio, a National Humanities Center 
Fellowship, and a University of California 
Presidential Award, among other awards. She 
is a member of the American Academy of Arts 
and Sciences. Her books have won numerous 
awards, including the Rene Wellek Prize for 
the Best Book in Literary Theory in 1998-99 
for How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bod­
ies in Cybernetics, Literature, and Informatics, 
and the Suzanne Langer Award for Outstand­
ing Scholarship for Writing Machines. She 
writes on media theory, experimental fiction, 
literary and cultural theory, science fiction, 
and contemporary American fiction. She has 
won two teaching awards, and has held visit­
ing appointments at Princeton, the University 
of Chicago as the Critical Inquiry Visiting 
Professor, and at the Institute for Advanced 
Studies at Durham University, UK, among oth­
ers. Her most recent book is Postprint: Books 
and Becoming Computational (2021).
Dylan Levi King
is a Tokyo-based independent researcher, 
writer, and translator, focused on contemporary 
Chinese culture and philosophy. His most recent 
translation is The New Civilization Upon Data: 
How Big Data Reshapes Human Civilization, 
Business and the Personal World by Tu Zipei 
(2022). His writing has appeared in Palladium, 
the Spectator, and Chinese Literature Today.
Michal Krzykawski
is Associate Professor in Philosophy and Head 
of the Centre for Critical Technology Studies 
at the University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland. 
His research revolves around continental 
philosophy of science and technology, critical 
theory, and political economy. He is particularly 
interested in a dialogue between philosophical 
thinking, technology and science in the context 
of epistemological, psychosocial, and ecolog­
ical issues related to the current digital trans­
formation. He is the author of The Other and the 
Common: Thirty-Five Years of French Philoso­
phy (2017, in Polish) and co-author of Bifurcate: 
There Is no Alternative, edited by Bernard 
Stiegler with the Internation Collective (2021).
David Maulen de los Reyes 
teaches history of technology at the Metro­
politan Technological University (UTEM) and 
Universidad Adolfo Ibanez (UAI), Chile. He 
has written about the relationships between 
art, science and technology in Chile and 
Latin America within the processes of social 
change, developing a specific methodology 
of the sociology of symbolic production for 
the retrospective study of project disciplines 
such as design, architecture, urban planning 
and engineering. Curatorial projects include: 
the third biennial of the National Museum of 
Fine Arts (MNBA), ‘The Situation of Chilean 
Contemporary Art’; the project for the new 
Gabriela Mistral cultural centre; visualization 
of information ‘Genealogical Trajectories of 
Buildings for the 3rd United Nations Confer­
ence on Trade and Development UNCTAD III’; 
and regional curator for the project ‘Everyone 
is a Bauhaus: Past and future of a concept’, 
at ZKM, Karlsruhe. He has contributed to the 
platform ‘Is Modernity Our Antiquity?’ at Doc­
umenta 12 in Kassel. He was co-editor of the 
special issue on cybernetics in Latin America 
of the AI & Society journal, research that he 
continues to develop.
Andrew Pickering
is Professor Emeritus of Sociology and 
Philosophy at University of Exeter, UK. He has 
held fellowships at the Institute for Advanced 
Study at Princeton and the Stanford Center 
for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Scienc­
es, and universities including MIT, Princeton, 
and Durham. He is a leading figure in science 
and technology studies and has published 
widely on the history, sociology and philoso­
phy of science, technology and mathematics. 
His writings have been translated into many

271
languages, including Chinese translations of 
his books Constructing Quarks: A Sociological 
History of Particle Physics (1984), Science as 
Practice and Culture (1992), and The Mangle 
of Practice: Time, Agency and Science (1995). 
His most recent book is The Cybernetic Brain: 
Sketches of Another Future (2010). He is now 
working on cybernetic relations with nature 
and cybernetic art.
Dorion Sagan
is a celebrated writer, ecological philosopher, 
and author or co-author of twenty-five books, 
translated into fifteen languages. As an eco­
logical theorist he has been at the forefront of 
bringing our growing understanding of sym­
biosis as a major force in evolution into the in­
tellectual mainstream, in both science and the 
humanities, and rethinking the human body as 
a ‘multispecies organism’. With Carl Sagan and 
Lynn Margulis, his parents, he is co-author of 
the entries for both ‘Life’ and ‘Extraterrestrial 
Life’ in the Encyclopedia Britannica.
Mathieu Triclot
teaches philosophy at the University of Tech­
nology of Belfort-Montbeliard, France. His 
research belongs to the French tradition of 
‘philosophy of technical milieux’ (Simondon, 
Beaune, Stiegler). His first book, Le moment 
cybernetique (2008), is a history of American 
cybernetics and the invention of the notion of 
information. Since the publication of Philoso- 
phie des jeux video (2011), he has participated 
in the development of game studies in the 
French-speaking world, notably by defending 
the perspective of play studies, centred on 
the phenomenological analysis of the regimes 
of experience with the computing machine. 
He has participated in numerous research 
projects in the field and is now working on 
the problems of a ‘techno-aesthetic’ and 
the analogies between games and music or 
dance, looking in particular at the relationship 
between gesture, computer programme and 
image. More recently, his research has fo­
cused on the role that the notion of ‘technical 
milieux’ can play in the context of design, and 
the reform of engineering training.

Special thanks to
Media Lab of Guangdong Times Museum and M Art Foundation

