Annals of the Canadian Society for History
and Philosophy of Mathematics
Société canadienne d’histoire
et de philosophie des mathématiques
Maria Zack
David Waszek
Editors
Research in 
History and 
Philosophy 
of Mathematics
The CSHPM 2022 Volume


Annals of the Canadian Society for History and 
Philosophy of Mathematics/ Société canadienne 
d’histoire et de philosophie des mathématiques 
Series Editor 
Maria Zack, Department of Mathematical Information & Computer Sciences, Point 
Loma Nazarene University, San Diego, CA, USA 
The books in the series contain selected papers written by members of the Canadian 
Society for History and Philosophy of Mathematics. Founded in 1974, this society 
promotes research and teaching in the history and philosophy of mathematics, as 
well as in the connection between the two. Volumes in this series cover a broad 
range of topics from a variety of time periods and cultures. They will be accessible 
to anyone who has had exposure to mathematics at the university level and will 
appeal to scholars of the history and/or philosophy of mathematics, graduate and 
undergraduate students undertaking research projects, and anyone with a general 
interest in mathematics.

Maria Zack • David Waszek 
Editors 
Research in History and 
Philosophy of Mathematics 
The CSHPM 2022 Volume

Editors 
Maria Zack 
Mathematical, Information & Computer 
Sciences 
Point Loma Nazarene University 
San Diego, CA, USA 
David Waszek 
École Normale Supérieure - PSL 
Paris, France 
ISSN 2662-8503
ISSN 2662-8511 (electronic) 
Annals of the Canadian Society for History and Philosophy of Mathematics/ Société 
canadienne d’histoire et de philosophie des mathématiques 
ISBN 978-3-031-46192-7
ISBN 978-3-031-46193-4 (eBook) 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-46193-4 
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG 2024 
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether 
the whole or part of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse 
of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and 
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar 
or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed. 
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication 
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant 
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use. 
The publisher, the authors, and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book 
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or 
the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any 
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations. 
This book is published under the imprint Birkhäuser, www.birkhauser-science.com by the registered 
company Springer Nature Switzerland AG 
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland 
Paper in this product is recyclable.

Preface 
Since 1988, the Canadian Society for History and Philosophy of Mathematics 
(Société canadienne d’histoire et de philosophie des mathématiques) has been 
publishing a yearly collection of papers. One virtue of these volumes is that they 
offer a window into the thematic and methodological breadth of contemporary 
scholarship in the ﬁeld. This is particularly manifest in this year’s installment, 
consisting of eight chapters which approach the history, philosophy, and teaching 
of mathematics from a great variety of angles. 
*** 
The volume opens with two chapters whose concerns are primarily foundational 
or philosophical. 
Nicolas Fillion reﬂects on the way logic is currently being taught to philosophy 
students. He argues that the reliance in philosophy courses on substantial mathemat-
ical tools, in particular elements of set theory, to rigorously ground logic makes the 
standard curriculum dangerously circular since axiomatic set theory itself cannot 
be grasped without some understanding of logic. Instead, Fillion proposes to start 
from a rejuvenated version of the Aristotelian idea of an argument schema and use 
this idea to develop a limited set of concepts from logic that is sufﬁcient for the 
introduction of the axioms of set theory. Once set theory is in place, mathematical 
logic can then be taught as usual. 
The question that underlies Mario Bacelar Valente’s chapter is the following: 
From the perspective of mathematical practice (rather than from that of logical 
foundations), what are mathematical proofs good for? His answer is that one of the 
important roles of proofs is to enable their readers to ascertain the correctness of the 
statement proved. To explain how they achieve this, he offers a cognitive model of 
the process of working through a proof. According to Bacelar Valente, mathematical 
proofs offer guidance for a reasoning process made of steps that are sufﬁciently 
small for each of them to elicit a strong metacognitive feeling of correctness. He 
tests his models on several proofs from ancient Greek mathematics, including the 
quadrature of a lune by Hippocrates of Chios. 
***
v

vi
Preface
One of the central goals of recent historiography of mathematics has been that 
of reconstructing the social, institutional, and cultural setting of past mathematics. 
This is quite difﬁcult to do if looking solely at mathematical texts. The next three 
chapters showcase the diversity of sources and methods that can be enlisted to help 
place mathematical work in its appropriate context. 
Megan Briers takes a quantitative approach, using data on mentions in ency-
clopedia articles to study collaboration in nineteenth-century British mathematics. 
Her chapter is in the spirit of previous efforts to reconstruct the collective dynamics 
of mathematics using, for instance, citation or co-authorship networks. Such work, 
however, usually relies on the onerous construction of tailor-made databases and on 
limited kinds of formal co-authorship or citation relationships. Instead, Briers shows 
how interesting patterns can be extracted by creatively exploiting information that 
is readily available online (in this instance, on Wikipedia and Wikidata, Wikipedia’s 
data back-end). Integrating young scholars into the profession is an important goal 
of the Society, and it is always a point of pride for us to be able, as in this case, to 
publish an author’s ﬁrst paper. 
Cynthia Huffman turns to imagery to study how the scientiﬁc contributions 
of a woman, Émilie Du Châtelet, were depicted and perceived in eighteenth-
century Europe. Her richly illustrated paper focuses on the frontispieces designed 
by publishers for books by Du Châtelet or connected to her, especially some books 
by Voltaire to which Du Châtelet is believed to have made substantial contributions. 
Huffman shows how these images served to credit Du Châtelet visually, even when 
she did not share formal authorship for the work, but in a way that marked out Du 
Châtelet’s contributions as distinctively feminine, combining traditional emblems 
of scientiﬁc investigations with the ﬁgure of the Muse. 
Shawn McMurran and James Tattersall are working on a long-term project that 
studies how women slowly gained access to scientiﬁc education in Britain in the 
nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Their chapter in this volume ﬁlls a further 
blank in our knowledge of this protracted process: it focuses on women’s access 
to peer discussion societies, in particular the Cambridge Women’s Research Club 
(1919–1979). By exploiting institutional archives, including minutes of meetings, 
McMurran and Tattersall are able to reconstruct the club’s activities and get a sense 
of its role in socializing women into a community of researchers, at a time when full 
participation in existing male-dominated spaces would have been difﬁcult. 
*** 
The last three chapters in this volume underscore how valuable it can be to 
study the development and circulation of mathematics at very different scales, both 
temporally and geographically. 
Emmylou Haffner puts, so to speak, individual texts under a magnifying glass. 
Through a variety of examples, ranging from Leibniz to Elie Cartan and Dedekind, 
she shows that much insight can be gained into the research and writing process 
of mathematicians by looking at their drafts and other preparatory notes, many of 
which have been preserved in archives, yet are rarely looked at by historians. Among 
other things, she argues, drafts allow us to see mathematicians taking notes and

Preface
vii
reworking other sources; performing exploratory computations and playing with 
notation or diagrams as a research strategy; and re-elaborating their concepts while 
preparing their work for publication. 
Roger Godard and Mark Lewis take as their focus two individual textbooks on 
vector analysis from the early twentieth century, an American one from 1901 by 
Edwin Wilson (based on lectures by Josiah Gibbs), and a German one from 1919 by 
Carl Runge. Comparing and contrasting them allows Godard and Lewis to highlight 
how differently a similar ﬁeld could be covered, at roughly the same period, in 
distinct national and institutional contexts. 
Finally, Jeffrey Oaks takes the long view in his wide-ranging chapter “The 
Legacy of al-Khw¯ar¯azm¯ı in History of Algebra.” What he offers is a kind of global 
history of one particular algebra treatise, the famous Kit¯ab al-jabr wa-l-muq¯abala, 
tracing its reception through its numerous re-elaborations and translations over 
the course of about eight centuries—from later algebra books written in Arabic 
to van Roomen’s commentary at the end of the sixteenth century, through Latin 
translations, Italian trattati d’abaco, and German cossist treatises. 
*** 
The 2022 annual meeting of the Society, at which a number of the chapters in this 
volume were presented, once more had to take place online because of the lingering 
effects of the coronavirus pandemic. In such conditions, the Annals have been all 
the more important in preserving the intellectual exchanges that are essential to any 
scientiﬁc society. We are grateful to our authors and reviewers; their hard work is 
what makes it possible for the Annals to continue to thrive. 
San Diego, CA, USA
Maria Zack 
Paris, France
David Waszek

Editorial Board 
The editors wish to thank the following people who served on the editorial board 
for this volume: 
Amy Ackerberg−Hastings 
Convergence, Mathematical Association of America 
Eisso Atzema 
University of Maine, Orono 
Christopher Baltus 
State University of New York, College of Oswego 
Michael Barany 
University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom 
Daniel Curtin 
Northern Kentucky University 
Thomas Drucker 
University of Wisconsin, Whitewater 
Craig Fraser 
University of Toronto 
Cynthia Huffman 
Pittsburg State University 
Dirk Schlimm 
McGill University
ix

x
Editorial Board
James Tattersall 
Providence College 
Glen Van Brummelen 
Trinity Western University 
David Waszek 
École Normale Supérieure, Paris 
Maria Zack 
Point Loma Nazarene University

Contents 
Logical Methodology and the Structure of Logic Syllabi ....................
1 
Nicolas Fillion 
Ancient Greek Mathematical Proofs and Metareasoning ................... 
15 
Mario Bacelar Valente 
Wikipedia and the Portrayal of Collaborative Networks of 
Nineteenth-Century British Mathematicians ................................. 
35 
Megan Briers 
Mathematical and Philosophical Imagery in Original Sources 
Related to Émilie du Châtelet................................................... 
47 
Cynthia J. Huffman 
Cambridge Women’s Research Club .......................................... 
65 
S. L. McMurran and J. J. Tattersall 
Going to the Source(s) of Sources in Mathematicians’ Drafts .............. 
83 
Emmylou Haffner 
Two Textbooks on Vector Analysis: Gibbs and Runge ....................... 111 
Roger Godard and Mark Lewis 
The Legacy of Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in History of Algebra......................... 127 
Jeffrey A. Oaks
xi

Contributors 
Mario Bacelar Valente Pablo de Olavide University, Seville, Spain 
Megan Briers Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of 
St Andrews, St Andrews, UK 
Nicolas Fillion Department of Philosophy, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, 
Canada 
Roger Godard Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Royal Military 
College of Canada, Kingston, ON, Canada 
Emmylou Haffner Institut des textes et manuscrits modernes, ÉNS/CNRS, Paris, 
France 
Cynthia J. Huffman Pittsburg State University, Pittsburg, KS, USA 
Mark Lewis Saint Lawrence College, Kingston, ON, Canada 
Shawnee L. McMurran Department of Mathematics, California State University, 
San Bernardino, San Bernardino, CA, USA 
Jeffrey A. Oaks University of Indianapolis, Indianapolis, IN, USA 
James J. Tattersall Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, 
Providence College, Providence, RI, USA
xiii

Logical Methodology and the Structure 
of Logic Syllabi 
Nicolas Fillion 
Abstract This paper starts from a dissatisfaction with the way logic is currently 
taught in philosophy departments. In such a context, we would want logic to be 
developed from ﬁrst principles, in such a way that it can then be applied to any 
other domain of study. But standard “rigorous” logic courses make it depend on a 
substantial amount of set theory, which itself seems to require notions from logic— 
confusing students, if not striking them as circular. Instead, this paper proposes to 
start from a rejuvenated version of the Aristotelian notion of an argument schema, 
and to use this idea to develop a limited collection of concepts from logic that is 
sufﬁcient for the introduction of the axioms of set theory. Once set theory is in 
place, mathematical logic can be taught as usual. 
Most colleges and universities offer at least one course in elementary formal logic. 
Such courses are often offered by philosophy departments, but they are also quite 
commonly offered by other departments such as mathematics, computer science, 
and linguistics. This fact reﬂects the plurality of reasons for which logic is included 
in educational curricula. Since a course syllabus ought to be responsive to the rea-
son(s) for which the course is included in the curriculum, it is clear that distinct logic 
syllabi are suited to logic courses having different functions in educational curricula. 
This paper’s objective is to discuss some important respects in which the 
structure of elementary logic syllabi ought to be improved. The emphasis will 
not be on the selection of subjects that should be included in a well-conceived 
elementary logic course, which nowadays standardly includes curricular items such 
as the concepts of argument, argument form, validity, deduction, interpretation, 
etc., systems such as syllogistic logic, propositional logic, and predicate logic, their 
elementary metatheory, and symbolization of simple natural language expressions. 
N. Fillion () 
Department of Philosophy, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada 
e-mail: nﬁllion@sfu.ca 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
M. Zack, D. Waszek (eds.), Research in History and Philosophy of Mathematics, 
Annals of the Canadian Society for History and Philosophy of Mathematics/ Société 
canadienne d’histoire et de philosophie des mathématiques, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-46193-4_1
1

2
N. Fillion
Instead, the paper’s objective is to make critical remarks about the organization 
of those curricular items or, in other words, about the structure of logic syllabi.1 
For the critique to be well-grounded, it is ﬁrst necessary to make clear what sort 
of logic course is targeted: logic courses devoted to students learning elementary 
logical theory and methodology, as opposed to logic courses that presuppose their 
knowledge. As I will argue, the pedagogical plan deployed in such courses fails to 
live up to the promises we make in the name of logic in that it presents a circular 
view of the discipline. I will also sketch an alternative plan that does live up to the 
promises of logic. 
1 
The Constitutive Promise of Logic 
It may prima facie seem that all elementary logic courses are introduced in educa-
tional curricula to make students learn elementary logical theory and methodology. 
This, however, is not the case. Indeed, modern educational curricula typically 
contain multiple courses that cursorily introduce students to some elements of logic 
as a means rather than as an end. As such, the objective is for students to acquire 
the knowledge of some collection of logical facts relevant to the study of something 
other than logic, without there being a need for a comprehensive well-grounded 
perspective on what logic is and on how it works. 
For example, in Altshuler et al. (2019), a textbook used at my institution for 
a third-year course on semantics offered by the linguistics department, a 42-page 
chapter introduces students to “symbolic logic.” Although the chapter does a ﬁne 
job of introducing students to the rudiments of syntax and semantics for predicate 
logic (but not for the whole of ﬁrst-order logic), it hardly teaches students even a 
minimally comprehensive view of logic. Indeed, the concepts of argument, validity, 
and deduction are not even mentioned,2 although logic is usually considered to be a 
discipline that primarily seeks to study the validity of arguments, where the validity 
of an argument is in most cases shown by means of a deduction. However, the logic 
syllabus it contains can hardly be criticized on that basis, for the purpose of the 
course is to simply introduce students to a few of the many concepts of logical theory 
and methodology, i.e., those relevant to a linguistics course on semantics, rather than 
to present students a compelling and comprehensive picture of logic as a discipline. 
As a second example, junior mathematics students are often offered a course (or 
part of a course) that contains elements of logic that—so it seems to be believed by
1 According to the Cambridge Advanced Learner’s Dictionary & Thesaurus, the deﬁnition of 
‘syllabus’ is as follows: “(a plan showing) the subjects or books to be studied in a particular 
course, especially a course that leads to an exam.” For the purpose of this paper, I will use the 
word ‘syllabus’ to refer speciﬁcally to the list of subjects included in a course plan, and the phrase 
‘structure of the syllabus’ to refer speciﬁcally to the organization of the subjects listed as part of 
the syllabus. 
2 For another textbook commonly used in linguistics for the same purpose, and to which this 
observation applies, see Kratzer and Heim (1998). 

Logical Methodology and the Structure of Logic Syllabi
3
curricula and syllabi designers—should sufﬁce for students to become proﬁcient at 
understanding and producing proofs of mathematical statements. At my institution, 
this is part of a ﬁrst-year discrete mathematics course offered in mathematics & 
computer science. Such courses usually give fairly loose deﬁnitions of key logical 
terms such as ‘argument,’ ‘validity,’ ‘deduction,’ and ‘proof,’ and introduce students 
to truth-tables and the interpretation of simple quantiﬁed sentences. On that basis, 
a collection of logical facts that ought to be known is given, e.g., De Morgan 
laws, associative laws, distributive laws, double negation, contraposition, quantiﬁer 
negation, etc. Logical deductions are presented as a process of going from sentence 
to sentence, making transformations based on equivalence rules learned as basic 
facts. For one of the best examples of this, see Velleman (2019). Logic is once again 
not presented as a discipline with a distinctively structured theory and methodology, 
but only as a means for having an ability to produce mathematical proofs. 
This should sufﬁce to show that there are courses teaching introductory logic that 
are not per se devoted to teaching logical theory and methodology; they cursorily 
introduce students to some aspects of logic with the aim of applying it in speciﬁc 
predetermined ways. As such it is sufﬁcient to introduce students to a small number 
of logical facts and rules, and the time pressure associated with the needs to move on 
to other topics may justify not engaging with logic in a more comprehensive manner. 
For the objective is not to understand logic and how it relates to other intellectual 
disciplines, but only to become competent users of a few elements of logic. This 
is the full (and clearly limited) extent of the promises made in the name of logic 
in such courses. As such, although logicians will likely ﬁnd their coverage of logic 
superﬁcial and unsatisfactory, those courses are not ill-conceived. But the fact that 
such courses deliver on their promises merely reﬂects the fact that so little of the 
breath, depth, and richness of logic as a discipline is touched on. In other words, 
they deliver on their promises, but merely because they promise so little. 
It is appropriate, at this point, to contrast such situations with one involving the 
more ambitious promises traditionally made in the name of logic. Let us start with 
the father of logic himself. Aristotle wrote six logical treatises that are collectively 
referred to as the Organon, following the edition of his work by Andronicus 
of Rhodes around 40BC; in what is not uncontroversially thought to be their 
chronological order, they are: Categories and Topics, Sophistical Refutations, On 
Interpretation, Prior Analytics, and Posterior Analytics (Boche´nski, 1961; Kneale 
and Kneale, 1962). We can appreciate the ambitious role promised for logic by 
considering what Aristotle says in the very ﬁrst sentence of Topics about the method 
he seeks to develop: 
The purpose of the treatise is to discover a method from which we will be able to 
reason about any problem set before us from accepted opinions and, when maintaining 
an argument, avoid saying anything self-contradictory. (100a163 )
3 ῾Η μὲν πρόϑεσις τῆς πραγματείας μέϑοδον εὐρεῖν, ἀφ’ ἧς δυνησόμεϑα συλλογίζεσϑαι περὶ 
παντὸς τοῦπροτεϑέντος προβλήματος ἐξ ἐνδόξων, (αὶαὐτοὶλόγον ὑπέχοντες μηϑὲν ἐροῦμεν 
ὑπεναντίον. 

4
N. Fillion
The need for such a method became quite pressing in fourth century BC Athens— 
where Aristotle studied and taught—since, to an unprecedented degree, large bodies 
of argumentative discourses were found in written form. Such argumentative dis-
courses intended to systematically establish some theses on the basis of other theses 
that were thought to be acceptable. In Aristotle’s time, this included ﬂourishing 
bodies of mathematical knowledge (especially geometry), elaborate discussions of 
questions of metaphysics, cosmogony, and science, as well as debates of political 
and legal natures. 
It is not the place to discuss why so much of it was present in Aristotle’s time, but 
it should be clear that a systematic methodology to scrutinize discourses involving 
many interrelated arguments would then feel desirable. Indeed, if one is to develop 
a method to adjudicate between different answers to legal, political, mathematical, 
or metaphysical questions, the method in question should not presuppose one of 
the answers to what is being questioned. Otherwise, using the method to adjudicate 
such questions would only be begging the question. Hence, such a method should 
remain neutral even with respect to some of the most fundamental metaphysical 
questions. For example, one of the hotly debated questions in Aristotle’s time was 
whether the Heraclitean view that nothing ever remains—everything being con-
stantly changing—or the Parmenidean view that nothing ever changes—everything 
remaining constantly and necessarily the same—is correct. The early dialectical 
account of logic developed by Aristotle in the Topics was designed so as to not 
even make commitments with respect to such questions, so that the method could 
be used to weigh in with the intent of non-circularly determining the correct answer, 
this being done throughout without running into contradictions. Let us refer to this 
as the constitutive promise of logic. Indeed, we ﬁnd Aristotle vigorously trying to 
fulﬁll this promise in the six treatises belonging to the Organon. 
2 
The Promise of Logic in the Liberal Arts Tradition 
Until the middle of the nineteenth century, logic as a discipline was traditionally 
understood to be a development of the ideas ﬁrst advanced by Aristotle. It must 
be said, however, that distinct traditions of Aristotelian logic were developed, 
partly as a result of the complicated history of the availability of the works of 
Aristotle in the centuries that followed his death (e.g. Lord, 1986; Spade, 2007). In 
some sectors of the historical literature, canonical Aristotelian logic was primarily 
devoted to the study and elaboration of themes such as Aristotle’s analysis of the 
predicative relation ‘to be’ in Categories and his account of the predicaments in 
Categories and Topics. It ought to be said that this endeavour has at times confused 
logic and metaphysics, in a way that did not live up to the constitutive promise 
of logic. In some other sectors of the historical literature, canonical Aristotelian 
logic was largely devoted to the complex theory of axiomatic knowledge that

Logical Methodology and the Structure of Logic Syllabi
5
Aristotle developed in the Posterior Analytics which, famously, was to a large extent 
implemented by Euclid in The Elements.4 
There is another part of Aristotelian logic that has been universally accepted to 
be an essential component of the canon of Aristotelian logic, namely, the theory of 
categorical syllogisms presented in Prior Analytics I, 1–2 and 4–7. In the Medieval 
period, this is the logical theory that became encoded using the letters A, E, I, 
O, and the various mood names such as Barbara, Celarent, Darii, etc. (e.g., see 
Spade, 2007). Except for a few wrinkles concerning conversion per accidens and 
subalternation, this remains a universally accepted core element of logical theory. 
The theory of syllogisms, and sometimes the other logical doctrines developed in 
the Organon, occupied a central place not only in the research-oriented scholarship, 
but also in the tradition of liberal arts education. This is because logic is both a 
science and an art. When we say that logic is an art, the word ‘art’ is not used to 
refer to the ﬁne arts. Rather, it is used in a broader, classical sense which includes 
things such as ﬁne art, industry, craftsmanship, skills, and even some things we now 
consider to be sciences. This sense has its roots in the ancient Greek word τέχνη— 
the etymological root of our current word ‘technique.’ Accordingly, the study of 
logic as an art is the study of the correct usage of a set of techniques governing 
correct reasoning. Bonevac (1990) puts the point as follows: 
[...] logic is both an art and a science. Logic is concerned with constructing a theory of 
correct reasoning, making it a science. Indeed, modern symbolic developments have led to 
sophisticated mathematical theories of reasoning. But logic is also concerned with applying 
theory to practice, making it an art. Most people study logic to improve their ability to 
reason: to argue, to analyze, and to think critically about issues that concern them.5 [...] 
But it’s important to remember that without theories of reasoning, there would be nothing 
to apply. The art of logic depends crucially on the science of logic. (p. vii–viii) 
Just as was the case in Aristotle’s Organon, the objective remained that of 
developing an increasingly comprehensive method that lives up to the constitutive 
promise of logic, including a comprehensive treatment of both logical theory and of 
its applications. 
Traditionally, the liberal arts together composed an entire educational cur-
riculum. The education obtained from the liberal arts has been meant to be a 
general-purpose (as opposed to a technical or professional) education. In other 
words, the point of liberal arts is to equip people with the tools to articulate a general 
perspective that applies to everything—a point that directly echoes the promise 
made by Aristotle at the beginning of the Topics. 
It is thus not surprising that logic has occupied a central place in the traditional 
liberal arts curriculum, in such a way that it was not taught with particular 
disciplinary objectives in mind (in contrast to the linguistics and mathematics &
4 Such points of focus may appear somewhat strange, from a modern point of view, since these 
topics are not contemporarily considered to be parts of logic per se, but it is perhaps not as strange 
as it might prima facie seem; in any case, it is not the purpose of this paper to decide this question. 
5 As one would expect, there seems to be empirical support for the idea that studying logic 
improves one’s skills in logic. See, e.g., Attridge et al. (2016). 

6
N. Fillion
Liberal Arts 
expression/organization 
of the intellect 
Trivium 
grammar, logic, rhetoric 
developed by studying 
Intellect per se/ 
Judgment 
Quadrivium 
arithmetic, music, 
geometry, astronomy 
developed by studying 
Fig. 1 The seven traditional liberal arts 
computer science courses mentioned above). To better grasp the intended structure 
of the liberal arts curriculum, consider as an example the list and division of 
disciplines presented in Fig.1, which have taken their form in the Middle Ages, as 
the teachings of Thierry de Chartres (c. 1150)—who anticipated the universities of 
the Renaissance—testify: “Philosophy has two main instruments, namely intellect 
and its expression. Intellect is illumined by the quadrivium (arithmetic, music, 
geometry, and astronomy). Its expression is the concern of the trivium (grammar, 
logic and rhetoric).” The study of the liberal arts is thus meant to develop the 
intellect in general, not merely as it applies to particular topics. As we see, the 
purpose is to have a method to argue about any topic whatsoever, without producing 
circular arguments or running into contradictions. This being said, my objective in 
what follows is not to examine syllabi proposals in this tradition, but rather to make 
critical remarks about the current approaches to teaching logic. The main purpose 
of the section was merely to make more visible the enduring importance of what 
I called the constitutive promise of logic. Moreover, in Sect.4, I’ll suggest that we 
revive some aspects of the logical methodology found in the liberal arts tradition. 
3 
Premature Attempts at Rigour in Logic 
Nowadays we do not teach logic as was traditionally done, owing to our reliance on 
mathematics from the start. It is certainly true that the scope of logic has expanded, 
as well as the rigour with which logical theory and methodology are developed. 
Although our typical courses sometimes touch upon topics from Aristotelian logic, 
they normally focus on sentential and predicate logic. Of course, the scope and 
rigour of such courses vary wildly. Some institutions have an introductory class that 
presents the material in a rather loose way, with an almost exclusive focus on the 
art component of logic. Sometimes such a course would be followed by a course 
designed toward the study of the science of logic. Such courses would typically be 
more mathematically involved, and would present what we “ofﬁcially” (or, at least,

Logical Methodology and the Structure of Logic Syllabi
7
very commonly) take to be the rigourous treatment of elementary logic.6 It is with 
respect to this ofﬁcial take on how one ought to rigorously teach logic that I would 
like to raise the question: to what extent does our presentation of logical theory and 
methodology deliver on the constitutive promise of logic? 
To be clear, I do not think that there is anything inconsistent or otherwise 
factually incorrect in what is presented. The purpose of asking the question is ped-
agogical: does it constitute a well-ordered curricular sequence, where assumptions 
and results are organized linearly and cumulatively, and especially in a way that 
avoids circularities? Does the presentation of elementary material presuppose non-
trivial knowledge of things whose knowledge is itself grounded in the elementary 
material we seek to rigorously teach students? 
The standard approach to rigorously teaching logic (especially ﬁrst-order logic) 
relies on a few key metatheoretical strategies: 
• 
Before logic is ofﬁcially introduced, a preamble (or an appendix) “reviews” 
some of the notions of set theory needed. Among other things, it includes basic 
set-theoretic operations (normal empty set∅, union∪, intersection∩, normal script upper P℘, etc.) and their properties, the deﬁnition of 
functions, the principle of mathematical induction, and sometimes something is 
said about uncountable sets. 
• 
A language is recursively deﬁned for a given primitive vocabulary; this enables 
us to assert that metavariables have a well-deﬁned range. 
• 
A semantics is provided based on an interpretation function that satisﬁes various 
recursive conditions for interpreting expressions containing primitive logical 
vocabulary. 
• 
Validity is deﬁned by quantifying over all possible interpretation functions: an 
argument upper Sigma divided by upper C∑/C is valid if and only if there is no interpretation function under 
which v left parenthesis upper S right parenthesis equals upper Tv(S) = T for all upper S element of upper SigmaS ∈∑and v left parenthesis upper C right parenthesis equals upper Fv(C) = F. 
• 
Some set of rules of inference is proposed, which will be shown to be sound 
by induction over the recursively deﬁned language. (The matter of completeness 
will not matter in what follows.) 
Note that non-trivial elements of set theory are presupposed for such metatheoretical 
strategies to work. Firstly, the notion of function is presupposed. Given the standard 
deﬁnition of what a function is, it is at least necessary to understand sentences 
of predicate logic with three quantiﬁers and identity. This seems like an awkward 
thing to presuppose if the intent is to teach someone predicate logic. Secondly, the 
strategies presuppose the abstract and non-trivial notion that there is a determinate 
set of all functions from a set to another set; more speciﬁcally, that there is a 
determinate set of all interpretation functions satisfying given recursive conditions. 
Until the nineteenth century, I do not think such a notion was part of the arsenal 
of either logicians or mathematicians, let alone the knowledge that such a notion
6 Although I prefer to not mention examples of recent textbooks that adopt the approach I criticize 
in the paper, here are example of older but still widely used textbooks exemplifying the problematic 
approach in question: Mendelson (1964), Enderton (1972), and Bell and Machover (1977). 

8
N. Fillion
is logically unproblematic. But following a standard treatment of set theory (e.g. 
Halmos, 1960), one can show the existence and properties of this set of functions 
based on the following argumentation. Firstly, the axiom of union and the axiom 
of separation enable one to show that for any two sets A and B, the Cartesian 
product upper A times upper BA × B exists. By applying the axiom of separation, functions can then be 
explicitly introduced as subsets of upper A times upper BA × B such that every element of A is paired 
with at most one element of B. In addition to this construction, the power set axiom 
and the axiom of separation are applied to show that there exists a unique set that 
contains all the functions with domain A and codomain B (i.e., all the subsets of 
upper A times upper BA × B associating with every element of A at most one element of B), which is 
usually denoted upper B Superscript upper ABA. The deﬁnition of validity mentioned above quantiﬁes over all 
interpretation functions and thus presupposes the existence of a set such as upper B Superscript upper ABA. 
Accordingly, teaching validity on the basis of such a deﬁnition presupposes an 
understanding of this sort of set-theoretic construction. But again, presupposing that 
a student who does not yet know predicate logic can have a hold of those axioms, of 
their correctness, and of how they ought to be used seems odd at best. 
Thirdly, it is presupposed that the method of recursive deﬁnitions actually works, 
i.e., that there exists a set of objects that it deﬁnes, and that this set is unique. In his 
book on set theory, Suppes (1972) lays down two principles that deﬁnitions must 
satisfy: the criterion of eliminability and the criterion of non-creativity. The point 
of the second criterion is merely that “a deﬁnition should not function as a creative 
axiom” (p. 16). Later in the book comes the time of rigorously deﬁning the notion 
of addition of natural numbers: 
To illustrate the problems which face us, we may for the moment concentrate on deﬁning 
addition. Given simply Peano’s axioms P1–P5 formulated in predicate logic with identity 
and without set theory, it may be shown (J. Robinson [1949]) that a proper, explicit 
deﬁnition of addition cannot be stated within this framework. The customary procedure 
is to adopt two further axioms: 
P6. If x is a natural number, then x plus 0 equals xx + 0 = x. 
P7. If x and y are natural numbers then 
x plus y Superscript prime Baseline equals left parenthesis x plus y right parenthesis primex + y' = (x + y)'
After a brief discussion of the procedure in question, Suppes continues: 
A pair of postulates like P6 and P7 is said to provide an inductive or recursive “deﬁnition” 
of addition. From the standpoint of the theory of deﬁnition [...], such “deﬁnitions” are not 
proper ones at all. [...] Recursive deﬁnitions, however, are close to being proper ones, and 
what we want to show is that given the additional apparatus of set theory, we can replace 
any recursive deﬁnition by an explicit, proper deﬁnition. (p. 137) 
Thus, from the point of view of set theory, we cannot merely assume the correctness 
of recursive deﬁnitions. This is something to be proved; and the proof requires 
means that go beyond ﬁrst-order logic. Once again, presupposing the correctness 
of mathematical induction and recursive deﬁnitions is an odd choice if the purpose 
is to rigorously teach ﬁrst-order logic.

Logical Methodology and the Structure of Logic Syllabi
9
Some students who somehow succeed at pursuing their study of this style of 
rigorously presented logic may go ahead in their education and take a course on the 
foundations of mathematics. Perhaps they will take a fairly standard course in set 
theory such as Halmos’ or Suppes’. The course would include the following: 
• 
A ﬁrst-order symbolic language containing only one non-logical symbol, i.e., the 
binary predicate ‘element of∈,’ of which set theory is a theory. 
• 
The logically non-trivial axioms of extensionality, separation, pairing, union, and 
power will then enable us to precisely describe the notion of an arbitrary function 
between two sets, and of the set of all such functions. 
• 
Eventually, the axiom of inﬁnity will be introduced and enable the deﬁnition of 
the set of natural numbers omegaω à la von Neumann. On that basis, it will be possible 
to prove the correctness of mathematical induction for countably inﬁnite sets and 
to prove the recursion theorem, which legitimizes recursive deﬁnitions. 
A student completing this curricular sequence will be in a position to make the 
following summary: We grounded our logic in set theory, recursive deﬁnitions, and 
induction; then we have become in a position to rigorously study set theory, which 
enabled us to show that set theory, recursive deﬁnitions, and induction are indeed 
justiﬁed. 
This understandably often leaves students in a deep state of confusion, and they 
occasionally feel cheated. In the face of these observations, what should we reply 
to a student, if we are asked: are you not peddling vicious circles? How can you 
teach logic in this way, knowing full well that it fails so patently to live up to the 
constitutive promise of logic, i.e., that promise of developing a method to reason 
about any topic without running into circles or contradictions? Perhaps we should 
just admit that they are not entirely wrong. But if so, what would be a better way to 
proceed? 
4 
Revisiting the Traditional Methodology of Formal Logic 
As we have seen, there is an important circularity in how contemporary logic 
is commonly taught—one that can reasonably trouble students in the process of 
learning logic—in that what ought to be shown by means of our logical methodology 
is instead assumed by the methodology itself. This difﬁculty is a symptom of a 
widespread tendency to present logic in a way that is too mathematically involved 
too quickly. That appeals to distinctively mathematical substantive facts ought to 
be postponed is required by the promise that logic be a method to discuss all 
topics, including mathematics, without incongruities such as contradictions and 
circularities. It is also required by sound pedagogy. 
However, we should not exaggerate the gravity of the situation. Indeed, the 
existence of a circularity in the common structure of logic syllabi does not imply 
that there is a circularity in the foundations of logic, as there might very well 
be another way of characterizing the dependency relations between the various

10
N. Fillion
elements of logic. As such, attempts at correcting our pedagogical oversights call 
for a different—and potentially better—point of view on the foundations of logic. 
To begin, we must emphasize that, following modern terminology, it is not the 
same to say what a logic  is and to say what logic itself is. For example, in their 
recent article on classical logic, Shapiro and Kouri Kissel (2022) do not introduce 
readers to logic itself (as it was classically thought of in the tradition), but rather 
to a system of logic known as ‘classical logic’ (as opposed to, say, three-valued or 
intuitionistic logic). Following this usage, the usual way of deﬁning a logic  (short 
for: a logical system) is to deﬁne a quadruple 
left angle bracket script upper L comma script upper I comma upper V comma upper D right angle bracket〈L, I, V, D〉
where script upper LL is a set of well-formed formulas corresponding to a given operational type 
(to use the terminology of Johnstone, 1987), script upper II is an interpretation function assigning 
to each relevant expression an element of a set-theoretical structure rich enough to 
interpret a language of the given operational type, V is a validity relation (which is 
a subset of normal script upper P left parenthesis script upper L right parenthesis times script upper L℘(L)×L) that may be deﬁned intensionally or extensionally, and D is a 
deduction system containing a given set of rules of inference and sometimes axiom 
schemata. This is in line with what was described in Sect.3. 
Consider the quadruple corresponding to classical ﬁrst-order logic. The purpose 
of introducing classical logic in this way is not to teach logic, for knowledge of 
logic is patently presupposed by the deﬁnition.7 Nevertheless, this is an immensely 
important mode of characterization of classical logic, for it enables the serious study 
of logical metatheory. Among other things, logical metatheory enables researchers 
to carefully re-examine their current and potential logical practices, so as to discover 
limitations of certain methods or new possibilities of application. From this point of 
view, the basic elements of logic are presupposed to be already known, but this is 
not a problem, for the knowledge of elementary logical principles is not in question. 
This being said, given the pedagogical concern of this paper, the simple way out is 
to not characterize logic itself in this way, i.e., to not require that script upper LL be a (recursively 
deﬁned) set, that script upper II be a (recursively deﬁned) function, that V be a subset of normal script upper P left parenthesis script upper L right parenthesis times script upper L℘(L)×
L, and that the metavariables occurring in the description of D be ranging over a 
predeﬁned set of expressions contributing to the deﬁnition of script upper LL (e.g., terms, n-ary 
predicates, sentences, etc.). Indeed, none of those requirements were traditionally 
imposed on the methodology of formal logic. 
Many textbook authors realize that, pedagogically speaking, the mathematically 
deﬁned notion of validity is a non-starter for students not already knowing elemen-
7 I am conﬁdent that the textbook authors mentioned in footnote 6 would agree with this 
assessment. Their textbooks are clearly written with the assumption that students will be ready 
for this sort of discussion of logic. In contrast, this paper asks how a pedagogical sequence to 
get students in this state of readiness can be articulated, and emphasizes that for this to be the 
case validity cannot be introduced in terms of quantiﬁcation over the set of all recursively deﬁned 
interpretation functions. 

Logical Methodology and the Structure of Logic Syllabi
11
tary logic. The predominant alternative is to deﬁne validity as follows: 
An argument is logically valid if and only if it is not possible for all the premises to be true 
and the conclusion false. (Bergmann et al., 2009) 
A large number of authors (e.g., Restall, 2004, Klenk, 2007, and Baronett, 2012) 
provide the same account. But this deﬁnition of validity is patently incorrect, unless 
one is inclined to reject the possibility of there being non-tautological necessary 
truths. Acknowledging the existence of such truths immediately leads one to see 
the problem with this account. Let us consider the example introduced by Kripke 
(1972), namely, that water is necessarily HSubscript 22O. Provided that this claim is factually 
the case, it is not possible for “I am currently drinking water” to be true and for 
“I am currently drinking HSubscript 22O” to be false, and thus the argument “I am currently 
drinking water, therefore I am drinking HSubscript 22O” would be deemed valid. Yet, it is 
not valid unless the necessary fact in question is explicitly stated as a premise. A 
similar situation would obtain by considering things from an Aristotelian point of 
view. If we consider humans, there would be a deﬁnition of the predicate ‘human’ 
stating its essence. Suppose that, as a matter of fact, the essence of human is rational 
animal. Then the argument ‘Socrates is a human, therefore Socrates is a rational 
animal’ would be deemed valid. Yet, it is not valid unless the statement of essence 
in question is explicitly added as a premise. Grounding elementary logical theory 
and methodology in this account of validity would be disastrous. 
The natural course correction is to specify which narrower sense of necessity 
is required for validity to obtain: the necessity connecting the premises and the 
conclusion is linguistic necessity. With this modiﬁcation, we would say that an 
argument is valid if and only if it is not possible in virtue of the meaning of the 
premises and of the conclusion that the premises be true and the conclusion false. 
Although this account is on the right track, the obvious problem is that the way in 
which it might be operationalized is not clear at all, for there are many disagreements 
about the meaning of particular terms and phrases, let alone disagreements about 
meaning itself. Aristotle’s ground-breaking insight was that this difﬁculty can, to a 
large extent, be circumvented by only focusing on patterns of occurrence of a few 
syncategorematic words whose meaning can be safely assumed, or at least explicitly 
stipulated (as he does in Prior Analytics 1.2). This is the insight that gave rise to 
formal logic. 
From the traditional point of view, the notions of form of a sentence and of 
argument form play the most central role in logical methodology. In this sense, 
‘formal’ is not to be equated with ‘symbolic.’ Rather, the formal aspect of logic 
is to be understood in terms of schemas. For instance, whereas Medieval accounts 
of syllogisms heavily rely on the notion of mood (i.e., modus), Aristotle restricts 
himself to discussing “the arguments in the ﬁgures,” where the Greek term for 
ﬁgure is schema.8 It seems that the same emphasis is found in the Stoics’ logical
8 E.g., “ἐν τούτῳ τῷ σχήματι” (in this ﬁgure) in Prior Analytics I.4. For a more extensive 
discussion, see Smith (2020). 

12
N. Fillion
writing, both for sentential and for predicate logic (see, e.g., Bobzien and Shogry, 
2020). Thus, perhaps the point of view on the foundations of logic needed for a 
pedagogically sound approach to logic lies in a reappraisal of the traditional role of 
‘forms’ in logical methodology. It could be what is needed if, at any rate, it does 
a good-enough job of giving a self-contained account of validity, although perhaps 
limited in ways that need to be highlighted. 
Here is an account of the notion of schema that it is in line with the traditional 
one, adapted from Corcoran and Hamid (2022): 
A schema (plural: schemata, or schemas) consists of two things: 
1. a linguistic expression composed of signiﬁcant words and/or symbols and also of 
placeholders (such as blanks, ellipses, letters, syntactic variables). 
2. a side condition specifying how the placeholders are to be ﬁlled to obtain instances (as 
well as the language, whether natural or symbolic, to which the instances of the schema 
are to belong). 
What we obtain by substituting for the placeholders in a schema according to the side 
condition is an instance of the schema. 
An equivalent term for ‘syntactic variable’ in the above is ‘metavariable.’ It is 
important that metavariables not be confused with what is commonly called ‘in-
dividual variables’ in modern predicate logic (i.e., x, y, z comma ellipsisz, . . .). Individual variables 
do not refer to anything in the domain of interpretation, but rather are said to range 
over the domain; with suitable rules, they are combined with quantiﬁers (for all∀, there exists∃) to  
express propositions about the domain of interpretation. In contrast, metavariables 
do not range over the domain; they are merely indications specifying how one 
ought to substitute linguistic expressions uniformly in order to obtain meaningful 
expressions. Importantly, this does not require a fully determinate set of objects 
from which substituents may be picked. Thus, for the notion of schema to play its 
key role in logical methodology, it is not required that we assume that linguistic 
objects suitable for substitution for a metavariable together constitute a determinate 
(perhaps recursively deﬁned) set. If the conditions sufﬁcient for substitution for each 
metavariable are satisﬁed, then the result is called an instance of the schema (or 
form). 
Following this traditional methodology, an argument is said to be valid provided 
that it has a valid argument form. More precisely: it is valid provided that there is 
a valid argument form of which it is an instance. According to this deﬁnition, all 
that is required to acquire the knowledge that an argument is valid is that we ﬁnd 
one valid argument form of which it is an instance. Arguments may be instances 
of multiple argument forms, some valid and some invalid, but this is irrelevant: 
as soon as a valid form of which the argument is an instance is found, we can 
conclude that the argument is valid. However, what if our search for such a valid 
form fails? It may be because there simply is no valid form of which this argument 
is an instance, or it may be that there is such a valid form but that we have been 
so far unfortunate. One limitation of the traditional approach to formal logic is 
that, owing to the fact that there is no fully determinate set of logical forms, it 
may not always be clear which of the two is the case. Of course, this will not be a

Logical Methodology and the Structure of Logic Syllabi
13
problem if we relativize our judgments to limited collections of logical forms (e.g., 
syllogistic, propositional, quantiﬁcational, alethic modal, etc.), for there will then 
be a small number of argument forms of which the argument might be an instance 
to consider. But this is what one usually does in contemporary logic as well (by 
imposing limitations on the logical vocabulary under consideration), and thus the 
traditional approach is not inferior to the modern one in this respect. 
This sketch of the traditional formal account of the validity of arguments 
presupposes a deﬁnition of what it is for an argument form to be valid. Following 
this traditional methodology, an argument form is said to be valid provided that there 
is no instance of that form with true premises and a false conclusion. According to 
this deﬁnition, all that is required to acquire the knowledge that an argument form 
is invalid is that we ﬁnd one argument of that form with true premises and a false 
conclusion. Thus, as soon as an argument of this form with true premises and a 
false conclusion is found, we can conclude that the argument form is invalid. What, 
however, if our search for such an instance fails? It may be because there simply 
is no such instance (in which case the argument form is valid), or it may be that 
there is such an instance but that we have been so far unfortunate (in which case 
the argument form is invalid). One limitation of the traditional approach to formal 
logic is that, owing to the fact that there is no fully determinate set of arguments to 
consider, it may not always be clear which of the two is the case. Of course, there 
nevertheless remains an important resource: for simple argument forms, we can 
analyze the side-conditions of the metavariables occurring in the form in order to 
determine whether an instance with true premises and a false conclusion is possible 
or not. This is fairly straightforward in the case of the simpler rules of inference 
of syllogistic and propositional logic. For more complex forms, the method of 
deductions can be relied upon to establish validity, but showing invalidity cannot 
be done in this way. 
This methodology does not at once solve all the logical questions one may have. 
Indeed, there are many aspects of the syntax and semantics of the expressions 
under consideration that remain underdetermined. As such, many metatheoretical 
questions cannot at once be solved. Nevertheless, this methodology has at its 
disposal the resources required to acquire knowledge of a large swath of logical 
facts. It is indeed sufﬁcient to construct a syllabus sequence that reaches the 
treatment of dyadic predicates in multiply quantiﬁed sentences, which are precisely 
the elements of logic required to introduce the axioms of set theory. Once axioms 
of set theory have been understood and the property of set-theoretic operators 
demonstrated, it then becomes pedagogically possible to use this very set-theoretical 
apparatus to re-examine the logical facts that are already known, with an eye toward 
metatheoretical concerns. This approach thus makes it possible for instructors to 
live up to the constitutive promise of logic—i.e., to provide a method to study all 
problems without circularity or contradiction. However, as we see, this curricular 
sequence resembles more the shape of a spiral than that of a straight line. It will 
perhaps occasionally lead to confusion and debate, but this is the sort of honest 
depiction of logical investigations that our students deserve.

14
N. Fillion
References 
Altshuler, D., Parsons, T., and Schwarzschild, R. (2019). A course in semantics. MIT Press. 
Attridge, N., Aberdein, A., and Inglis, M. (2016). Does studying logic improve logical reasoning? 
In Csíkos, C., Rausch, A., and Szitányi, J. (eds.). Proceedings of the 40th Conference of the 
International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education, Vol. 2, pp. 27–34. Szeged, 
Hungary: PME. 
Baronett, S. (2012). Logic. Oxford University Press. 
Bell, J. L. and Machover, M. (1977). A course in mathematical logic. Elsevier.  
Bergmann, M., Moor, J., and Nelson, J. (2009). The logic book. McGraw-Hill, New York, 6th 
edition. 
Bobzien, S. and Shogry, S. (2020). Stoic logic and multiple generality. Philosophers’ Imprint, 
20(31). 
Boche´nski, J. M. (1961). A History of Formal Logic. University of Notre Dame Press. 
Bonevac, D. (1990). The Art and Science of Logic. Mayﬁeld Publishing Company, Mountain View. 
Corcoran, J. and Hamid, I. S. (2022). Schema. In Zalta, E. N. and Nodelman, U., editors, The 
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, Fall 
2022 edition. 
Enderton, H. B. (1972). A Mathematical Introduction to Logic. Academic Press, New York and 
London. 
Halmos, P. R. (1960). Naive set theory. Van Nostrand. 
Johnstone, P. T. (1987). Notes on logic and set theory. Cambridge University Press. 
Klenk, V. (2007). Understanding Symbolic Logic. Prentice-Hall, 5th edition. 
Kneale, W. C. and Kneale, M. (1962). The development of logic. Oxford University Press. 
Kratzer, A. and Heim, I. (1998). Semantics in generative grammar, volume 1185. Blackwell 
Oxford. 
Kripke, S. A. (1972). Naming and necessity. In Semantics of natural language, pages 253–355. 
Springer. 
Lord, C. (1986). 
On the early history of the Aristotelian corpus. 
The American Journal of 
Philology, 107(2):137–161. 
Mendelson, E. (1964). Mathematical logic. Princeton: Van Nostrand. 
Restall, G. (2004). Logic: An introduction. Routledge. 
Shapiro, S. and Kouri Kissel, T. (2022). Classical Logic. In Zalta, E. N. and Nodelman, U., editors, 
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, Fall 
2022 edition. 
Smith, R. (2020). 
Aristotle’s Logic. 
In Zalta, E. N., editor, The Stanford Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, Fall 2020 edition. 
Spade, P. V. (2007). Thoughts, words and things: An introduction to late mediaeval logic and 
semantic theory. Version 1.2. 
Suppes, P. (1972). Axiomatic set theory. Courier Corporation. 
Velleman, D. J. (2019). How to prove it: A structured approach. Cambridge University Press.

Ancient Greek Mathematical Proofs 
and Metareasoning 
Mario Bacelar Valente 
Abstract We present an approach in which ancient Greek mathematical proofs by 
Hippocrates of Chios and Euclid are addressed as a form of (guided) intentional 
reasoning. Schematically, in a proof, we start with a sentence that works as a 
premise; this sentence is followed by another, the conclusion of what we might take 
to be an inferential step. That goes on until the last conclusion is reached. Guided 
by the text, we go through small inferential steps; in each one, we go through an 
autonomous reasoning process linking the premise to the conclusion. The reasoning 
process is accompanied by a metareasoning process. Metareasoning gives rise to a 
feeling-knowing of correctness. In each step/cycle of the proof, we have a feeling-
knowing of correctness. Overall, we reach a feeling of correctness for the whole 
proof. We suggest that this approach allows us to address the issues of how a proof 
functions, for us, as an enabler to ascertain the correctness of its argument and how 
we ascertain this correctness. 
1 
Introduction 
There is no unique deﬁnition of mathematical proof. Besides establishing the truth 
of a mathematical statement, a mathematical proof has many functions or roles. 
For example, convincing (that that is the case), explaining (how that is the case), 
and others (Dutilh Novaes 2020). Depending on the roles we might want to stress, 
we might adopt somewhat different deﬁnitions (see, e.g., Tall et al. 2021; Krantz 
2011; Beck, Geoghegan 2010). However, it is still the case that if a mathematical 
argumentation is not correct, strictly speaking, it is not a proof. So, the deﬁning role 
of a mathematical proof is that it establishes, or enables us to establish, the truth of 
a certain mathematical claim. 
M. B. Valente () 
Pablo de Olavide University, Seville, Spain 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
M. Zack, D. Waszek (eds.), Research in History and Philosophy of Mathematics, 
Annals of the Canadian Society for History and Philosophy of Mathematics/ Société 
canadienne d’histoire et de philosophie des mathématiques, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-46193-4_2
15

16
M. B. Valente
Depending on the context in which we address a mathematical proof, different 
deﬁnitions might be valuable. For example, we might consider the following 
“deﬁnition”: 
A proof is a piece of discourse that puts forward a chain of arguments for public scrutiny, 
whose core function is to establish the truth of a mathematical claim. 
Here, we will adopt a somewhat different working deﬁnition. The point is that a 
proof does not really establish the truth of a mathematical statement; the proof is an 
enabler for us to ascertain its truth. The reasoning is in us, not in the proof. As Rav 
emphasized: 
Mathematical texts abound in terms such as “it follows from . . .  that” [ . . .  ] a mathematical 
proof in general only says that it follows, not why [it follows] [ . . .  ] why the consequent 
follows from the antecedents has to be ﬁgured out by the reader of a proof. (Rav 2007) 
So, the proof consists of a sort of scaffolding of antecedents and consequents. And it 
is us who must carry out the reasoning connecting them and come to the realization 
that a consequent (a conclusion) does follow from an antecedent (a premise). 
A deﬁnition that, in our view, stresses this aspect of a mathematical proof is as 
follows: 
A proof is a piece of discourse that puts forward a chain of arguments for public scrutiny, 
whose core function is to enable the audience to ascertain the correctness of the chain of 
arguments. 
Here, we want to address the question of how a proof functions, for us, as an enabler 
to ascertain the correctness of its argument. As we will see, this question relates to 
the issue of how we ascertain this correctness. In the present work, we will answer 
both of these related questions. 
We will consider the most ancient proofs for which there are records. The reason 
is simple. If the approach developed here is to be of general application to informal 
mathematical proofs, it must work for the case of extant early proofs. If this is the 
case, then in the future, we might address how this approach works in the case of 
mathematical practices from other periods (which we will not do here). 
The present work is structured as follows. In Sect. 2, we will look in some detail 
into a mathematical proof by Hippocrates of Chios. In Sect. 3, we will present the 
framework adopted in this work. We will consider a schematic model of intentional 
reasoning, in which metareasoning gives rise to a feeling of correctness associated 
with each reasoning process. We will address Hippocrates’ proof as a form of 
(guided) intentional reasoning. At this point, we will see how a proof functions, for 
us, as an enabler to ascertain the correctness of its argument, and how we ascertain 
its correctness. In Sect. 4, we will address, using this framework, two proofs from 
Euclid’s Elements and see how they can also be conceived as a form of (guided) 
intentional reasoning.

Ancient Greek Mathematical Proofs and Metareasoning
17
2 
Hippocrates of Chios’ Proof of the Quadrature of a Lune 
The earliest extant mathematical proofs are those of Hippocrates of Chios about the 
quadrature of lunes, which were made by Hippocrates around 450–430 BCE. We 
do not have Hippocrates’ text, but only an account of it in a text by Simplicius from 
the sixth century CE (Høyrup 2019a). Simplicius’ text reports on what Alexander 
of Aphrodisias wrote around 200 CE, and on what Eudemus wrote in the late fourth 
century BCE (or possibly a later version of this text) (Høyrup 2019a). Here, we 
consider the part of Simplicius’ text related to the older Eudemian text. We rely on 
the reconstruction by Becker of the Eudemian text and on Netz’s translation of it 
into English (Netz 2004). 
It is said that Hippocrates taught geometry and wrote the ﬁrst collection of 
elements of geometry. This collection, not yet in the axiomatic format of Euclid, 
“is likely to have been connected to Hippocrates’s teaching” (Høyrup 2019b). 
Most likely, it consisted of a loose collection of known results and techniques – 
which were taken for granted – and newer developments obtained using these 
(Høyrup 2019b). Among the newer developments, we might expect that there was 
Hippocrates’ quadrature of lunes. 
Here, we will consider the proof of the ﬁrst quadrature as given in the Eudemian 
account of Hippocrates’ text (the numbering is not part of the ancient text; it is 
included by Netz to ease reference). It is as follows: 
(2) So he made his starting point by assuming, as the ﬁrst among the things useful to the 
quadratures, that both the similar segments of the circles, and their bases in square, have 
the same ratio to each other [ . . .  ] [(4)] he ﬁrst proved by what method a quadrature was 
possible, of a lunule having a semicircle as its outer circumference. (5) He did this after he 
circumscribed a semicircle about a right-angled isosceles triangle and, about the base, <he 
drew> a segment of a circle, similar to those taken away by the joined <lines>. (6) And, 
the segment about the base being equal to both <segments> about the other <sides>, and 
adding as common the part of the triangle which is above the segment about the base, the 
lunule shall be equal to the triangle. (Netz 2004) 
Part 2 of the text mentions geometric knowledge that is useful for arriving at the 
intended result: both the similar segments of the circles, and their bases in square, 
have the same ratio to each other. This “similar segments principle” is the only 
background knowledge made explicit in the text. Not mentioned are the related 
Pythagorean rule or the simple arithmetic of areas (additivity and subtractivity 
of areas). According to Høyrup, this principle, like the Pythagorean rule, and the 
simple arithmetic of areas, “were known since well above a millennium [BCE] in 
Near Eastern practical and scribal geometry” (Høyrup 2019a). 
Part 4 of the text speciﬁes what quadrature is being considered, namely that of 
a lune having a semicircle as its outer circumference. Afterward, the text, in part 5, 
gives indications of how to draw that ﬁgure – a lune having a semicircle as its outer  
circumference. We circumscribe a semicircle about a previously drawn right-angled 
isosceles triangle. This gives rise to two segments of circle, each having a side of 
the triangle as its base (see Fig. 1 left). Then we draw about the base of the triangle

18
M. B. Valente
Fig. 1 Semicircle circumscribing a right-angled isosceles triangle (left). Drawing of the lune 
(right) 
Fig. 2 The Pythagorean rule for the case of a right-angled isosceles triangle (left); Pythagorean 
rule plus the “similar segments principle” (right) 
a segment of a circle similar to the segments already drawn, e.g., by completing a 
square and using its lower corner as the center of another circle (see Fig. 1 right). 
What we might call the argumentation proper is given in part 6 of the text. It can 
be divided into two parts. In the ﬁrst, one uses the above-mentioned principle and 
concludes that the area of the segment of circle about the base is equal to the sum of 
the areas of the segments of circles about the sides. This is phrased in the text as “the 
segment about the base being equal to both segments about the other sides”, that is, 
it is presented already as a premise (an antecedent) for a subsequent inference. 
A way to visualize the “similar segments principle” and the related Pythagorean 
rule for our case is depicted in Fig. 2 (the area of the larger square is equal to the 
sum of the areas of the smaller squares, and the area of the larger segment of circle 
is equal to the sum of the areas of the smaller segments of circles). 
In the second part of the proof, the text gives us instructions on how to do simple 
arithmetic of areas: adding as common the part of the triangle which is above the 
segment about the base. Finally, the text presents the conclusion (the consequent): 
the lune shall be equal to the triangle.

Ancient Greek Mathematical Proofs and Metareasoning
19
Fig. 3 Simple arithmetic of areas 
With the aid of the ﬁgure, we “add” the part of the triangle which is above the 
larger segment of circle to the two small segments of circle (Fig. 3 left). We also 
“add” this area to that of the larger segment of circle (Fig. 3 right). We are adding 
the same area (that of part of the triangle) to areas that are equal according to the 
“similar segment principle” (the area made up of the two smaller segments of circle 
and the area of the larger segment of circle). We then conclude, as stated, that the 
area of the lune is equal to the area of the triangle. 
The argumentation in the ﬁrst part of the proof is made on a single level: it 
is directly based on geometric knowledge – namely what we called the “similar 
segment principle” – that is useful for arriving at the intended result (Høyrup 2019a). 
The conclusion of the ﬁrst argument lays the ground for the next one, which is also 
based on a direct application of background knowledge, in this case the arithmetic 
of areas. 
3 
Mathematical Proofs as a Form of (Guided) Intentional 
Reasoning 
Here, we develop a schematic model of intentional reasoning inspired by Frankish’s 
model of intentional reasoning as a cyclical process (Frankish 2018). By intentional 
reasoning, Frankish means “deliberate, intentionally controlled reasoning” (Frank-
ish 2018), in which we work out an issue in a sequence of steps or “actions”; e.g., a 
mathematical problem. 
Frankish conceives intentional reasoning as a cyclical process. Let us say that we 
begin with a written (or spoken) sentence. In Frankish’s model, “we start with [the] 
sentence, interpret it as a step in an argument, form a belief about the next step, add 
that sentence, and so on” (Frankish 2018). Figure 4 illustrates the cycles. Forming a 
belief and producing a new sentence would be the result of an autonomous reasoning 
process. In that way, while the reasoning cycle is intentional, “the processes that 
guide and support this reasoning will be autonomous” (Frankish 2018). That means 
that “intentional reasoning is not wholly intentional, but guided and mediated by 
autonomous reasoning” (Frankish 2018).

20
M. B. Valente
Fig. 4 Frankish’s model of intentional reasoning 
An example of an intentional reasoning process is making a long division. 
According to Frankish: 
We begin by writing out the ﬁgures in a certain format [ . . .  ] and autonomous processes 
interpret them as posing a simpler division problem [ . . .  ] autonomous processes then 
generate a belief about the solution to this subproblem and a decision to write down further 
symbols expressing it. (Frankish 2018) 
Notice that the result of an autonomous reasoning process is not so much a 
“solution” but a belief about the solution. Frankish mentions, elsewhere, that 
“judging that p [is the case] results in my forming the belief that p [is the case]” 
(Frankish 2018). We might say that an autonomous reasoning process gives rise not 
so much to a solution but to a belief that a solution is the case. In the model, arriving 
at a belief that p is the case is followed by the decision “to communicate [the] belief” 
(Frankish 2018). That is, the new sentence that is produced at the end of the cycle is 
not so much the “solution” p but a sentence expressing the belief that p is the case. 
The idea that what is expressed corresponds not to p but to the belief that p is 
the case is a bit awkward. If we consider the long division example, one supposedly 
writes new mathematical symbols for each step of the division. For each step, do 
the symbols express p or the belief that p is the case? The mathematical symbols 
seem to be expressing the output of an autonomous reasoning process, in this case, 
an arithmetic result, not the belief that an arithmetic result is the case. 
In the model developed here, we do not adopt any notion of belief. Instead, 
we take into account the view that different cognitive processes are accompanied 
by metacognitive processes. Accordingly, “metacognition is ubiquitous because 
virtually all cognitive operations are monitored and controlled, before, during, and 
after their execution” (Fiedler, Ackerman, Scarampi 2019). A crucial aspect of 
metacognition is that it leads to a “subjective feeling” (Fiedler, Ackerman, Scarampi 
2019).

Ancient Greek Mathematical Proofs and Metareasoning
21
Focusing on reasoning, our autonomous reasoning processes are accompanied 
by metareasoning processes, which provide monitoring of the reasoning processes. 
Metareasoning gives rise to what we might call a feeling of rightness or even a 
feeling of error (Ackerman, Thompson 2017). Like other affects, these “subjective 
feelings” have different degrees or intensities. For example, we can go from a low 
feeling of rightness to a strong feeling of rightness. 
In Efklides’ view, “‘affect’ is a generic term for emotions and other mental 
states that have the quality of pleasant-unpleasant, such as feelings, mood, motives, 
or aspects of the self, e.g., self-esteem” (Efklides 2006). Also, according to her, 
metacognitive feelings or affects “have a dual character, that is, a cognitive and 
an affective one” (Efklides 2006). In simple terms, in the case that interests us, a 
feeling of rightness can be accompanied by a verbal label “I feel it is right.” We 
might say that metareasoning gives rise to a feeling-knowing of rightness (or even 
“wrongness”, if that is the “output” of the metareasoning process). 
In this way, the output of an autonomous reasoning process is not only what will 
be expressed as a linguistic expression (“after” language production); it is that and 
a metacognitive affect – a weaker or stronger feeling of rightness or correctness 
(in this work, we adopt the term “feeling of correctness” instead of “feeling of 
rightness,” since we are addressing mathematical proofs). 
Here, we propose a model of intentional reasoning that incorporates the notion 
of metareasoning. In our view, in his model, Frankish conﬂates two aspects of 
reasoning into one notion. The output of an autonomous reasoning process is not the 
belief that p is the case (something like “I believe that p is the case”); it is “p” plus 
a feeling of correctness (the feeling that the reasoning is correct; or, rephrasing, the 
feeling that p is the case). In this way, our schematic model is as depicted in Fig. 5. 
Notice that in the ﬁgure, the relative position of the different components is not 
intended to imply that as neural processes their temporal order corresponds exactly 
to what is depicted (see, e.g., Vaccaro, Fleming 2018; Rouault et al. 2018; Bartley 
et al. 2018). Also, we have a possibly non-linguistic conclusion of the reasoning 
Fig. 5 Schematic model of 
intentional reasoning

22
M. B. Valente
and the “intention to express the conclusion.” This “intention” is conceived in 
terms of Levelt’s model of language production (Levelt 1989), in which there is 
an “intention” to express verbally some conceptual structure (in our case, the non-
linguistic “solution” of an autonomous reasoning process); this is not something 
we need to address here. The key aspects of the model are that the autonomous 
reasoning process is accompanied by a metareasoning process that gives rise to 
a metacognitive feeling of correctness of the reasoning and that metacognitive 
feelings have a dual aspect – a cognitive and an affective one. 
Let us now address Hippocrates’ proof in terms of this model of intentional 
reasoning as a cyclical process. If we were considering the proof as made by 
Hippocrates for the ﬁrst time, we would directly apply our schematic model as it is. 
But we want to address the proof as given in a text (in our case, Netz’s translation). 
In our view, we can address the proof as a form of guided intentional reasoning. 
The written text of the proof guides us through cycles, in each of which we face the 
premise and the conclusion of a reasoning process. For each step/cycle of the proof, 
we are “induced” into producing an autonomous reasoning process that “links” the 
premise with the conclusion. 
Hippocrates’ proof (part 6 of Netz’s translation) consists, as mentioned, of two 
parts. That means that there are two cycles of guided reasoning. Schematically it is 
as follows: 
Cycle 1. 
Initial “sentence”: “similar segments principle” + ﬁgure. 
Conclusion: “the segment about the base [is] equal to both <segments> 
about the other <sides>” (Netz 2004). 
(continued)

Ancient Greek Mathematical Proofs and Metareasoning
23
Cycle 2. 
Initial “sentence”: Previous conclusion + ﬁgure. 
We are told to: “[add] as common the part of the triangle which is above 
the segment about the base” (Netz 2004). 
Conclusion: “the lunule shall be equal to the triangle” (Netz 2004). 
In each of these cycles, there is an autonomous reasoning process that connects 
the premise to the conclusion (in the second cycle we are even given instructions on 
how to reason). The text guides us into producing these reasoning processes. They 
go hand in hand with metareasoning processes that give rise to a strong feeling of 
correctness for each cycle. Having a strong feeling of correctness for each cycle, we 
have a strong feeling of correctness for the whole proof. 
Hippocrates’ proof works as a form of guided intentional reasoning. This 
“format” of the proof enhances the metareasoning processes that accompany 
the reasoning processes. We have a sequence of “small” reasoning steps, each 
accompanied by a metareasoning process, which gives rise to a feeling-knowing 
of correctness. The metacognitive “feeling” in its dual nature, of a cognitive and an 
affective one, is what makes us feel-know that the inferential step is correct (even if 
we might be wrong). 
That is how a proof functions, for us, as an enabler to ascertain the correctness 
of its argument, and how we ascertain this correctness. 
Notice that having a strong feeling of the correctness of each step, and because 
of this of the whole proof, does not imply that we are right. Our metareasoning 
depends on heuristic cues (Ackerman 2019) and might be defective. We can have a 
strong feeling of correctness associated with a reasoning process and be wrong. 
In fact, there are biases regarding the feelings of rightness generated by our 
metareasoning processes (see, e.g., Fiedler, Ackerman, Scarampi 2019). We must 
distinguish what each one of us feels-knows about a proof’s correctness from how 
we collectively ascertain “objectively” that a proof is correct; here, we only suggest 
that the “objectivity” of the correctness of a proof could be the result of a robust

24
M. B. Valente
intersubjectivity: a strong feeling of correctness, shared by many, e.g., as the result 
of group discussions. There are, however, issues regarding the effectiveness of group 
discussions (see, e.g., Silver, Mellers, Tetlock 2021; Bang, Frith 2017); in this way, 
there is no simple answer. 
Also, notice that, in this work, we do not address the geometric proofs qua 
geometric proofs, but as early examples of mathematical proofs. In this way, we 
do not try to address the “black boxes” of (geometric) autonomous reasoning 
and metareasoning. Currently, geometric cognition and reasoning are still poorly 
understood (for some views related to the issue, see, e.g., Hohol, Miłkowski 
2019; Ferreirós, García-Pérez 2020; Hohol 2020). However, there are already some 
relevant results, e.g., regarding the role of diagrams and diagrammatic reasoning 
in proofs (see, e.g., Freksa, Barkowsky, Falomir, van de Ven 2019; Dal Magro, 
García Pérez 2019; Magnani 2013; Giardino 2013; Manders 2008; Giaquinto 
2007). 
4 
Two Euclidean Proofs 
How mathematical statements were proved changed from the time of Hippocrates 
to that of Euclid, roughly one and a half centuries later (see, e.g., Mueller 2006). 
As we have seen, in the case of Hippocrates general geometric principles were used 
without being proved. That is not the case with Euclid. His assumptions are much 
simpler than those admitted by Hippocrates. In the Elements, there are deﬁnitions 
like those of point, straight line, or circle (Heath 1956); also, there are postulates, 
like the ones that license the construction of a straight line, or a circle (Heath 1956); 
we also have common notions that make more precise general principles that were 
applied intuitively by Hippocrates. For example, we can take Hippocrates to use, in 
his arithmetic of areas, the following common notion: “if equals be added to equals, 
the wholes are equal” (Heath 1956). 
Since there are only a few very basic assumptions, even the simplest geometric 
results must be proved. That implies that, generally, proofs have more than a single 
level, contrary to the case of Hippocrates. In this way, a proof may rely on previously 
proved propositions, besides relying on the admitted assumptions. That can give rise 
to a very complex structure. 
To address Euclidean proofs in terms of (guided) intentional reasoning, we 
think it is simpler if we start by addressing a proposition that does not depend on 
previously proved propositions. The simplest case is that of proposition 1 of book 1 
of the Elements (I.1). The Euclidean text is as follows:

Ancient Greek Mathematical Proofs and Metareasoning
25
On a given ﬁnite straight line to construct an equilateral triangle. 
Let AB be the given ﬁnite straight line. 
Thus it is required to construct an equilateral triangle on the straight line AB. 
With center A and distance AB let the circle BCD be described; [Post. 3] 
again, with center B and distance BA let the circle ACE be described; [Post. 3] 
and from the point C, in which the circles cut one another, to the points A, B 
let the straight lines CA, CB be joined. [Post. I] 
Now, since the point A is the center of the circle CDB, AC is equal to AB. 
[Def. I5] 
Again, since the point B is the center of the circle CAE, BC is equal to BA. 
[Def. I5] 
But CA was also proved equal to AB; therefore each of the straight lines CA, 
CB is equal to AB. 
And things which are equal to the same thing are also equal to one another; 
[C. N. 1] 
therefore CA is also equal to CB. 
Therefore the three straight lines CA, AB, BC are equal to one another. 
Therefore the triangle ABC is equilateral; and it has been constructed on the 
given ﬁnite straight line AB. 
(Being) what it was required to do. (Heath 1956) 
[we adopt an English translation of the standard edition of the Elements. On  
this see, e.g., Vitrac (2012)] 
Let us analyze the structure of this proof in terms of the schematic model of 
intentional reasoning as a cyclical process. While following the text of the proof, 
the reader has, for each step/cycle, the verbal premise(s) and verbal conclusion, 
and goes through autonomous reasoning and metareasoning processes. Each metar-
easoning process gives rise to a strong feeling of correctness associated with the

26
M. B. Valente
conclusion of the corresponding step of the proof. Having a strong feeling of 
correctness for each step, we have a strong feeling of correctness of the whole proof. 
Schematically, in terms of cycles of (guided) intentional reasoning, the proof is 
as follows (we do not include connectors like “since”, “therefore”, “but”, and “and” 
(see Netz 1999)): 
Cycle 1. 
Sentence0: “the point A is the center of the circle CDB” → Conclusion 
(sentence1): “AC is equal to AB” 
Cycle 2. 
Sentence2: “the point B is the center of the circle CAE” → Conclusion 
(sentence3): “BC is equal to BA” 
Cycle 3. 
Sentence3 + Sentence4 (a reframing of sentence1): “CA was also proved 
equal to AB” → Conclusion (sentence5): “each of the straight lines CA, 
CB is equal to AB” 
Cycle 4. 
Sentence5 + sentence6 (common notion 1): “things which are equal to the 
same thing are also equal to one another” → Conclusion (sentence7): 
“CA is also equal to CB” 
Cycle 5. 
Sentence7 + sentence5 (implicit) → Conclusion (sentence8): “the three 
straight lines CA, AB, BC are equal to one another” 
Cycle 6. 
Sentence8 → Conclusion (sentence9): “the triangle ABC is equilateral”

Ancient Greek Mathematical Proofs and Metareasoning
27
The proof of I.1 consists of 6 cycles of intentional reasoning. In each of 
these cycles, our metareasoning generates a strong feeling of correctness of 
the autonomous reasoning process being made. Overall, we reach a feeling of 
correctness for the whole proof. 
The proof of I.1 is a bit more general than our schematic model. As we have just 
seen, in general, the verbal conclusion of a cycle is not, just by itself, taken to be 
the premise of the following cycle. Only in cycles 1, 2, and 6 do we have just one 
premise. In the other cycles, there is more than one premise at play. However, even 
if a bit more complex, we still have a form of (guided) intentional reasoning. 
We will now consider another type of proof that was pervasive in ancient Greek 
mathematics; it is called in Latin “reductio ad absurdum” (see, e.g., Netz 1999; 
Heath 1981). We will call it simply a reductio proof. The form of a reductio proof 
is, schematically, as follows: to prove P, assume not P, derive a “contradiction”; i.e., 
derive an obviously false result, like a geometric statement and its opposite (e.g., 
AB = CD and AB /= CD). Conclude that P is true (Cunningham 2012). 
Ancient Greek proofs that adopt a reductio strategy have a very ﬁxed argumen-
tative structure, as described by Netz (1999). Simplifying, when we intend to prove 
a geometrical statement P, we use “for if” to introduce the negation of P (i.e., 
not P) and a consequence of not P. A sequence of “arguments” follows (i.e., the 
verbal expressions corresponding to premises and conclusions), leading to some 
property, “which is impossible/absurd” (Netz 1999). Afterward, we ﬁnd the crucial 
arguments in the reductio proof. First, we have “therefore not (not P)”; second, we 
have “therefore P.” 
Here, a pause is necessary. As mentioned by Dutilh Novaes, the step of going 
from reaching an absurd result to concluding that P is the case (which in the 
Euclidean proof is made in two steps, as we have just seen), “strongly relies on 
a number of assumptions, and if these are not in place then the argument does 
not go through” (Dutilh Novaes 2016). These are related to what can be named 
the culprit problem and the act of faith problem. The ﬁrst problem is described by 
Dutilh Novaes as follows: 
We start with the initial assumption, which we intend to prove to be false, but along the way 
we avail ourselves of auxiliary hypotheses/premises. Now, it is the conjunction of all these 
premises and hypotheses that leads to absurdity, and it is not immediately clear whether we 
can single out one of them as the culprit to be rejected. (Dutilh Novaes 2016) 
To avoid the culprit problem, we must assume that “we can isolate the culprit” 
(Dutilh Novaes 2016). For that: “what is required is that all auxiliary assump-
tions/premises used in the argument have a higher degree of certainty to us than 
the initial assumption that is singled out to be rejected” (Dutilh Novaes 2016). 
The second problem can the stated as follows: “How does one go from it being 
a bad idea to maintain the hypothesis to it being a good idea to maintain its 
contradictory?” (Dutilh Novaes 2016). According to Dutilh Novaes, “A reductio 
ad absurdum also starts with the tacit assumption of an exhaustive enumeration of 
cases: for a given proposition A, either A is the case or its contradictory is the case, 
and not both” (Dutilh Novaes 2016). In this way:

28
M. B. Valente
If we can be sure that the enumeration of cases is truly exhaustive (i.e., excluded middle 
holds in the relevant situation), and that we will not end up in a situation of aporia where 
all options lead to absurdity, then we can safely conclude not-p after showing that p leads 
to absurdity. (Dutilh Novaes 2016) 
Here, we want to suggest that the culprit problem and the act of faith problem are 
avoided in Euclidean geometry and are dealt with, each one, one step at a time, 
in the ﬁnal stages of the argumentative structure of Euclidean reductio proofs. As 
mentioned, in the argumentative structure there is one point in which we reach some 
property that is impossible/absurd. Afterward, we deal with the culprit problem: 
therefore not (not P). There is an autonomous reasoning process that identiﬁes not 
P as the culprit (and not some other assumption or set of assumptions). Then we 
face the act of faith problem: therefore P; i.e., the rejection of not P leads to an 
autonomous reasoning process that enables us to conclude that P is the case. We 
will consider an example of a reductio proof to see how this is done and how a 
reductio proof can be addressed from the perspective of proofs as a form of (guided) 
intentional reasoning. 
We will consider the ﬁrst reductio proof in the Elements; that of proposition 6 of 
book 1 (I.6). The text of proposition I.6 is as follows: 
If in a triangle two angles be equal to one another, the sides which subtend 
the equal angles will also be equal to one another. 
Let ABC be a triangle having the angle ABC equal to the angle ACB; 
I say that the side AB is also equal to the side AC. 
For, if AB is unequal to AC, one of them is greater. [C.N.] 
Let AB be greater; and from AB the greater let DB be cut off equal to AC the  
less; [I.3] 
let DC be joined. [Post. 1] 
(continued)

Ancient Greek Mathematical Proofs and Metareasoning
29
Then, since DB is equal to AC, and BC is common, the two sides DB, BC are 
equal to the two sides AC, CB respectively; and the angle DBC is equal to 
the angle ACB; 
therefore the base DC is equal to the base AB, and the triangle DBC will be 
equal to the triangle ACB, [I.4] 
the less to the greater: 
which is absurd [C.N. 5]. 
Therefore AB is not unequal to AC; 
it is therefore equal to it. (Heath 1956) 
Thus, if a triangle has two angles equal to one another then the sides 
subtending the equal angles will also be equal to one another. (Which 
is) the very thing it was required to show. [These last sentences are from 
the translation by Fitzpatrick (2008) since in Heath’s translation it is left 
incomplete] 
The demonstration starts with a triangle ABC with two equal angles, ABC and 
ACB. What we want to show is that the corresponding sides are equal; i.e., AB = AC. 
We start our proof by assuming the “opposite” property AB /= AC (that they are 
“opposite” follows from the “solution” to the act of faith problem). Schematically, 
in terms of cycles of (guided) intentional reasoning, the proof is as follows: 
Cycle 1. 
Sentence0: “AB is unequal to AC” → Conclusion (sentence1): “one of them 
is greater” 
[Comment: To reach the conclusion, use is made of the previously 
unmentioned common notion: if two quantities are unequal, then one 
is greater or lesser than the other (see, e.g., Joyce 1998)] 
[Comment: After the ﬁrst cycle of intentional reasoning that includes 
an autonomous reasoning process, we have what we might call the 
“insertion” of another construction. That is made in sentence2 (by 
considering sentence1): “Let AB be greater; and from AB the greater let 
DB be cut off equal to AC the less; let DC be joined”. The new ﬁgure 
shows that the triangle DBC is smaller than the triangle ACB. That is 
our (implicit) sentence3. This “property” will be important later since it 
will lead to a contradiction with another property that will be deduced 
later; on diagrams in reductio proofs, see, e.g., Dal Magro and Valente 
(2021)] 
(continued)

30
M. B. Valente
Cycle 2. 
Sentence4: “DB is equal to AC, and BC is common” → Conclusion 
(sentence5): “the two sides DB, BC are equal to the two sides AC, CB 
respectively; and the angle DBC is equal to the angle ACB” 
[Comment: The (guided) autonomous reasoning process, leading from 
sentence4 to the conclusion (sentence5), uses properties of the triangles 
as depicted in the ﬁgure and given in the text] 
Cycle 3. 
Sentence5 → Conclusion (sentence6): “the base DC is equal to the base 
AB, and the triangle DBC will be equal to the triangle ACB” 
[Comment: The (guided) autonomous reasoning process is to be made by 
resort to proposition I.4 (as indicated by the inclusion in the text of 
[I.4])] 
Cycle 4. 
Sentence6 + (implicit) Sentence3 → Conclusion (sentence7): “the less [is 
equal] to the greater” 
Cycle 5. 
Sentence7 → Conclusion (sentence8): “[the previous conclusion] is 
absurd” 
Cycle 6. 
Sentence8 → Conclusion (sentence9): “AB is not unequal to AC” 
[Comment: In this cycle of (guided) intentional reasoning, we reason 
to the rejection of the initial assumption AB /= AC. It is here that 
the culprit problem is faced. Since there are no auxiliary assumptions 
besides the initial assumption (all the other “assumptions” are taken 
to be “true” (deﬁnitions, postulates, common notions) or proved to be 
true (propositions I.3 and I.4)), we use this knowledge in the reasoning 
and conclude that the absurd result that triangle DBC = triangle ACB 
and triangle DBC < triangle ACB follows from the initial assumption. 
Since there is one reasoning cycle to address the culprit problem, 
the metareasoning during this cycle generates a strong feeling of the 
correctness of the conclusion, in this way dispelling any doubts we 
might have in this inferential step concerning the culprit problem] 
Cycle 7. 
Sentence9 → Conclusion (sentence10): “it is therefore equal to it” 
(continued)

Ancient Greek Mathematical Proofs and Metareasoning
31
[Comment: The act of faith problem is faced during this reasoning process. 
As mentioned by Fitzpatrick, here we use a previously unmentioned 
common notion: if two quantities are not unequal then they must 
be equal (Fitzpatrick 2008). This common notion implies that, for 
quantities, there are no other cases/options that might lead to an act 
of faith problem. If two lengths are not unequal then these lengths 
must be equal; there is no other option. The reasoning process taking 
into account this evident property of quantities leads to the conclusion: 
“it is therefore equal to it”; i.e., AB = AC. By addressing just the act 
of faith problem in this last cycle, we generate a strong feeling of 
correctness that dispels any doubts we might have concerning the act of 
faith problem. Notice that we do not face any risk of having a situation 
of aporia where all options lead to absurdity. We have determined that if 
the triangle had the sides AB and AC unequal, there would be an absurd 
consequence; that of two triangles being at the same time equal and 
different. The only alternative that remains is that the sides AB and AC 
of the triangle are equal. If this also leads to absurd consequences, then 
pure geometry would not be consistent] 
As we see, reductio proofs ﬁt nicely within a perspective on proofs as a form 
of guided intentional reasoning. In our view, the present approach to mathematical 
proofs clariﬁes why reductio proofs are a hallmark of mathematics not to be found in 
other human practices, e.g., in legal reasoning. As we have seen, to be able to adopt 
a reductio proof we must face the culprit problem and the act of faith problem. If 
these are not avoided, “the argument does not go through” (Dutilh Novaes 2016). 
We see a speciﬁc feature of geometry (i.e., that these problems can be avoided) 
at work “directly” at the level of the structure of the proof. By being a form of 
guided intentional reasoning, in a proof, these problems are faced in individual and 
consecutive cycles of reasoning. In each cycle, metareasoning generates a strong 
feeling of the correctness of the conclusion, thus dispelling these problems. 
Evidently, there are other approaches that give enlightening perspectives on 
mathematical proofs, in general, and reductio proofs, in particular. We are thinking, 
in particular, of the dialogical conception of mathematical proof (Dutilh Novaes 
2018) and the view of mathematical proof as audience-reﬂective argumentation 
(Ashton 2021). However, it would go beyond the scope of the present work to 
address how the approach developed here ﬁts with other approaches. 
5 
Conclusion 
As mentioned in the introduction, the purpose of the present work was to determine, 
for ancient Greek proofs, how a proof functions, for us, as an enabler to ascertain 
the correctness of its argument, and how we ascertain this correctness. Our answer

32
M. B. Valente
to the ﬁrst question is that Hippocrates’ and Euclid’s proofs work as a form of 
guided intentional reasoning. Each cycle corresponds to what we usually refer to 
as an inferential step that goes from a premise to a conclusion (the “it follows 
from . . .  that . . . ”). In each cycle, the reader “actively” connects the premise to 
the conclusion through an autonomous reasoning process. This “format” of the 
proof – i.e., that of a chain of arguments – enhances the metareasoning processes 
that go hand in hand with the reasoning processes. We have a sequence of “small” 
reasoning steps, each accompanied by a metareasoning process. It is metareasoning 
that produces a feeling-knowing of correctness that is associated with the verbal 
conclusion of an autonomous reasoning process (and that answers our second 
question). Feeling-knowing that the conclusion of each cycle is correct enables us 
to assess the correctness of the whole mathematical proof. 
References 
Ackerman R (2019) Heuristic cues for meta-reasoning judgments: review and methodology. 
Psychological Topics 28, 1–20. 
Ackerman R, Thompson VA (2017) Meta-reasoning: monitoring and control of thinking and 
reasoning. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 21, 607–617. 
Ashton Z (2021). Audience role in mathematical proof development. Synthese 198, 6251–6275. 
Bang D, Frith CD (2017) Making better decisions in groups. Royal Society Open Science 4, 
170193. 
Bartley JE, Boeving ER, Riedel MC, Bottenhorn KL, Salo T, Eickhoff SB, Brewe E, Sutherland 
MT, Laird AR (2018) Meta-analytic evidence for a core problem solving network across 
multiple representational domains. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Review 92, 318–337. 
Beck M, Geoghegan R (2010) The art of proof: Basic training for deeper mathematics. New York:  
Springer. 
Cunningham DW (2012). A logical introduction to proof. New York: Springer. 
Dal Magro T, García Pérez MJ (2019). On Euclidean diagrams and geometrical knowledge. 
Theoria 34, 255–276. 
Dal Magro T, Valente M (2021). On the representational role of Euclidean diagrams: representing 
qua samples. Synthese 199, 3739–3760. 
Dutilh Novaes C (2016). Reductio ad absurdum from a dialogical perspective. Philosophical 
Studies 173, 2605–2628. 
Dutilh Novaes C (2018). A dialogical conception of explanation in mathematical proofs. In: Ernest 
P (ed)  The philosophy of mathematics education today. Cham: Springer, p. 81–98. 
Dutilh Novaes C (2020) The dialogical roots of deduction. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Efklides A (2006) Metacognition and affect: what can metacognitive experiences tell us about the 
learning process? Educational Research Review 1, 3–14. 
Ferreirós J, García Pérez MJ (2020). Beyond natural geometry: on the nature of proto-geometry. 
Philosophical Psychology 33, 181–205. 
Fiedler K, Ackerman R, Scarampi C (2019) Metacognition: monitoring and controlling one’s own 
knowledge, reasoning and decisions. In: Sternberg RJ, Funke J (eds) The psychology of human 
thought: an introduction. Heidelberg: Heidelberg University Publishing, p. 89–110. 
Fitzpatrick R (2008). Euclid’s Elements of geometry. Morrisville: Lulu. (Online version available 
at http://farside.ph.utexas.edu/books/Euclid/Euclid.html)

Ancient Greek Mathematical Proofs and Metareasoning
33
Frankish K (2018) Inner speech and outer thought. In: Langland-Hassan P, Vicente 
A
(eds)
 Inner 
speech: 
new 
voices. Oxford: Oxford University Press. (Author’s 
preprint, available via: https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/k0711/kf_articles/blob/master/ 
Frankish_Inner%20speech%20and%20outer%20thought_eprint.pdf) 
Freksa C, Barkowsky T, Falomir Z, van de Ven J (2019). Geometric problem solving with strings 
and pins. Spatial Cognition & Computation 19, 46–68. 
Giardino V (2013). A practice-based approach to diagrams. In: Aminrouche M, Shin S (eds) Visual 
reasoning with diagrams. Basel: Birkhäuser, p. 135–151. 
Giaquinto M (2007). Visual thinking in mathematics. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Heath T L (1956) The thirteen Books of the Elements. New York: Dover Publications. 
Heath TL (1981). A history of Greek mathematics. New York: Dover Publications. 
Hohol M, Miłkowski M (2019). Cognitive artifacts for geometric reasoning. Foundations of 
Science 24, 657–680. 
Hohol M (2020). Foundations of geometric cognition. New York: Routledge. 
Høyrup J (2019a) Hippocrates of Chios – his Elements and his lunes: A critique of circular 
reasoning. AIMS mathematics 5, 158–184. 
Høyrup J (2019b) From the practice of explanation to the ideology of demonstration: an informal 
essay. In: Schubring G (ed) Interfaces between mathematical practices and mathematical 
education. Cham: Springer, p. 27–46. 
Joyce 
DE 
(1998). 
Euclid’s 
Elements. 
http://aleph0.clarku.edu/~djoyce/java/elements/ 
elements.html. 
Krantz SG (2011) The proof is in the pudding: The changing nature of mathematical proof. New  
York: Springer. 
Levelt WJM (1989) Speaking: From intention to articulation. MIT Press. 
Magnani L (2013). Thinking through drawing. The Knowledge Engineering Review 28, 303–326. 
Manders K (2008). Diagram-based geometric practice. In: Mancosu P (ed) The philosophy of 
mathematical practice. New York: Oxford University Press, p. 65–79. 
Mueller I (2006) Greek mathematics to the time of Euclid. In: Gill ML, Pellegrin P (eds) A 
companion to ancient philosophy. Malden: Blackwell Publishing, p. 686–718. 
Netz R (1999) The shaping of deduction in Greek mathematics: a study in cognitive history. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Netz R (2004) Eudemus of Rhodes, Hippocrates of Chios and the earliest form of a Greek 
mathematical text. Centaurus 2004, 243–286. 
Rav Y (2007) A critique of a formalist-mechanist version of the justiﬁcation of arguments in 
mathematicians’ proof practices. Philosophia Mathematica 15, 291–320. 
Rouault M, McWilliams A, Allen MG, Fleming SM (2018) Human metacognition across domains: 
insights from individual differences and neuroimaging. Personality Neuroscience 1, 1–13. 
Silver I, Mellers BA, Tetlock PE (2021) Wise teamwork: collective conﬁdence calibration predicts 
the effectiveness of group discussion. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 96, 104157. 
Tall D, Yevdokimov O, Koichu B, Whiteley W, Kondratieva M, Cheng, YH (2021) Cognitive 
development of proof. In: Hanna G, de Villiers M (eds) Proof and proving in mathematical 
education. Cham: Springer, p. 13–49. 
Vaccaro AG, Fleming SM (2018) Thinking about thinking: a coordinate-based meta-analysis of 
neuroimaging studies of metacognitive judgements. Brain and Neuroscience Advances 2, 1– 
14. 
Vitrac B (2012). The Euclidean ideal of proof in the Elements and philological uncertainties of 
Heiberg’s edition of the text. In: Chemla K (ed) The history of mathematical proof in ancient 
traditions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p. 69–134.

Wikipedia and the Portrayal 
of Collaborative Networks 
of Nineteenth-Century British 
Mathematicians 
Megan Briers 
Abstract Collaboration is key to research but it is often hard to assess and evaluate. 
Understanding how collaborative networks developed in different historical periods 
can help shed light on how scientiﬁc advances have occurred. Most studies aiming 
to assess collaborative groups use coauthorship as their main statistic. This article 
aims to move away from studies of collaboration based on ﬂawed co-authorship 
statistics and introduces a new method of assessing the portrayal of collaborative 
networks. The method uses computational techniques applied to Wikipedia arti-
cles about nineteenth-century British mathematicians and philosophers to identify 
collaborative networks. This article will brieﬂy summarise the functionality of the 
software used to extract the information from Wikipedia, evaluate the approach, and 
look towards future use cases for this kind of analysis. 
1 
Introduction 
Collaboration is key to research but because it takes many shapes, it is often hard to 
assess and evaluate. Understanding how collaborative networks developed in differ-
ent historical periods can help shed light on how scientiﬁc advances have occurred. 
Most studies aiming to assess collaborative groups use co-authorship as their main 
statistic. When assessing how collaboration occurred in the nineteenth century, 
the use of co-authorship as a metric may be projecting a modern quantiﬁcation 
of working relationships onto previous periods. Mathematicians in the nineteenth 
century had many different types of collaboration that may not have resulted in 
publication but were instrumental to their career development. 
An example of this phenomenon is the working relationship of William Henry 
Young and Grace Chisholm Young. Grace Chisholm Young was a pioneering female 
mathematician in the end of the nineteenth century. She was the ﬁrst person to 
M. Briers () 
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, UK 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
M. Zack, D. Waszek (eds.), Research in History and Philosophy of Mathematics, 
Annals of the Canadian Society for History and Philosophy of Mathematics/ Société 
canadienne d’histoire et de philosophie des mathématiques, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-46193-4_3
35

36
M. Briers
achieve a ﬁrst from both Oxford and Cambridge, and she earned a doctorate in 
mathematics from Göttingen University in 1895 [1]. Chisholm Young married one 
of her previous tutors, the prominent Cambridge mathematician William Henry 
Young, and they worked together on a variety of mathematical problems. Although 
there are instances of them having published together, William Young decided that 
it was better for his name to appear solely on the papers. He wrote to Grace ‘The 
fact is that our papers ought to be published under our joint names, but if this were 
done neither of us get the beneﬁt of it. No. Mine the laurels now and the knowledge. 
Yours the knowledge only’ [2]. 
Not only do conventions for listing co-authors sometimes conceal actual collab-
orations, but these conventions can be subject to change. One constant, however, is 
that exclusion from co-authorship means that collaborations are not visible. People 
of colour, women, non-Europeans and indigenous people are still less likely to 
have their contributions deemed signiﬁcant enough for recognition as a co-author 
[3]. Using co-authorship as a measurement means that these voices are left out 
of the analysis of collaborative networks, downplaying the importance of their 
contributions. 
This article aims to move away from studies of collaboration based on ﬂawed 
co-authorship statistics and introduces a new method of assessing collaborative 
networks. To illustrate the method, this article uses computational techniques 
applied to Wikipedia articles about nineteenth-century British mathematicians and 
philosophers. For each Wikipedia page studied, all mentions of other people and 
all links to articles on other people have been extracted to allow for an evaluation 
of network representation using two metrics: unique names mentioned per 1000 
characters, and length of the article in characters. The ﬁrst metric normalizes the 
count of names mentioned across articles of different lengths. The second metric 
takes a wider perspective, incorporating the length of the articles, which is a measure 
of the amount of information presented about the subject of the article. 
Using the presence of relationships in the article as opposed to co-authorship 
also allows for informal relationships, and collaborations with lesser-known ﬁgures 
to emerge. As an example, Fig. 1 illustrates the relationships mentioned on Grace 
Chisholm Young’s Wikipedia page. Many of these individuals would not have been 
her co-authors; however, they still collaborated with her and played a key part in her 
mathematical career. They include Felix Klein, who supervised her PhD. 
Fig. 1 Network graph illustrating the ﬁgures identiﬁed as linked from Grace Chisholm Young’s 
Wikipedia page by one of the methods presented in the paper

Wikipedia and the Portrayal of Collaborative Networks of Nineteenth-Century. . .
37
This article will ﬁrst comment on the choices made here of which working 
groups to use in order to test the new methods for analysing collaboration. This is 
followed by a brief summary of the functionality of the software used to extract the 
information from each Wikipedia article. The results will then be discussed, and the 
approach evaluated, with a look towards future use cases for this kind of analysis. 
2 
Motivation 
The portrayal of mathematicians in popular media and general society may not 
be an accurate representation of reality. Mathematics is commonly viewed as a 
solitary activity, with people shut away, spending hours working alone on the same 
question until an answer is discovered. It is easy to see from these assumptions 
how the ﬁgure of the “lone genius” is a popular representation of mathematicians. 
Some well-known examples include Einstein and, more recently, Andrew Wiles, 
who allegedly worked on Fermat’s Last Theorem for years without discussing the 
content of his work with his colleagues [4]. Is this lone-genius representation being 
perpetuated by biographical sources on mathematicians? The original goal of this 
paper was to answer this question. The following section explains the choices that 
were made regarding which time period, geographic location, and ﬁelds of study to 
investigate, and which sources of data to use, while developing software to try to 
assess collaborations. 
2.1 
Nineteenth Century 
In the nineteenth century, new developments, including learned societies and 
cheaper communication strategies, meant that collaborative practices became more 
common within scientiﬁc communities. The ﬁrst coauthored paper was published 
in 1665, but it was not until the professionalization of the sciences in the nineteenth 
century that collaborative research began to develop rapidly. According to deB 
Beaver and Rosen, the move to professionalization of the sciences led to signiﬁcant 
changes in the social structures of science over this period, with the transformation, 
by the end of the century, of a ‘loose group of amateurs’ into a scientiﬁc community. 
Scientists had many motivations for collaboration, including gaining experience, 
increasing visibility and recognition, becoming more efﬁcient in the use of time, 
and gaining access to special facilities [5]. 
Despite the popular image of mathematicians, there are numerous historical 
examples of communication and collaboration within the mathematical community. 
The nineteenth century was chosen as the period of focus for this project because the 
movement towards professionalization increased communication and collaborative 
practices between members of all scientiﬁc disciplines.

38
M. Briers
2.2 
Wikipedia 
Because of its high usage as a source of information, Wikipedia was chosen as 
the data source for assessing the portrayal of collaborative networks. Since being 
founded in 2001, Wikipedia has continued to grow in popularity, with 111 billion 
views of English pages between September 2021 and August 2022 [6]. Wikipedia 
tends to appear high in search ranking algorithms, and it does not have the paywall 
often used by more professionally produced information sources. Therefore it is 
not surprising that Wikipedia is commonly consulted as a deﬁnitive source of 
information rather than just one of multiple sources being evaluated [7]. 
However, the ethos of Wikipedia, as well as characteristics of articles and 
common contributors may lead to bias in the articles. Since the popularity of these 
reference articles continues to grow, it is important to assess how well historical 
situations are being represented, so that incorrect or biased information is not further 
ampliﬁed. Some of the analysis presented here will consider this issue. 
2.3 
Comparison Groups 
To assess how well collaborative networks of mathematicians were represented, a 
comparison group was needed. Philosophers were selected, because comparing one 
group of ﬁgures from the sciences to one from the humanities prevented the high 
level of crossover between mathematicians and the comparison group that would 
have occurred if astronomers or physicists had been chosen instead. Unfortunately, 
research on collaboration within philosophical communities is scarce and there is 
very little relevant literature for the period of interest. However, it is acknowledged 
that collaboration in philosophy does not tend to be represented using the co-
authorship statistics, and philosophy still remains one of the subjects with the lowest 
co-authorship rate [8]. In this context, ideas proposed in the analysis section to 
explain collaboration representation need to be combined with further research into 
the collaborative style of philosophers. 
For the purpose of classifying people for this method, Wikipedia categories 
were consulted. These are pages that contain a list of articles related to a central 
topic. The list of people identiﬁed as members of each group was extracted from 
the category pages of ‘19th-century British mathematicians’ and ‘19th-century 
British philosophers’. The British groups were focused on due to the training of the 
computational models on the English language, and the development and popularity 
of English-language Wikipedia. At the time of extraction, there were 54 unique 
philosophers in the ‘19th-century British philosophers’ category and 82 unique 
mathematicians in the ‘19th-century British mathematicians’ category. Crossover 
between articles in the categories is minimal with only two articles appearing on 
both lists (George Boole and Alfred North Whitehead).

Wikipedia and the Portrayal of Collaborative Networks of Nineteenth-Century. . .
39
3 
Method 
In order to assess the representation of networks on Wikipedia pages, the names 
mentioned on a Wikipedia page needed to be extracted from each of the articles. 
This involves Named Entity Recognition (NER). NER is a sub-area of Natural 
Language Processing (NLP) and Information Retrieval (IR) that involves identifying 
expressions in text that are members of various categories including people, 
organisations and locations. 
The aim of NER is to move from unstructured text into a semi-structured output, 
helping to identify which entities are referred to within the text and where. Figure 2 
illustrates an example of the movement from the Wikipedia article contents to the 
classiﬁcation of the words in the text. 
Code was developed to extract the named entities from Wikipedia pages of 
nineteenth-century mathematicians and philosophers using methods from spaCy, a 
library in Python developed for a variety of NLP techniques. For the purpose of this 
analysis, we are only interested in the words that are identiﬁed as PERSON, and so 
the code extracts all the words with this identiﬁcation. 
A given article also has links to Wikipedia articles whose subject are other 
ﬁgures, and these are important to identify, as another way of referring to a person 
in an article. For this research, the only people of interest were those that lived in the 
same time span as the person who is the subject of the original article, to maximise 
the chances that they were collaborating. The code can identify all the links to 
articles of other nineteenth-century ﬁgures by using information from Wikidata. 
Wikidata is a site that stores meta data on the people featured in Wikipedia pages 
and it was used to ﬁlter out the links to articles that were not about people born in 
the nineteenth century by looking at their date of birth and death. 
The two methods for extraction (spaCy and Wikidata) allowed for analysis on the 
relationships between number of linked people (Wikidata) compared to mentioned 
people who had no Wikipedia article (spaCy) and ensured the analysis was between 
networks existing in the nineteenth century. 
Fig. 2 Illustration of the process by which unstructured text becomes semi-structured

40
M. Briers
The code was ﬁrst tested on a set of ten test ﬁgures whose Wikipedia pages had 
been manually combed to identify both named and linked people. Modiﬁcations 
were made to the code until a desired level of performance was reached. An F1 
score, a commonly used statistic in NLP papers, allows for a testing of how well 
methods are performing. The F1 score evaluates the success by looking at the true 
positives, false negatives and false positives that have been identiﬁed by the method. 
True positives are the names that were mentioned in the article and identiﬁed by the 
method. An example of a true positive from the code’s run on Mary Somerville’s 
Wikipedia article was Maria Edgeworth (author and friend of Somerville). False 
negatives are entities that are mentioned in the article but not picked up by the 
methods. An example of a false negative from Somerville’s article was the Earl 
of Minto (Somerville’s ﬁrst dancing partner at her ﬁrst ball). False positives are 
entities that have been picked up by the methods that do not correspond to a name 
mentioned in the article. The word could still be present in the article, but is not 
referring to a person. An example of a false positive from Somerville’s article was 
Navigation. 
The F1 score allows for both false negatives and false positives to be accounted 
for in the evaluation, and is a balance of both the precision and recall values. 
Precision is a measure of how well the positives identiﬁed match the expected 
data, whereas recall is a measure of how many of the expected people have 
been identiﬁed. This allowed for a level of conﬁdence in the spaCy and Wikidata 
methods, with spaCy having an F1 score of 0.7697 and Wikidata scoring 0.8328 on 
the ten Wikipedia articles used in the test set. F1 scores can range between 0 and 
1, and a value of above 0.75 was predetermined to be the threshold for this study. 
Once these levels were achieved, the code was run on both sets of articles relating 
to nineteenth-century British mathematicians and philosophers. 
The two main statistics collected were: the average number of unique entities 
identiﬁed (mentions) per 1000 characters, and the average number of characters in 
a Wikipedia article. The average values of these were compared between groups 
(mathematicians and philosophers) using Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) to test for 
a signiﬁcant difference based on the F ratio test. The square root or log of these 
statistics were taken at various points during the analysis, so that the assumptions 
(normally distributed residuals, equal variance and independence of observations) 
of ANOVA tests could be satisﬁed and comparisons drawn. 
4 
Results 
The following section will discuss the differences in statistics produced across the 
categories of articles (mathematicians and philosophers). When trying to assess how 
well collaboration is represented on the Wikipedia articles, looking at the quantity of 
mentions in themselves will not reveal anything illuminating, as this number will fail 
to consider the length of the articles, and how different they may be between groups. 
Instead, two main statistics were utilised, the ﬁrst looking at how many other people

Wikipedia and the Portrayal of Collaborative Networks of Nineteenth-Century. . .
41
are mentioned in a set length of text in the article, and the second looking at the 
average length of the articles. By considering both of these, a better picture of the 
collaboration representation on articles of both categories can be presented. 
4.1 
Average Number of Mentions per 1000 Characters Across 
Categories 
The lengths of the Wikipedia articles of mathematicians and philosophers varied 
substantially both within and between groups, so a normalised version (per 1000 
characters) is examined to assess the relationship between the article’s length and 
the number of people mentioned. 
Figure 3 compares the number of mentions per 1000 characters across the two 
methods of named entity extraction and the two groups under consideration. 
When considering the number of mentions of other people per 1000 characters in 
articles about mathematicians and articles about philosophers, the data showed that 
in both methods the average number of mentions was higher in the articles about 
mathematicians (two-way ANOVA, F = 6.28, df = 1, 232, p < 0.02). 
Furthermore, considering the two named entity extraction methods (either 
spaCy for names or Wikidata for links), the data showed that in the articles of 
mathematicians and philosophers, more people were mentioned by name than by 
sqrt mentions per 1000 characters 
philosophy 
maths 
Category 
method of analysis 
wikidata
spacy 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Fig. 3 Square root of mentions per 1000 characters for Wikipedia articles on mathematicians and 
philosophers

42
M. Briers
link, as spaCy had a consistently higher mean (two-way ANOVA, F = 106.88, df 
= 1, 232, p < 0.001). There was no signiﬁcant interaction between the method and 
category on the square root of mentions per 1000 characters. 
This result indicates that, contrary to expectations, Wikipedia articles for 
nineteenth-century British mathematicians are mentioning a greater number of 
people in a section of text of a given length compared with philosophers, regardless 
of the type of named entity extraction methods. This is a promising sign that 
the Wikipedia articles of the mathematicians are acknowledging the collaboration 
required for their work, and highlighting connections and collaborators that the 
mathematicians had. While mathematicians have a greater number of mentions per 
1000 characters than philosophers, there has been no indication of how these values 
compare to other categories of people. Further work on various other professional 
groups of the time could provide further insight. 
4.2 
Length of Articles 
The previous section has shown that when given the same number of characters, 
articles about mathematicians tend to contain more mentions. However, Fig. 4 
illustrates the differences present in the true length of the Wikipedia articles of 
ﬁgures from both categories. 
philosophy 
philosophy 
category of article 
log average number of characters in article
11 
10 
9 
8 
7 
maths 
maths 
Category 
Fig. 4 Log number of characters per article for Wikipedia pages of nineteenth-century British 
Mathematicians and Philosophers

Wikipedia and the Portrayal of Collaborative Networks of Nineteenth-Century. . .
43
When considering the lengths of the Wikipedia articles, the data showed that 
articles about philosophers had a higher number of characters compared to the 
articles about mathematicians (one-way ANOVA, F = 45.47, df = 1, 234, p < 
0.001). This indicates that even though, given the same amount of text, articles about 
mathematicians contain more mentions, the existing articles about mathematicians 
are not as developed as the articles about philosophers, and contain less content 
overall. 
This analysis has highlighted that the expected difference in article mentions by 
category is predominately driven by the length of the articles. The data have shown 
that there is a higher number of mentions per 1000 characters for mathematicians. 
However, the difference in lengths of articles of mathematicians and philosophers 
indicate that the articles overall are less developed for mathematicians. 
There may be many reasons why articles of philosophers tend to be longer. 
Academic philosophers, by training, are taught how to write prose and therefore may 
be more comfortable with contributing to writing Wikipedia articles. In comparison, 
mathematicians are often not equipped with the same writing practice during their 
training and may be less inclined to contribute to written representations of previous 
mathematicians. Some philosophical views are named after philosophers and are 
more widely known compared to mathematical theories, which may result in an 
increased contribution to articles of major ﬁgures as the articles about the relevant 
views are also developed. 
4.3 
Commonly Linked Mathematicians 
While not directly related to the representation of collaboration on Wikipedia for 
mathematicians, data were gathered about the frequency with which names were 
mentioned or linked across articles, to help discover patterns accounting for why 
the same names were continually referenced across the network. This statistic counts 
the number of articles in which a name appears and does not take into account how 
many times the person was mentioned in a given article. The following sections 
discuss these data. 
4.3.1 
Performance of Methods 
During this analysis, the limitations of both methods were brought to light. As 
seen in Table 1, the NER picked up additional entities that are not referring to 
people, such as Senior Wrangler and Natural Philosophy. While this is frustrating 
to see, it also indicates a potential bias in the choice of mathematicians who are 
on the Wikipedia category list. Over the nineteenth century, Cambridge grew to 
become world leading in its training of mathematical physicists. Cambridge not 
only trained a large number of the brightest mathematical minds at the time, but 
produced extremely capable graduates, with the questions in the senior examinations

44
M. Briers
being incredibly similar in difﬁculty to the research level mathematics at the time 
[9]. The dominance is clearly illustrated with Senior Wrangler being the joint most 
mentioned entity recognised by the NER methods. 
Table 1 illustrates the ten most commonly extracted names in Wikipedia articles 
for mathematicians by spaCy. Without the additional context of surnames, single-
word ﬁrst names cannot reveal much about the commonly linked nodes in the 
mathematics network. Similarly names such as Smith, Hamilton, William and James 
are too ambiguous to state whose these may be referring to, and there is no guarantee 
it is a reference to the same person. 
Euclid has been highlighted as a commonly mentioned name in the articles of 
nineteenth-century mathematicians. This may be expected, because of the inﬂuence 
he had on modern mathematics, the use of his work for mathematical teaching 
and the revival of interest in the ﬁfth postulate from the Elements [10]. While 
British mathematicians were not prominently involved in the early moves into non-
Euclidean geometry, Euclid’s Elements was the dominant textbook used to teach 
geometry to school children until the 1900s [11]. It is likely that many of the 
mathematicians featured on the Wikipedia category were exposed to Euclid’s work 
from a young age, explaining why he is such a prominent ﬁgure within the network 
of articles. Euclid, being a ﬁgure from the ancient period, is eliminated from the list 
when the discussed date ﬁltering is in place. 
An examination of the most commonly linked names (Table 2) revealed a list 
of people who were often involved in teaching of some form. This is standard 
for the period, as teaching was the main occupation of anyone that was classed 
as a mathematician in the nineteenth century. Unsurprisingly, those associated with 
Table 1 Commonly 
mentioned names in 
Wikipedia articles of 
Mathematicians 
Mathematician
Number of articles mentioned in 
Euclid
7 
Senior Wrangler
7 
Smith
6 
Hamilton
5 
Peter Guthrie Tait
5 
James Clerk Maxwell
5 
William
4 
Laplace
4 
James
4 
Mary
4 
Table 2 Commonly linked 
ﬁgures from Wikipedia 
articles of Mathematicians 
Mathematician
Number of articles mentioned in 
James Clerk Maxwell
8 
Peter Guthrie Tait
6 
Arthur Cayley
4 
Augustus De Morgan
4 
William Rowan Hamilton 
4

Wikipedia and the Portrayal of Collaborative Networks of Nineteenth-Century. . .
45
teaching or high up positions are then commonly mentioned throughout the articles 
of people in this category, due to their exposure to a large number of people and 
the potential inﬂuence of a mentor-type relationship. Teaching roles held by these 
ﬁgures include the chair of natural philosophy at Edinburgh (Tait) and Sadleirian 
professor of mathematics at Cambridge (Cayley). 
5 
Conclusion 
This article has outlined a new way to assess the collaborative networks of mathe-
maticians and philosophers in the nineteenth century. The results from this analysis 
of Wikipedia pages found that mathematicians have signiﬁcantly higher mentions 
per 1000 characters than philosophers. However, articles about philosophers have 
signiﬁcantly longer character lengths. When comparing a typical length article for 
both groups, articles about philosophers mention more people. This shows that 
despite the typical portrayal of mathematicians as lone geniuses in popular media, 
the Wikipedia articles are representing a collaborative network, even if the articles 
are shorter in length. It is positive that the number of mentions is signiﬁcantly higher 
for mathematicians. This indicates that the collaborative nature of the subject is 
being presented to the public and that the articles are going some way in preventing 
the lone genius stereotype. 
There are multiple ways this work could be extended including linking the 
analysis up with Epsilon, a framework developed by the Darwin Correspondence 
Project to store data on the correspondence of nineteenth-century ﬁgures of science. 
Wikipedia cannot claim to be a complete record of the collaborations in which each 
ﬁgure participated, and allowing a comparison between ﬁgures on the Wikipedia 
article and the records stored in Epsilon could provide insight into the relationships 
being featured or missed out across a selection of articles. 
When requesting data from the Wikidata information associated with each 
article, there is also an opportunity to get information about their occupation. 
Adding this into the analysis could allow for an exploration into the type of 
relationships being portrayed on these Wikipedia articles, and how often the articles 
are referring to people with whom the subject has a working relationship. 
Overall, a new way of assessing the collaboration that is not dependent on the 
ever changing co-authorship standards has been presented. This allowed working 
relationships that didn’t necessarily result in joint publications to be added to 
the discussion around collaborative networks. This kind of analysis could provide 
additional insight when further applied to other groups with supporting background 
material on the collaborative styles. 
Acknowledgments The author thanks Isobel Falconer and Mark-Jan Nederhof for their support 
during the development of this work, and Deborah Kent for her guidance and comments on the 
paper.

46
M. Briers
References 
[1] P. Rothman, “Grace Chisholm Young and the Division of Laurels,” Notes and Records of the 
Royal Society of London, vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 89–100, 1996. 
[2] I. Grattan-Guinness, “A mathematical union: William Henry and Grace Chisholm Young,” 
Annals of Science, vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 105–185, 1972. 
[3] J. Habgood-Coote (2021). What’s the point of authors? The British Journal for the Philosophy 
of Science. https://doi.org/10.1086/715539 
[4] S. Singh, Fermat’s Last Theorem. Harper Perennial, 2007. 
[5] D. deB Beaver and R. Rosen, “Studies in scientiﬁc collaboration,” Scientometrics, vol. 1,  
no. 1, pp. 65–84, Sep 1978. 
[6] Wikimedia Statistics, “Wikistats - statistics for wikimedia projects,” Sep 2022. [Online]. 
Available: https://stats.wikimedia.org/#/en.wikipedia.org 
[7] R. Rosenzweig, “Can history be open source? Wikipedia and the future of the past,” The 
Journal of American History, vol. 93, no. 1, pp. 117–146, 2006. 
[8] J. A. Miller and E. Schleisser, “A case for co-authorship in philosophy (guest post by Joshua 
A. Miller and Eric Schliesser),” Dec 2017. [Online]. Available: https://dailynous.com/2017/ 
07/20/a-case-for-co-authorship-in-philosophy-miller-schliesser 
[9] A. Warwick, “Writing a pedagogical history of mathematical physics,” in Masters of Theory: 
Cambridge and the Rise of Mathematical Physics. University of Chicago Press, 2003, pp. 
1–49. 
[10] S Taylor, “Euclid in the 19th century.” [Online]. Available: http://personal.colby.edu/~ 
sataylor/teaching/S09/MA111/Euclid.pdf 
[11] A. Mokteﬁ, “Geometry: The Euclid debate,” in Mathematics in Victorian Britain, Jan 2011, 
pp. 320–336 & 445.

Mathematical and Philosophical Imagery 
in Original Sources Related to Émilie du 
Châtelet 
Cynthia J. Huffman 
Abstract Emblematic imagery was prevalent in scientiﬁc books in the sixteenth 
and seventeenth centuries, with symbolism appearing in frontispieces, illustrated 
title pages, and other images. Images, mottoes, and poems were used to help 
elucidate concepts, connections, and hidden meanings, as well as to provide a 
preview of the contents of the book. Although the French mathematician and 
philosopher Émilie du Châtelet, a signiﬁcant ﬁgure in the Enlightenment, lived in 
the eighteenth century, emblematic imagery can be seen in her works, as well as in 
the works of others connected to her. In this article, we will give a brief biography 
of Émilie du Châtelet before delving into an analysis of examples of mathematical 
and philosophical imagery in original sources authored by Émilie du Châtelet and 
her colleagues, including the French philosopher and author Voltaire and the Italian 
polymath and philosopher Francesco Algarotti. 
1 
Introduction 
At the onset of printing in the late ﬁfteenth century, books did not have title pages; 
rather, the title might appear alone on the ﬁrst page, with a colophon at the end of 
the book providing more information, such as the author and the printer’s emblem. 
The illustrated title page had its beginnings in the sixteenth century. During the 
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, many scientiﬁc works made use of symbolism 
in various forms such as visual imagery, emblems, and mottoes, and even poems on 
occasion (as we will see in the case of Voltaire in Sect. 4). There were books devoted 
to emblems and mottoes available as an aid to authors and printers, for example, 
Emblemata by Andrea Alciato, published in 1548 [Alciato 1548]. Beyond being 
decorative, graphics in the front matter of books often provided visual representation 
C. J. Huffman () 
Pittsburg State University, Pittsburg, KS, USA 
e-mail: cjhuffman@pittstate.edu 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
M. Zack, D. Waszek (eds.), Research in History and Philosophy of Mathematics, 
Annals of the Canadian Society for History and Philosophy of Mathematics/ Société 
canadienne d’histoire et de philosophie des mathématiques, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-46193-4_4
47

48
C. J. Huffman
Table 1 A timeline related to the Calculus Controversy and Émilie du Châtelet 
Year
Event 
1642
Birth of Sir Isaac Newton 
1646
Birth of Gottfried Leibniz 
1684
Leibniz published an article introducing calculus 
1687
Newton published the Principia, which included calculus 
1694
Birth of François-Marie Arouet (Voltaire) 
1706
Birth of Émilie du Châtelet 
1716
Death of Leibniz 
1726
Death of Newton 
1738
Publication of Voltaire’s Elements of Newton’s Philosophy 
1740
Publication of ﬁrst edition of du Châtelet’s Institutions de Physique 
1749
Death of du Châtelet 
1759
Du Châtelet’s complete French translation of Newton’s Principia is pub-
lished 
1778
Death of Voltaire 
of the contents, giving the reader an idea of the purpose of the book and what to 
expect in the pages that followed [Ashworth 2015]. In some books, including Émilie 
du Châtelet’s Institutions de Physique [LHL Chatelet 2022], symbolism continues 
throughout the book by means of graphics in chapter headings, as we will see in 
Sect. 5. 
Émilie du Châtelet lived from 1706 to 1749, during the height of the infamous 
Newton-Leibniz calculus controversy. Most mathematicians on the European Con-
tinent sided with the German Leibniz, while mathematicians in the United Kingdom 
sided with Newton. (See [Guicciardini 2017] to read more about the Newton-
Leibniz controversy.) To provide some context to the life and work of Émilie du 
Châtelet, Table 1 provides a timeline of selected events, including dates related 
to the Calculus Controversy. Du Châtelet is best known for her French translation 
and commentary on Newton’s greatest work Principia; her translation is still in use 
today [Zinsser 2001]. 
In this article, after a brief biography of Émilie du Châtelet, we analyze 
mathematical and philosophical imagery in works connected to her by Francesco 
Algarotti, Voltaire, and du Châtelet herself. Each of the books considered in this 
article is also connected in some way to works of Newton or Leibniz. 
2 
Émilie du Châtelet 
Gabrielle-Émilie Le Tonnelier de Breteuil (1706–1749) was born into a wealthy 
family with connections to the French court. From about the time she was nine, the 
family home was in Paris overlooking the Tuileries near what is now the Louvre 
[O’Connor and Robertson 2003]. As a child, du Châtelet was well-educated by

Imagery Related to Émilie du Châtelet
49
tutors. The following quote from her father explains that the reason was to provide 
for her adult life since he thought her marriage prospects were slight. 
My youngest is an odd creature destined to become the homeliest of women. Were it not for 
the low opinion I hold of several bishops, I would prepare her for a religious life and let her 
hide in a convent. She stands as tall as a girl twice her years, she has prodigious strength, 
like that of a wood-cutter, and is clumsy beyond belief. Her feet are huge, but one forgets 
them the moment one notices her enormous hands. Her skin, alas, is as rough as a nutmeg 
grater, and altogether she is as ugly as a Gascon peasant recruit in the royal footguards. 
[Edwards 1970] 
Du Châtelet was bright and loved learning, especially mathematics and science. 
She taught herself analytic geometry, and learned to count cards to help her to win 
popular gambling games. Her father wrote, 
My daughter is mad. Last week she won more than two thousand gold louis at the 
card tables, andellipsis. . .spentellipsis. . .half on new books. I argued with her in vain, yet she would 
not understand that no great lord will marry a woman who is seen reading every day. 
[Edwards 1970] 
However, in 1725 du Châtelet did ﬁnd a man to marry who was willing to have 
a wife who studied, Florent-Claude, Marquis Du Châtelet-Lomont. She was 18 and 
he was a musketeer in his thirties. Shortly after their marriage they moved away 
from Pairs to his home in Burgundy. By 1730, du Châtelet had two children and a 
husband who was away performing military duties. That year du Châtelet returned 
to Paris so that she could continue her intellectual pursuits. 
In 1733, when du Châtelet was 26, she met the 38-year-old accomplished 
poet and philosopher Voltaire (1694–1778). He was back in Paris, after spending 
time in England to avoid being arrested in France. Mutual friends, who thought 
the two would enjoy each other’s company, introduced them, leading to a long-
term tumultuous relationship with each of du Châtelet and Voltaire encouraging 
excellence in the other’s work. In his book Passionate Minds, David Bodanis 
writes 
Voltaire was so delighted at ﬁnding someone who adored him – and whose intellect he 
admired so much – that his creativity rose to a higher level. She also encouraged him to do 
more thoughtful work and spend less time on mere rhymes. [Bodanis 2006] 
Du Châtelet had been attracted to the ideas of Newton, as had Voltaire. Voltaire 
was the ﬁrst to admit that du Châtelet was brighter than he was, and when she 
wanted to investigate things like force lines and tangents from Newton’s work, he 
would rather tell anecdotes like the story of the apple falling from the tree giving 
Newton the idea for his theory of gravity. 
Voltaire introduced du Châtelet to Pierre Louis Maupertuis (1698–1759), a young 
mathematician who was considered to be an expert on Newton. Maupertuis provided 
du Châtelet with lessons in advanced calculus. In addition, du Châtelet also received 
mathematical education from another supporter of the ideas of Newton, Alexis 
Claude Clairaut (1713–1765). Clairaut would later publish a textbook based on his 
lessons with her. In addition, he aided du Châtelet in her French translation and 
commentary of Newton’s paramount Principia [Arianrhod 2012].

50
C. J. Huffman
In 1734 Voltaire was again in trouble with the French government and needed 
a place to hide to avoid arrest. At that time Voltaire and du Châtelet moved to her 
estate of Cirey. 
3 
Algarotti 
Together at Cirey, du Châtelet and Voltaire studied Newton’s work and carried out 
experiments with magnifying lenses, a telescope, prisms, a pendulum, and other 
scientiﬁc devices. They often had visitors as well, one of whom was Francesco 
Algarotti (1712–1764). 
Algarotti was an Italian polymath and philosopher, and author of Newtonianism 
for the Ladies (1737). This book played an instrumental role in popularizing 
Newton’s work and ideas in continental Europe. Algarotti and du Châtelet posed 
for the frontispiece (see Fig. 1). Notice that du Châtelet’s estate Cirey is in the 
background, which represents the fact that Algarotti spent some time with du 
Châtelet and Voltaire at Cirey while he was ﬁnishing the book. In addition to being 
related to the circumstances under which the text was written, this imagery also ties 
in with the format of the book—a series of conversations in which Newton’s ideas on 
light and colors are explained to a ﬁctional marquess. The ﬁrst 1737 Italian edition 
Fig. 1 The frontispiece of 
Algarotti’s Newtonianism for 
the Ladies [Courtesy of The 
Linda Hall Library of 
Science, Engineering & 
Technology]

Imagery Related to Émilie du Châtelet
51
was on the Roman Catholic church’s 1739 list of prohibited books. There was also 
a 1738 French edition and a 1739 Italian edition [Huffman (Algarotti) 2017]. 
The engraving is signed Giovanni Marco Pitteri (1703–1767). Pitteri was an 
engraver from Venice, who worked in the studio of Giovanni Battista Piazzetta. 
Many of Pitteri’s over 100 engravings were based on drawings or paintings by 
Piazzetta, including this one. 
4 
Voltaire 
About the same time, in 1738, Voltaire published a book on the philosophy of 
Newton [Voltaire 1738], greatly inﬂuenced by du Châtelet. In fact, there is some 
indication that the calculations for the book would have been carried out by her. 
At the beginning of the book, next to a portrait of Voltaire is a striking 
frontispiece (see Fig. 2), replete with imagery, which was purportedly designed by 
Voltaire [Bodanis 2006]. In the upper left corner, the light of insight passes from 
heaven above through Newton, who is using a compass on a celestial globe. The 
light continues to du Châtelet who is portrayed as a graceful goddess supported by 
putti or cupids, holding a mirror to collect the light from Newton. She then reﬂects 
the light down to Voltaire, working at his desk, in robes and a laurel leaf crown, 
a symbol of achievement. Voltaire is surrounded by books and various instruments 
representing academic studies and the pursuit of knowledge. Notice that in addition 
to the neatly shelved books, books are scattered on the ﬂoor and desk to suggest 
that they are being consulted. Instruments, including a square, parallel line rule, 
compass, and a globe, are navigational tools and could indicate Voltaire plotting the 
course to knowledge concerning Newton’s ideas for the readers. 
Imagery in the title page (Fig. 3) includes a ship at sea, a common emblem in 
scientiﬁc works symbolizing exploration of the unknown [Ashworth 2015], and 
two merpeople holding a banner. The printer’s imprint on the banner translates as 
“Hope guides me.” The title page lists Voltaire’s name as the sole author. There is 
speculation that, if the book had been written in a different culture and age, Émilie 
du Châtelet would have been listed as a co-author. However, even though she is not 
listed as a co-author, we saw her symbolically given credit in the frontispiece (Fig. 2) 
and Voltaire explicitly gave credit to Émilie du Châtelet in an acknowledgment and 
foreword. Figure 4 shows the ﬁrst page of the acknowledgment, which includes the 
start of a poem dedicated to Madame the Marquise du Châtelet. 
You call me to you vast and powerful Genius; Minerva of France, immortal Émilie, 
Disciple of Newton, & of the Truth, You penetrate my senses from the ﬁres of your clarity. 
[Translation by Dr. Don Viney.] 
The Roman goddess mentioned in the poem, Minerva, and her Greek counterpart 
Athena, was the goddess associated with wisdom and learning. Figure 5 is the image 
at the start of the Foreword, in which Voltaire once more dedicates the book to 
Madame the Marquise du Châtelet. Again she is portrayed as a goddess surrounded

52
C. J. Huffman
Fig. 2 The frontispiece of Voltaire’s Élémens de la philosophie de Neuton [Courtesy of The Linda 
Hall Library of Science, Engineering & Technology]

Imagery Related to Émilie du Châtelet
53
Fig. 3 The title page of 
Voltaire’s Élémens de la 
philosophie de Neuton 
[Courtesy of The Linda Hall 
Library of Science, 
Engineering & Technology] 
by cherubs and books and mathematical and scientiﬁc objects, such as an armillary 
sphere, compass, and a torch containing ﬁre. 
Later Voltaire decided to enter a prize competition sponsored by the Paris 
Academy of Science to determine the nature of ﬁre. Du Châtelet helped him, but 
she seems to have realized he was going off in the wrong direction. So du Châtelet 
also did her own work, not with experiments but with calculations and thought. Both 
Voltaire and du Châtelet received an honorable mentions. People were impressed 
with du Châtelet’s submission and her reputation and fame spread. 
Quoting from Bodanis, a biographer of du Châtelet, 
Now almost everyone who counted had heard rumors that she was a woman who’d 
learned Latin, English, Italian, and a good bit of Dutch and Greek; translated Virgil, as 
well as English social critics; written commentaries on the Bible; done all the technical 
work for a shared exposition of Newton; performed original research on ﬁre and light; 
accumulated one of Europe’s leading research libraries; and made Cirey a research center 
for important thinkers. Most of all, she’d created a unique way of living, and [had] 
become – despite having been excluded from all the ofﬁcial, males-only institutions – a 
respected correspondent with top researchers [around the world including the Bernoullis.] 
[Bodanis 2006]

54
C. J. Huffman
Fig. 4 The ﬁrst page of the  
acknowledgments of 
Voltaire’s Élémens de la 
philosophie de Neuton 
[Courtesy of The Linda Hall 
Library of Science, 
Engineering & Technology] 
5 
Institutions de Physique 
Du Châtelet became interested in the ideas of Leibniz, which caused problems with 
Voltaire who supported the ideas of Newton. No one had synthesized the thinking 
of Leibniz and Newton before, but she wanted to show how the best ideas of each 
could be combined. Most scholars were solidly in one camp or the other, but as 
a female, du Châtelet was excluded from the main science academies and was far 
enough on the outside that she had a different perspective. 
Figure 6 is the title page of a revised French edition of Émilie du Châtelet’s 
Institutions de Physique, published in 1741 in Holland. The ﬁrst edition had been 
published the previous year, and several other editions followed. Du Châtelet 
wrote this book, in which she assimilated points of view of Descartes, Newton, 
and Leibniz, to teach new ideas in physics to her thirteen-year-old son. Notice 
that her name is not mentioned on the title page of this edition, though there 
was a 1742 edition also published in Amsterdam which was not anonymous 
[Huffman (Institutions) 2017].

Imagery Related to Émilie du Châtelet
55
Fig. 5 The ﬁrst page of the  
foreword of Voltaire’s 
Élémens de la philosophie de 
Neuton [Courtesy of The 
Linda Hall Library of 
Science, Engineering & 
Technology] 
The frontispiece (Fig. 7) of the  Institutions de Physique contains much symbol-
ism. In the center, a person (possibly du Châtelet or her son) is climbing to reach 
a glorious temple occupied by “Truth” depicted as a naked woman, illustrating 
the lofty goal of learning mathematics and physics. At the bottom of the stairs 
are the Muses of Botany, Astronomy, Mechanics, Grammar, and Chemistry. As 
muses, they represent motivation, while their location at the bottom of the stairs 
symbolizes foundational knowledge upon which to build. Cherubs hold portraits 
at the top of the page picturing Descartes, Leibniz, and Newton, men whose ideas 
are synthesized within the text. (See Fig. 8 for a comparison with other portraits of 
Descartes, Leibniz, and Newton.) 
Each chapter of the Institutions de Physique begins with a graphic exhibiting 
an aspect of mathematics or science in some way. For example, Chapter 14 on 
the phenomena of gravity has a picture of a device used to demonstrate Galileo’s 
law of natural motion. The paraboloid apparatus involves dropping balls on a 
spiral track to show that each turn of the spiral is traveled in the same amount 
of time (isochronism). According to the virtual Galileo Museum there are only 
two such devices currently known to be in existence. Figure 9 shows the graphic

56
C. J. Huffman
Fig. 6 The title page of the 
Institutions de Physique, 
published in 1741 in Holland 
[Courtesy of The Linda Hall 
Library of Science, 
Engineering & Technology] 
from Chapter 14 next to a photograph of one such device at the Galileo Museum 
[Museo Galileo 2022] in Florence, Italy. 
In her biography of Émilie du Châtelet, Judith P. Zinsser questions whether these 
chapter opening graphics tie in with the fact that du Châtelet wrote the book to teach 
her son the fundamentals of physics, since 
many of the decorative illustrations at the beginnings of the Institutions’s chapters show a 
young boy at games and activities demonstrating one or the other law of motion: lacrosse, 
billiards, balancing on a seesaw, shuttlecock, riding, shooting a gun. [Zinsser 2007] 
Figure 10 displays several of these chapter opening graphics. 
6 
Translating Newton’s Principia 
The fame of Émilie du Châtelet’s book Institutions de Physique spread. By 1749 
she was at work on a commentary and French translation of Sir Isaac Newton’s 
groundbreaking Principia. In that same year, as the result of a brief affair with the 
poet Jean-Francois de Saint-Lambert (1716–1803), she found herself pregnant at the 
age of 42. In the months leading up to the birth of her child, du Châtelet worked to 
ﬁnish her translation and commentary.

Imagery Related to Émilie du Châtelet
57
Fig. 7 The frontispiece of the Institutions de Physique, published in 1741 in Holland [Courtesy of 
The Linda Hall Library of Science, Engineering & Technology] 
Voltaire couldn’t get her to slow down: He wrote, “She believed that death was strikingellipsis. . .
all she thought about was how to use the little time she had left, to deprive death of taking 
what she felt was the best part of herself.” [Bodanis 2006] 
On September 3, 1749, Emilie du Châtelet gave birth to a baby girl. One week 
later, she died from infection, with the baby passing away not long afterwards 
[Bodanis 2006]. Du Châtelet’s husband, Voltaire, and the baby’s father were all with 
her when she died. 
Figure 11 shows the title page of volume 1 of Émilie du Châtelet’s Principes 
Mathématiques de la Philosophie Naturelle, published in 1759 in French in Paris, 
which is a two volume translation and commentary of Newton’s Principia. It is

58
C. J. Huffman
Fig. 8 Comparison of portraits of Descartes, Leibniz, and Newton with those of the frontispiece 
of Institutions de Physique [Courtesy of The Linda Hall Library of Science, Engineering & 
Technology] 
Fig. 9 Comparison of the Chapter 14 graphic with a photograph of a similar instrument [Left 
image courtesy of The Linda Hall Library of Science, Engineering & Technology. Right image is 
a photograph taken by the author at the Galileo Museum in Florence, Italy] 
considered her greatest achievement. The complete work was published ten years 
after her death, and is still the only complete French translation available. According 
to the Dictionary of Scientiﬁc Biography, 
her work contributed to the great progress made by Newtonian science in the middle of the 
eighteenth century. [Taton 1970]

Imagery Related to Émilie du Châtelet
59
Fig. 10 Graphics from the openings of several chapters in Institutions de Physique [Courtesy of 
The Linda Hall Library of Science, Engineering & Technology]

60
C. J. Huffman
Fig. 11 The title page of du Châtelet’s French translation and commentary of Newton’s Principia 
[Courtesy of The Linda Hall Library of Science, Engineering & Technology] 
David Bodanis wrote, 
Her translation and commentary on Newton’s Principia became fundamental to key 
18th century developments in theoretical physics, laying the groundwork for much of 
contemporary science. [Bodanis 2006] 
It is interesting to note, as we see in Fig. 12, that even though she was translating 
Newton’s work, du Châtelet used Leibniz’ calculus notation for integrals and 
differentials. 
7 
Conclusion 
Émilie du Châtelet had a passion for life and mathematics which produced both 
joint work with Voltaire as well as her most signiﬁcant book, the two-volume 
commentary and translation into French of Newton’s Principia. In this article, we

Imagery Related to Émilie du Châtelet
61
Fig. 12 A page of du Châtelet’s French translation and commentary of Newton’s Principia 
showing the use of Leibniz’s notation rather than Newton’s [Courtesy of The Linda Hall Library 
of Science, Engineering & Technology] 
have seen how imagery and symbolism played a role in her work and in the work of 
others associated with her. Illustrated title pages and frontispieces provided previews 
of a book’s content. Images also represented beneﬁts of reading a book, such as

62
C. J. Huffman
attaining truth or knowledge. In addition, these illustrations can be used to provide 
some level of attribution. In particular, Voltaire used illustrations to connect her to 
their work. Voltaire used imagery and symbolism to credit and acknowledge the 
assistance of du Châtelet in his work. 
Several biographies, including [Bodanis 2006] and [Zinsser 2007], are listed in 
the references below for those wanting to read more about the life of Émilie du 
Châtelet. The images of original sources in this chapter are from the History of 
Science Rare Book Collection at the Linda Hall Library of Science, Engineering, 
and Technology in Kansas City, Missouri. Complete digital copies of Algarotti’s 
Newtonianism for the Ladies (in French) [LHL Algarotti 2022] and du Châtelet’s 
Institutions de Physique [LHL Chatelet 2022], as well as her French translation of 
Newton’s Principia [LHL Chatelet Principia 2022], can be found online. Images in 
this chapter can also be found in the “Mathematical Treasures” of the online MAA 
Journal Convergence [Huffman (Algarotti) 2017], [Huffman (Institutions) 2017], 
[Huffman (Principia) 2017], and [Huffman (Voltaire) 2017]. 
Acknowledgments The author is indebted to the editors and anonymous referees for help in 
improving the article and to Dr. Bill Ashworth for introducing her to emblematic science. In 
addition, the author wishes to acknowledge The Linda Hall Library of Science, Engineering & 
Technology. First, for the support of a Research Fellowship in 2015, during which time the author 
had the opportunity to notice the mathematical imagery in the books by Algarotti, Voltaire, and 
du Châtelet. Second, for making the volumes available to the public in The Linda Hall Digital 
Collections. Third, for permission to use images from the volumes in this article under a Creative 
Commons license. 
References 
[Alciato 1548] Alciato, A (1548) Emblemata. Lugduni: Apud Gulielmum Rouillium, Sub 
scuto Veneto, 1548. Available online. https://search.lib.virginia.edu/sources/uva_library/ 
items/u2338872 Cited 9 February 2023 
[Arianrhod 2012] Arianrhod, R (2012) Seduced by Logic: Émilie du Châtelet, Mary Somerville, 
and the Newtonian Revolution, Oxford 
[Ashworth 2015] Ashworth, W (2015) Emblematic Science. A Cockefair/Linda Hall Library Short 
Course, https://vimeo.com/240844316 Cited 26 September 2022 
[Bodanis 2006] Bodanis, D (2006) Passionate Minds. Crown Publishers, New York, NY 
[Edwards 1970] Edwards, S (1970) The Divine Mistress. David McKay Co., New York, NY 
[Museo Galileo 2022] Galileo Museum (2022) https://www.museogalileo.it/en Cited 26 Septem-
ber 2022 
[Guicciardini 2017] Guicciardini, N (2017) The Newton-Leibniz Controversy. The Oxford Hand-
book of Newton, doi: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199930418.013.9 
[Huffman (Algarotti) 2017] Huffman, C (2017) Mathematical Treasure: Francesco Algarotti’s 
Newtonianism for the Ladies. MAA Convergence. Available online. https://www.maa.org/ 
node/841018 Cited 12 September 2022 
[Huffman (Institutions) 2017] Huffman, C (2017) Mathematical Treasure: Émilie du Châtelet’s 
Institutions de Physique. MAA Convergence. Available online. https://www.maa.org/press/ 
periodicals/convergence/mathematical-treasure-milie-du-ch-telet-s-institutions-de-physique 
Cited 12 September 2022

Imagery Related to Émilie du Châtelet
63
[Huffman (Principia) 2017] Huffman, C (2017) Mathematical Treasure: Émilie du Châtelet’s 
Principes Mathématiques. MAA Convergence. Available online. https://www.maa.org/ 
press/periodicals/convergence/mathematical-treasure-milie-du-ch-telet-s-principes-math-
matiques Cited 12 September 2022 
[Huffman (Voltaire) 2017] Huffman, C (2017) Mathematical Treasure: Voltaire’s Élémens de 
la philosophie de Newton. MAA Convergence. Available online. https://www.maa.org/ 
press/periodicals/convergence/mathematical-treasure-voltaires-l-mens-de-la-philosophie-
de-newton Cited 12 September 2022 
[LHL Algarotti 2022] Linda Hall Library (2022) Digital copy of Il Newtonianismo per le dame 
ovvero dialoghi sopra la luce e i colori, by Francesco Algarotti, 1737. Available online. https:// 
catalog.lindahall.org/discovery/delivery/01LINDAHALL_INST:LHL/12871156300059611 
Cited 12 September 2022 
[LHL Chatelet 2022] Linda Hall Library (2022) Digital copy of Institutions de physique, by du  
Châtelet, Gabrielle Emilie Le Tonnelier de Breteuil. Available online. https://catalog.lindahall. 
org/permalink/01LINDAHALL_INST/19lda7s/alma99475603405961 Cited 12 September 
2022 
[LHL Chatelet Principia 2022] Linda Hall Library (2022) Digital copy of Principia, by du  
Châtelet, Gabrielle Emilie Le Tonnelier de Breteuil. Available online. https://https://catalog. 
lindahall.org/discovery/delivery/01LINDAHALL_INST:LHL/1290367740005961 Cited 12 
September 2022 
[O’Connor and Robertson 2003] O’Connor, J, Robertson, E (2003) Gabrielle Émilie Le Tonnelier 
de Breteuil Marquise du Châtelet. MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive. Available 
online. https://mathshistory.st-andrews.ac.uk/Biographies/Chatelet/ Cited 12 September 2022 
[Taton 1970] Taton, R (1970) Châtelet, Gabrielle-Émilie le Tonnelier de Breteuil, Marquise du. In: 
Gillispie, C (ed) Dictionary of scientiﬁc biography. American Council of Learned Societies, 
Arlington, VA 
[Voltaire 1738] Voltaire (1738) Elemens de la philosophie de Neuton. Chez Etienne Ledet and 
Compagnie, Amsterdam 
[Zinsser 2001] Zinsser, J (2001) Translating Newton’s Principia: The Marquise de Chatelet’s 
revisions and additions for a French audience. Notes Rec. R. Soc. Lond. 55 (2), 227–245, 
https://doi.org/10.1098/rsnr.2001.0140 
[Zinsser 2007] Zinsser, J (2007) Emilie Du Chatelet: Daring Genius of the Enlightenment. Penguin 
Books, New York, NY

Cambridge Women’s Research Club 
S. L. McMurran and J. J. Tattersall 
Abstract Before 1900 most women students in Great Britain were trained to be 
governesses or teachers. At the turn of the century efforts were afoot to encourage 
capable women to engage in research. At the time, most if not all of the academic 
research-oriented associations were not conducive to female membership. In an 
effort to provide such an opportunity for women in Cambridge, England, a women’s 
research club was organized. Over its sixty-year existence, it was open only to local 
women engaged in research. We describe its activities, impact, and eventual demise. 
1 
Background 
For the academic year 2019–2020, the Graduate Admissions Ofﬁce at Cambridge 
University reported that 49.85% of the 4604 applicants admitted to graduate 
programs identiﬁed as female [4]. This landscape is quite different from that of 
the late nineteenth century when women were ﬁrst able to slip their toes in the door 
of that renowned institute of higher learning. At the time, the academic environment 
at Cambridge University was decidedly a man’s world, and had been so since 
its inception in the early thirteenth century when a group of religious scholars 
established themselves in the town. As the university became established, it grew 
into a center of training for clergymen and ordained clerks. For centuries, the 
church’s inﬂuence permeated the university’s structure and operations. For example, 
S. L. McMurran 
Department of Mathematics, California State University San Bernardino, San Bernardino, CA, 
USA 
e-mail: smcmurran@csusb.edu 
J. J. Tattersall () 
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Providence College, Providence, RI, USA 
e-mail: tat@providence.edu 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
M. Zack, D. Waszek (eds.), Research in History and Philosophy of Mathematics, 
Annals of the Canadian Society for History and Philosophy of Mathematics/ Société 
canadienne d’histoire et de philosophie des mathématiques, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-46193-4_5
65

66
S. L. McMurran and J. J. Tattersall
until the nineteenth century, although heads of colleges were allowed to marry, 
college fellows, by statute, had to vacate their positions upon marriage. Such 
outdated attitudes gradually began to change. In the early 1870s, a window of 
opportunity opened for women scholars when two independent women’s colleges, 
Girton and Newnham, were established in Cambridge [11]. 
As a rule, students who matriculated at the women’s colleges had experienced 
signiﬁcantly fewer opportunities to prepare than their male counterparts. Yet, many 
chose to tackle the same degree program as Cambridge men, ﬁnding support for this 
endeavor from some of the more progressive Cambridge professors who offered 
lectures and exam coaching. With determination, and despite weaker preparation 
and limited access to university-level courses, many Girton and Newnham students 
demonstrated their capability to succeed in a rigorous undergraduate program. In 
several cases, women excelled, and in so doing began to cement a place for women 
scholars at Cambridge. 
In 1880, a particularly inﬂuential event occurred when Charlotte Scott of 
Girton College ranked in the ﬁrst class on the formidable Mathematical Tripos 
examination [16]. As a consequence, women were thereafter allowed to attend 
certain advanced university lectures and sit for honours examinations without 
seeking special permission.1 Yet this was only a small step forward. Even if 
successful on the honours examinations, women were not considered eligible for 
a Cambridge degree.2 Although a number of Cambridge illuminati pushed for this 
privilege, proposals to admit women to Cambridge degrees and thus allow them 
to take part in the university’s decision-making process were soundly defeated in 
1897 and 1921. While the university’s attitude toward women had thawed regarding 
access to education, the chief impediment toward awarding degrees to women lay 
in the access to power that such a move would engender. At the time, a Cambridge 
graduate who stayed out of trouble for three years and paid a nominal fee, was 
entitled to a master’s degree. With a master’s degree, came the right to vote on 
proposed university matters. 
Shortly after the First World War, the University of Oxford began awarding 
degrees to women. It would take another world war for Cambridge University to 
do the same when, in the 1940s, the regent masters were disenfranchised and their 
responsibilities were relegated to the vice-chancellor of the university. This action 
removed the main roadblock for granting degrees to women.
1 In 1890, Philippa Fawcett of Newnham College ranked above the Senior Wrangler, the male 
scoring highest on the examination. 
2 Between 1869 and 1948, women who satisﬁed the required university regulations for an honours 
degree were given certiﬁcates of achievement. 

Cambridge Women’s Research Club
67
2 
Foundations 
While many of the women from Newnham and Girton were content with under-
graduate programs of three years or less, as at any university there were those who 
developed a taste for academia and desired to pursue more advanced studies. The 
formation of discussion societies provided one avenue toward this goal by offering 
a venue in which like-minded women could discuss their ideas. 
An early example of such a society was The Cambridge Ladies’ Discussion 
Society (1886–1890) organized by Mary Paley Marshall and others.3 One aim of the 
group was to bring university wives, townswomen, and female students together to 
discuss social issues [15]. It is possible that this society segued into the Cambridge 
Ladies’ Dining Society, a private women’s dining and discussion club founded 
in 1890 by Louise Creighton and Kathleen Lyttelton.4 The group included Paley 
along with about a dozen other women who were mainly associated with Newnham 
College and married to Cambridge fellows. Normally, the group met a few times 
each term to discuss various aspects of women’s education. They continued to meet 
until the outbreak of the First World War [15]. 
Although such societies served a useful role in supporting higher education 
for women, keeping abreast of current affairs, and promoting women’s rights in 
general, women who wished to pursue advanced studies were in need of more 
speciﬁc support. In 1899, aware of the importance of scholarship, former students 
of Girton funded the College’s ﬁrst research students. Newnham College began 
offering research fellowships in 1908. 
In addition to adequate funding, any research student will usually beneﬁt greatly 
from a supportive environment in which they may ﬂourish. Such support may 
be found in clubs composed of like-minded researchers. Cambridge offered such 
organizations for its men, but they often proved less than welcoming to women. 
One such group that particularly stands out was the Cambridge Del Squared V 
Club5 (1900–1970). At their meetings, the club discussed relevant questions in 
mathematical physics. Initially, membership was open to research students, any 
member of the university with a BA degree, or anyone engaged in research in 
Cambridge. Its membership included several men who in subsequent years would 
be awarded a Nobel Prize in Physics.6 It is unclear from the club’s records as to 
what threat women posed to the group but, at their 101st meeting on October 24, 
1922, members amended their by-laws to exclude women from membership [3].
3 Paley was the daughter of William Paley, author of Natural Theology. In 1875, she became the 
ﬁrst female resident lecturer at Newnham College. In 1877, she married the economist Alfred 
Marshall. 
4 Lyttelton was the wife of the master of Selwyn College, Cambridge. Creighton, an author and 
suffragist, was the wife of the Bishop of London. 
5 The del-squared in the name refers to the differential operator nabla squared∇2. 
6 C.T.R. Wilson (1927), O.W. Richardson (1928), P.A.M. Dirac (1933), J. Chadwick (1935), G.P. 
Thompson (1937), J.D. Cockroft (1941), E.V. Appleton (1947), and M.S. Blackett (1948). 

68
S. L. McMurran and J. J. Tattersall
Sufﬁcient library access also proved to be a struggle for women readers and 
researchers. For 50 years, students from Girton and Newnham were categorised 
with non-members of the university. As such, library access was severely limited. 
In 1923, as a result of successful campaigns from the women’s colleges for greater 
library access, “women students were admitted to the library on the same terms as 
their male counterparts. [20]” Yet, these rights did not extend to women graduates. 
Whereas male Cambridge alumni were permitted to retain their library privileges, 
alumnae from the women’s colleges, even those who were continuing research, were 
once again relegated to their status as non-members of the university with limited 
library access. 
Under the increased professionalism in the sciences and humanities developing 
during the early twentieth century, an outlet or venue was needed for women 
researchers to discuss their work on an expanded scale. In 1919, the Cambridge 
Women’s Research Club (CWRC) was founded by two Newnham College research 
students, Enid Elder Hancock Welsford, a literary scholar,7 and Maud D. Brindley 
(née Haviland), an ornithologist and founder of the Cambridge Bird Sanctuary 
(Fig. 1).8 The two women envisioned a forum for women actively engaged in 
research in Cambridge to meet and exchange ideas.9 The research club met once or 
twice each term with their meetings normally held at either Girton or Newnham.10 
3 
Lectures 
In its sixty-year existence, the research club met almost 300 times. A highlight 
of each meeting was an after-dinner lecture by a prominent woman researcher 
beginning about 8:45 pm. These lectures not only provided interesting insights on 
a variety of research topics, they also offered an opportunity for club members to 
become exposed to the research techniques of other researchers. A list of speakers
7 Welsford’s The Fool: His Social and Literary History describes the history of fools and jesters. 
Her The Court Masque investigates the relationship between English poetry and revels from their 
origin to the reign of Charles II [18]. Masques were a form of allegorical drama in which stories 
from classical mythology were adapted to convey contemporary meanings [17]. Two of Welsford’s 
students at Newnham were the biographer Claire Tomalin and the poet Sylvia Plath. 
8 Brindley’s research specialized in parasites and aphids. A Summer on the Yenisei [8] describes 
her 1914 expedition to Siberia. 
9 Women’s research organizations founded just prior to the founding of the CWRC include the 
Women’s Research Club of the University of Michigan (1902–1999), the Women’s Research Club 
of Portland, Oregon (1916–1966), the Greentown Women’s Research Club of Kokomo, Indiana 
(1916– ), and the Aronos Women’s Research Club of Sonora, California (1915– ) [21]. 
10 In the 1960s, with the advent of more Cambridge women’s colleges, meeting sites included New 
Hall (now Murray Edwards College) and Lucy Cavendish College. 

Cambridge Women’s Research Club
69
Fig. 1 Enid Welsford (left) and Maud Brindley (right). Image credits, respectively, the President 
and Fellows of Newnham College and National Portrait Gallery, London 
for the academic year appeared in mid-September. Several of the early talks were 
advertised as ‘Lantern Lectures’.11 
The following sample of speakers and lecture topics draws from the late 1940s 
until the club’s demise in 1979. The collection epitomizes the talent embodied in 
the group and the opportunities the club provided for young women to meet and be 
mentored by eminent researchers. 
In general, speakers from Newnham and Girton would alternate, evidently in 
an effort to offer both institutions equal recognition. In the late 1940s speakers 
from Newnham included Jocelyn M.C. Toynbee, Dorothy Garrod, and Nora K. 
Chadwick. Speakers from Girton included Kathleen T. Butler and Helen D. Megaw. 
In 1948, Jocelyn M.C. Toynbee, an archaeologist and historian, led the group 
with a talk on Romano-British archaeology (Fig. 2). Her lecture focused on 
the Virgil mosaic found in the frigidarium of the baths of a Roman villa near 
Low Ham, Somerset, the fourth century Mildenhall treasure of silver,12 and a 
parade helmet possibly worn in cavalry exercises found in the River Wensum near 
Worthing, Norfolk. In 1951, Toynbee was elected Laurence Professor of Classical 
Archaeology at Cambridge.13 
That same year, Kathleen T. Butler read a translation of excerpts from the letters 
of Giuseppe Pallavicino, a village doctor in sixteenth-century Italy who felt that his 
work was very laborious, his patients too numerous, and his salary too small for
11 A magic lantern, an early type of image projector, was employed. Lantern lectures were a 
common form of diversion and education in Britain from the 1870s through the early 1900s. 
12 Now in The British Museum. 
13 Toynbee was the only woman to hold that position. 

70
S. L. McMurran and J. J. Tattersall
Fig. 2 Jocelyn Toynbee. 
Reproduced with permission 
[9] 
him to live in comfort. The letters are included in her anthology ‘The Gentlest Art’ 
in Renaissance Italy published in 1954. As Mistress of Girton, Butler had guided 
the College through World War II and had the gratiﬁcation of seeing the college 
become a full member of the University. 
Later in 1948, Dorothy Garrod, Disney Professor of Archaeology at Cam-
bridge,14 spoke on her excavations at a prehistoric rock-shelter at Anglo-sur-
l’Anglin near Vienne, France, an occupation level of the little-known Early Mag-
dalenian Epoch (Fig. 3). The site had yielded ﬂint implements, spear-heads made 
from reindeer antlers, and over sixty pieces of limestone covered with intricate 
engravings. During the war, Garrod served in the Women’s Auxiliary Air Force, 
after which she returned to Cambridge to set up England’s ﬁrst undergraduate 
program in prehistoric archaeology. 
In January 1949, crystallographer Helen D. Megaw spoke about her work in the 
ﬁeld of X-ray crystallography and how diffraction patterns were used to discover 
the arrangements of atoms which built up in crystalline materials giving rise to 
their physical and chemical properties (Fig. 4). In recognition of her accurate 
measurement of the cell dimensions of ice, Megaw Island off the coast of Antarctica 
was named for her. 
Later that year, the medievalist, Nora K. Chadwick of Newnham spoke on 
the intellectual contacts between Britain and Gaul in the ﬁfth century, which 
she referred to as one of the most obscure periods in literature and history. She
14 Garrod was the only woman to hold that position. 

Cambridge Women’s Research Club
71
Fig. 3 Dorothy Garrod. Pitt 
Rivers Museum, University 
of Oxford, accession number 
1998.294.608 
mentioned the deﬁnite evidence of communication between Britain and Gaul and 
enlightened listeners on the signiﬁcant population of Gauls residing in Britain at the 
time and the Pelagian heresy15 that drew Britain into the orbit of papal attention. She 
then traced a literary relationship for the period. In 1950, Chadwick was appointed 
University Lecturer in the Early History and Culture of the British Isles at the 
University of Cambridge. 
Renowned speakers of the 1950s included Dr. Janet Sondheimer, Mary 
Cartwright, Margaret Burbidge, Marjorie Chibnall, Kathleen Raine, Harriet Tunmer, 
and Catherine Hebb. 
In 1950, Dr. Janet Sondheimer of Girton spoke on medieval women and their role 
in society. In the ﬁrst part of her talk she discussed the background for the Church’s 
intolerance of women. She then focused on women in France and Germany of the
15 To deny the doctrine of original sin. 

72
S. L. McMurran and J. J. Tattersall
Fig. 4 Helen Megaw. Photo 
from [13] courtesy of the 
Mineralogical Society of 
America 
eighth and ninth centuries describing the careers of various well-off individuals. 
Even though conditions during the period were uncomfortable, the women she 
referred to were in some respects better off than their successors in the more highly 
feudalized age. Sondheimer devoted her life to women’s education and served as 
historian and archivist at Westﬁeld College of the University of London. 
The next year, Mary Cartwright spoke on the history of pure mathematics at 
Cambridge since 1900 (Fig. 5). She began by noting that Cambridge had been 
the mathematical center of England since the time of Newton. In the second half 
of the nineteenth century, she described Cambridge teaching as being dominated 
by coaches who prepared candidates for the Mathematical Tripos, a formidable 
exam that tested knowledge of applied mathematics. She mentioned the Sadlerian 
Professorship of Pure Mathematics. She chose to focus on the years following 1900 
as that was when Cambridge mathematics became more international in outlook. 
While illustrating the change in balance between pure and applied mathematics 
at Cambridge, she highlighted the contributions of the Henry Baker school of 
geometry, the collaboration of G.H. Hardy and J.E. Littlewood, and the work of 
Srinivasa Ramanujan. In the early 1950s, Cartwright served as president of the 
CWRC. For 19 years, she was Mistress of Girton College. She also served as 
president of both the Mathematical Association and of the London Mathematical 
Society.16 
16 Cartwright was the ﬁrst woman to serve in that capacity in either organization.

Cambridge Women’s Research Club
73
Fig. 5 Mary Cartwright. 
National Portrait Gallery, 
London 
In February 1955, astrophysicist Margaret Burbidge spoke on the magnetic ﬁelds 
of stars and how they are detected by the Zeeman splitting of their spectral lines 
(Fig. 6). In 1971, she was part of the group that determined that all but the very 
lightest chemical elements were produced by nuclear synthesis in stars [2]. She 
held positions at the Yerkes Observatory, California Institute of Technology, and 
University of California San Diego. For a time, she also served as director of 
the Greenwich Observatory. Burbidge once refused an award from the American 
Astronomical Society (AAS) feeling that it was discriminatory because it was 
awarded only to women. Four years later she was elected the society’s president. 
The next year, Mary Cartwright spoke again, this time lecturing on her six-week 
experience behind the Iron Curtain. She went as a delegate of the Royal Society and 
a guest of Moscow University. The delegation visited the Kremlin, Lenin’s Tomb, 
and several museums in Moscow. The group attended the opera and later visited 
the orthodox Monastery of the Caves in Kiev. Her lecture included a description of 
the architecture of Russian churches. She noted that she had learned quite a bit of 
Russian from their interpreter. 
Later in 1956, historian Marjorie Chibnall spoke on historians in the twelfth 
century. She noted that in many cases these historians’ real incentive was an interest 
in events for their own sake and not as part of a general pattern. Her lecture focused 
on the works of John of Salisbury, an author, educationalist, and diplomat. 
In February 1957, Kathleen Raine, who had recently worked in the Political 
Intelligence Department of the Foreign Ofﬁce [6, p. 392], spoke on some neo-
Platonic themes in the works of William Blake. She described the continuity of his

74
S. L. McMurran and J. J. Tattersall
Fig. 6 Margaret Burbidge. 
Caltech Archives. Photo by 
W.W. Girdner (1956) 
images and symbols with some traditional images derived from the neo-Platonists 
of Alexandria. 
The year 1958 included lectures from Harriet Tunmer of Newnham and Catherine 
Hebb of the Babraham Animal Physiological Research Institute in Cambridgeshire. 
Tunmer spoke on some recent advances in radio astronomy, focusing on how radio 
waves allow us to determine the extent of hydrogen in our galaxy and the distribution 
of particular objects that are ‘bright’ at radio wavelengths. Later in the year, Hebb 
spoke on the value of physiology in agricultural research. 
Two notable speakers from the 1960s were Sylvia Fitton-Jackson of the Strange-
ways Research Laboratory in Cambridge and the chemist Ruth Lyndon-Bell from 
New Hall. Fitton-Jackson was responsible for most of the 1327 illustrations in 
the centenary edition of Gray’s Anatomy published by Longmans in 1958. Her 
lecture, given in March 1962, focused on the subject of the growth of skeletal 
tissue. In February 1964, Lyndon-Bell spoke on exploring molecules with radio 
waves. Lyndon-Bell later served as acting president of Murray Edwards College, 
Cambridge. 
In its last decade, the club continued to provide lectures from outstanding women 
researchers. The speaker list included Judy Matthewman, Patricia Easterling, 
Harriet Crawford, Carol MacCormack, and Marilyn Strathern.

Cambridge Women’s Research Club
75
Judy Matthewman of the Computer Laboratory17 addressed the group in 1974. 
Topics ranged from programming the Titan computer to computer graphics, and 
touched on the potential of working from home, which she did starting in the late 
1960s with a computer console at home after the birth of her daughter. 
Anna Bidder, ﬁrst president of Lucy Cavendish College, spoke the following 
year. She discussed form and function as essential elements in the study of natural 
history. 
At the next meeting, Patricia Easterling of Newnham, later Regius Professor of 
Greek at Cambridge,18 spoke on Greek tragedy for modern readers. She emphasized 
the alienness of many inherent ideas in Greek drama, even though it can also be 
seen as relevant to modern parallels. She noted that much of Greek tragedy depends 
on the inevitability of the consequences of an act, not on the moral quality of the 
original act. 
Harriet Crawford of Lucy Cavendish, a senior fellow at the McDonald Institute 
for Archaeological Research at the University of Cambridge, spoke in March 1976. 
Her presentation focused on Nomads, in particular sheep and goat herders of the 
desert edges of Mesopotamia in the 2nd millennium BCE. 
In May 1977, the anthropologist Carol MacCormack of New Hall spoke on the 
economic role of women in a West African society. She made reference to her 
anthropological studies in Sierra Leone. 
The last lecture was given in January 1979 by anthropologist Marilyn Strathern 
(Fig. 7). Her presentation, titled “What is the point of working in New Guinea?,” 
focused on food and nutrition. She discussed the anthropologist’s cookbook and 
how societies deal with surplus food. Strathern was later elected the William Wyse 
Professor of Social Anthropology at Cambridge19 and later served as mistress of 
Girton College. 
4 
Operations 
As evidenced by the club’s sample of lecturers, the club strove to highlight the 
accomplishments of women researchers in a variety of ﬁelds. Minutes of the club’s 
meetings provide further insight into the club’s activities. Records indicate that 
between 1895 and 1937, members of the club were quite productive. Forty-four 
members published ﬁfty-ﬁve books and ninety-four research articles in such diverse 
ﬁelds as archaeology, astronomy, biochemistry, chemistry, ecology, history, history 
of music, history of science, linguistics, mathematics, modern languages, physics, 
psychology, and religion.
17 The Computer Laboratory, formerly the Mathematical Laboratory, was founded in 1937 and 
renamed in 1970. 
18 Easterling was the only woman to hold that position. 
19 Strathern was the only woman to hold that position. 

76
S. L. McMurran and J. J. Tattersall
Fig. 7 Marilyn Strathern. 
Cambridge University 
Department of Social 
Anthropology. Photo by Chris 
Thomand 
The prime objective of the club was networking and the communication of 
experiences. In order to foster such an interchange of thoughts, its organizers agreed 
that the membership should avoid becoming very unwieldy in size and discourage 
admission of potential members whose interest in research was temporary or 
superﬁcial. On the other hand, the organizers felt that it would be a pity to exclude 
keen young research workers just because they had not yet had time to publish their 
work. It was therefore deemed that all full members of the club should be well-
established researchers and that research students at an early stage in their studies 
should be admitted as associate members. The latter would not be allowed voting 
powers that might lead to control of the future policy of the club. 
The election of club ofﬁcers took place at the Annual General Meeting (AGM), 
normally held in December or January. As is typical of such meetings, the sequence 
of items on the AGM agenda began with the approval of minutes of the previous 
AGM, followed by matters arising, the secretary’s report, the treasurer’s report, the 
election of ofﬁcers, the recognition of recently elected members, and the nomination 
of new members. It concluded with a discussion of any other outstanding business. 
Originally, all woman actively engaged in research in Cambridge were eligible 
for membership, provided they had published at least one independent research 
article. The rule was later amended to read, “provided she has published at least one 
paper embodying the results of independent research, or has had a thesis accepted 
for a PhD degree.” In 1955, with the support of Girtonians Mary Cartwright and 
Ann Bishop, this by-law was compressed to read, “All woman actively engaged in 
research in Cambridge shall be eligible for membership.” The organization’s by-
laws contained a provision for electing honorary members, especially distinguished 
former members of the club or prominent women residents in Cambridge.20 As
20 From 1948 to 1979, the number of honorary members varied from two to ﬁve. 

Cambridge Women’s Research Club
77
women moved in and out of Cambridge, membership was always in ﬂux with a 
mostly slow but steady increase.21 
When senior members of the club proposed candidates for membership, the 
candidate’s name, together with the title of her research topic and a list of her 
published work or the title of her doctoral thesis, was sent to the secretary. The 
election of a new member did not take place at the meeting at which her name was 
proposed, but if during the fortnight following that meeting no written objection had 
been received by the secretary, the candidate was considered elected. If an objection 
to a candidate was received, the election of all candidates proposed at the meeting 
would be conducted by secret ballot at the next meeting. A minimum of three no 
votes were required to reject a candidate. It is unclear if this rule was ever executed 
as no record exists of any candidate having been denied membership. 
Club ofﬁcers consisted of a president, secretary, and treasurer. An executive 
group called the Committee consisted of the president, secretary, treasurer and 
two other members.22 Duties of the secretary included keeping the membership 
list up to date, informing the treasurer of any new members, sending out notices, 
making arrangements for the AGM dinner, and presenting an annual report at the 
AGM. Responsibilities of the treasurer included collecting dues, issuing receipts, 
paying the bills, collecting payments for the AGM dinners, keeping the books, and 
preparing the presentation of a ﬁnal balance sheet at the AGM.23 
An important duty of the president was to invite speakers. The secretary would 
follow up by contacting the speaker to see if she would like to invite one or two 
guests, to inquire as what audiovisual equipment she may need, and to tell her the 
time and place for sherry before dinner. It was also the secretary’s job to put notices 
in the combination room of the women’s colleges and prepare an agenda for the 
president that included the names of all dinner guests. 
At meetings of the Committee, the treasurer noted which members were in 
arrears with their dues,24 dates of future meetings were determined, which members 
received grants,25 and which speakers should be invited. Members of the Commit-
tee, except for the secretary and treasurer, were required to step down annually but 
were eligible for reelection.26 
Associate members paid reduced dues and had the right to attend every meeting 
except for the AGM. Nevertheless, they could be nominated for election as an ofﬁcer
21 In 1948, there were 44 full members and 38 associates; in 1951, while the group added 9 full 
members and 19 associates, it lost 11 full members and 14 associates; in 1956, there were 81 full 
and 24 associate members; and in 1965, there were 119 full and 9 associate members [5, 2/1].  
22 Amended to three other members in 1953. 
23 The annual operating budget ran about £75 and the club normally had about £100 in savings. 
24 If a member or associate did not pay her dues for three successive years, her membership ceased. 
25 In 1955 the club covered the cost of translating Sophie Trenkner’s University of Brussels 
dissertation from French to English. Trenkner’s original thesis, written in Latin, had been destroyed 
by ﬁre during the war. Her dissertation led to the publication of The Greek Novella in the Classical 
Period in 1958, the year of her death. 
26 Minutes of the Committee from 1955 to 1976 can be found in [5, 2/1].  

78
S. L. McMurran and J. J. Tattersall
or Committee member, and if elected would ipso facto become a full member. In the 
1950s the subscription was four shillings27 a year for members and three shillings 
for associates, payable in October.28 
AGM dinners were elaborate affairs. At Girton, in 1976, thirty-two members 
each paid £3 to attend. As an example of the offerings, before dinner, from 7:30 to 
8:00 pm, a glass of sherry could be had for 15 pence. The dinner consisted of a thick 
vegetable soup, fried chicken, sautéed potatoes, buttered carrots, Brussels sprouts, 
and lemon mousse for dessert. With dinner, Rheinischer, a crisp German Riesling, 
was served [5, 4/3]. Two years later, the cost of the annual dinner had risen to £4.90. 
The main fare was turkey escalopes with an expanded wine list that now included a 
white Bordeaux, a Piesporter Michelsburg, and a Mateus Rosé. 
5 
Decline 
As early as December 1953, there was discussion at the AGM concerning the 
mission of the club. Some members doubted whether the group still served a useful 
purpose. Enid Welsford, then president, spoke of constitutional reform but felt that 
there were more problems relating to reform of the club than could be met by 
the few alterations proposed. A motion expressing conﬁdence in the club’s future 
was proposed and carried unanimously, thereby resolving the issue for a time. Yet, 
attendance at regular meetings continued to drop in spite of increased membership 
in the club itself. 
The club evidently made attempts to expand visibility and promote its activities. 
In October 1958 they attempted to have notice of their meetings posted in the weekly 
Cambridge University Reporter, the ofﬁcial journal of the university. A letter of 
rejection from the University Registrary R.M. Rattenbury reasoned: 
Lots of clubs and societies hold meetings ... I am therefore bound to decline to publish 
notices except of meetings of societies that are virtually societies of senior members of the 
University, to which a more or less general invitation is issued. On present evidence it does 
not seem to me that the Cambridge Women’s Research club falls into this category, nor do 
I think that a notice in the Reporter would in fact be a good way of bringing its meetings 
to the attention of the limited number of persons who would be interested. Would not typed 
notices for display on the notice-boards of the relevant departments and institutions be much 
more satisfactory? [14] 
The Committee followed up with a decision to put notice of their meetings in a 
student publication, the Cambridge Review, a journal of university life and thought. 
In spite of a generous attitude towards supporting the research of its members, 
attendance at meetings continued to dwindle. By the 1970s, even with over 100
27 The purchasing power of a 1950 shilling would be about $2.20 in 2019. There were 12 pence in 
a shilling and 20 shillings in a pound [12]. 
28 The subscription for full members was raised to 5 shillings in 1958. After the decimalization of 
the currency in 1971, the annual subscription was set at 50 pence. 

Cambridge Women’s Research Club
79
members and the organization’s ﬁnances in good shape,29 attendance at meetings, 
which had averaged 50 in the 1940s, had dwindled to about 30. In 1971, membership 
included only 6 associate members [5, 1/2].  
In 1969, the Committee was asked to consider some radical alterations to 
the rules. In response, in January 1970, president Kate Bertram circulated a 
survey among the membership to discover how best the group could fulﬁll the 
function envisioned by its founders. The survey solicited opinions on abolishing 
the distinction between associate members and full members, the type and number 
of meetings per year, allowing men as guests, extending membership to men, and 
dissolution of the club.30 
To recruit support, in the late 1970s the Committee held an open meeting to 
which all women graduate students were personally invited. The gathering attracted 
few potential members. The secretary reported that of 50 replies to a 1978 survey, 
60% supported closure. Dr. Rosamund McKitterick of Newnhan replied: 
It has obviously served a very useful purpose in the past as well as ﬁlling a real need, but I 
feel that there are enough alternative opportunities for women in Cambridge now to make a 
Women’s Research club superﬂuous. [10] 
Muriel Arber of Newnham added: 
It is very sad that the club should be in this position; my own feeling is rather that it is better 
to bring it to a digniﬁed and ceremonial end than to try to keep that shell of it in suspended 
animation. [1] 
Alison Fairlie of Girton wrote: 
It was a privilege and a joy to go to all the meetings. So much has changed since then 
(1944!) that conﬂicting commitments and a proliferation of valuable other societies have 
completely altered conditions. [7] 
As none of the club’s efforts had succeeded in attracting a signiﬁcant number 
of new young researchers or to increase the attendance at meetings, the realization 
came that this new element of the academic community did not feel the need of what 
the club had to offer. Moreover, members became increasingly aware that a number 
of women doing research in Cambridge were ignorant of the existence of the club. 
There was little doubt that the historical rationale for a women’s research club no 
longer existed. 
The secretary reported to the Committee that it appeared the club no longer 
served its original purpose as a bastion for women actively engaged in research. 
Meetings were now chieﬂy attended by only a few elderly and retired academics. 
The founder, Enid Welsford, wrote to the secretary Mary Cra’ster that old age and
29 In the 1940s the group’s annual operating budget was approximately £35 with about £40 in a 
savings account. By the 1970s, the operating budget was about £79 and the club had £98 in their 
savings account. The purchasing power of £1 in 1975 was about $10.80 in 2019. 
30 In the 68 replies to the 1970 questionnaire only 4 members supported closure, 94% favored 
abolishing the associates category, 96% favored allowing men at ordinary meetings, and only 53% 
were against granting men membership [5, 4/3].  

80
S. L. McMurran and J. J. Tattersall
increasing deafness prevented her from attending the annual dinner where formal 
termination of the club would be the main topic of discussion, and offered her 
opinion: 
I do not know whether you do, or do not, welcome views from absentees, but I should like 
to say that if I did have a vote, I should vote for the complete termination of the club and for 
depositing the minute books in the University Archives and that any remaining cash balance 
of funds (after present expenses have been met) should be given to a suitable charity, e.g., 
a travel fund for research students. When the late Maud Brindley and I founded the club 
many years ago, the position of women in the University was very different from what it is 
now, and I am sure that, if my friend were alive today, she would agree that that it is a great 
mistake to prolong the existence of an institution which is no longer needed. [19] 
Since there was no treasurer, no nominee for secretary, and no one willing to 
serve on the Committee, the following motion was proposed and passed at the 1978 
AGM: 
That the Cambridge Women’s Research club be formally dissolved on 31 January 1979; 
that the minutes books be deposited with the University Archives; and that any balance in 
the account of the club be given to a charity approved by the Committee. [5, 1/3]  
Margaret Stanier of Newnham proposed, and those present agreed, that the balance 
be given to the Lucy Cavendish College Science Research Fund. 
6 
Conclusion 
Women’s research organizations such as the Cambridge Women’s Research Club 
and similar organizations are remnants of the past that have gone the way of 
lamplighters, elevator operators, bowling alley pinsetters, and switchboard oper-
ators. Early in the twentieth century, as a community of women researchers 
was only just emerging at Cambridge, opportunities to be actively involved in 
ﬁeld-speciﬁc professional organizations were often limited. Research clubs for 
women academics, such as the CWRC, served a useful and valuable service in 
a male-dominated academic research community. The CWRC provided a space 
in which women engaged in academic research could support one another, feel 
their contributions were valued, and offer mentorship to their burgeoning sister 
researchers. 
As views on women academics evolved over the century and increasing numbers 
of women engaged in research activity, their work became more widely recognized 
and respected. In addition, the century saw a proliferation of professional societies 
as engagement with research increased on the whole. As Welsford suggested in her 
memo, the need for a women’s research club had reached its ﬁnale as professional 
organizations offered more opportunities for women academics to take on leadership 
roles and share their research with colleagues in their respective ﬁelds. 
Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank Anne Thomson, archivist at Newnham 
College for her sage advice and valuable assistance. We are also grateful to the staff and the 
Manuscripts Room at Cambridge University Library and to Norma Emmerton of Wolfson College 
and member of the CWRC.

Cambridge Women’s Research Club
81
References 
[1] Arber, M., Correspondence to M.D. Cra’ster, 21 October 1978. Cambridge University 
Archives, SOC V. 5/4-5. 
[2] Burbidge, E.M., Synthesis of the elements in stars, with Burbidge, G., Fowler, W., and Hoyle, 
F. Reviews of Modern Physics 29 (1957), 548-650. 
[3] University of Cambridge Library Archives, SOC.XXIX 1/2. 
[4] Cambridge University Graduate Admissions Ofﬁce Postgraduate Admission statistics online 
at https://www.postgraduate.study.cam.ac.uk/ accessed 14 August 2022. 
[5] Cambridge University Library Archives, SOC.V. 
[6] The Girton College Register, 1869–1946, Cambridge, 1948. 
[7] Fairlie, A., Correspondence to M.D. Cra’ster, 25 October 1978. Cambridge University 
Archives, SOC V. 5/4-5. 
[8] Haviland, M., A Summer on the Yenisei. London, E. Arnold, 1915. 
[9] J.M.R., Jocelyn Toynbee. The Journal of Roman Studies 67 (1977), xi. Cambridge University 
Press. 
[10] McKitterick, R.D., Correspondence to M.D. Cra’ster, 20 October 1978. Cambridge University 
Archives, SOC V. 5/4-5. 
[11] McMurran, S.L. and Tattersall, J.J., Fostering academic and mathematical excellence at 
Girton College, 1870–1940. Women in Mathematics, Association for Women in Mathematics 
Series, Vol. 10, 1–33. Springer, New York, 2017. 
[12] Measuringworth at measuringworth.com. Accessed 12 May 2020. 
[13] Megaw, H., Acceptance of the Roebling Medal of the Mineralogical Society of America for 
1989. American Mineralogist Vol. 75 (1990), 715–719. 
[14] Rattenbury, L.M., Correspondence from R.M. Rattenbury to E.H. Wheltham, 21 October 
1958. Cambridge University Library Archives, SOC.V. 2/1. 
[15] Smith, A.K., Cambridge Dining Society at https://akennedysmith.com/about-2/ accessed 10 
January 2022. 
[16] Tattersall, J.J. and McMurran, S.L., Women and the Cambridge Mathematical Tripos. Proc. 
Canadian Soc. Hist. and Phil. Math. 8 (1995), 38-50. 
[17] Tavernor, R., Palladio and Palladianism, p. 118. Thames & Hudson, London, 1991. 
[18] Welsford, E., The Court Masque. Cambridge, 1927. 
[19] Welsford, E., Correspondence from Miss Welsford to Mrs. Cra’ster, October 27, 1978. 
Cambridge University Library Archives, SOC.V. 1/3. 
[20] Whitelock, J., ‘Lock up your libraries’? Women readers at Cambridge University Library, 
1855–1923 Library & Information History, 38.1 (2022): 1–33. 
[21] Winslow, H.M., Ofﬁcial Register and Directory of Women’s Clubs in America, Vol. 23, 
Winslow, Shirley, MA, 1923.

Going to the Source(s) of Sources 
in Mathematicians’ Drafts 
Emmylou Haffner 
Abstract The mathematical text in its published form, as we are most used to 
reading it, is a carefully structured and polished means of communicating results 
to the scientiﬁc community. It is, as Reuben Hersh put it, the ‘front’ of mathematics. 
In this paper, I propose to look at the ‘back’ of mathematics, at what happens in 
the privacy of drafts, which can certainly be seen as the mathematician’s laboratory. 
Considering that these preliminary texts are a part of the mathematical practice— 
and indeed a crucial one—I will show that they allow us to understand the shaping 
of mathematics in deep and signiﬁcant ways. Using a selection of examples, 
I will focus on questions related to the materiality of mathematical texts, how 
textual elements and mathematical practices work with each other, the processes 
of writing in mathematics, and the choices made in writing a text deemed suitable 
for communication to the scientiﬁc community. 
1 
Introduction 
In modern and contemporary mathematics, the ﬁrst means of diffusion of (new) 
mathematical knowledge is very often the written text. Such texts, which are the core 
medium for mathematicians, but also for historians and philosophers of mathematics 
are, of course, the result of a fairly long process. This process is often made invisible 
to readers, who are presented with a polished, reconstructed and restructured version 
of the author’s initial work. 
In [Hersh(1991)], Reuben Hersh suggested, using an idea from sociologist 
Erving Goffman, that there is a “front” and a “back” of mathematics: areas in which 
the public is admitted, areas in which it is not. Similarly, albeit more provocatively, 
in 1963, Nobel Prize winner Peter Medawar gave a talk entitled “Is the scientiﬁc 
E. Haffner () 
Institut des textes et manuscrits modernes, ÉNS/CNRS, Paris, France 
e-mail: emmylou.haffner@ens.psl.eu 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
M. Zack, D. Waszek (eds.), Research in History and Philosophy of Mathematics, 
Annals of the Canadian Society for History and Philosophy of Mathematics/ Société 
canadienne d’histoire et de philosophie des mathématiques, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-46193-4_6
83

84
E. Haffner
paper a fraud?”1 in which he suggested that the norms of writing for scientiﬁc 
publication did not reﬂect how research truly happened, in particular because of 
the very rigid structure of the papers, the setup of a narrative falsely reconstructing 
the research process, and the dehumanization of the discovery process. In this paper, 
I would like to make the case for looking at the “back” of mathematics, the parts 
of mathematics which are not written for the public, and argue that, as Medawar 
stated, our conception and understanding of mathematical research are biased by 
such publication norms, and that epistemological and methodological reﬂections 
tend to miss what really happens in the research process. To do so, I will be using a 
speciﬁc kind of archival material, namely mathematicians’ drafts.2 
A core methodological point of my analysis will be the rejection of a supposed 
divide between the contents of scientiﬁc texts and their materiality. Such an 
approach was in parts initiated by Karine Chemla’s suggestion to jointly use history 
of mathematics and history of text. In the introduction of her 2004 book, History of 
science, history of text, she explains that the starting point of this approach is “the 
hypothesis that [scientiﬁc] texts, as such, are to be presumed to be historical objects 
in every respect”: 
In a ﬁrst, weaker sense, [texts] are historical objects simply because they were produced 
at different times and within given working communities. However, in a second, stronger 
sense [...] they are historical objects because they were produced, as texts, at the same time 
as the concepts, results and theories which they contain were, and essentially contribute to 
the shaping and sharing of these ideas. 
In other words, we reject the presupposition that, once concepts, results or theories have 
been obtained by other ways, in an immaterial space, they are merely transcribed in a textual 
form that remains indifferent to them. (...) [We assume that] the texts elaborated in the 
course of the practice of science belong, as such, to the outcome of the scientiﬁc work, 
along with the concepts, results, or theories, in intimate interaction with which they were 
shaped. [Chemla(2004), viii] 
In this light, it should be clear that mathematicians’ drafts are tools for their 
research. They are their laboratory, the place where we can witness the steps of 
their research, some of which were erased from the publication. As such, drafts 
give us an internal view of mathematical practice, which can be different from the 
idealised image of a very normed, somewhat rigid, text, which we have become 
used to—especially in contemporary mathematics—and they allow us to better 
understand the shaping of mathematical ideas, results or theories. Not only do these 
sources provide us with additional elements on their author’s mathematics, of crucial 
importance for the history of mathematics,3 but they also force us to reconsider 
some of what we thought we knew by studying only published works. For example, 
in [Descotes(2010)], Descotes presents a mathematical manuscript of Pascal’s,
1 [Medawar(1991)]. 
2 I will consider as drafts all private research manuscripts, not written to be communicated to 
another reader. It will not matter, here, whether they are ‘just’ working manuscripts without speciﬁc 
publication intents or part of a process that led to a published work. 
3 See, for example, [Lützen(1990), Knobloch(2004), Sauer and Schütz(2020), Bustamante(2022)]. 

Going to the Source(s) of Sources in Mathematicians’ Drafts
85
discovered while working on the Recueil original of Pascal’s Pensées, which 
reveals—unlike what his published works suggest—that Pascal used symbolism and 
computations to support his geometrical reasoning. Historians of mathematics are 
also familiar with Carl Siegel’s and Harold Edwards’ arguments against an image 
of Riemann as a purely conceptual mathematician:4 relying on his Nachlass, they  
argued that Riemann’s so-called conceptual mathematics, in fact, relied deeply on 
computations—or, as Edwards puts it, Riemann “did not venture into these higher 
realms without doing a lot of serious computation to lay the groundwork for his 
ﬂights” [Edwards(2010), 64]. In my own work,5 I showed that a similar observation 
can, in fact, be made for Dedekind’s research on modules and Dualgruppen 
(equivalent to our concept of lattice). Rather than ﬂying into the abstract set-
theoretic realms of Dualgruppen right away, or even as soon as he could, Dedekind 
laid a rather thick ground of computations, concrete examples, tables, diagrams, 
etc., seemingly going against his statements that mathematics should be essentially 
“conceptual”.6 
At the same time, it is important to acknowledge that drafts are a very speciﬁc 
type of manuscripts, insofar as they show intermediate states of writing, and, most 
often, were not written to be read by anybody but their author. Hence, they require 
caution in interpreting them. In addition to careful critical historical analysis, it is 
useful to consider methods from literary studies, which have been studying writers’s 
drafts for a long time, and in particular the approach called “critique génétique”, 
genetic criticism: 
The term critique génétique was coined by Louis Hay in 1979 in the title of a collection 
of essays, Essais de critique génétique. Genetic critics focus on the temporal dimension 
of writing and regard a work of literature as a process rather than a product. The end 
result remains inextricably bound up with its textual memory, that is, the numerous 
textual transformations that preceded its publication. [...] [Their] main objective [...] is 
to examine the writing mechanisms and to reconstruct the genesis of the literary work by 
studying notebooks, manuscripts, typescripts, and proofs, focusing on the “potentiality” of 
writing. The confrontation of a published text with all its previous versions gives the reader 
an idea of what it might have become. Genetic critics study the contingencies of the writing 
process as research objects in their own right, independent from the publication of a ﬁnished 
product (a “corrected” text). [Van Hulle(2009), 3]  
In this paper, I will raise several issues in these directions. I will propose 
to discuss textual practices developed by mathematicians in their research. I
4 [Siegel(1932), Edwards(2010)]. 
5 [Haffner(2018a), Haffner(2023)]. 
6 Another example of a new light shed by studying drafts is Clare Moriarty’s recent paper on the 
draft of Maclaurin’s Treatise on Fluxions and what it reveals of the initial ideological concerns of 
its author [Moriarty(2022)]. There is a number of recent or ongoing works using archival material 
akin to drafts, many of which I will cite in this paper—there is also a considerably larger number 
of available (yet often unexploited) notebooks and drafts that are awaiting exploration. My own 
project funded by the Émergence(s) program of the Ville de Paris, “Brouillons mathématiques” 
gathers a small team of historians and philosophers focused on such issues (see http://www.item. 
ens.fr/brouillons-mathematiques-projet-emergences-2022-2026/). 

86
E. Haffner
will do so using (mostly) a selection of drafts from Leibniz (Gottfried Wilhelm 
Leibniz—Bibliothek Niedersächsische Landesbibliothek Hannover, abbreviated in 
LH), Richard Dedekind (Cod. Ms. Dedekind, Niedersächsische Staats-und Univer-
sitätsbibliothek Göttingen), and Élie Cartan (fonds 38J, Académie des Sciences de 
Paris). The selection of sources, here, is admittedly subjective. It should be clear that 
it is not at all meant as an exhaustive look into textual and mathematical practices 
in drafts, but as a way to open the door and encourage us to look behind the scene 
whenever possible. Drafts have been overlooked as historical sources because they 
show temporary states of mathematics. I believe that this is what makes them most 
interesting.7 
2 
Written Tools and Artefacts for Research 
In mathematical drafts, even more so than in mathematical texts in general, the 
variety of writing practices is striking. Indeed, drafts being a private space of 
writing, the writing in drafts is freed from practical constraints related to printing, 
and freed as well from a number of disciplinary, sociological norms for publication. 
In their drafts, the mathematician is free to write however and wherever they like. 
Compared to publications (and in large part to letters as well) which are written 
to be read, drafts present striking material characteristics. Each page has its own 
semiotics. This material singularity is important, as it testiﬁes to the multiplicity of 
writing practices used by mathematicians throughout their work. It is also striking 
to observe that this diversity of practices can be observed in the work of one and the 
same mathematician as well, suggesting that different textual practices are used for 
different reasons and produce different sorts of knowledge. And drafts are, of course, 
a privileged place to observe mathematical invention, in particular the production of 
notation, signs, written tools and artefacts for research, which will be the focus of 
this section. 
As should be clear, writing, in its different forms and shapes, is the mathemati-
cian’s main tool to convey and materialize thought. How a mathematician writes 
gives us concrete information about the conceptual and textual paths followed, and 
provides precious clues to understand their processes of working and the genesis 
of mathematical concepts and texts. Hence, it is essential to pay attention to the 
uses, and indeed the changes in uses of notation, tables, diagrams and other written 
tools, as well as computations, hypotheses, proofs, and so on, as they testify of the 
mathematical work as it is being done.
7 Of course, archives contain many unpublished works, in more or less ﬁnished states. As we know, 
many of them have been published and served greatly in advancing our understanding of the history 
of mathematics. This is not my focus in this paper. I would rather like to focus, here, on aspects of 
mathematics in the making, on temporary steps before the completion or ﬁnal stages of a readable 
or publishable text. 

Going to the Source(s) of Sources in Mathematicians’ Drafts
87
I have written elsewhere about Dedekind’s drafts,8 and the shaping of written 
tools and artefacts to accompany and support his mathematical practice. I have 
highlighted the genesis—or more exactly geneses—of his notation for computing 
with modules in a way that is not only efﬁcient but also allows him to put forward 
structural properties of Dualgruppen. Directly related to this notation and their role 
in computations, is Dedekind’s use of spatialization of writing: how he arranged his 
writing on the paper sheet to guide computations, how he used spatial arrangements 
of writing to clarify and arrange the results of said computations, and how he 
devised spatial tools, in particular columns and tables, but also diagrams, to both 
support his research and conceptualize his results. This is striking not only in that 
his careful crafting of notation and written visualization tools is, indeed, efﬁcient 
both computationally and visually to explore the theory of modules and generalize it 
to the more abstract structure of Dualgruppen, but also because Dedekind famously 
advocated for mathematics relying on “concepts” and internal characteristics, rather 
than on “representations”. Drafts thus reveal large parts of Dedekind’s mathematical 
practice that were effectively hidden when writing the version of his work he 
considered suited for communication to the scientiﬁc community. 
Rather than repeat myself with Dedekind’s drafts, I would like to point out how 
some of these aspects of draft writing can be found in other authors. As there are 
obvious limits of space in this paper, I will concentrate on two authors, namely 
G. W. Leibniz9 and Élie Cartan. 
2.1 
Cartan’s Notational Changes 
Élie Cartan’s notebooks show how notational choices are ingrained in personal 
practice. Cartan, a prominent French mathematician of the late nineteenth to mid-
twentieth century, left a rather large archive, which is kept at the Académie des 
Sciences in Paris (fonds 36J). In this archive, there are over ﬁfty notebooks, covering 
most periods of his career from 1893 to 1947.10 Those are beautiful sources, but Car-
tan’s mathematics is notoriously difﬁcult, and so are his notebooks. Nevertheless, 
they provide a compelling inside view of his works, with mathematical research, 
reading notes, lecture plans, bibliographies, administrative notes, and, more rarely, 
some personal notes. Cartan’s notebooks do not follow any sort of thematic order, 
and all the above types of work—as well as the various mathematical subjects he 
investigated—are blended together in the notebooks. As such, his notebooks are
8 [Haffner(2018a)], [Haffner(2023)]. 
9 While I do not pretend to possess any sort of expertise on Leibniz’s manuscripts as I might have 
been able to build for Dedekind’s, the material available is too amazing to be overlooked. My 
remarks on Leibniz have greatly beneﬁted from my discussions with members of the ERC project 
PHILIUMM, to whom I am very grateful. 
10 See http://eliecartanpapers.ahp-numerique.fr/ and [Haffner(2017a)]. 

88
E. Haffner
testimonies of a moment of his work. One of the most remarkable aspects of these 
notebooks is the amount of extremely dense computations, and Cartan’s use of it 
to understand and explore various mathematical subjects. Of course, any sort of 
computing is deeply reliant on notation, but it is interesting to note that, in Cartan’s 
notebooks, changing notation played an important role in his mathematical practice. 
As it would be difﬁcult to do justice to Cartan’s drafts in such a limited space, let me 
concentrate on a typical (and understandable) case of switching notation to further 
mathematical understanding: when reading and taking notes about other people’s 
works.11 
For a friendly example, let us look at Cartan’s notes on Dirk Struik’s 1922 doc-
toral dissertation Grundzüge der Mehrdimensionalen Differentialgeometrie (Foun-
dations of multidimensional differential geometry).12 Cartan’s notes start on p. 51, 
in section “6. Parallel upper V Subscript n minus 1Vn−1” (where upper V Subscript n minus 1Vn−1 are n minus 1n −1-dimensional manifolds with 
arbitrary quadratic measure). Figure 1 shows a correspondence between the begin-
ning of Struik’s and Cartan’s texts, with similar colors indicating corresponding 
contents.13 
Struik then gives the following theorem: 
If through each point of a upper V Subscript n minus 1Vn−1 the geodesic lines normal to it are drawn and on them from 
the upper V Subscript n minus 1Vn−1 equal arcs are traced, then the locus of the end points is again a upper V Subscript n minus 1Vn−1 normal to 
the geodesic lines. [Struik(1922), 51] 
Cartan’s version unfolds and reformulates the contents in the following way: 
If the upper V Subscript n minus 1Vn−1 intersect equal arcs of the geodesics, we have (3) and the equations of (4) 
become (according to (2)) 
d left parenthesis e Subscript i Baseline e Subscript n Baseline right parenthesis equals sigma summation left parenthesis gamma Subscript i Superscript k Baseline Subscript n Baseline minus gamma Subscript n Superscript k Baseline Subscript i Baseline right parenthesis e Subscript k Baseline e Subscript nd(eien) =

(γ k
i n −γ k
n i)eken
linear and homogeneous eq[uations] such that if [for] left parenthesis upper V Subscript n minus 1 Baseline right parenthesis Subscript 0(Vn−1)0 the e Subscript i Baseline e Subscript neien are null, they are 
null for all the upper V Subscript n minus 1Vn−1. Hence, by placing constant arcs on the geodesics normal to left parenthesis upper V Subscript n minus 1 Baseline right parenthesis Subscript 0(Vn−1)0, 
the locus of the endpoints is again a upper V Subscript n minus 1Vn−1 normal to the geodesics. 
Conversely, if the upper V Subscript n minus 1Vn−1 are orthogonal to the left parenthesis script upper C right parenthesis(C), then we have, according to (2) gamma Subscript n Superscript n Baseline Subscript i Baseline equals 0γ n
n i = 0
according to (4) gamma Subscript i Superscript n Baseline Subscript n Baseline equals 0γ n
i n = 0 hence, the [equations] (3) are veriﬁed, and the upper V Subscript n minus 1Vn−1 decompose 
equal arcs of the geodesics. (Fonds 36J, 1–54, 11) 
Cartan’s notes continue for several pages, but it would takes us too far to follow 
his reading (and rewriting) of Struik.14 What matters, here, is the observation that 
to better understand, and to a certain extent appropriate, what he is reading, Cartan 
reformulates it in his own notation. In many cases, Cartan merely translates results 
and proofs in his own language, so his notational changes might as well be a
11 On note taking as a private scientiﬁc practice, see [Bustamante(2020), Bustamante(2022)]. 
12 [Struik(1922)]. 
13 Unless stated otherwise, translations are mine. 
14 The interested reader can look directly at Cartan’s notes here: http://eliecartanpapers.ahp-
numerique.fr/items/show/37. 

Going to the Source(s) of Sources in Mathematicians’ Drafts
89
Fig. 1 A comparison of corresponding excerpts from Dirk Struik’s doctoral dissertation (left) and 
Cartan’s notes on it (right) 
question of taste.15 Still, it suggests further that this notational adjustments help 
reframing and clarifying notions and results. This is further supported by the fact 
that it happens fairly often that, in his own computations, Cartan interrupts himself 
and “start[s] again differently” or “reformulate[s]” his computations. 
2.2 
A Very Cursory Glimpse in Leibniz’s Drafts 
Leibniz’s drafts provide a wealth of material to study written tools and artefacts. Let 
me start with notation.16 A well-known example of witnessing the birth of notation
15 This is not to say that his reading of his contemporaries’ works never led to important 
breakthroughs in his own research, as his reading of Weyl’s or of Einstein’s works testify. 
16 Notation in Leibniz’s mathematics have been fairly well studied, ﬁrst in [Cajori(1929)], but 
also in [Serfati(2005), Knobloch(2010), Trunk(2016), Waszek(2018), Gentil(2021)]. Yet the sheer 
amount of manuscripts available makes this question a still largely to be explored one. 

90
E. Haffner
Fig. 2 LH 35, 5, 9 Bl. 2 
is the introduction of the dx notation, in Methodi tangentium inversae exempla 
(Examples of the inverse method of tangents (1675), A VII, 5, 324),17 in which 
Leibniz introduces both the integral

sign and the dx notation. The signs are introduced 
(and used, for the ﬁrst page and half) in the following way: 
integral ModifyingAbove w z With quotation dash equals StartFraction y squared Over 2 EndFraction or w z equals StartFraction y squared Over 2 d EndFraction

wz = y2
2 or wz = y2
2d
[In the margin:] Underine integral

sum, Underine dd difference. [Leibniz and Child(2008), 93 (the marginal note is not 
included in Child’s translation)] 
On the next page, in the midst of his reasoning, a marginal note states a notational 
change Fig. 2: 
Remark d x perioddx. is the same as StartFraction x Over d EndFraction periodx
d ., that is, the difference between two closest x. (A VII, 5,  
32418 ) 
And from there, Leibniz uses the dx notation. This notational change is certainly 
neither trivial nor inconsequential—despite being made in a marginal note—for his 
calculus, considering the emphasis he put on his symbolism. 
That being said, Leibniz’s drafts also provide us with an important warning not to 
put too much weight on notation alone in general. An example of this (but certainly 
not the only one) is the manuscript Elemens du calcul (LH 35, 4, 12, Bl. 1–2),19 a 
text on the foundations of algebra with a list of axioms for elementary algebra (on 
numbers and magnitudes). It opens with: 
Any number can be marked by a letter, an imaginary number, ou by any other character 
one wishes, of those there are many; as long as this character is not already assigned to 
some meaning in the calculus in which this number must enter. Hence, a number, known or 
unknown, determined or undetermined, can be marked by a, b, x, y. A, B, C. ⊙. . ♀.
17 Citations for Leibniz manuscripts are from the so-called Akademie edition [Leibniz(1923–)]. VII 
designates the seventh series on mathematical writings. 5 means the ﬁfth volume. This precise text 
is translated and commented in [Leibniz and Child(2008)] (see also [Hofmann(1974)], chap. 13). 
18 Child’s translation does not reproduce this note—although both Gerhardt’s original edition and 
the 2008 edition by the Leibniz-Akademie do. 
19 See [Rabouin(2021)]. 

Going to the Source(s) of Sources in Mathematicians’ Drafts
91
even 10 period 11 comma 12 comma10. 11, 12, etc. 100 comma 101 comma100, 101, etc.20 but these numbers then only signify letters and are 
used to mark some relation that exist between the numbers we mark. And we must, then, 
distinguish them by some mark from the numbers they usually signify. (LH 35, 4, 12, Bl. 1) 
More interesting is the deﬁnition of several signs for some of the operations, as well 
as for parentheses (for which he uses a comma, a vinculum or proper parentheses): 
(5) The Number a intersection ba ∩b or a period ba.b, or  ab is the product of a multiplication of the number a by 
the number b. (...) 
(6) The number a union ba ∪b or a colon ba : b, or StartFraction a Over b EndFractiona
b , is a number which multiplied by b gives a. (LH 35, 4, 
12, Bl. 2) 
In his list of axioms, Leibniz uses notation indifferently, writing, for example: 
(7) 0 period a equals 00.a = 0
0 intersection 1 equals 0 0 intersection 2 equals 0 0 intersection 3 equals 0 etc period0 ∩1 = 0
0 ∩2 = 0
0 ∩3 = 0 etc.
(8) 1 a equals a1a = a
1 intersection 1 equals 1 1 intersection 2 equals 2 1 intersection 3 equals 3 etc period1 ∩1 = 1
1 ∩2 = 2
1 ∩3 = 3 etc. (Ibid.) 
This is not uncommon in Leibniz’s mathematical practice, as in a number of his 
contemporaries, such as Descartes or Van Roomen, who switch notation without a 
qualm, both in private papers and in (some) letters. This suggests that even if one 
has the impression that a notation is more efﬁcient than another, actors worked, 
apparently without trouble, with several notations, prompting us to be careful about 
the so-called ‘power’ of notation. 
Leibniz’s manuscripts, of course, harvest a wealth of unpublished works in which 
he develops such written tools.21 Knobloch, in [Knobloch(2004)] in particular, 
showed very well how, for Leibniz, the use of “text as process” (as stated in the title 
of his paper) supports a use of writing in which text “serv[es] the art of invention, 
[. . . ]  the  visualization  of  his  thoughts, theorems, and proofs”, how it is “used to 
ﬁx insights” to “think by writing” [Knobloch(2004), 51]. Textual artefacts are, for 
Leibniz—and certainly for many mathematicians—effectively tools: 
Tables, illustrations, and ﬁgures play a crucial role in Leibniz’s mathematical thinking. 
They enable him to ﬁnd rules, laws, and regularities; in other words, they serve the art 
of invention, sometimes successfully, and sometimes not. (Ibid., 52) 
This is very explicitly stated by Leibniz himself: 
[T]he art of inventing famous theorems, regarding the intelligible, consists in painting or 
hearing their representations, because they themselves cannot be painted or heard. (...) And 
in observing some sensible beauties in them. They will enable us to understand a theorem 
or the property of the intelligible thing, or at least that which is of such a nature that it 
produces, so to say, these apparitions if it is expressed by these characters. (A VII 1, 598. 
Quoted and translated in [Knobloch(2004), 63])
20 This is a reference to Leibniz’s attempts to denote the coefﬁcients of equations by sequences of 
numbers in order to make writing determinants easier. 
21 See, among others, [Knobloch(2004)], [Trunk(2016), Gentil(2021)] on ambiguous signs, or 
Arilès Remaki’s rich PhD dissertation [Remaki(2021)]. 

92
E. Haffner
Leibniz’s seemingly deep trust in the efﬁciency of such written tools should, 
of course, be taken with a grain of salt—especially since it concerns, here, a 
diagrammatic representation of the distribution of prime numbers, which Leibniz 
hoped to use to ﬁnd a law of distribution of prime numbers (see [Knobloch(2004), 
57–63]). Yet, it is undeniable in Leibniz’s drafts that writing, its spatialization and 
its dynamics, is a multifold tool indispensable for mathematical research. 
Among the most powerful of such tools are tables, which, according to Knobloch, 
have two main roles, a dynamic role and a static one: 
While the dynamic role of tables [...] consists in serving the art of invention, the static role 
of tables serves to avoid repeated calculations at future times. According to Leibniz, such a 
table is the best way of ﬁxing the results which have been calculated once and for all. The 
tables can be used to ﬁnd a needed value. While the purpose of the ﬁrst use of tables, as we 
were told, is to reduce tables to calculations, the purpose of the second use of tables is to 
replace calculations by tables. (Ibid., 64) 
Knobloch cites a number of examples on number partitions, permutations when 
computing the powers of polynomials, symmetric functions, and more. More 
recently, Arilès Remaki showed, in [Remaki(2021)], the complexity and richness 
of Leibniz’s tabular practice(s) in questions related to combinatorics, to quadratures 
and to exponentiation. Tables, he argues, are “both a general mechanism for analysis 
and for computation, a mode of presentation, or a classiﬁcation tool” (ibid., 592). 
Tables support Leibniz’s mathematical research, largely as a powerful heuristic 
tool—to answer given questions but also to ask new questions—but also, in some 
instances, as a tool for proofs. Remaki shows how tables can function as simple lists, 
but also as “exposing the procedure to generate” elements (ibid., 313); how using 
and inventing tables relies on a “deep reﬂection on the notion of disposition”, that 
is, how to arrange its elements; how tables are used to “study the relations between 
terms and places in order to extract a rule, a universal law, which characterizes all 
the terms” (ibid., 314); and how “it is thus possible that the inductive practice of 
tables constituted, in a ﬁrst time, for the young Leibniz, an apodictic mode both 
satisfying and suitable to determine a result without doubt” (ibid., 590). 
In many aspects, these observations about Leibniz’s tabular practices, and more 
largely about his use of written artefacts and spatialization of writing, are in 
line with those I made on Dedekind’s use of columns, tables and diagrammatic 
representations, in his research on modules and Dualgruppen [Haffner(2023)]. 
For Dedekind, tables, lists and diagrams are parts of a larger toolbox developed 
to support his computations. They help him organize his computations and their 
results, and visualize properties, relations and patterns. Tables, in particular, are both 
a result—since they contain the ordered results of computations—and a device for 
further computations—since they help shorten and verify the computations. Such 
textual elements of practice give us clues to better understand research practices, 
discovery practices, which are largely invisible in publications even though they 
are an essential part of the mathematician’s activity. And while they are, most of 
the time, erased from published works (especially since the nineteenth century), 
such practices are, in fact, a fundamental and even founding part of the theoretical

Going to the Source(s) of Sources in Mathematicians’ Drafts
93
activity. This also supports the idea that mathematics is not solely an activity of 
proving, but indeed can contain elements of experimental practice. 
2.3 
Computations and Experimentations 
Experimental aspects of mathematical research appear salient and fairly striking 
when working with drafts.22 Experimentation in mathematics is not a new subject, 
nor is it a subject speciﬁc to drafts.23 However, drafts do show a certain prevalence 
of experimentation and inductive approaches among mathematicians who are not, 
in fact, classiﬁed as experimental mathematicians (neither by themselves, nor by 
commentators). Leibniz advocated for calculations as a sort of experimentation (La 
vraie methode (1677), A VI 4, 4-5), and although he recognized that induction 
is sometimes misleading, his manuscripts show a rather abundant use of this 
approach.24 Even Dedekind, who not only advocated against computations as 
grounding mathematics but openly disliked them, can be observed as developing 
research processes that are primarily experimental computations, which he uses to 
explore properties of his objects. Indeed, as I have mentioned, Dedekind’s drafts on 
module and Dualgruppe theories are ﬁlled with computations, and they tell us that 
through computations, Dedekind was observing the laws, trying to identify which 
ones are general, which ones are fundamental, by trial and error. It is strikingly 
different from his publications.25 
To give more substance to this picture, let me illustrate it with some excerpts of 
Cartan’s notebooks. As I mentioned earlier, Cartan’s notebooks reveal the extent to 
which his mathematical practice relied on computations. It is fairly clear that Cartan 
used computations as a way to explore and experiment. Computations appear to 
be his main, most important tool to think about and explore a given mathematical
22 While I will concentrate on computations for mainly incidental reasons—they are the approach 
favored by the authors I am studying—it should be clear that similar observations can certainly be 
made concerning diagrammatic experimentation. There are instances in the history of mathematics, 
of course: Leibniz used diagrams, as [Knobloch(2004)] shows well, and we also ﬁnd diagrams 
in Riemann’s, Hurwitz’s, or even Dedekind’s drafts. Mathematician and theoretical computer 
scientist Viviane Pons, who works on algebraic combinatorics at the Laboratoire de Recherche 
en Informatique at the Université Paris-Saclay, argues for an experimental approach in mathe-
matics (see https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3LZiZKgVjaU or https://www.lri.fr/~pons/docs/ 
EAUMP/introduction.pdf), and her own notebooks—which are visible in these links and which 
she showed me personally—are covered in diagrams, sometimes for dozens of pages. 
23 Of course, experimental mathematics is an approach argued for by a number of mathematicians 
(see, for example, the journal titled and dedicated to Experimental mathematics). For historical 
sources, see [Echeverria(1992), Echeverria(1996), Goldstein(2008), Goldstein(2011)]. 
24 See [Remaki(2021), 245], for example. 
25 Riemann’s computations can certainly also be interpreted as experimentations, to some extent. 

94
E. Haffner
subject. Unlike Leibniz, Cartan did not make any statement about using something 
akin to the inductive method. As observers, though, there is a number of clues 
that point towards this interpretation of his drafts. His notebooks showcase a 
recurring method: in a given mathematical framework but not necessarily with a 
precise starting question, Cartan studies the behavior of the relevant mathematical 
objects through computations, observes the properties that are brought out, makes 
an hypothesis, and attempts to prove it. To observe this, we are lucky to have not 
only Cartan’s many pages of computations, but also his very explicit annotations: 
what he wants to study, when he makes a mistake, when he notices something 
interesting, when he changes approaches, when he tries and succeeds or fails to 
prove  something. . . Cartan  is  engaged in a dialogue with himself,26 in his drafts, 
and through this inner dialogue, we can follow the steps of his reasoning. 
For example, on pages 149 sqq of 38J 1–37, in research on what he called 
“Espaces de plans” (spaces of planes, a type of manifold), Cartan considers 
the links between the coefﬁcients of the structure equation and those giving the 
decomposition into linear (and later irreducible) groups of the group of the surface. 
He starts with the structure equation 
omega Subscript h Baseline 00 Baseline omega Subscript a b c Baseline equals sigma summation upper A Subscript alpha beta gamma Baseline omega Subscript alpha beta gammaωh00ωabc =

Aαβγ ωαβγ
and sets up to prove the following theorem: 
Theorem: if omega Subscript h Baseline 00 Baseline omega Subscript a b c Baseline equals sigma summation upper A Subscript alpha beta gamma Baseline omega Subscript alpha beta gammaωh00ωabc =  Aαβγ ωαβγ , the coefﬁcients upper A Subscript alpha beta gammaAαβγ are the same as those giving 
the decomposition of the product of 2 linear groups left parenthesis a 1 x 1 plus a 2 x 2 plus ellipsis right parenthesis Superscript h(a1x1 + a2x2 + . . .)h and left parenthesis a 1 x 1 plus ellipsis right parenthesis Superscript a minus b Baseline left parenthesis a 12 x 12 plus ellipsis right parenthesis Superscript b minus c(a1x1 +
. . .)a−b(a12x12 + . . .)b−c. (Ibid., 150) 
From there, he looks brieﬂy at the “general case” and states a result which he 
comments as being “very important”: 
In the formula omega Subscript h k Baseline 0 Baseline omega Subscript a b c Baseline equals sigma summation upper A Subscript alpha beta gamma Baseline omega Subscript alpha beta gammaωhk0ωabc =  Aαβγ ωαβγ , the coefﬁcients upper A Subscript alpha beta gammaAαβγ are the same as those giving 
the decomposition of the product of 2 irreducible groups of dominant weights h x plus k yhx + ky, 
a x plus b y plus c zax + by + cz. (Ibid., 151) 
The next step is to consider a higher dimension, that is p equals 4p = 4 (since the previous 
pages considered the case p equals 3p = 3). After some computations, and a proof modelled 
explicitly on the previous one, Cartan is able to show the theorem “if one of the 
factors is omega Subscript h Baseline 000ωh000”. He then proves that it is also true “if one of the factors is omega Subscript h k Baseline 00ωhk00”
26 This is something that Knobloch also notes in Leibniz’s drafts [Knobloch(2004), 77]. It is 
certainly not the case of every mathematician. 

Going to the Source(s) of Sources in Mathematicians’ Drafts
95
Fig. 3 Fonds 38J, 1–37, 153 
and as well for omega Subscript h k l Baseline 0ωhkl0. From there, he concludes Fig. 3: 
This is probably general. (Ibid., 153) 
a statement which he brieﬂy justiﬁes.27 
Computations can also raise new questions in Cartan’s notebooks. In 38J 1–38, 
for example, after some very short computations under the title Réseaux à invariants 
ponctuels et tangentiels égaux (Lattices with punctual and tangential invariants), 
Cartan arrives at a conclusion he calls a “paradox”: 
If these are surfaces R and if the lattice is that of projective def[ormations], the asymptotes 
of left parenthesis upper A 1 right parenthesis(A1) do not correspond to that of left parenthesis upper A 2 right parenthesis(A2). (38J, 1–38, 267) 
where a surface R is a projectively deformable surface, and upper A 1A1, upper A 2A2 are the Laplace 
transforms of a point A. After a few lines of computations justifying this “paradox”, 
Cartan notes that it is “Something to study” and: 
It seems that the conjugate lattice of the ﬁrst also has punctual tangential invariants. Curious! 
(Ibid., 268) 
Cartan continues this research further in the notebook,28 but following it would lead 
us too far. Let me just mention that it is related to surfaces R and Jonas surfaces and 
the research that eventually led to what he called “surfaces E” in [Cartan(1944)]. 
3 
Processes of Redaction 
In the previous section, I focused on written practices related to what one would 
call the research process—the back of mathematics. In the following, I would like 
to consider the process of writing a readable, fully redacted text–the elaboration 
of what would be the front of mathematics. These two aspects arguably represent 
different processes, different practices of writing. These modes of writing are 
complementary in the creative mathematical process, and likely both indispensable.
27 I could not locate a related result in Cartan’s publications (but I could have missed it). The 
notebook contains a variety of research on manifolds and generalised spaces, some related to these 
pages, many not. See http://eliecartanpapers.ahp-numerique.fr/items/show/21. 
28 http://eliecartanpapers.ahp-numerique.fr/items/show/22. 

96
E. Haffner
In writing a text that would be not only readable but hopefully publishable, at 
least that could be communicated to the scientiﬁc community, a lot of ‘external’ 
criteria come into play, such as disciplinary and sociological norms of what text 
is acceptable, and practical aspects related to printing. These are not questions I 
will try to address, here. Rather, I will continue to focus on internal textual aspects, 
and analyze the process of writing such a text. Of course, it could be tempting to 
distinguish between the type of documents used in the ﬁrst part of this paper as being 
part of the discovery process, and the redaction of readable texts as a justiﬁcation 
process. One of the core goal of the following paragraphs is to show that it is fairly 
more complicated than that. First, I will use an example from Dedekind’s archive 
to illustrate that conceptual clariﬁcation and thinking by writing are still at play 
in these steps of writing. Then, I will propose a selection of examples from recent 
secondary literature to further illustrate the possibilities offered by a genetic analysis 
of mathematical texts. 
3.1 
Dedekind’s Terminological Fine-Tuning in Was sind und 
was sollen die Zahlen? 
Dedekind’s famous essay on the natural numbers Was sind und was sollen die 
Zahlen?29 was published in 1888. In this book, Dedekind wants to provide a general, 
rigorous deﬁnition for the sequence of natural numbers. He deﬁnes an abstract 
concept named “simply inﬁnite system”, of which the sequence of natural numbers 
is an instance. To do so, he develops a set-theoretical arsenal, based on two concepts: 
mappings, which he calls Abbildungen, and sets, which he calls Systems. 
We know from Dedekind’s correspondence with Heinrich Weber, and from his 
archive, that an early version of Zahlen was started in the 1870s, which he left aside 
for about ten years. In Cod. Ms. Dedekind III-1, we ﬁnd three sets of texts that can 
be identiﬁed as drafts of Zahlen:30 pp. 1–13, second draft (1887); pp. 15–27, ﬁrst 
draft (1872–1878);31 pp. 30–45, third draft (1887).32 The ﬁrst set of manuscripts 
dated from 1872–1878 is a bit complex: there are three texts following, completing 
and correcting each other. The three together do not make a coherent whole, there 
are repetitions and gaps. The drafts are organized in a two-column layout, with the 
left column containing the main text, and the right column containing corrections 
and additions—a fairly standard layout for Dedekind’s redacted texts. In the right
29 [Dedekind(1888)]. I will refer to it as Zahlen. 
30 See [Sieg and Schlimm(2005)] for an analysis of the changes in Dedekind’s concept of number 
reﬂected in these manuscripts. 
31 These documents were published in [Dugac(1976), 293–308]. 
32 A lot of the pages of this third draft are notes. In those that are redactions, many are crossed out, 
and some are written with a pencil. This is not the last version in the sense of the version sent to 
the printer (which, as far as I know, we do not have). 

Going to the Source(s) of Sources in Mathematicians’ Drafts
97
column, some additions and corrections seem to be more or less simultaneous with 
the writing, while some can be traced to the second or third draft (by the use of 
notation only introduced in those later versions). Material aspects and contentual 
aspects allow us to understand the chronology of the writing and better understand 
its stratigraphy. The sets of 1887 drafts are more standard. Dedekind uses the two 
column presentation in all of these drafts.33 
My aim, in the following, is not to offer strikingly new insights on Dedekind’s 
concept of number, but to look at the genesis of the text itself, at the process of 
writing. As the text itself is fairly long, I will focus on the concept of mapping, 
which appears early in the text and does not require much context.34 
3.1.1 
In 1872–1877 
In the ﬁrst layer, Dedekind does not introduce the notion of mapping but of 
“distinctly (deutlich) mappable”, which is a one-to-one correspondance: 
A system  S is called 
distinctly mappable in a system T if for each 
thing contained in S (origin) a (associated, 
corresponding) thing in T (image) can be 
speciﬁed such that to different origins 
correspond different images. 
[Late addition] Mapping phiϕ of a system S A  
into a system T . To any thing a of A 
corresponds (is determined by a) a thing  
a vertical bar phi equals ba|ϕ = b of the system B. 
Distinctness of application phiϕ : a prime vertical bar phi equals ba′|ϕ = b and 
a double prime vertical bar phi equals ba′′|ϕ = b different if a primea′ et a double primea′′ different. 
(Cod. Ms. Dedekind III 1, 16v) 
The deﬁnition of Abbildung added in the right column uses a notation introduced 
only in the third layer of the draft, so it was likely added later. 
In the second layer, Dedekind does not deﬁne either mappable systems nor 
mappings. He was likely satisﬁed with the deﬁnition of mappable system given pre-
viously. He does deﬁne “image” for sets and studies some properties of mappings. A 
notion of “distinct” (deutlich) mapping is introduced later, somewhat in the middle 
of the text. 
In the third layer, Dedekind gives an actual deﬁnition of Abbildung in the main 
text, with, again, the notion of image and its properties as stated in the second draft. 
“Distinct mappings” are moved up after mappings, making their introduction less 
ad hoc and more part of a structured paragraph on mappings. 
33 In fact, this type of layout is fairly standard, we ﬁnd it in some of Leibniz’s texts, in some of 
Cartan’s, in Borel’s notebooks... 
34 The concept of mapping is an important concept in Dedekind’s mathematics, used in many areas 
of his works, and which is subjected to a number of transformations through its uses in number 
theory, function theory, set theory...It is not my purpose, here, to analyse the changes of the 
concept of Abbildung, I only wish to study its deﬁnition in the versions of Zahlen. 

98
E. Haffner 
1. [Deﬁnition]. By a mapping phiφ of a system S, we understand a law according to which for 
any thing a contained in S is generated a determined thing, which must be called the image 
of a and denoted by the sign a vertical bar phia|ϕ. (Cod. Ms. Dedekind III 1, 23r) 
This is followed by the deﬁnition of images (as sets), and by: 
4. Deﬁnition. A mapping phiφ of a system S is called distinct if the images of a vertical bar phia|ϕ, b vertical bar phib|ϕ of 
different things a comma ba, b contained in S are themselves different. (Ibid.) 
Note, here, a shift in focus: sets were the central concept in the previous deﬁnition, 
but in this new one, Dedekind is giving more importance to mappings. 
3.1.2 
In 1887 
For the 1887 version, I will concentrate on the ﬁrst draft (and second overall). This 
draft is the most complete of the last two, and contains most of the conceptual and 
textual modiﬁcations. Mappings are deﬁned in §2, with a number of additions (Cod. 
Ms. Dedekind III 1, 2v). The page is again divided in two columns, the left-hand 
side one for the main text, the right-hand side one for the corrections. The right-
hand side column is, in this part of the text, almost completely ﬁlled (see Fig. 4), 
showing corrections and additions, with the substantial addition of a new section—I 
will come back to that. The material aspects of the manuscript immediately suggest 
that there was a number of back and forth to write these paragraphs. As a matter of 
fact, these back and forth give us a beautiful view of the conceptual clariﬁcation of 
(some aspects of) the Abbildung concept. 
First, Dedekind gave the deﬁnition of an Abbildung (Fig. 5, in the frame number 
1 in red):  
Deﬁnition and notation. By a mapping phiϕ of a system S, we mean a law according to which 
to each determined element s of a system S belongs a determined thing denoted by phi left parenthesis s right parenthesisϕ(s) (or 
phi left parenthesis s right parenthesisϕ(s) corresponds to the element s, phi left parenthesis s right parenthesisϕ(s) is generated by from s), phi left parenthesis s right parenthesisϕ(s) is called the image of 
s (and s is the original image [Urbild] (?), the model [Vorbild] (?); the origin [Original] (?),  
the source [Ursprung] (?)  of  s). 
Since for the time being (in this §.) we deal only with S and with a certain mapping phiϕ of it 
of a certain system S, simple large Latin letters shall denote exclusively parts of S, and  for  
convenience the image phi left parenthesis s right parenthesisϕ(s) shall be denoted more brieﬂy by s primes′. 
Then, he gave propositions 14 to 17 (Fig. 5, in the frame number 2 in blue).35 In 
this paragraph, Dedekind added two “Nota Bene” (highlighted in purple in Fig. 5). 
Their place in the text shows clearly that they were not added later, but their being in 
square brackets suggests a speciﬁc status, which remains relatively unclear. Indeed, 
these NB add important information on the reciprocity of the propositions in relation 
with a yet-to-be-introduced notion of distinctness (Deutlichkeit). As such, they give 
clues about what is expected to follow in the text. 
35 There is little difference between these propositions and the published ones. 

Going to the Source(s) of Sources in Mathematicians’ Drafts
99 
Fig. 4 Cod. Ms. Dedekind III 1, 2v

100
E. Haffner 
Fig. 5 Cod. Ms. Dedekind III 1, 2v., modiﬁed by E. H.

Going to the Source(s) of Sources in Mathematicians’ Drafts
101 
14. Deﬁnition. upper A primeA′ represents the system (image of A), whose elements are the images a primea′ of 
the elements a of A. 
15. [Proposition]. If A3B, then  A′3B′ (from 1. 14. 1.).–[NB: the converse is allowed only 
if it is a mapping such that we will call a distinct [deutlich] later.] 
16. [Proposition]. The image of German upper M German left parenthesis German upper A German comma German upper B German comma German upper C ellipsis right parenthesisM(A, B, C  . . .)  whose system is, according to 7., a part of 
S, is German upper M German left parenthesis German upper A prime German comma German upper B prime German comma German upper C prime right parenthesisM(A′, B′, C′). Proof. (...) 
17. Proposition. The image of German upper G German left parenthesis German upper A German comma German upper B German comma German upper C right parenthesisG(A, B, C)  is a part of German upper G German left parenthesis German upper A prime German comma German upper B prime German comma German upper C prime right parenthesisG(A′, B′, C′). Proof (...) [NB: with 
the hypothesis of the distinctness [Deutlichkeit] of the mapping, the proposition will later 
be made stronger, see 15.] 
In the margin, Dedekind wrote the deﬁnition of a “distinct mapping” (deutliche 
Abbildung), and three propositions numbered 15*, 15** and 17* (green frame 
number 3 in Fig. 5). We will see, a little further down the line, why it is clear that this 
part was written before the paragraph just above it. The deﬁnition is the following: 
The mapping of the system S is called distinct [deutlich] when two different elements a, b 
from the system S also have different images a prime comma b primea′, b′. Under this condition, the following is 
true: 
15*. Proposition. If A′3B′, then  A3B . 
15**. Proposition. If upper A prime equals upper B primeA′ = B′, then upper A equals upper BA = B. 
17* Proposition. German upper G left parenthesis upper A prime comma upper B prime comma upper C prime ellipsis right parenthesisG(A′, B′, C′ . . .)  is the image of German upper G German left parenthesis German upper A German comma German upper B German comma German upper C right parenthesisG(A, B, C). 
One may notice that the deﬁnition, unlike the deﬁnition of a mapping, and most of 
the propositions in the text, is not numbered. This, along with the speciﬁc numbering 
of the following propositions, suggests that this was written as a complement to the 
deﬁnition 13 of an Abbildung and, of course, after propositions 14–17 written in 
the left column. The propositions 15*, 15**, 17* are the ones alluded to in the NB. 
Hence, with these propositions, the NB are obsolete but Dedekind did not delete 
them. 
Dedekind then develops some properties of distinct mappings (yellow frame 
number 4 in Fig. 5): 
In each determined mapping of a system S is also contained a determined mapping of each 
part T of S; this latter is determined by the fact that the image of each element t contained 
in T is the same thing t primet′ which t, as an element of S, has as its image. If the mapping of S 
is distinct [deutlich], the mapping of T contained in it is also distinct [deutlich]. 
Each distinct [deutlich] mapping of a part T of S is contained in a distinct [deutlich] 
mapping of S (or can be extended into one), by taking as the image of each element of S 
not contained in T this element itself. 
Let me now turn to the paragraph written above the deﬁnition of a deutliche 
Abbildung (orange frame number 5 in Fig. 5). This was likely added later than 
the paragraphs just described (frames 1 to 4 on Fig. 5). The fact that the writing is 
pressed down is a clue that it was added later, but more importantly the contents of 
this paragraph signiﬁcantly change the text. Indeed, it contains not only a correction 
of the structure of both paragraphs, but also a change of terminology: 
§2.a. Similarity of a mapping, similar systems 
For this, best a special §!!! 
Instead of distinct [deutliche] better similar  [ähnliche] mapping! Converse or reverse  
thereof. The deﬁnition of similar systems [10 July 1887] A, B (there is a similar mapping 

102
E. Haffner 
of A such that B is the image of A). Then it will state later: S is called inﬁnite if it is similar 
to a proper part of itself. 
The change of terminology is signiﬁcant, as it shows a shift in Dedekind’s 
conception. “Distinct” suggests that the property that interests him is the fact that the 
images of two distinct elements are two distinct elements. By switching to “similar”, 
it suggests that what is of interest is the fact that the mapping (here, a bijection since 
it is from S into itself) preserves such properties. 
Finally, Dedekind added three propositions at the bottom (brown frame number 
6 in Fig. 5), which all contain the word ähnlich, and were thus written after this 
addition. In the left column: 
If A, B are similar systems, then each proper part of A is also similar to proper part of B. 
If A and B are similar systems, then each system C similar to B is also similar to B A. 
In the right column: 
Moreover, there is something to say about the composition of mappings: upper B equals phi left parenthesis upper A right parenthesis comma upper C equals psi left parenthesis upper B right parenthesis equals psi phi left parenthesis upper A right parenthesisB = φ(A), C = 
ψ(B) = ψφ(A). If phiϕ and psiψ are similar mappings, then so is psi phiψφ. 
More interesting, even, than this change of terminology mid-deﬁnition is the 
fact that these modiﬁcations were not made at the same moment(s) of the writing 
process. Indeed, the next few pages of the text still contain deutlich and Deutlichkeit. 
Following the terminological change provides a lot of information about the 
profoundly non-linear nature of this writing process. 
A ﬁrst (but neither the strongest nor the deepest) clue of this non-linearity, is the 
fact that in the paragraph §3 on “mappings of a system onto itself”, the numbering of 
propositions and deﬁnitions does not take into account the propositions 15* to 17*, 
it starts at 18 rather than 21. (It does not take into account the additional paragraph 
either.) The paragraph itself does not consider distinct/similar mappings.36 On the 
other hand, at the end of §3, Dedekind wrote proposition 36 and three additional 
propositions, making it 39, and the paragraph §4, on the deﬁnition of the ﬁnite and 
the inﬁnite, does start at deﬁnition number 40. Paragraph §4 then seems to take 
into account the additions that were made in the previous paragraph (but only in 
§3), and adjusted his numbering. This further suggests that the additions in §2—at 
least starting from the propositions 15* to 17*—were written relatively late in the 
process, maybe even after writing §4. 
In this paragraph, Dedekind deﬁnes an inﬁnite system using deutlich and 
referring to §2 (not §2a): 
40. Deﬁnition. S is called an inﬁnite system, if there is a distinct mapping from S, such that 
the image of S is a proper part of S; in the opposite case S is called a ﬁnite system. (Cod. 
Ms. Dedekind III 1, 3v, transl. altered in [Sieg and Schlimm(2005), 149]) 
Likewise, in the entire §4, Dedekind uses the word deutlich. We have here a clue 
that Dedekind, at that point was working with the deﬁnition of Deutlichkeit, but  
36 However, the published version gives a deﬁnition of the mapping of a system onto itself that 
mentions the Abbildung being either similar or not. 

Going to the Source(s) of Sources in Mathematicians’ Drafts
103 
only with that deﬁnition—hence, before the correction of terminology and of the 
structure of the text. This is a further clue about the chronology of the corrections in 
§2. 
In the interest of honesty, and to underline how cautious it is necessary to be 
when interpreting written traces in this context, let me mention that the numbering 
of propositions in paragraph §5 starts at 50, while §4, which starts at 40, only 
contains ﬁve numbered propositions and deﬁnitions. It would be tempting to assume 
that Dedekind decided to count all additional propositions, including in notes and 
in §2a., but this is unlikely (and does not round up to 50!). Indeed, the following 
paragraphs all start at a multiple of ten (the next highest after the last number in the 
previous paragraph, so if a paragraph ends at proposition 56, the ﬁrst proposition of 
the next paragraph will be 60). It is, in fact, more likely that Dedekind gave up on 
the idea of following the numbers from paragraph to paragraph in this version of the 
text. Still, since it was not the case up to §4, we can nevertheless hypothesize that 
the additions in §2 were done after §4—the additional notes to the 4th paragraph 
use the word deutlich—or maybe during. 
Paragraph §5 allows us to close this investigation of Dedekind turning distinct 
into similar. The page, again, bears traces of signiﬁcant changes. In particular, the 
right column contains corrections of the contents and title initially written in the left 
column (see Fig. 6).37 
The left column states the following: 
§5 The sequence of natural numbers 
If S is an inﬁnite system, there is thus a distinct mapping phiφ of S such that the image upper S primeS′
is a proper part of S. Then, I choose an element of S which is not in upper S primeS′, and I examine 
the property of the image-chain N of this element. I disregard the accidental special 
nature of the elements of N completely here, retain only their distinguishability and only 
consider the mutual relations in which they stand to one another according to the former 
mapping, I name the elements n of N natural numbers or numbers for short, and N the 
sequence of natural [ordinal] numbers. (Cod. Ms. Dedekind III 1, 4r) 
This ﬁrst deﬁnition, rather informal, thus uses the word deutlich. It is also used at the  
end of the paragraph. Note that this deﬁnition does not contain the abstract concept 
of simply inﬁnite system, the core of Dedekind’s theory of natural numbers. The 
correction in the right column reads: 
§5 The simply inﬁnite systems. 
(Sequence of natural numbers) 
Deﬁnition. A system N is called simply inﬁnite when there exists a similar mapping phiϕ of 
N which fulﬁls the following conditions in itself, namely such that N is the image-chain 
of an element not contained in phi left parenthesis upper N right parenthesisϕ(N). Any such mapping phiφ of N can be called an order 
[Anordnung] [numerical] of N. The elements of N (with respect to this order) can be called 
natural numbers. 
51. Propositions. In any inﬁnite system S, a simply inﬁnite part N is contained. 
N a simple  sequence or order. (Ibid.) 
37 The blue and purple circles were added by me to locate the use of deutlich and ähnlich, as  
explained below. 

104
E. Haffner 
Fig. 6 Cod. Ms. Dedekind III 1, 4r., modiﬁed by EH

Going to the Source(s) of Sources in Mathematicians’ Drafts
105 
This is indeed a deep and crucial correction, as it drastically changes how the 
sequence of natural numbers is deﬁned. However, this is not my focus, here. Rather 
let me draw the reader’s attention to the fact that Dedekind uses the term ähnlich, 
and not deutlich. The  deutlich used in the left paragraph is the last we meet, after 
that, Dedekind uses ähnlich /Ähnlichkeit. In fact, we can observe in that paragraph a 
correction that was likely added after the new deﬁnition, as it uses Ähnlichkeit. See 
Fig. 6, where the occurrences of deutlich are circled in blue and those ähnlich and 
Ähnlichkeit are circled in purple. 
It is relatively safe to state that this terminology change was made at this moment 
of the writing process. Both the additional properties and the change of terminology 
thus happened fairly late after to the initial introduction of the notion. Finally, there 
is a reference to Ähnlichkeit and to §2 in §5 (Cod. Ms. Dedekind III 1, 5r, Deﬁnition 
60), which tells us that making the paragraph on similar mappings a paragraph of 
its own was likely not a decision made exactly at the same moment as changing 
the deﬁnition. But it was, indeed, made while writing the text—not once it was 
ﬁnished—as we also ﬁnd references to §2a in §6 (Cod. Ms. Dedekind III 1, 9r, 
Proposition 100). We would need more clues to assess exactly the timing of that 
change, which we do not have. Still, we are able to point quite a narrow time frame, 
and to underline how Dedekind was thinking by writing. The non-linear chronology 
of his writing is striking, and shows that a core basic concept (the distinct/similar 
mapping) was not fully clariﬁed when Dedekind wrote this version of the text, and 
only came close to its full ﬁnal form when Dedekind arrived at the deﬁnition of a 
simply inﬁnite system—the most central concept of the essay. 
3.2 
Some Additional Examples 
A genetic analysis of the writing process can also provide other types of valuable 
insights. Let me give, here, a selection of examples where a genetic approach has 
given or is giving such insights. 
In my own (ongoing) work on the edition of Riemann’s Gesammelte mathema-
tische Werke und wissenschaftlicher Nachlass by Dedekind and Heinrich Weber, 
I show how a joint use of the Dedekind-Weber correspondence and Dedekind’s 
and Riemann’s manuscripts (Cod. Ms. Riemann, Niedersächsische Staats-und 
Universitätsbibliothek Göttingen) allows to unfold a muti-layered construction of 
the texts, in which the editors themselves played a signiﬁcant role by correcting and 
completing the texts.38 
In [Joffredo(2019)], Thierry Joffredo gives a beautiful example of using the 
methods of genetic criticism, along with a careful codicological analysis of the 
manuscripts and a thorough investigation of Cramer’s correspondence, thus recon-
stituting a textual and conceptual biography of the Introduction á l’analyse des 
38 See [Haffner(2017b), Haffner(2018b), Haffner(2021)] and hopefully, more to come. 

106
E. Haffner 
lignes courbes algébriques. Doing so, he “shed[s] light on the steps of writing 
the book, the variations of the perimeter of its subject and the strengthening 
of the author’s demands, the consideration of his contemporaries’ works and 
of correspondences, its initial goals and the various functions (scientiﬁc, social, 
scholarly) [the author] gave his work in construction, the structural changes of the 
book through the versions of its manuscript” [Joffredo(2019), 237]. 
In [Krömer(2023)], Ralf Krömer uses Bourbaki’s archive to investigate the 
history of duality in the works of members of the Bourbaki group, both individually 
and as a collective. To better understand the shaping of their collective reﬂection 
on duality, Krömer proposes to reconstruct the writing process of the Chapter II of 
the book Algèbre of Bourbaki’s Éléments de mathématique. To do so, he uses the 
successive drafts of the Éléments, called Rédactions, together with the minutes of 
the meetings of the group and the vast correspondence network of the members.39 
Each Rédaction constitutes a different state of the text, and each is written by 
a different author. In some Rédactions, the author is identiﬁed—for this case, 
identiﬁed authors are Jean Dieudonné, Charles Ehresmann, and Claude Chevalley— 
but some Rédactions do not provide this information. The drafts circulate among 
Bourbaki members, are widely discussed (in meetings and in letters) and rewritten 
accordingly, making it a truly collective text, with a sometimes complex genesis. 
Krömer tracks the changes made on two propositions on duality in vector spaces 
(and the solution of linear equations). He notes a number of controversial points 
related to duality which, throughout the collective writing process, shed light on 
how the individual conceptions of duality of the members collide, and he highlights 
how the resolution (or lack thereof) of their disagreements (in particular, a debate 
between Dieudonné and Chevalley, who give very different deﬁnitions of duality 
[Krömer(2023), 280 sqq]) eventually leads to the ﬁnal published version. Krömer’s 
reconstitution of the writing process allows him to raise important points on the 
conception of duality (in particular “whether duality is necessarily symmetric [. . . ]  
[a]  problem  [. . . ]  closely  tied  to  [. . . ]  the  relation  of  the  algebraic and the topological 
dual” (ibid., 293)) in that context, and on the “rather difﬁcult functioning of the 
Bourbaki group at that time” (ibid., 282). It also sheds (additional) light on important 
epistemological and historical issues, such as the debate around choosing the ‘right’ 
generality, and the acceptance (or avoidance) of the axiom of choice. 
The reader will not be surprised to read that many examples of complex redaction 
processes can be found in Leibniz’s archive. In [Remaki(2021), 179 sqq], Remaki 
reconstitutes Leibniz’s ﬁrst attempts to answer Huyghens’ challenge to compute the 
sum of the inverse of triangular numbers, using the only two manuscripts addressing 
that question: De Summa Numerorum Triangularium Reciprocorum (A VII, 3, N.1) 
and Differentiœ Numerorum Harmonicum et Reciprocorum Triangularium (A VII, 
3, N.2), in which Leibniz tries two different (but ultimately inefﬁcient) methods: 
39 See http://archives-bourbaki.ahp-numerique.fr/. 

Going to the Source(s) of Sources in Mathematicians’ Drafts
107 
decomposition of fractions and the method of differences.40 By analyzing the 
material and textual clues in both of Leibniz’s manuscripts, Remaki unfolds a 
possible chronology of writing that shows how Leibniz’s work on this question is 
spread over two manuscripts (LH 35 3B 10 Bl. 5 and LH 35 12 2 Bl. 197), with 
parts of his computations “inserted in another text on algebra” [Remaki(2021), 180]. 
The manuscript (LH 35 3B 10 Bl. 5) contains the ﬁrst method and elements of the 
second one on differences. The manuscript (LH 35 12 2 Bl. 197) contains the second 
method, in between unrelated research on algebra. The reconstitution of the writing 
process, albeit hypothetical, suggests that these two manuscripts should be read 
together, as the elements of the method of differences in the ﬁrst manuscript could 
be, in fact, the end of the research in the second one (see [Remaki(2021), 181]). This 
is all the more insightful as it shows, as Remaki underlines, how underestimated “the 
schemas of differences and diagrams in general” had been (ibid., 181). 
Studying Leibniz’s manuscripts with a genetic approach also allows unveiling 
past editorial choices that deeply modiﬁed the text, which can have crucial 
repercussions on our reading of it. In a joint work with David Rabouin, we are 
considering such cases, in relation to reﬂections on how to best edit such texts 
so as to faithfully showcase their genesis, insofar as it gives us critical material 
to understand Leibniz’s thought. A typical example is the edition of the De Arte 
characteristica inventoriaque analytica combinatoriave in mathesis universalis (A 
VI, 4, 315–331)41 which, in its edited version, looks like a text that went through 
three preliminary versions (Ansatz 1 to 3) and a deﬁnitive one (Endgültige Fassung). 
The manuscript (LH 35, 1, 27, Bl. 3 sqq) tells a completely different story: there 
is only one text, with several layers of corrections on the ﬁrst folio (3r and 3v), 
whose entire contents was subsequently crossed out, making the page 4r the de 
facto beginning of the text—but this page was already written in the ﬁrst version 
(i.e., before the corrections in the ﬁrst folio). Hence, rather than several versions of 
the text, we have a unique text with a relatively complex stratigraphy of corrections. 
Of course, the edition of such a text is not simple, if one wishes to offer a critical, 
exhaustive edition of the drafts. One reason is that such layers of text cannot be 
accurately represented statically. Another reason is the status of a completely deleted 
part of text, such as the ﬁrst folio: how can we, in fact, edit it as a variant?42 
40 These are Leibniz’s ﬁrst mathematical works, in which we witness the beginning of his method 
of differences. In these manuscripts, Leibniz only attempt to compute the said sum, but later he 
tries to generalize his approach to pyramidal numbers. These works are also identiﬁed as the origin 
for Leibniz’s harmonic triangle. 
41 The title is not Leibniz’s but the editors’. 
42 On (the difﬁculties of) editing Leibniz, see also [Costa and Pasini(2019)]. 

108
E. Haffner 
4 
Concluding Remarks 
Drafts open doors to the mathematician’s workshop, they reveal practices and 
methods which are often erased from the published text and, as such, offer access to 
the working processes of mathematicians. By studying the materiality of writings, 
invention of written artefacts, tools and notation, inductive and experimental aspects 
of research, etc., we gain invaluable information on the shaping of mathematical 
knowledge and its multiple forms. This rich material gives us keys to better 
understand the genesis of knowledge and texts, to better understand the links 
between the steps of conceptual development and the different modes of writing, 
to better understand the variety of means involved in the production of new 
mathematical knowledge. 
References 
[Bustamante(2020)] Bustamante MC (2020) À l’aube de la théorie des quanta. Notes inédites 
d’Émile Borel sur un cours de Paul Langevin au Collège de France (1912–1913). Brepols, 
Turnhout 
[Bustamante(2022)] Bustamante MC (2022) Parcours, pratique théorique et documents scien-
tiﬁques “privés” du physicien Jacques Solomon. Comptes Rendus Physique https://doi.org/ 
10.5802/crphys.105, online ﬁrst 
[Cajori(1929)] Cajori F (1929) A History of Mathematical Notations, t. II. Rééd. 2007. Cosimo, 
Inc., New York 
[Cartan(1944)] Cartan É (1944) Sur une classe de surfaces apparentees aux surfaces R et aux 
surfaces de Jonas. Bull Sci Math 68(2):41–50; Repr. in Œuvres complètes : Partie III, Divers, 
géométrie différentielle, vols. 1–2, Gauthier–Villars, Paris, 1955, pp. 1663–1672. 
[Chemla(2004)] Chemla K (ed) (2004) History of Science, History of Text. Springer, Boston 
Studies in the Philosophy of Science 238, Dordrecht 
[Costa and Pasini(2019)] Costa A, Pasini E (2019) L’édition critique de la Dynamica de potentia 
seu de legibus naturæ corporeæ de G. W. Leibniz. Revue d’histoire des sciences 72(1):137– 
161 
[Dedekind(1888)] Dedekind R (1888) Was sind und was sollen die Zahlen? In: Gesammelte 
Werke, Vol. III, Ed. par R. Fricke, E. Noether et O. Ore. F. Vieweg and Sohn, Vieweg, 
Braunschweig. Reéd. Chelsea Publishing Co. (1968), pp 335–392 
[Descotes(2010)] Descotes D (2010) An unknown mathematical manuscript by Blaise Pascal. 
Historia Mathematica 37:503–534 
[Dugac(1976)] Dugac P (1976) Richard Dedekind et les fondements des mathématiques. Vrin, 
Paris 
[Echeverria(1992)] Echeverria J (1992) Observations, problems and conjectures in number theory: 
the history of the prime number theorem. In: Echeverria J, Ibarra A, Mormann T (eds) The 
Space of Mathematics, De Guryter, New York, pp 230–252 
[Echeverria(1996)] Echeverria J (1996) Empirical Methods in Mathematics. A Case-study: Gold-
bach’s conjecture. In: Munevar G (ed) Spanish Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Kluwer, 
Dordrecht, pp 19–55 
[Edwards(2010)] Edwards HM (2010) The Algorithmic Side of Riemann’s Mathematics. In: Bott 
R, Kotiuga P (eds) A Celebration of the Mathematical Legacy of Raoul Bott, American 
Mathematical Society, Providence, CRM proceedings & lecture notes 

Going to the Source(s) of Sources in Mathematicians’ Drafts
109 
[Gentil(2021)] Gentil S (2021) Une caractéristique pour les uniﬁer toutes et dans l’harmonie les 
lier. Uniﬁcation des équations dans les textes De la méthode de l’universalité. Philosophia 
Scientiæ 25(2):47–70 
[Goldstein(2008)] Goldstein C (2008) How to Generate Mathematical Experimentation and Does it 
Provide Mathematical Knowledge? In: Feest U, Hon G, Rheinberger HJ, Schickore J, Steinle 
F (eds) Generating Experimental Knowledge, Max Planck Institute for the History of Science, 
Berlin, pp 61–85 
[Goldstein(2011)] Goldstein C (2011) Les mathématiques comme science d’observation : les 
convictions de Charles Hermite. In: Ferrara F, Giacardi L, Mosca M (eds) Associazione 
Subalpina Mathesis Conferenze e seminari 2010–2011, Kim Williams, Torino, pp 147–156 
[Haffner(2017a)] Haffner E (2017a) Esquisse d’une cartographie des cahiers d’Élie Cartan. Revue 
d’histoire des mathématiques 23(1):125–182 
[Haffner(2017b)] Haffner E (2017b) Insights into Dedekind and Weber’s edition of Riemann’s 
Gesammelte Werke. Math Semesterber https://doi.org/10.1007/s00591-017-0194-3 
[Haffner(2018a)] Haffner E (2018a) From modules to lattices, insight into the genesis of 
Dedekind’s Dualgruppen. British Journal for History of Mathematics pp 23–42 
[Haffner(2018b)] Haffner E (2018b) L’édition des œuvres mathématiques au XIXe siècle en 
Allemagne. L’exemple des Gesammelte Werke und wissenschaftlicher Nachlass de Bernhard 
Riemann. Philosophia Scientiæ 22(2):115–135 
[Haffner(2021)] Haffner E (2021) The edition of Bernhard Riemann’s collected works: then and 
now. European Mathematical Society Magazine 120:29–39 
[Haffner(2023)] Haffner E (2023) Duality as a guiding light in the genesis of Dedekind’s 
Dualgruppen. In: Krömer R, Haffner E (eds) Duality in 19th and 20th century mathematical 
thinking, Birkhäuser, Basel 
[Hersh(1991)] Hersh R (1991) Mathematics has a front and a back. Synthese 8(2):127–133 
[Hofmann(1974)] Hofmann J (1974) Leibniz in Paris 1672–1676: His Growth to Math-
ematical Maturity. Cambridge University Press, URL https://books.google.fr/books?id= 
tVaVQgAACAAJ 
[Joffredo(2019)] Joffredo T (2019) Une analyse génétique de l’Introduction à l’analyse des 
lignes courbes algébriques de Gabriel Cramer (1750). Revue d’Histoire des Mathématiques 
25(2):235–289 
[Knobloch(2004)] Knobloch E (2004) Leibniz and the Use of Manuscripts: Text as Process. In: 
[Chemla(2004)], Cambridge University Press, pp 51–80 
[Knobloch(2010)] Knobloch E (2010) Leibniz between ars characteristica and ars inveniendi: 
Unknown news about Cajori’s ‘master-builder of mathematical notations’. In: Heeffer A, 
Van Dyck M (eds) Philosophical Aspects of Symbolic Reasoning in Early-modern Mathe-
matics, Studies in Logic 26. College Publications, London, pp 289–302 
[Krömer(2023)] Krömer R (2023) Duality à la Bourbaki. In: Krömer R, Haffner E (eds) Duality in 
19th and 20th century mathematical thinking, Birkhäuser, Basel 
[Leibniz and Child(2008)] Leibniz G, Child J (2008) The Early Mathematical Manuscripts of 
Leibniz. Cosimo Classics 
[Leibniz(1923–)] Leibniz GW (1923–) Sämtliche Schriften und Briefe. Akademie Verlag, 
Darmstadt [then] Leipzig [then] Berlin, herausgegeben von der Berlin-Brandenburgischen 
Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen 
[Lützen(1990)] Lützen J (1990) Joseph Liouville 1809–1882. Master of Pure and Applied 
Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, New York 
[Medawar(1991)] Medawar PB (1991) Is the scientiﬁc paper a fraud? (Based on a BBC interview 
published in The Listener, Sept. 12, 1963). In: The Threat and the Glory: Reﬂections on 
Science and Scientists, Oxford University Press, pp 228–233 
[Moriarty(2022)] Moriarty C (2022) Ructions over ﬂuxions: Maclaurin’s draft, the analyst con-
troversy and Berkeley’s anti-mathematical philosophy. Studies in History and Philosophy of 
Science 96:77–86 
[Rabouin(2021)] Rabouin D (2021) Présentation des manuscrits. Philosophia Scientiæ 25(2):133– 
154 

110
E. Haffner 
[Remaki(2021)] Remaki A (2021) L’art combinatoire en tant qu’art d’inventer chez Leibniz, sur la 
période 1672–1680. PhD thesis, Université de Paris, Paris 
[Sauer and Schütz(2020)] Sauer T, Schütz T (2020) Einstein’s Washington Manuscript on Uniﬁed 
Field Theory. Berichte zur Wissenschaftsgeschichte 44:94–105 
[Serfati(2005)] Serfati M (2005) La révolution symbolique: la constitution de l’écriture symbol-
ique mathématique. Pétra 
[Sieg and Schlimm(2005)] Sieg W, Schlimm D (2005) Dedekind’s analysis of number: systems 
and axioms. Synthese 147:121–170 
[Siegel(1932)] Siegel CL (1932) Über Riemanns Nachlass zur analytischen Zahlentheorie. Quell 
Stud Gesch Math 2:45–80 
[Struik(1922)] Struik DJ (1922) Grundzüge der mehrdimensionalen Differentialgeometrie in 
direkter Darstellung. Springer 
[Trunk(2016)] Trunk A (2016) Sechs Systeme. Leibniz und seine signa ambigua. In: Li W, 
Beckmann U, Erdner S, Errulat EM (eds) Für unser Glück oder das Glück anderer”, Vorträge 
des X. Internationalen Leibniz-Kongresses, Olms Verlag, Hildesheim, pp 191–207 
[Van Hulle(2009)] Van Hulle D (2009) Textual Awareness: A Genetic Study of Late Manuscripts 
by Joyce, Proust, and Mann. Editorial Theory And Literary Criticism, University of Michigan 
Press 
[Waszek(2018)] Waszek D (2018) Les représentations en mathématiques. PhD thesis, Université 
Paris 1 Panthéon Sorbonne, Paris 

Two Textbooks on Vector Analysis: Gibbs 
and Runge 
Roger Godard and Mark Lewis 
Abstract The goal of this work is to do a critical analysis and comparative study of 
two textbooks on vector analysis: One written in 1901 in the United States by Edwin 
Wilson based on lectures by J. Willard Gibbs, and the other written by Carl Runge 
in Germany in 1919, and translated into English in 1923. Both were well-known 
scientists: Gibbs is considered as a father of the modern school of vector analysis, 
while Runge kept his German Grassmannian roots. First, we present biographical 
sketches of Gibbs and Runge and describe their scientiﬁc styles. Then we comment 
upon their ideas chapter by chapter, with particular emphasis on vector operators 
and the integral calculus of vectors. We discuss in detail the Gibbs and Wilson book 
because it was the ﬁrst book on vector analysis. We ﬁnish with a brief introduction 
to tensors from Runge’s ﬁrst volume. 
1 
Introduction 
The goal of this work is to critically analyze and to compare two foundational 
textbooks on vector analysis. Based on lectures by J. Willard Gibbs, Edwin Wilson 
published the ﬁrst ever textbook on the subject in the United States in 1901. Not long 
after, Carl Runge released his own Vektoranalysis in Germany in 1919, translated 
into English in 1923. Our inspiration stems from remarks made by Runge in his 
introduction, where he states explicitly: 
Modern vector analysis is essentially an offshoot of the work of Grassmann and of the 
quaternionic investigations of Hamilton, both rich sources of mathematical knowledge . . .  
R. Godard () 
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Royal Military College of Canada, Kingston, 
ON, Canada 
M. Lewis 
Saint Lawrence College, Kingston, ON, Canada 
e-mail: mark.lewis@queensu.ca 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
M. Zack, D. Waszek (eds.), Research in History and Philosophy of Mathematics, 
Annals of the Canadian Society for History and Philosophy of Mathematics/ Société 
canadienne d’histoire et de philosophie des mathématiques, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-46193-4_7
111

112
R. Godard and M. Lewis
In the present work I have striven to correlate the customary conceptions of vector analysis 
with the fundamental ideas of Grassmann’s treatments. I have, however, not always kept 
close to his terminology . . . As far as the representation of scalar and vector products are 
concerned, I have not followed the system adopted by the “Mathematische Enzyklopädie,” 
but rather that introduced by Gibbs . . .  In the treatment of tensors I owe much to Gibbs, for 
in this connection Grassmann’s notation is too special . . .  This, the ﬁrst volume, contains 
the vectorial analysis of three dimensions. In the second volume, that of four and more 
dimensions, playing an important part in the theory of relativity, will be treated. (Runge 
1923) 
In this work, we address only his ﬁrst volume. 
2 
Brief Biographical Sketch of Gibbs 
Josiah Willard Gibbs (1839–1903) was born in the state of Connecticut. His father 
was a professor at Yale, and entering Yale himself at the age of 15, he obtained 
his doctorate of philosophy in 1863. It was the ﬁrst doctorate of engineering to be 
conferred in the United States! After 3 years in Europe, including time in Paris, 
Heidelberg, and Berlin, he was appointed as a professor of mathematical physics at 
Yale, where he remained throughout his career. Langer wrote: 
The repertoire of courses from which Gibbs lectured from year to year seems to have 
been essentially the following: Vector Analysis, Capillarity, The Wave Theory of Light and 
Sound, Least Squares, The Theory of Potential, The Mathematical Theory of Electricity and 
Magnetism, and Multiple Algebra . . .  (Langer 1939) 
The course on vector analysis was Gibbs’ own brainchild. According to Petruni´c: 
By 1901, Gibbs’s goal was to publish a book that would be of help to “geometry 
and physics” students. He did not identify the text as one of interest to the “pure” 
mathematicians, but rather one of interest to students in “physics”. (Petruni´c 2009) 
Around the same period, Gibbs spent considerable time preparing The Principles of 
Statistical Mechanics, a book which earned high praise from the Austrian scientist 
Ludwig Boltzmann and was translated into German soon after its initial publication 
in English. Gibbs is also known for the Gibbs phenomenon regarding trigonometric 
series: with H. Wilbraham, A.E.H. Love, and A.A. Michelson, he discovered that 
the trigonometric series of a piecewise smooth function must have a little pulse at 
the discontinuities of the function (Ustina 1974). 
3 
Brief Biographical Sketch of Runge 
Gibbs and Runge were both physicists and mathematicians, but parallels between 
their careers end there. In 1877, Carl David Tolmé Runge (1856–1927) went to 
Berlin where he completed his doctoral dissertation under Karl Weierstrass (1815– 
1897). From the courses he taught in Berlin we can see that his interests lay not

Two Textbooks on Vector Analysis: Gibbs and Runge
113
only in pure mathematics; he already lectured on numerical solutions of equations in 
1883/1884, numerical calculus in 1884/1885, and the solutions of partial differential 
equations. Then, in 1886, Runge obtained a position as a professor of mathematics at 
the Technical Institute Hanover, where he remained for 18 years. Among numerous 
papers in experimental physics, Runge published a few important articles on 
numerical methods: on the numerical solutions of ordinary differential equations 
in 1895, on the least squares in 1897, on the Lagrangian interpolation in 1901, 
and on harmonic analysis and the summation of trigonometric polynomials in 1903 
(Godard 2008). 
In 1904, Runge moved to Göttingen University, the prestigious institution of 
Gauss, Dirichlet, and Riemann. Gauss’ versatility was a source of inspiration that 
Felix Klein (1849–1925) dreamed of emulating in Göttingen. In 1904, Klein created 
for Runge the ﬁrst chair in applied mathematics, a position he held until his 
retirement in 1925. Klein sought to diversify his department, and we should admire 
his perspicacity. 
Runge published 123 articles, and authored or co-authored no less than seven 
books. Two of these were translated into English shortly after their publication in 
Germany. Runge was 63 years old when he wrote his book on vector analysis. In 
1918, Richard Courant (1888–1972) married Runge’s daughter, Nerina. In 1924, 
Courant published with David Hilbert the ﬁrst volume of their famous book 
Methoden der mathematischen Physik. Runge also visited the USA on several 
occasions, and in 1909–1910, he lectured at Columbia University on graphical 
methods. 
4 
The Scientiﬁc Styles of Gibbs-Wilson and of Runge 
We now begin our comparison of Runge’s Vektoranalysis from 1919 with the earlier 
Vector Analysis, a text-book for the use of students of mathematics and physics, 
founded on the lectures of J. Willard Gibbs, Professor of Mathematical Physics in 
Yale University, written by Edwin Bidwell Wilson, Instructor in Mathematics at Yale 
University (Runge 1919; Gibbs and Wilson 1901). In his preface to the latter, Gibbs 
wrote: 
Since the printing of a short pamphlet on the Elements of Vector Analysis in the years 1881– 
84,—never published, but somewhat widely distributed among those who were known to 
be interested in the subject,— the desire has been expressed in more than a quarter, that 
the substance of that treatment, perhaps in fuller form, should be made accessible to the 
public . . .  
I have not desired that Dr. Wilson should aim simply at the reproduction of my lectures, 
but rather that he should use his own judgment in all respects for the production of a text-
book in which the subject should be so illustrated by an adequate number of examples as to 
meet the wants of students of geometry and physics. (Wilson 1901) 
Wilson was more explicit in his general preface:

114
R. Godard and M. Lewis
By far the greater part of the material used in the following pages has been taken from 
the course of lectures on Vector Analysis delivered annually at the University by Professor 
Gibbs. Some use, however, has been made of the chapters on Vector Analysis in Mr. Oliver 
Heaviside’s Electromagnetic Theory (Electrician Series, 1898), and in Professor Föppl’s 
Lectures on Die Maxwell’sche Theorie der Electricität (Teubner, 1894). My previous study 
of Quaternions has also been of great assistance. (Wilson 1901) 
Gibbs’ work on vector analysis has been studied and commented upon by many 
historians of mathematics, most particularly by Michael J. Crowe in his book A 
History of Vector Analysis (Crowe 1967). Both textbooks were well written and 
structured, beginning with a description of vectors and scalars. Runge chose to 
represent vectors with lowercase, heavy (Clarendon) type, e.g. a or b. In contrast, 
quantities representing positive or negative numbers were represented by lowercase 
italic or Greek letters. This was almost the convention that Wilson adopted, except 
that he sometimes represented vectors by capital Clarendon letters. 
The books of Gibbs-Wilson and Runge were real pedagogical efforts to explain 
the equations and to present the ﬁelds of interest. They discussed the subject 
at a considerable length, although neither included historical notes. The Gibbs-
Wilson book includes a summary for each chapter, and some related exercises. 
Both books used a diagrammatic approach to illustrate the addition, subtraction, or 
multiplication of vectors. Gibbs-Wilson’s contained seven chapters, spanning 436 
pages, while Runge’s book ran to a slender 224 pages, divided into just three long 
chapters. From Wilson’s preface once again: 
The subject of Vector Analysis naturally divides itself into three distinct parts. First, that 
which concerns addition and the scalar and vector products of vectors. Second, that which 
concerns the differential and integral calculus in its relations to scalar and vector functions. 
Third, that which contains the theory of the linear vector functions. (Wilson 1901) 
Runge followed the same pattern, except that he spent less time on the theory of 
operators, preferring to ﬁrst introduce the exterior product of vectors. 
5 
Scalars and Vectors 
5.1 
Chapters I and II of Gibbs-Wilson 
Chapter I concerned the addition and scalar multiplication in vector analysis and 
included certain geometric applications at the end. Gibbs and Wilson began with 
the deﬁnitions of a vector and a scalar: 
A vector is a quantity which is considered as possessing direction as well as magnitude . . . A 
scalar is a quantity which is considered as possessing magnitude but no direction. (Wilson 
1901) 
Then the authors presented the “laws” of addition, subtraction, and scalar multipli-
cation of vectors. In Cartesian coordinates, a vector was expressed as:

Two Textbooks on Vector Analysis: Gibbs and Runge
115
StartLayout 1st Row bold r equals a bold a plus b bold b plus c bold c period EndLayoutr = a a + b b + c c.
(1) 
In chapter II, the direct product (that is, the scalar product, dot product, or inner 
product) of two vectors is introduced as A. B, and then the skew product (cross 
product) as C = A × B. In section 43, pages 81–83, Gibbs and Wilson deﬁned the 
vectors a∗, b∗, c∗ that are reciprocal to the system a, b, c as:1 
StartLayout 1st Row bold a Superscript asterisk Baseline equals StartFraction bold b times bold c Over left bracket bold abc right bracket EndFraction comma bold b Superscript asterisk Baseline equals StartFraction bold c times bold a Over left bracket bold abc right bracket EndFraction comma bold c Superscript asterisk Baseline equals StartFraction bold a times bold b Over left bracket bold abc right bracket EndFraction comma EndLayouta∗= b × c
[abc] , b∗= c × a
[abc], c∗= a × b
[abc] ,
(2) 
where a. b × c = [abc] is a scalar quantity, with a∗a = b∗b = c∗c = 1, the other 
direct products being zero, and where a, b, c are not coplanar. The authors observed 
a full symmetry between the two systems.2 These reciprocal vectors will play a 
major role in Runge’s book. Chapter II concludes with applications to kinematics. 
The ﬁrst two chapters span 52 and 58 pages respectively, which we must say seems 
far too long, to the detriment of the beginning student. 
We remark that “vector” is a Latin word meaning “to transport”. As a mathe-
matical term, “vector” was coined by W R Hamilton in 1845 for his study of the 
quaternions, but the idea was older. Let us quote Moore: 
. . . the idea of a vector . . . formed part of the barycentric calculus of Möbius in 1827, the 
calculus of equipollences of Bellavitis in 1835, and the calculus of extension of Grassmann 
in 1844. (Moore 1995) 
Gibbs and Wilson’s book reﬂected mainly the contribution of the British school of 
mathematics. The use of the dot for the direct product, and of × for the vectorial 
product, appears in William Kingdon Clifford’s (1845–1879) work of 1878 (Crowe 
1967). The vectorial triple product A × (B × C) and more complex products already 
appeared in Gibbs’ booklet (Gibbs 1881–1884). 
5.2 
Runge and the Exterior Product 
In 1844, the German mathematician Hermann Grassmann (1809–1877) published 
his Lineale Ausdehnungslehre (linear theory of extension), in which he created a 
new theory about vectors (Grassmann 1844; Fehr 1907; Crowe  1967; Dorier  1995; 
Schubring 1996). Despite its lack of success, his work was gradually accepted by 
the mathematical community: 
Historical analysis of the acceptance of revolutionary ideas show that acceptance requires 
much time . . .  (Crowe 1967)
1 In order to obtain these relations, we have to multiply successively Eq. (1) by .b × c, .c × a, 
.a × b. We have: bold r equals StartFraction bold r period bold b times bold c Over left bracket bold abc right bracket EndFraction bold a plus StartFraction bold r period bold c times bold a Over left bracket bold abc right bracket EndFraction bold b plus StartFraction bold r period bold a times bold b Over left bracket bold abc right bracket EndFraction bold c periodr = r.b×c
[abc] a + r.c×a
[abc] b + r.a×b
[abc] c. Or r = r. a∗a + r. b∗b + r. c∗c. 
2 We now say that they are dual vectors. 

116
R. Godard and M. Lewis
Fortunately, Victor Schegel (1843–1905) was one of his most enthusiastic support-
ers. Grassmann’s concepts were also well integrated into the algebra of William 
Kingdon Clifford. Runge also favored Grassmann’s ideas and, in his 1919 Vek-
toranalysis, focused on the Grassmannian exterior product. Grassmann’s system 
contained the inner (scalar) product and the exterior product that Runge presented in 
his ﬁrst chapter on vectors and vectorial areas. The exterior product of two vectors3 
p and q was represented simply by pq, and deﬁned as an oriented vectorial area4 or 
bivector. The latter term was introduced by Peano in 1888. Note that the modern 
style is to use the wedge operator, so that the vectorial area is denoted p ∧ q. 
Consequently the exterior product is also called the wedge product. p and q are anti-
commutative, satisfying the relation pq = − qp. To the bivector pq corresponds the 
area of a parallelogram with sides p and q. We shall take a product as positive when 
the rotation from p to q is in the counterclockwise direction. The external product 
is zero if one of the vectors is nil or if both vectors are parallel. (Guérindon and 
Dieudonné 1978) 
In section 9, Runge introduced the complementary notion of the representation 
(or complement)5 of a vectorial area: 
Let F be an arbitrary vectorial area and let us associate with it a particular vector f which 
bears the following relation to F. In the ﬁrst place, let f be perpendicular to F . . . Let the 
vector f have the direction that a right-hand screw would take . . .  (Runge 1923) 
Then Runge wrote f = |F and F = |f. To  f was associated a number corresponding 
to the area F. In section 12, Runge explained the connection with the theory of 
determinants, and in section 13, he described the inner (scalar) product p | q = q | p, 
where p and q were two independent vectors satisfying the condition of perpendic-
ularity p | q = 0. Runge admitted that writing the representation (noted |) of one  
of the vectors was unnecessary here and denoted the scalar product simply by p.q. 
The inner product corresponded to the area of a rectangle having dimensions equal, 
respectively, to one vector and to the projection of the other vector onto the ﬁrst. 
6 
The Vector Operators 
6.1 
Chapter III of Gibbs-Wilson 
Returning to Gibbs and Wilson’s analysis in 1901, we ﬁnd the theory of vector 
operators expressed in a magniﬁcent and very modern style. The title of their third 
chapter was “The differential calculus of vectors,” covering 62 pages. Here the
3 There is a relation of duality between the external product and the cross product. 
4 Grassmann wrote the exterior product as [pq]. 
5 Grassmann called it “Ergänzung”. 

Two Textbooks on Vector Analysis: Gibbs and Runge
117
authors offered the following illuminating deﬁnition of the gradient of a scalar 
function V(x,y,z): 
The rate at which the function V increases in the X direction — that is, when x changes to 
x + ∆x and y and z remain constant — is: 
StartLayout 1st Row limit Underscript normal upper Delta x right arrow 0 Endscripts StartFraction upper V left parenthesis x plus normal upper Delta x comma y comma z right parenthesis minus upper V left parenthesis x comma y comma z right parenthesis Over normal upper Delta x EndFraction period EndLayout lim
∆x→0
V (x + ∆x, y, z) −V (x, y, z)
∆x
.
(3) 
This is the partial derivative of V with respect to x. Hence the rates at which V increases in 
the directions of the three axes X, Y, Z are respectively StartFraction partial differential upper V Over partial differential x EndFraction comma StartFraction partial differential upper V Over partial differential y EndFraction comma StartFraction partial differential upper V Over partial differential z EndFraction period∂V
∂x , ∂V
∂y , ∂V
∂z .
Inasmuch as these are rates in a certain direction, they may be written appropriately as 
vectors . . .  The vector sum which is the resultant rate of increase of V is denoted by ∇V. 
StartLayout 1st Row nabla upper V equals i StartFraction partial differential upper V Over partial differential x EndFraction plus j StartFraction partial differential upper V Over partial differential y EndFraction plus k StartFraction partial differential upper V Over partial differential z EndFraction period EndLayout∇V = i ∂V
∂x + j ∂V
∂y + k ∂V
∂z .
(4) 
∇V represents a directed rate of change of V — a directed or vector derivative of V, so to 
speak. (Wilson 1901) 
We may note that the operator ∂ has a long history. In the book A history of 
mathematical notations, Florian Cajori acknowledged Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi 
(1804–1851) who wrote in 1841: 
I have preferred to designate ordinary differentials by the character d and the partial 
differential by ∂. Adopting this convention, error is excluded. (quoted in Cajori 1928–1929) 
However, we already found the StartFraction partial differential Over partial differential x EndFraction ∂
∂x operator in Cauchy’s Exercises de mathéma-
tiques (Cauchy 1828a, b). The term gradient itself was introduced by Horace Lamb 
in 1897. We may also refer to the gradient as “the slope” like Maxwell did in 
1873. Gibbs and Wilson acknowledged that the symbolic operator ∇ was introduced 
by Hamilton; they suggested reading ∇V as “del V,” though they used the word 
“derivative” for ∇V. This deﬁnition of the gradient reminds us of a few sentences 
written by Tait (1831–1901) at the beginning of his article “On Green’s and other 
Allied Theorems”: 
I was originally attracted to the study of Quaternions by Sir W.R. Hamilton’s ingeniously 
devised and most valuable operator 
StartLayout 1st Row nabla equals i StartFraction d Over d x EndFraction plus j StartFraction d Over d y EndFraction plus k StartFraction d Over d z EndFraction comma EndLayout∇= i d
dx + j d
dy + k d
dz,
to which he called special attention (Lectures on Quaternions, § 620) on account of its 
promise of usefulness in physical applications. (Tait 1870) 
We see that the term “operator” was already well accepted. Then vector functions 
of position in space were studied: 
StartLayout 1st Row bold upper V left parenthesis bold x comma bold y comma bold z right parenthesis equals upper V 1 left parenthesis x comma y comma z right parenthesis bold i plus upper V 2 left parenthesis x comma y comma z right parenthesis bold j plus upper V 3 left parenthesis x comma y comma z right parenthesis bold k period EndLayoutV (x, y, z) = V1 (x, y, z) i + V2 (x, y, z) j + V3 (x, y, z) k.
(5)

118
R. Godard and M. Lewis
The scalar and vectorial operations6 ∇.V and ∇× V were presented, along with: 
StartLayout 1st Row nabla period nabla upper V equals d i v nabla upper V semicolon nabla times nabla upper V equals c u r l nabla upper V period EndLayout∇.∇V = div∇V ;
∇× ∇V = curl∇V.
(6) 
The expression ∇.∇ V = 0 is the Laplace equation, or: 
StartLayout 1st Row nabla period nabla upper V equals normal upper Delta upper V equals StartFraction partial differential squared upper V Over partial differential x squared EndFraction plus StartFraction partial differential squared upper V Over partial differential y squared EndFraction plus StartFraction partial differential squared upper V Over partial differential z squared EndFraction equals 0 period EndLayout∇.∇V = ∆V = ∂2V
∂x2 + ∂2V
∂y2 + ∂2V
∂z2 = 0.
(7) 
The Laplace operator ∆or ∇2, has its own history. Fourier wrote DV = 0, while 
Poisson and Green used δV = 0. It was ∆2V to Lamé, ∆2V to Betti, and ∆V to 
Gibbs and Wilson (Burkhardt et Meyer 1899–1916). 
Chapter III veritably blossoms with formulas; we have, for example: 
StartLayout 1st Row curl curl bold upper V equals nabla nabla period bold upper V minus nabla period nabla bold upper V period EndLayoutcurl curl V = ∇∇.V −∇.∇V.
(8) 
On pages 153–156, the authors showed that ∇.V and ∇×  V had very important 
meanings. They took the example of a ﬂuid with V representing its velocity and 
the divergence giving, at each point, the rate (per unit volume and per unit time) 
at which the ﬂuid is leaving that point. Of course, the authors mention that James 
Clerk Maxwell (1831–1879) employed the word “convergence” for the negative of 
the divergence (Maxwell 1873). The curl was more complex to explain, and as an 
example, it was linked to vortices in ﬂuid dynamics. 
On page 157, the authors demonstrated the important properties of linearity for 
the operators ∇, ∇., ∇×, observing that these rules of operation will prove very 
useful for applications. 
6.2 
The Gibbs and Wilson Integral Calculus of Vectors 
Chapter IV of Gibbs and Wilson’s book concerned the integral calculus of vectors. 
Over 76 pages they covered line integrals, Gauss’ theorem, Stokes’ theorem, the 
study of the theory of potential, and some applications. It ﬁnished with some basic 
theorems on boundary value problems. The authors presented the fundamental 
integral theorems relating line, surface, and volume integrals: 
StartLayout 1st Row integral Subscript r 0 Superscript r Baseline nabla upper V period d bold r equals upper V left parenthesis r right parenthesis minus upper V left parenthesis r 0 right parenthesis comma EndLayout
⨜r
r0
∇V.dr = V (r) −V (r0) ,
(9)
6 The components of a curl can be found in the works of d’Alembert, Euler, and Lagrange on ﬂuid 
dynamics from the eighteenth century. 

Two Textbooks on Vector Analysis: Gibbs and Runge
119
StartLayout 1st Row double integral Underscript upper S Endscripts nabla times bold upper W period d bold a equals integral Underscript o Endscripts bold upper W period d bold r comma EndLayout
⨜⨜
S
∇× W.da =
⨜
o
W.dr,
(10) 
StartLayout 1st Row triple integral nabla period bold upper W d v equals double integral Underscript s Endscripts bold upper W period d bold s period EndLayout
⨜⨜⨜
∇.Wdv =
⨜⨜
s
W.ds.
(11) 
In these relations, the authors were concerned by the existence and uniqueness 
of these integrals. They said that scalar and vector functions are “supposed to be 
continuous, single-valued, possessing derivatives of the ﬁrst two orders at any point 
of space” (Wilson 1901).7 Then they introduced the concept of a curve C being 
either reducible or irreducible — a fundamental concept. They wrote: “The line 
integral of the derivative ∇V of any function V vanishes around any reducible 
circuit C” (Wilson 1901). This was a farsighted prediction of connected domains. 
The concept of an open set was developed only in 1906. Before Gibbs and Wilson, 
line integrals were used by Maxwell in (1873). Gibbs and Wilson did not mention 
the Green-Riemann theorem. 
The divergence theorem (Eq. 12) has a long history. Victor Katz remarked that the 
main question was to link a k dimensional integral to a k −1 dimensional integral. 
Lagrange (1736–1813) and Laplace (1749–1827) applied this concept near the end 
of the eighteenth century (Katz 1979). (In Russia, and in France, the divergence 
theorem is known as the Gauss-Ostrogradsky theorem. Ostrogradsky (1801–1862) 
was a Russian scientist who lived in Paris around 1826.) Note that Gibbs and Wilson 
derived the divergence theorem from physical considerations. Stokes’ theorem 
appeared in 1854. Here we must credit Tait in 1870, and Maxwell in 1873, for 
the introduction of vector operators in the vector integrals — a more compact 
formalism. Gibbs and Wilson gave a complete proof for the Stokes theorem, then 
offered three pages of formulas and the Green-Ostrogradsky theorem. 
If U and V are two differentiable scalar functions, we obtain from ordinary 
calculus the following formula (Kline 1972): 
StartLayout 1st Row triple integral left parenthesis upper U nabla period nabla upper V minus upper V nabla period nabla upper U right parenthesis d pi equals double integral left parenthesis upper U nabla upper V minus upper V nabla upper U right parenthesis period d bold a period EndLayout
⨜⨜⨜
(U∇.∇V −V ∇.∇U) d𝛡=
⨜⨜
(U∇V −V ∇U) .da.
(12) 
Unfortunately, Gibbs and Wilson did not explore the full possibilities and meanings 
of the Green theorems. Then, in section 86, they presented the integrating operators, 
and the integral of the potential. There were ambiguities in their deﬁnition of the 
potential. They used the symbol V for the density of matter at a point (x2,y2,z2),
7 The fundamental theorem of line integrals is the following. Suppose that C is a smooth curve 
from point A to point B parameterized by r(t) for  a ≤ t ≤ b. Let  f be a differentiable function 
whose domain includes C and whose gradient vector ∇f is continuous on C. Then integral Underscript upper C Endscripts nabla f period d bold r equals f left parenthesis upper B right parenthesis minus f left parenthesis upper A right parenthesis period
⨜
C
∇f.dr =
f (B) −f (A).
Let C be a curve in a connected region D. Then integral Underscript upper C Endscripts bold upper F period d bold r
⨜
C
F.dr is independent of path if and only if 
integral Underscript upper C Endscripts bold upper F period d bold r equals 0
⨜
C
F.dr = 0 for every closed path in D. 

120
R. Godard and M. Lewis
and consequently they had to invent a new symbol Pot for the potential at a point 
(x1,y1,z1): 
StartLayout 1st Row Pot upper V equals triple integral StartFraction upper V left parenthesis x 2 comma y 2 comma z 2 right parenthesis Over r 12 EndFraction d x Subscript 2 Baseline d y Subscript 2 Baseline d z Subscript 2 Baseline period EndLayoutPot V =
⨜⨜⨜V (x2, y2, z2)
r12
dx2dy2dz2.
(13) 
The symbol Pot was exact and logical, but not too practical. They invented other 
symbols like the Maxwellian8 Max, used in a spate of formulas like: div Lap 
W = Max curl W = 0. This notation was not used after Gibbs and Wilson. 
In section 92, the authors proved the Poisson equation: 
StartLayout 1st Row nabla period nabla Pot upper V equals minus 4 pi upper V period EndLayout∇.∇Pot V = −4πV.
(14) 
Their proof spanned some four pages. Gibbs and Wilson concluded this chapter by 
noting 
a number of useful theorems of a function-theoretic nature which may perhaps be mentioned 
here owing to their intimate connection with the integral calculus of vectors . . . The 
theorems are often useful in practical applications of vector analysis to physics as well 
as in purely mathematical work. (Wilson 1901) 
We realized that the authors omitted discussion of the boundary conditions (Dirich-
let conditions, Neumann conditions) associated to the solutions of a Laplace or 
Poisson equation, and of the “Thomson (Lord Kelvin)-Dirichlet principle” (Kline 
1972). This topic has proved fundamental in mathematical physics; in contrast, 
Gibbs and Wilson lingered overlong on the theory of operators. 
6.3 
Runge: The Differentiation and Integration of Vectors 
Though his approach is less structured than that of Gibbs and Wilson, Runge gave in 
the corresponding chapter some additional and important applications to kinematics, 
the curvature and torsion in space, the rules for the operator ∇, which he called 
the gradient, and an introduction to curvilinear coordinates for the gradient, the 
divergence, and the Laplacian. The systematic use of the reciprocal vectors makes 
this chapter difﬁcult for a reader who is not familiar with the Grassmann algebra. 
We must remember that the vectorial operators were invented after Grassmann’s 
book. For example, Runge wrote: 
Suppose the vector r derived by means of the coefﬁcients x, y, z from three mutually 
independent vectors a, b, and  c, 
StartLayout 1st Row bold r equals x bold a plus y bold b plus z bold c period EndLayoutr = xa + yb + zc.
8 The Maxwellian is a scalar quantity, deﬁned as follows: upper M a x bold upper W equals StartFraction partial differential upper P o t upper X Over partial differential x 1 EndFraction plus StartFraction partial differential upper P o t upper Y Over partial differential y 1 EndFraction plus StartFraction partial differential upper P o t upper Z Over partial differential z 1 EndFraction periodMaxW = ∂PotX
∂x1
+ ∂PotY
∂y1
+ ∂PotZ
∂z1 . We 
also have: ∇×  Pot W = Lap W. 

Two Textbooks on Vector Analysis: Gibbs and Runge
121
Then f [a function of position] becomes a function of x, y, z, for  which  
StartLayout 1st Row d f equals StartFraction partial differential f Over d x EndFraction d x plus StartFraction partial differential f Over partial differential y EndFraction d y plus StartFraction partial differential f Over partial differential z EndFraction d z comma EndLayoutdf = ∂f
dx dx + ∂f
∂y dy + ∂f
∂z dz,
and this may be regarded as the scalar product of the two vectors 
StartLayout 1st Row bold g equals StartFraction partial differential f Over partial differential x EndFraction bold a Superscript asterisk Baseline plus StartFraction partial differential f Over partial differential y EndFraction bold b Superscript asterisk Baseline plus StartFraction partial differential f Over partial differential z EndFraction bold c Superscript asterisk Baseline comma EndLayoutg = ∂f
∂x a∗+ ∂f
∂y b∗+ ∂f
∂z c∗,
and 
StartLayout 1st Row d bold r equals dx bold a plus dy bold b plus dz bold c comma EndLayoutdr = dxa + dyb + dzc,
whereby a∗, b∗, c∗ is meant the reciprocal system to a, b, c. 
StartLayout 1st Row bold a Superscript asterisk Baseline equals StartFraction bold b times bold c Over left bracket bold abc right bracket EndFraction comma bold b Superscript asterisk Baseline equals StartFraction bold c times bold a Over left bracket bold abc right bracket EndFraction comma bold c Superscript asterisk Baseline equals StartFraction bold a times bold b Over left bracket bold abc right bracket EndFraction comma EndLayouta∗= b × c
[abc] , b∗= c × a
[abc], c∗= a × b
[abc] ,
Hence: 
StartLayout 1st Row d f equals bold g period d bold r period ellipsis EndLayoutdf = g.dr. . . .
In this derivation of the vector g from the function of position f use is also made of the  
symbol 
StartLayout 1st Row bold g equals nabla f EndLayoutg = ∇f
where ∇ expresses the vectorial operator, 
StartLayout 1st Row nabla equals StartFraction partial differential Over partial differential x EndFraction bold a Superscript asterisk Baseline plus StartFraction partial differential Over partial differential y EndFraction bold b Superscript asterisk Baseline plus StartFraction partial differential Over partial differential z EndFraction bold c Superscript asterisk EndLayout∇= ∂
∂x a∗+ ∂
∂y b∗+ ∂
∂zc∗
which is applied to the function f. (Runge 1923) 
Then, Runge proposed to introduce the representation of a gradient: 
StartLayout 1st Row vertical bar nabla equals StartFraction partial differential Over partial differential x EndFraction StartFraction bold bc Over bold ab bold c EndFraction plus StartFraction partial differential Over partial differential y EndFraction StartFraction bold ca Over bold ab bold c EndFraction plus StartFraction partial differential Over partial differential z EndFraction StartFraction bold ab Over bold ab bold c EndFraction comma EndLayout| ∇= ∂
∂x
bc
abc + ∂
∂y
ca
abc + ∂
∂z
ab
abc,
And he added: “we may refer | ∇ as a vectorial area”. We understand that the 
Grassmannian symbols could well disorient an undergraduate student! 
7 
Tensor Analysis: Runge 
The modern abstract approach to tensors has been initiated by Gregorio Ricci-
Curbastro (1853–1925) and Tullio Levi-Civita (1873–1941) in Italy (Ricci and

122
R. Godard and M. Lewis
Levi-Civita 1900, Kline 1972). Their article became the cornerstone of the theory of 
tensors. It was published in French in Mathematische Annalen, and its English title 
was: “Methods of the absolute differential calculus and their applications”. They 
wrote in their preface: 
The algorithm of the absolute differential calculus [i.e., tensors], that is to say, the concrete 
tools of these methods is found entirely in one remark by Christoffel: “But the methods 
themselves and the beneﬁts, which they present, have their raison d’être and source in 
intimate relationships that link them to the notion of an n-dimensional manifold (which we 
owe to Gauss and Riemann).” (Ricci and Levi-Civita 1900, engl. transl.) 
So the modern history of tensors has two roots, one in pure mathematics, and one 
in physics, in its applications to mechanics. The authors offered the examples of 
elasticity and electrodynamics. In section 12 of his book, Runge commented on the 
“tensor idea”. For Runge, the word “tensor” came from “the state of stress” in the 
theory of elasticity (“tendere = to stretch, tensio = tension”; Runge 1923: 178). The 
word “tensor” itself is due to the Göttingen physicist Woldemar Voigt (1850–1919), 
one of Runge’s colleagues, in 1898. If we try to retrace the history of tensorial 
applications, we need of course to honor Augustin-Louis Cauchy’s pioneering work 
on elasticity during the 1820s (Cauchy 1828b; Belhoste 1985). 
Here we emphasize again that Gibbs and Runge were not pure mathematicians: 
Gibbs was a theoretical physicist, and Runge had a position as an applied mathe-
matician. 
In Gibbs and Wilson’s book, chapter V concerned the linear vector functions: 
StartLayout 1st Row StartLayout 1st Row f left parenthesis bold r Subscript 1 Baseline plus bold r Subscript 2 Baseline right parenthesis equals f left parenthesis bold r Subscript 1 Baseline right parenthesis plus f left parenthesis bold r Subscript 2 Baseline right parenthesis comma 2nd Row f left parenthesis a bold r right parenthesis equals a f left parenthesis bold r right parenthesis period EndLayout EndLayoutf (r1 + r2) = f (r1) + f (r2) ,
f (ar) = af (r).
(15) 
On page 265 of their book, Gibbs and Wilson gave the deﬁnition of a “dyad”. They 
said: 
An expression ab formed by the juxtaposition of two vectors without the intervention of a 
dot or a cross is called a dyad. 
The dyad operator was already used by Gibbs in his little book (Gibbs 1881–1884). 
The dyad was a mathematical device for extending ordinary vector analysis to 
cover special matrices (Arfken 1970). Gibbs and Wilson had three chapters on 
tensors: (1) Linear vector functions, (2) Rotations and strains, and (3) Miscellaneous 
applications. 
Here we shall not follow Gibbs and Wilson, but rather focus on Runge’s 
developments of the tensor theory and his work on the change of coordinates 
for vectors, because Runge’s approach was more modern. Chapter III of Runge’s 
Vektoranalysis contained the tensor analysis in three dimensions while his second 
volume addressed the case of four or more dimensions, and its applications to the 
theory of relativity. This chapter, divided into 16 sections over 68 pages, offered 
only an introduction to tensor analysis. To our point of view, this was Runge’s 
most important chapter even if it was incomplete. He illustrated his tensorial ideas 
through many examples. He wrote that “now-a-days . . .  [the word “tensor”] . . .

Two Textbooks on Vector Analysis: Gibbs and Runge
123
merely expresses the relation of a vector to another, whether or not it refers to an 
actual state of stress” (Runge 1923). He expressed this relation by: 
StartLayout 1st Row bold r prime equals bold upper T period bold r comma EndLayoutr' = T.r,
(16) 
where T is the tensor, and he emphasized that this occurred in many problems of 
mathematical physics. Therefore, T is related to the theory of transformations, and 
it can be a scalar for an afﬁne application, a vector, a special matrix, a gradient, 
a rotational, a reciprocal tensor, a combination of tensors,9 etc. In this chapter, 
Runge did not mention the concepts of contravariance or covariance that we can 
ﬁnd in Ricci and Levi-Civita’s article. However, in section 16 of his chapter III, 
he introduced the concepts of cogradience and contragradience by using reciprocal 
vectors. He did not develop in detail the use of matrices for changes of coordinates. 
Runge began his presentation in the following way. 
Let a vector p be represented as a linear combination of three independent vectors 
e, f, g such that: 
StartLayout 1st Row bold p equals x bold e plus y bold f plus z bold g period EndLayoutp = xe + yf + zg.
(17) 
If we select three other vectors a, b, c, we can represent p as a combination of this 
new basis for a change of coordinates: 
StartLayout 1st Row bold p equals xi bold a plus eta bold b plus final sigma bold c period EndLayoutp = ξa + ηb + ςc.
(18) 
We assume the relations: 
StartLayout 1st Row StartLayout 1st Row bold e equals a 1 bold a plus b 1 bold b plus c 1 bold c 2nd Row bold f equals a 2 bold a plus b 2 bold b plus c 2 bold c 3rd Row bold g equals a 3 bold a plus b 3 bold b plus c 3 bold c comma EndLayout EndLayout
e = a1a + b1b + c1c
f = a2a + b2b + c2c
g = a3a + b3b + c3c,
(19) 
and: 
StartLayout 1st Row StartLayout 1st Row xi equals a 1 x plus a 2 y plus a 3 z 2nd Row eta equals b 1 x plus b 2 y plus b 3 z 3rd Row final sigma equals c 1 x plus c 2 y plus c 3 z period EndLayout EndLayout
ξ = a1x + a2y + a3z
η = b1x + b2y + b3z
ς = c1x + c2y + c3z.
(20) 
Then, Runge stated that the same type of relations occurred between the reciprocal 
unit vectors e∗, f∗, g∗ and a∗, b∗, c∗ and the corresponding coefﬁcients. He showed 
that the tensor T had the form: 
StartLayout 1st Row bold upper T equals bold ee Superscript asterisk Baseline plus bold ff Superscript asterisk Baseline plus bold gg Superscript asterisk Baseline equals bold aa Superscript asterisk Baseline plus bold bb Superscript asterisk Baseline plus bold cc Superscript asterisk Baseline period EndLayoutT = ee∗+ ff∗+ gg∗= aa∗+ bb∗+ cc∗.
(21)
9 If we have r
' = T. r, 
r'' = T
'. r
', then  r'' = T
'. (T. r). 

124
R. Godard and M. Lewis
Runge then derived the vector p according to the reciprocal vectors: 
StartLayout 1st Row bold p equals x Superscript asterisk Baseline bold e Superscript asterisk Baseline plus y Superscript asterisk Baseline bold f Superscript asterisk Baseline plus z Superscript asterisk Baseline bold g Superscript asterisk Baseline equals xi Superscript asterisk Baseline bold a Superscript asterisk Baseline plus eta Superscript asterisk Baseline bold b Superscript asterisk Baseline plus final sigma Superscript asterisk Baseline bold c Superscript asterisk Baseline period EndLayoutp = x∗e∗+ y∗f∗+ z∗g∗= ξ∗a∗+ η∗b∗+ ς∗c∗.
(22) 
This corresponded to the following equations for the coefﬁcients x∗, y∗, z∗: 
StartLayout 1st Row StartLayout 1st Row x Superscript asterisk Baseline equals a 1 xi Superscript asterisk Baseline plus b 1 eta Superscript asterisk Baseline plus c 1 final sigma Superscript asterisk Baseline 2nd Row y Superscript asterisk Baseline equals a 2 xi Superscript asterisk Baseline plus b 2 eta Superscript asterisk Baseline plus c 2 final sigma Superscript asterisk Baseline 3rd Row z Superscript asterisk Baseline equals a 3 xi Superscript asterisk Baseline plus b 3 eta Superscript asterisk Baseline plus c 3 final sigma Superscript asterisk Baseline period EndLayout EndLayout
x∗= a1ξ∗+ b1η∗+ c1ς∗
y∗= a2ξ∗+ b2η∗+ c2ς∗
z∗= a3ξ∗+ b3η∗+ c3ς∗.
(23) 
Now, we quote Runge: 
In order to express this property between the coefﬁcients and the unit vectors shortly, we 
say, “the coefﬁcients are transformed contragradiently to the unit vectors to which they 
relate and cogradiently to the reciprocal unit vectors.” The word cogradient implies the 
same type of transformation in the passage to new unit vectors and the corresponding new 
coefﬁcients. 
Using afﬁxes to distinguish the various unit vectors and coefﬁcients, then the contragra-
dience is best indicated by using a sufﬁx in one case and an index in the other. Accordingly 
we write 
StartLayout 1st Row bold p equals x 1 bold e Superscript 1 Baseline plus x 2 bold e squared plus x 3 bold e cubed equals x Superscript 1 Baseline bold e Subscript 1 Baseline plus x squared bold e Subscript 2 Baseline plus x cubed bold e Subscript 3 Baseline period EndLayoutp = x1e1 + x2e2 + x3e3 = x1e1 + x2e2 + x3e3.
(24) 
(Runge 1923) 
We must remember that Runge’s objective was vector analysis, and in his volume 
I, tensor analysis was concerned with vectors only. In his Éléments d’histoire 
des mathématiques, Bourbaki (1960) wrote of “the distinction between series of 
cogradient and contragradient variables, i.e. vectors in one space and vectors in the 
dual space”. Runge did not mention the word duality in his book, but the notion was 
implicit. A classic example of duality in linear algebra is the row space of a matrix, 
or the column space in squared matrix theory. 
8 
Conclusion 
Runge’s book was well-received, going through 12 editions between 1919 and 
1923. It has been reprinted recently in German in 2012, and in English in 2021. 
However, his strong focus on the Grassmannian symbols was not fully accepted 
in his time, not even by his son-in-law, Richard Courant, and by David Hilbert at 
Göttingen University. Today, the Grassmannian algebra is not taught in an ordinary 
course on vector analysis. However, the exterior product is still an important tool in 
mathematics. 
Historically, it is interesting to note that Tait responded with vitriol to Gibbs’ 
work on vector analysis in the 1880s and 1890s. Tait did not support the division of 
vector multiplication into two categories. According to Petruni´c, he viewed it as an

Two Textbooks on Vector Analysis: Gibbs and Runge
125
objectionable dismantling and diminution of the robustness of quaternions (Pertuni´c 
2009). Nevertheless, Gibbs and Wilson’s book now forms the basis of modern vector 
analysis. Gibbs and Oliver Heaviside (1850–1925), who began a correspondence 
in 1888, must be acknowledged for their stimulating ideas in this ﬁeld (Heaviside 
1893; Crowe  1967). For Crowe, the ﬁrst volume of Heaviside’s Electromagnetism 
Theory “is the most important, since it contained the ﬁrst extensive published 
treatment of modern vector analysis”. In the words of Stolze: 
The development of the vector calculus is due primarily to the independent efforts of two 
men, Oliver Heaviside (1850–1925) and Josiah W Gibbs (1839–1903). In 1893 Heaviside 
published his famous work on electromagnetic theory. In it he devoted a chapter to vector 
algebra and analysis. (Stolze 1978) 
Our goal here has been to perform a comparative study of two well-known books 
on vector analysis. In future research, it would be important, on the one hand, to 
examine in detail the correspondence between Gibbs and Heaviside and its role in 
the development of vector analysis, and, on the other hand, to study the evolution of 
tensor theory, together with its applications, during the nineteenth century and the 
beginning of the twentieth century. 
References 
Belhoste B (1985) Cauchy 1789–1857: Un mathématicien légitimiste au XIXe siècle. Belin, Paris 
Bourbaki N (1960) Éléments d’histoire des mathématiques. Hermann, Paris 
Burkhardt H, Meyer W (1899–1916) Potentialtheorie. In: Encyklopädie der mathematischen 
Wissenschafften (Analysis). Druck und Verlag von B G Teubner, Leipzig 
Cajori F (1928–1929) A history of mathematical notations. The Open House publishing company, 
Chicago 
Cauchy A-L (1828a) Sur les équations qui expriment les conditions d’équilibre ou les lois du 
mouvement des ﬂuides. Exercices de mathématiques, 3eannée. Bure frères, Paris: 159–194. 
Les Œuvres complètes. Tome 20, Gauthier-Villars, Paris 
Cauchy A-L (1828b) Sur les équations qui expriment les conditions d’équilibre ou les lois du 
mouvement intérieur d’un corps solide, élastique ou inélastique. Exercices de mathématiques, 
3eannée. Bure frères, Paris: 195–226. Les Œuvres complètes. Tome 20, Gauthier-Villars, Paris 
Crowe M J (1967) A History of Vector Analysis. University of Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame 
Guérindon J, Dieudonné J (1978) L’Algèbre depuis 1840. In: Abrégé d’histoire des mathématiques 
1700–1900, Dieudonné J (ed), Hermann, Paris 
Dorier J-L (1995) A General Outline of the Genesis of Vector Space Theory. Historia Mathematica 
22:227–261 
Fehr H (1907) Application de la méthode vectorielle de Grassmann à la géométrie inﬁnitésimale. 
Librairie Georg et Co, Genève 
Gibbs J W (1881–1884) Elements of Vector Analysis Arranged for the Use of Students in Physics. 
Unpublished notes 
Gibbs J W, Wilson E B (1901) Vector Analysis. A text-book for the use of Students of Mathematics 
and Physics. Copyright by Yale University. Edition of 1909 by Charles Scribner’s sons, New 
York 
Godard R (2008) Carl Runge, a Professor of Applied Mathematics at Paula Aula Univerzität, 
Göttingen. Proceedings of the HPM 08, Mexico City 
Grassmann H G (1844) Die lineale Ausdehnunglehre. Otto Wigand, Leipzig

126
R. Godard and M. Lewis
Heaviside O (1893) Electromagnetic Theory. Vol 1. The Electrician Print and Pub Co, London 
Katz V (1979) The History of Stokes’ Theorem. Mathematical Magazine 52: 146–156 
Kline M (1972) Mathematical Thought from Ancient to Modern Times. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford 
Langer R E (1939) Josiah Willard Gibbs. The American Mathematical Monthly 46 (2): 75–84 
Maxwell J C (1873) A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism (2 volumes). Clarendon Press, 
London 
Moore G H (1995) The Axiomatisation of Linear Algebra: 1875–1940. Historia Mathematica 22: 
262–303 
Petruni´c J G (2009) J.W. Gibbs and the Development of Vector Analysis in the Late 19th Century. 
Proceedings of CSHPM 22: 120–129 
Ricci G and Levi-Civita T (1900) Méthodes de calcul différentiel absolu et leurs applications. 
Mathematische Annalen 54: 125–201. English translation by V. McHale (2013) available from 
http://vmchale.com/translations/tensor_translation.pdf (accessed Jan 29, 2023). 
Runge C (1919) Vektoranalysis. S. Hirzel, Leipzig. Engl. tr. Runge (1923). 
Runge C (1923). Vector Analysis, transl. by H. Levy. Methuen & Co, London 
Schubring G (ed) (1996) Hermann Günther Grassmann (1809–1877) visionary mathematician, 
scientist and neohumanist scholar. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht 
Stolze C H (1978) A history of the divergence theorem. Historia Mathematica 5(4): 427–442 
Tait P G (1870) On Green’s and other Allied Theorems. Trans Royal Soc Edinb 26: 69–85 
Ustina F (1974) Henry Wilbraham and the Gibbs phenomenon in 1848. Historia Mathematica: 
83–84

The Legacy of Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in History 
of Algebra 
Jeffrey A. Oaks 
Abstract Muh.ammad ibn M¯us¯a al-Khw¯arazm¯ı is today arguably the most well-
known medieval Arabic mathematician. His signiﬁcant work on arithmetic, algebra, 
and astronomical tables were written in Baghdad in the ﬁrst half of the third/ninth 
century. This paper traces the impact of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s Kit¯ab al-jabr wa-l-
muq¯abala (Book of algebra) on the ﬁeld of algebra. 
1 Introduction 
Muh.ammad ibn M¯us¯a al-Khw¯arazm¯ı1 is today arguably the most well-known 
medieval Arabic mathematician. His fame rests mainly on the far-reaching inﬂuence 
of three books that he wrote in Baghdad in the ﬁrst half of the third/ninth century,2 
on arithmetic, algebra, and astronomical tables. He composed other treatises on 
mathematics and astronomy, but it is these three that were studied, copied, adjusted, 
translated, and commented on extensively over the succeeding centuries in Arabic, 
Latin, Hebrew, and European vernacular languages. 
1 Until recently the standard transliteration of his name was “al-Khw¯arizm¯ı”. Those who deem 
what is proper have recently adjusted the rule, so we now write “al-Khw¯arazm¯ı”. 
2 For dates relating to Islamic civilization we give both Muslim and Christian dates. Here, the third 
century AH corresponds roughly to the ninth century CE. 
This article began as a lecture I delivered at the one-day seminar “al-Khw¯arizm¯ı’s contribution 
to civilization” held November 21, 2016 at Hamid bin Khalifa University in Doha, Qatar. All 
translations are mine unless noted otherwise. 
J. A. Oaks () 
University of Indianapolis, Indianapolis, IN, USA 
e-mail: oaks@uindy.edu 
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
M. Zack, D. Waszek (eds.), Research in History and Philosophy of Mathematics, 
Annals of the Canadian Society for History and Philosophy of Mathematics/ Société 
canadienne d’histoire et de philosophie des mathématiques, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-46193-4_8
127

128
J. A. Oaks
This paper traces the impact of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s Kit¯ab al-jabr wa-l-muq¯abala 
(Book of algebra, henceforth Algebra) on the ﬁeld of algebra. We begin with a brief 
bio-bibliographic summary and a review of the structure of solutions to problems 
in Arabic algebra. From there al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s book is situated in the context of 
the movement to collect knowledge in early Abb¯asid Baghdad, particularly with 
regard to the new role of written books in a traditionally oral society. With this 
background in mind and taking into account the ways he presents his material, we 
propose which features of the Algebra were original with al-Khw¯arazm¯ı and which 
he borrowed from other sources. From there we follow the inﬂuence of his book in 
the textual tradition that it initiated over the course of the succeeding eight centuries 
and across three continents. Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı would already be considered to be a 
crucial ﬁgure in the history of algebra solely for the fact that he wrote the seminal 
work that served as a model for the Arabic books that followed. But his book also 
experienced a rebirth in the twelfth century CE in Latin translation, where it again 
became a seminal text, this time in the development of European algebra. 
2 Life and Works 
Few details of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s life have come down to us. We know that he wrote 
three of his works in Baghdad during the caliphate of al-Mam¯un (reigned 198– 
218/813–833), including his book on algebra, and that he was present at the death of 
the caliph al-Wathiq in 232/847. His nisba indicates that he or his ancestors hailed 
from Khwarazm, the region south of the Aral Sea. His Persian heritage might be 
read as an indication that he was a Zoroastrian, but the long invocation to God in the 
beginning of his Algebra leaves no doubt that he was a Muslim. Ibn al-Nad¯ım tells 
us in his fourth/tenth-century bio-bibliographic Kit¯ab al-ﬁhrist (Catalog [of books]) 
that al-Khw¯arazm¯ı was associated with the Bayt al-H. ikma (House of Wisdom) in 
Baghdad. Based on our scanty sources, the House of Wisdom was most likely a 
palace library devoted to the preservation of Persian culture, and not, as historians 
once thought, a center or university devoted to the translation of Greek books. Even 
if its focus may have shifted in a more scientiﬁc direction in early Abb¯asid times, 
it is unlikely that al-Khw¯arazm¯ı wrote his  Algebra in association with the library.3 
Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s known works are listed below. In the list below, a “bullet•” is placed 
next to those that are extant in substantial, if sometimes altered, form.
•
Kit¯ab al-h. is¯ab al-Hind¯ı (Book of Indian reckoning). The earliest known Arabic 
arithmetic book explaining calculation with what we call Arabic numerals.4 
3 See (Gutas 1998, 53–60) for what is known about the Bayt al-H. ikma. The work of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı 
that best ﬁts the mission of the library is his book on astrological history. 
4 The book survives in a medieval Latin reworking of a Latin translation. The complete edition with 
German translation and English summary is published in (al-Khw¯arazm¯ı 1997). For an English 
translation of roughly the ﬁrst half, see (Crossley 1990). For the Arabic title, see (Saidan 1987, 
440).

The Legacy of Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in History of Algebra
129
Kit¯ab al-jam wa-l-tafr¯ıq (Book of adding and subtracting). A book on practical 
problem solving in a business context.5 
•
Kit¯ab al-jabr wa-l-muq¯abala (Book of algebra). Written during the reign of al-
Mam¯un (198–218/813–833).6 
•
Z¯ıj al-Sindhind (Astronomical tables based on Indian models).7 
•
Kit¯ab s. ¯urat al-ard. (Book of the map of the earth). Possibly written, with co-
authors, in connection with al-Mam¯un’s world map. Composed sometime 201– 
210/817–826. 
Kit¯ab al-tar¯ıkh (Book of history). An astrological history of the world. Some 
horoscopes from it are preserved in a History written in the late third/ninth 
century by al-Yaq¯ub¯ı.
•
Istikhr¯aj tar¯ıkh al-yah¯ud (Extractions of the Jewish era). A work on the Jewish 
calendar, probably written in 208/823-4. 
Kit¯ab amal al-ast.url¯ab (Book on working the astrolabe)
•
Kit¯ab al-amal bi l-ast.url¯ab (Book on the workings of the astrolabe) 
3 The Scope and Limits of Arabic Algebra 
The word “algebra” today takes a variety of related meanings. It can refer to the 
concrete numerical technique taught in secondary schools, to the mathematician’s 
axiomatic approach, or to any kind of abstract system in which unknown or 
undetermined parameters are manipulated via symbols. These meanings all derive 
historically from the practical algebra of early modern Europe, which in turn can be 
traced back through the books of the Italian abacists of the fourteenth and ﬁfteenth 
centuries, who appropriated it ultimately from medieval Arabic sources. 
In contrast to the range of meanings the word “algebra” assumes today, medieval 
Arabic algebra was a speciﬁc technique of numerical problem-solving, with its own 
technical vocabulary, methods, and concepts. It was not used to state identities like 
left parenthesis x plus y right parenthesis squared equals x squared plus y squared plus 2 x y(x + y)2 = x2 + y2 + 2xy, formulas like upper A equals pi r squaredA = πr2, curves like y equals 3 x squared plus 2y = 3x2 + 2, or  
physical laws like d equals one half g t squaredd = 1
2gt2. Apart from rare exceptions of its application in proofs, 
algebra was used only to ﬁnd unknown numbers (Oaks 2019).
5 See the discussion in (Saidan 1987, 439–40).
6 The Arabic text with English translation is published in (al-Khw¯arazm¯ı 2009), which is translated 
from the French edition (al-Khw¯arazm¯ı 2007). (al-Khw¯arazm¯ı 2009b) contains a facsimile of the 
Oxford manuscript with a Spanish translation.
7 The Arabic original is lost, but much of this z¯ıj can be reconstructed from later books that preserve 
parts of the original through borrowings and commentaries. The main sources are: (a) Adelard of 
Bath’s twelfth-century Latin translation of an Arabic recension made in the late tenth century in 
Cordova by Maslama al-Majr¯ıt.¯ı, (b) twelfth-century Latin and Hebrew translations of the tenth-
century Arabic commentary by al-Muthann¯a, (c) a tenth-century commentary by Ibn Masr¯ur, and 
(d) the eleventh-century Toledan Tables of al-Zarq¯al¯ı.

130
J. A. Oaks
The name given to algebra in Arabic was al-jabr wa-l-muq¯abala (“restoration 
and confrontation”), or just al-jabr for short. Algebra was in fact just one of several 
different techniques of numerical problem-solving. Some others are the rule of three, 
single false position, and double false position. In double false position, for example, 
two guesses are made for the answer, and the solution is found by a calculation made 
with the guesses and their respective errors.8 
All calculations in the other problem-solving methods are performed on known 
numbers, but in algebra unknowns are given names that are operated on to set up 
equations, which are then simpliﬁed and solved. The name given to the ﬁrst-degree 
unknown in Arabic is shay (“thing”) or jidhr (“root”). The second-degree unknown 
is called a m¯al (“amount of money”), and the third degree is a kab (“cube”). Higher 
powers are expressed as combinations of m¯al and kab. The fourth power is a 
m¯al m¯al, the ﬁfth is usually a m¯al kab, the sixth a kab kab, etc. Units, which 
al-Khw¯arazm¯ı calls “simple numbers” (adad mufrad) were usually counted in 
dirhams, a denomination of silver coin, or as “units”, “in number”, or the designation 
was left off altogether. 
Three of these terms are also common in Arabic arithmetic, where they take 
different meanings. The arithmetical meaning of jidhr is “(square) root”, and this 
root is always taken of some other quantity, like “a root of ﬁve” (StartRoot 5 EndRoot
√
5) or “a root of 
two things” (StartRoot 2 x EndRoot
√
2x). In arithmetic the word m¯al means either an amount of money or 
a generic “quantity”. Many problems in Arabic arithmetic ask for an unknown m¯al, 
and even when the problem is solved by algebra the arithmetical m¯al is still named 
in terms of the names of the powers in the beginning of the solution. It is usually 
named as a “thing”, with a statement like “So make your m¯al a thing”. But often it is 
named as the algebraic m¯al, with a statement like “So make your m¯al a m¯al”, which 
could be translated as “So make your quantity x squaredx2” (Oaks & Alkhateeb 2005). The 
third term common in arithmetic is kab, which usually means “cube root”, though 
sometimes it can mean an arithmetical “cube”. Which meaning is intended for these 
terms is always clear from the context. 
Solutions to problems are presented rhetorically in the Arabic books, with even 
the numbers written out in words. But problems were not worked out rhetorically. 
To perform calculations and solve problems one wrote in notation on a temporary 
surface like a dust-board. This was a ﬂat surface on which ﬁne sand or dust was 
spread, and calculations were written with a stylus. Then, to communicate algebra to 
others in a book, whether rules or worked-out problems, a rhetorical version without 
notation was composed. This is because books were regarded as being transcriptions 
of lectures, and notation serves no purpose for the listener (Oaks 2012). 
To solve a problem by algebra, an unknown number is named in terms of the 
names of the powers, usually as a “thing”, and the conditions of the problem are 
applied to ideally set up a polynomial equation. If needed, the equation is then 
simpliﬁed by al-jabr (restoration) and/or al-muq¯abala (confrontation). For example, 
in one problem al-Khw¯arazm¯ı sets up the equation “a hundred less twenty things
8 See (Abdeljaouad & Oaks 2021, 25ff; Oaks 2023) for explanations of the different techniques. 

The Legacy of Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in History of Algebra
131
equal forty dirhams” (in our notation, 100 minus 20 x equals 40100 −20x = 40). Here the “hundred 
less twenty things” was regarded as being a deﬁcient hundred, in which twenty 
things is lacking. So he writes, “Restore the hundred by the twenty-things, and 
add it to the forty, so you get: forty dirhams and twenty things equal the hundred” 
(40 plus 20 x equals 10040 + 20x = 100) (al-Khw¯arazm¯ı 2009, 159.8). Two steps are involved here. First, 
the “hundred less twenty things” is restored to a full hundred, then, to balance the 
equation, twenty things are added to the forty dirhams. Next, al-Khw¯arazm¯ı applies 
al-muq¯abala, conjugated as q¯abil, to this equation: “Then confront (q¯abil) it with the 
hundred: cast away the forty from the hundred, leaving sixty dirhams equal twenty 
things” (60 equals 20 x60 = 20x).9 Here the forty and the hundred are confronted, which entails 
subtracting the smaller from the greater (Oaks & Alkhateeb 2007). 
The rules for solving simpliﬁed equations use the “numbers” (i.e., coefﬁcients) 
of the terms, and because only positive numbers were acknowledged, there are six 
types of simpliﬁed equation of degree one and two. They are listed here together 
with modern notation in the order given by al-Khw¯arazm¯ı, and with the sample 
equations that he solves:10 
Simple equations 
1. “m¯als equal roots” (a x squared equals b xax2 = bx) 
x squared equals 5 xx2 = 5x; one third x squared equals 4 x 1
3x2 = 4x; 5 x squared equals 10 x5x2 = 10x
2. “m¯als equal a number” (a x squared equals cax2 = c) 
x squared equals 9x2 = 9; 5 x squared equals 805x2 = 80; one half x squared equals 181
2x2 = 18
3. “roots equal a number” (b x equals cbx = c) 
x equals 3x = 3; 4 x equals 204x = 20; one half x equals 101
2x = 10
Composite equations 
4. “m¯als and roots equal a number” (a x squared plus b x equals cax2 + bx = c) x squared plus 10 x equals 39x2 + 10x = 39; 2 x squared plus 10 x equals 482x2 + 10x =
48; one half x squared plus 5 x equals 281
2x2 + 5x = 28
5. “m¯als and a number equal roots” (a x squared plus c equals b xax2 + c = bx) x squared plus 21 equals 10 xx2 + 21 = 10x
6. “roots and a number equal m¯als” (a x squared equals b x plus cax2 = bx + c) 3 x plus 4 equals x squared3x + 4 = x2
Each type of equation is solved by its own rule, and al-Khw¯arazm¯ı explains the 
solutions in the context of his examples. Here is the rule to solve the type 4 equation 
worked out for his second example, which in modern notation is 2 x squared plus 10 x equals 482x2 + 10x = 48 (I 
leave m¯al untranslated for both its algebraic and arithmetical meanings): 
[ellipsis. . .] such as when you say, two m¯als and ten roots equal forty-eight dirhams, and its 
meaning is: what two m¯als, if added together and the same as ten of its roots are added 
to it, amounts to forty-eight dirhams?11 It is necessary to return the two m¯als to one m¯al,
9 The translation takes into account the critical apparatus. In nearly all instances of confrontation 
in Arabic texts, the word qabala is not invoked: the authors simply make the subtraction. 
10 (al-Khw¯arazm¯ı 2009, 97.17, 101.3). I label the two groups as “simple” and “composite” 
following al-Karaj¯ı. Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı did not give names to the two kinds. 
11 Here “two m¯als and ten roots equal forty-eight dirhams” is the algebraic equation, in which the 
words m¯al and jidhr (root) are the algebraic names of the powers. The meaning of the equation is 
then explained by re-expressing it as an arithmetic problem, “what two m¯als, if added together and 
the same as ten of its roots are added to it, amounts to forty-eight dirhams?”, where m¯al and jidhr 

132
J. A. Oaks
and you know that a m¯al with respect to two m¯als is its half. So return everything in the 
problem12 to its half, so it is as if [someone] said, a m¯al and ﬁve roots equal twenty-four 
dirhams, and its meaning is: what m¯al, if you add to it ﬁve of its roots, amounts to twenty-
four? 
Halve the roots to get two and a half. Multiply it by itself to get six and a fourth. Add it to 
the twenty-four to get thirty dirhams and a fourth. Take its root, which is ﬁve and a half. 
Subtract from it half the roots, which is two and a half, leaving three, which is a root of the 
m¯al, and the  m¯al is nine. (al-Khw¯arazm¯ı 2009, 101.14) 
Each equation type except the ﬁfth has exactly one positive solution. The normalized 
type 5 equation x squared plus c equals b xx2 + c = bx has two positive solutions if left parenthesis one half b right parenthesis squared greater than c( 1
2b)2 > c, one solution 
if left parenthesis one half b right parenthesis squared equals c( 1
2b)2 = c, and no solution if left parenthesis one half b right parenthesis squared less than c( 1
2b)2 < c. Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı gives only one solution, 
from the ﬁrst case, corresponding to our x equals one half b minus StartRoot left parenthesis one half b right parenthesis squared minus c EndRootx = 1
2b −

( 1
2b)2 −c. Later algebraists 
distinguished between the cases and give both solutions to the ﬁrst case. 
Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı gave proofs by geometry for the rules for solving the composite 
equations. These proofs are intuitive in that they rely on a direct comparison of 
lines and areas. They make no use of ratio and proportion, and are not grounded in 
Euclid’s Elements. They are described below in Sect. 5. 
Many Arabic algebra books, al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s included, begin by explaining the 
various rules for algebraic problem-solving and then give a collection of worked-
out problems that apply those rules. Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı gives a total of 39 problems 
(The Oxford manuscript has 40 problems, but problem (7) in that manuscript is a 
later interpolation). Just as our Arabic authors understood, examples help make the 
whole problem-solving process clearer. So I will translate two of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s 
problems. The ﬁrst is Problem (T5). I have divided it into the stages just described, 
and I put corresponding modern symbolic versions of the rhetorical polynomials 
and equations in brackets. First, the enunciation: 
Ten: you divide it into two parts, and you multiply each part by itself and you sum them, so 
it gives ﬁfty-eight. 
Because algebra was just one of several methods for solving problems, the 
enunciation itself is not an algebra question. It is a question in arithmetic that in 
this text will be solved by algebra. 
[Stage 1: Name an unknown and set up an equation] 
Its rule is that you make one of the parts a thing [x], and the other ten less a thing [10 minus x10 −x]. 
So multiply ten less a thing by itself to get a hundred and a m¯al less twenty things [100 plus x squared minus 20 x100 +
x2 −20x]. Then you multiply a thing by itself to get a m¯al [x squaredx2]. Then you sum them, so it 
gives: a hundred and two m¯als less twenty things equal ﬁfty-eight [100 plus 2 x squared minus 20 x equals 58100 + 2x2 −20x = 58]. 
[Stage 2: Simplify the equation] 
Restore (ajbir, conjugated from al-jabr) the hundred and two m¯als [100 plus 2 x squared100 + 2x2] by the  
missing twenty things [20x], and add it to the ﬁfty-eight. So you say: a hundred and two 
m¯als equal ﬁfty-eight and twenty things [100 plus 2 x squared equals 58 plus 20 x100 + 2x2 = 58 + 20x]. Return it to a m¯al. So  
assume their arithmetical meanings of “quantity” and “square root”. Several other Arabic authors 
explain the meanings of equations this way.
12 I.e., the equation. At this point in time there was no word for algebraic “equation” in Arabic. 
That would come with the translation of Diophantus’s Arithmetica later in the century. 

The Legacy of Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in History of Algebra
133
you say: ﬁfty dirhams and a m¯al equal twenty-nine and ten things [50 plus x squared equals 29 plus 10 x50 + x2 = 29 + 10x].13 
Confront (q¯abil, from al-muq¯abala) them, by which you cast away twenty-nine from the 
ﬁfty. So this leaves: twenty-one and a m¯al equal ten things [21 plus x squared equals 10 x21 + x2 = 10x]. 
[Stage 3: Solve the simpliﬁed equation according to the prescribed rule] 
Halve the things, so it becomes ﬁve. Multiply it by itself, to get twenty-ﬁve. Cast away the 
twenty-one from it, leaving four. Take its root, which is two. Subtract it from the ﬁve things, 
which is half the roots, leaving three, and that is one of the parts.14 
Algebra belongs to arithmetic, so the rule for solving simpliﬁed equations in stage 
3 is a sequence of arithmetical operations. Sometimes the equation set up at the end 
of stage 1 is already simpliﬁed, so stage 2 is omitted, and if the simpliﬁed equation 
is one of the three simple types then stage 3 is trivial. 
A total of twelve of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s 39 solved problems ask for the two parts 
of ten given some condition on the parts. More common are problems asking 
for an unknown m¯al, where the m¯al takes the arithmetical meaning of a generic 
“quantity”.15 Here is Problem (T6), where the equation that is set up is already 
simpliﬁed: 
A m¯al: you multiply its third by its fourth, so it brings back the m¯al with an additional 
twenty-four. 
[Stage 1] 
Its rule is that you make your m¯al a thing. You multiply a third of a thing by a fourth 
of a thing to get half a sixth of a m¯al, (which) equals a thing and twenty-four dirhams 
[one twelfth x squared equals x plus 24 1
12x2 = x + 24]. 
[Stage 3] 
Then you multiply half a sixth of a m¯al by twelve to complete your m¯al. And multiply the 
thing by twelve to get twelve things, and multiply twenty-four by twelve, so you will have 
two hundred eighty-eight dirhams and twelve roots equal a m¯al [288 plus 12 x equals x squared288 + 12x = x2]. Halve 
the roots to get six and multiply it by itself and add it to two hundred eighty-eight, which 
amounts to three hundred twenty-four. Then take its root, which is eighteen, add it to half 
the roots, which is six, to get twenty-four, which is the m¯al. (al-Khw¯arazm¯ı 2009, 155.6) 
Here, too, an unknown number (this time the arithmetical m¯al) is named a “thing”, 
and an equation is set up and solved. In the solution the square of the thing becomes 
the algebraic second power m¯al. 
With this structure in mind, we can review the organization of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s 
book. The Kit¯ab al-jabr wa-l-muq¯abala is divided into three parts. The ﬁrst part, 
which I call the “algebra proper”,16 covers the rules of algebra together with a 
collection of worked-out problems in which the rules are applied. The problems 
just translated are from that group. The second part is relatively short, covering the
13 In this problem al-Khw¯arazm¯ı performs this step out of order from the norm. Setting the number 
of m¯als to 1 should be the ﬁrst step in stage 3, as he himself instructed when he explained the six 
equations. 
14 (al-Khw¯arazm¯ı 2009, 153), taking into account the critical apparatus. 
15 There are 23 such problems in al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s book. Of the three remaining problems, two deal 
with an amount of money distributed among some men. The interpolated problem (7) in the Oxford 
manuscript deals with wheat and barley. 
16 See (Oaks 2015) for more on the notion of “algebra proper”. 

134
J. A. Oaks
rule of three and mensuration. In the last part, occupying about half of the book, 
inheritance problems are solved by algebra. 
It is the ﬁrst part, the “algebra proper”, that became the model for later Arabic 
books on algebra. It can be broken down as follows: 
1. Rules for solving problems by algebra 
a. The names of the powers: root, m¯al, and “simple number” 
b. Classiﬁcation and solutions of the six equations 
c. Geometric proofs for the rules for solving the three composite equations 
d. Operations on polynomials and square roots, with a couple of proofs 
2. Solved problems 
a. Six problems (T1)–(T6) to illustrate the six types of equation 
b. Thirty-three additional problems (1)–(34), excluding problem (7). 
It is also instructive to see how the medieval authors themselves characterized 
algebra. I have reviewed extant sources for the period before ca. 440/1050 and found 
that most authors describe algebra as a technique for ﬁnding unknown numbers (Al¯ı 
al-Sulam¯ı, al-Karaj¯ı, al-F¯ar¯ab¯ı, the 4th/10th c. lexicographer al-Khw¯arazm¯ı), and/or 
they explain the meanings of the terms al-jabr and al-muq¯abala as they are applied 
in the simpliﬁcation of the equation in stage 2 (Al¯ı al-Sulam¯ı, the lexicographer 
al-Khw¯arazm¯ı, al-B¯ır¯un¯ı), while longer explanations describe the entire three-stage 
process of solving problems (al-B¯ır¯un¯ı, al-Karaj¯ı) (Oaks, forthcoming). Still other 
authors, including al-Khw¯arazm¯ı the algebraist, do not explain what algebra is, 
but simply present the rules and give examples of solved problems. None of the 
more than two dozen algebraists I have read, whether they wrote before or after ca. 
440/1050, singles out the six equations as being the central focus of algebra. 
Later authors describe algebra in similar terms. Al-Khayy¯am introduces the art 
in his Treatise on algebra (ca. 464/1072) with: “One of the mathematical notions 
needed in the part of philosophy known as mathematics is the art of algebra (al-jabr 
wa-l-muq¯abala), established for ﬁnding unknowns in arithmetic and mensura-
tion.”17 Al-F¯aris¯ı (d. 718/1319), in a commentary in which he provides arithmetical 
and algebraic rules with proofs in the style of Euclid’s number theory books, writes: 
“Algebra (al-jabr wa-l-muq¯abala) is the science of ﬁnding unknown quantities by 
the properties of proportional numbers”,18 and he describes in detail the three-
stage process of solving problems by algebra.19 And last, the social scientist Ibn
17 (Rashed & Vahabzadeh 1999, 117.5). In applications of algebra to mensuration (mis¯ah. a) it is  
the numerical measures of the lines and areas that are found. Al-Khayy¯am presumes the reader is 
already familiar with the basics of algebraic problem-solving. His book is devoted to geometric 
solutions to simpliﬁed cubic equations (Oaks 2011b). 
18 (al-F¯aris¯ı 1994, 461.19). The “proportional numbers” are the powers of the unknown: the unit, 
the thing, the m¯al, the cube, etc. 
19 See (al-F¯aris¯ı 1994, 463.1) for the Arabic text, and (Christianidis & Oaks 2023, 54, 60) for 
English translations of part of it. 

The Legacy of Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in History of Algebra
135
Khald¯un (732–808/1332–1406), writing in Egypt in the eighth/fourteenth century, 
describes the various branches of mathematics in his Muqaddima (Prolegomena), 
where he writes: “Another subdivision of arithmetic is algebra. This is a craft that 
makes it possible to discover the unknown from the known data, if there exists a 
relationship between them requiring it”,20 and he, too, then describes the steps of 
solving problems by algebra, beginning with the setting-up of the equation, then its 
simpliﬁcation by al-muq¯abala and aj-jabr to one of the six types, and ﬁnally its 
solution. 
4 Diophantus and Ab¯u K¯amil 
To properly assess the impact of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı on algebra in both the Islamic world 
and later in Europe, we will need to consider his book with respect to the books 
of two other algebraists, Diophantus and Ab¯u K¯amil. Diophantus of Alexandria 
wrote his Arithmetica in Greek around the third century CE. Of the thirteen books 
that made up the Arithmetica, six are extant in the original Greek and four more 
are extant in Arabic translation. The remaining three are lost.21 The Arithmetica 
is structured a little like al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s algebra proper, with rules followed by 
problems, though here the problems take up the vast majority of the work. Just as 
in Arabic algebra, Diophantus establishes the names of the powers of the unknown 
in his introduction and he solves problems by setting up, simplifying, and solving 
equations expressed in terms of those names. His method thus warrants to be 
called algebra, based on how Arabic authors characterized the term and solved their 
problems. Because Diophantus routinely sets up equations up to the ninth degree 
that simplify to two terms of consecutive powers, it would not have served him to 
classify the three simple equations as al-Khw¯arazm¯ı did. But he did present rules 
for solving the three composite equations, and he justiﬁed these rules arithmetically 
by arguments based on completing the square.22 
In the latter part of the third/ninth century, a few decades after al-Khw¯arazm¯ı 
wrote his Algebra, the  Arithmetica was translated into Arabic by Qust.¯a ibn L¯uq¯a (d.  
ca. 299/912). Qust.¯a called it the “book of Diophantus on algebra” (kit¯ab D¯ı¯ufant.is f¯ı 
l-jabr wa-l-muq¯abala), and other Arabic writers also naturally called the Arithmetica 
a book on algebra, either al-jabr wa-l-muq¯abala or just al-jabr (Sesiano 1982, 13).
20 (Ibn Khald¯un 1967 III, 124), Rosenthal’s translation. 
21 The Greek books are edited in (Diophantus 1893–5) and translated into French in (Diophantus 
1959). The Arabic books are edited and translated into English in (Sesiano 1982), and edited and 
translated into French in (Diophantus 1986). A complete English translation of all ten extant books 
has recently been published in (Christianidis & Oaks 2023). 
22 Two of Diophantus’s derivations are preserved in al-Karaj¯ı’s al-Fakhr¯ı, and all three are 
transformed into proofs in another short work of al-Karaj¯ı as well as in a work of Fakhr al-D¯ın 
al-H. il¯at.¯ı (Oaks  2018; Christianidis & Oaks 2023, 63–6). 

136
J. A. Oaks
Later, in the ﬁfteenth century, manuscripts of the six surviving Greek books surfaced 
in Europe where again it was invariably recognized as a work on algebra. 
That Diophantus did not invent algebra is clear from testimony in Ibn al-
Nad¯ım’s Kit¯ab al-ﬁhrist. This book not only mentions the book on al-jabr by 
Diophantus, but also the book on al-jabr by the Greek astronomer Hipparchus of 
Nicaea (second century BCE) that was translated into Arabic, and that the tenth-
century mathematician Ab¯u l-Waf¯a wrote commentaries on the algebra books of 
al-Khw¯arazm¯ı, Diophantus, and Hipparchus (Christianidis & Oaks 2023, 92ff). 
With the exception of the Arithmetica of Diophantus, all of these books are lost. We 
have independent conﬁrmation of the commentary on Hipparchus by Ab¯u l-Waf¯a
himself, who mentions it in one of his extant books.23 Of course, Hipparchus should 
not be considered to be the inventor of algebra either. Both he and Diophantus, like 
al-Khw¯arazm¯ı a few centuries later, composed books dealing with the algebra of 
practitioners that must have circulated orally in their times. 
Turning to other cultures, the method of naming unknowns then setting up and 
simplifying equations was also practiced in India, such as we read in Brahmagupta’s 
seventh-century CE Br¯ahma-sphut.a-siddh¯anta. And we know that Mesopotamian 
cuneiform tablets represent known and unknown numbers with lines and rectangles 
that are then manipulated to ﬁnd the solution, but in this case there is no notion of an 
equation that can be simpliﬁed to a standard form. We can reasonably posit that there 
is some historical connection between Babylonian algebra and the algebra of Dio-
phantus. Although it is to some extent arbitrary, I choose to restrict the term “alge-
bra” in premodern texts to the technique applied by Diophantus, Brahmagupta, and 
al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in which equations are simpliﬁed. So conceived, the identities and 
even the nationality of the people who originally devised algebra are lost to history. 
The other author important for understanding the impact of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı is  
Ab¯u K¯amil, who wrote his Kit¯ab f¯ı l-jabr wa-l-muq¯abala (Book on algebra) in  
Egypt later in the third/ninth century, around the same time that Qust.¯a translated 
the Arithmetica.24 Neither Qust.¯a’s translation nor Ab¯u K¯amil’s Algebra show any 
inﬂuence on the other. Like al-Khw¯arazm¯ı, Ab¯u K¯amil composed his book in three 
parts, the ﬁrst of which is his version of the “algebra proper”. The second part, titled 
“On the pentagon and decagon”, is a collection of geometry problems solved by 
algebra, and the third part is a further collection of solved problems in arithmetic 
that begin with 38 indeterminate problems of the type solved by Diophantus and end 
with a section on summing geometric progressions. Only one of those indeterminate 
problems is also solved in the extant part of Diophantus’s Arithmetica, and the 
problems are worded differently. They belong to an Arabic tradition that certainly 
has some historical but not direct link with Diophantus (Sesiano 1977).
23 (Ibn al-Nad¯ım 2009, II/1, 219, 259.11; Saidan 1971, 126.7). 
24 Only one Arabic manuscript of Ab¯u K¯amil’s Algebra is extant: Istanbul, Beyazid Library, Kara 
Mus.t.afa Pa¸sa collection 379 (new number 19046), published in facsimile in (Ab¯u 1986) and edited 
with French translation in (Ab¯u K¯amil 2012). See also (Levey 1966) for an edition of a medieval 
Hebrew translation with English translation. More recent is the edition and English translation of 
the Hebrew translation on the Mispar project website: https://mispar.ethz.ch/wiki/Mainnormal bar_Page. 

The Legacy of Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in History of Algebra
137
The two main inﬂuences on Ab¯u K¯amil were al-Khw¯arazm¯ı and Euclid, both of 
whom he mentions by name. He modeled his algebra proper on al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s, 
with rules followed by worked-out problems, and he sought to establish the various 
rules and procedures with Euclidean-style proofs. In the ﬁrst part of the algebra 
proper he classiﬁes and solves the six equations of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı and he gives 
proofs by geometry after each rule. All four of his sample composite equations 
are the same as al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s, too.25 The large majority of his proofs are either 
geometric and cite some proposition from the Elements, or they mimic the number 
theory proofs from Euclid’s Books VII-IX (Oaks 2011). For the rules for solving 
the composite equations he also includes proofs written in the intuitive style of al-
Khw¯arazm¯ı. For example, for the type 4 equation his ﬁrst proof is structured like 
Euclid’s and he appeals to Elements Proposition II.6. He then begins the second 
proof with: “And if you want to demonstrate visually what I said to you” (Ab¯u 
K¯amil 2012, 257.1), and he gives a cut-and-paste proof following the argument in 
the second of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s proofs (al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s proofs are described below 
in Sect. 5). The proofs for the type 5 and 6 equations are written similarly. 
Instead of 39 problems total, Ab¯u K¯amil gives 74 problems. The ﬁrst six 
problems again illustrate the six types of equation, and several problems are 
borrowed from al-Khw¯arazm¯ı.26 
5 Oral Traditions, Books, and al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s Innovations 
The well-known Arabic translation movement, which saw the large-scale appropria-
tion and translation of scientiﬁc and philosophical works, mainly from Greek, lasted 
roughly from the middle of the second/eighth to the end of the fourth/tenth century 
(Gutas 1998). Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı did his part in the gathering of foreign sciences by 
writing books making Indian arithmetic and astronomical tables accessible to an 
Arabic-reading audience, and his Book of the map of the earth is an expanded 
and corrected version of Ptolemy’s Geography. We should also include his Book 
of history, which was based in Persian milennial astrology. 
But it was not just foreign knowledge that was sought out by Arabic scholars. 
People in different professional groups locally in the Middle East had cultivated 
knowledge and techniques orally that also attracted the attention of those now 
writing books. Topics include Arabic folk astronomy (al-anw¯a), mensuration 
(ilm al-mis¯ah. a), and the arithmetic of ﬁnger-reckoning, called h. is¯ab al-yadd 
(hand arithmetic) or h. is¯ab al-haw¯a¯ı (mental arithmetic). Finger reckoning was 
a technique of calculating mentally in which intermediate results were “stored”
25 For the nine examples of simple equations, only x squared equals 5 xx2 = 5x and one half x equals 10 1
2x = 10 are the same. 
26 Ab¯u K¯amil’s problems (T2) and (T3) are the same as al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s, and his (T5), (11), and 
(14) are al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s (1), (5), and (31) respectively. Other problems are modiﬁcations of al-
Khw¯arazm¯ı’s. 

138
J. A. Oaks
by positioning the ﬁngers in particular ways. The numerical problem-solving 
techniques described above, including double false position and algebra, originated 
in the ﬁnger-reckoning tradition (Saidan 1974, 369). This practical, oral knowledge 
in astronomy, mensuration, and arithmetic was written down in books beginning in 
the third/ninth century.27 
The Yemeni scholar Muh.ammad al-Khuz¯a¯ı (d. in Zab¯ıd in 680/1281-2), in his 
commentary on al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s Algebra, describes the oral tradition in algebra and 
how al-Khw¯arazm¯ı came to write his book: 
[ellipsis. . .] the people transmitted this knowledge orally without it being recorded in any 
book, until the caliphate reached al-Mam¯un and the knowledge of algebra had become 
extinguished amongst the people. Al-Mam¯un was informed of this and he made inquiries 
after someone who had experience in (algebra). The only person who had (such) experience 
was Shaykh Ab¯u Bakr28 Muh.ammad ibn M¯us¯a al-Khw¯arizm¯ı, so al-Mam¯un asked him to 
write a book on algebra to restore what had been lost [ellipsis. . .]29 
Parts of al-Khuz¯a¯ı’s account not translated here indicate that details of the story 
were fabricated at a later time. Yet it shows that at least in al-Khuz¯a¯ı’s time it was 
acknowledged that algebra had been transmitted orally before it was written down. 
Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı does not mention the practitioners of algebra directly, but two 
mathematicians from later in his century do. Ab¯u K¯amil brings up algebraic 
techniques not found in al-Khw¯arazm¯ı that he learned from the “arithmeticians” 
(h. uss¯ab, sing. h. ¯asib), and he identiﬁes himself as a h. ¯asib, too.30 Th¯abit ibn Qurra 
makes no reference to al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in his short treatise giving proofs for the rules 
to solve the composite equations, but in two places he notes that the rules he proves 
conform to the “method of the people of algebra” (ahl al-jabr) and the “method of 
the followers of algebra” (as.h. ¯ab al-jabr) (Th¯abit ibn Qurra 2009, 163.13, 167.3). 
For what I write below it is relevant to note that Th¯abit does not place the three 
composite equations in the context of the six equations. He begins his brief work 
with: “The elementary cases (us. ¯ul) to which most problems of algebra fall back on
27 The earliest known authors of books on anw¯a are Sahl ibn Nawbakht (ﬂ. ca. 200/800), Ab¯u 
Mashar (171–272/787–886), and Th¯abit ibn Qurra. Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s chapter on mensuration in 
his Algebra is the earliest extant Arabic treatment of the subject. The earliest extant book on ﬁnger 
reckoning is by Ab¯u-l-Waf¯a (328–388/940–998), though it is likely that some lost ninth century 
books reported by other authors dealt with the same topic, perhaps even al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s Book of 
adding and subtracting. The earliest known treatises on double false position are by Ab¯u K¯amil 
(late 9th c.) and Qust.¯a ibn L¯uq¯a (d. ca. 910). For surveys of Arabic arithmetic, see (Oaks 2023) 
and the introductions to (al-Uql¯ıdis¯ı 1978) and (Abdeljaouad & Oaks 2021). 
28 “Abu Bakr” is an error. King suggests that our commentator confused the algebraist with “the 
fourth/tenth-century litterateur named Ab¯u Bakr (Muh.ammad ibn al-Abb¯as) al-Khw¯arizm¯ı (d.  
393/1002-3)” (King 1988, 28). 
29 (King 1988, 26–7; King 2012, 228), his translation. A manuscript of al-Khuz¯a¯ı’s 
book, British Library, MS Delhi Arabic 1897/1, ff. 1a-124b, is available online: 
http://www.qdl.qa/en/archive/81055/vdc 100042392200.0x000001. The passage quoted begins at 
fol. 1b.20. 
30 Ab¯u K¯amil mentions the h. uss¯ab in ten different passages in his book, and calls himself a h. ¯asib 
in the last of these (Ab¯u K¯amil 2012, 781). 

The Legacy of Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in History of Algebra
139
are three” (Th¯abit ibn Qurra 2009, 161.4), and he covers the “ﬁrst elementary case”, 
the “second elementary case”, and the “third elementary case”. This, together with 
the fact that he links his proofs to the rules of “the people/followers of algebra” and 
not to al-Khw¯arazm¯ı, suggests that his source was the oral practitioners directly, and 
not al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s book.31 
Although no book on algebra is known to have been written in Arabic before 
al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s, his contemporary Ibn Turk also composed a Book of Algebra in 
Baghdad about the same time. The only part of this book that is extant is the chapter 
on proofs for the rules for solving simpliﬁed equations. Without mentioning the six 
types, he gives proofs for rules that correspond to al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s types 1, 4, 5, and 
6 in the same intuitive manner as al-Khw¯arazm¯ı (Sayili 1962). 
In his introduction, al-Khw¯arazm¯ı identiﬁes the practical uses to which algebra 
would have been employed in his time. He explained that the caliph al-Mam¯un 
has encouraged me to write a concise book on algebraic calculation which encompasses 
the ﬁne and important parts of its calculations that people constantly need in cases of their 
inheritances, their wills, their partnerships, their legal decisions, and their trade, and in 
all their dealings with one another, such as the surveying of land, the digging of canals, 
architecture, and other procedures and kinds of work. (al-Khw¯arazm¯ı 2009, 95.11) 
But his book was more than just a written guide to an algebra serving practical 
needs. The very fact that he put it all down on paper was itself a great step toward 
bringing algebra to the attention of theoretically-minded scholars. And although he 
makes no claim of originality anywhere in the book, we can tentatively identify 
some of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s own innovations, both in content and organization, by 
paying close attention to the ways he presents the material. We ﬁrst examine his 
worked-out problems and then turn to his geometric proofs. 
Reading over the problems in the second part of the algebra proper, the ﬁrst 
six, which I number (T1) to (T6), stand out from the 33 that follow, which are 
numbered (1) to (34) (omitting the interpolated Problem (7)) in Rashed’s edition. 
Problems (T1) to (T6) begin “The ﬁrst of the six”, “the second problem”, “the third 
problem”, up to “the sixth problem”, and the equations set up in their solutions 
simplify in order to the six types of equation he described earlier. By contrast, each 
of the 33 additional problems begins “If [someone] says”, which reﬂects the setting 
of a teacher presenting a question orally to a student. We also ﬁnd phrases like “so 
you say” or the imperative “say” ﬁfteen times among the solutions. 
More signiﬁcant than these opening lines is that ten of the 33 additional problems 
are not even solved by algebra. Instead, they are worked out by simply reasoning 
through the operations without shifting to the names of the powers and setting up 
an equation. This approach is not given a name either by al-Khw¯arazm¯ı or by later
31 The same may be true of the brief book of geometrical problems of the late third/ninth century 
Nuaim ibn Muh.ammad ibn M¯us¯a. Problem 4 gives geometric proofs based in Euclid for the 
solutions to the types 4 and 5 equations, and Problems 37 to 42 are geometrical variations of al-
Khw¯arazm¯ı’s Problem (9). There is no clear dependence on al-Khw¯arazm¯ı among these problems 
(Hogendijk 2003). 

140
J. A. Oaks
authors, so I call it “arithmetical reasoning” (Oaks & Alkhateeb 2005). These non-
algebraic solutions come in two groups, Problems (12)–(16), and Problems (29)– 
(32), (34). For example, the ﬁrst part of Problem (29) translates as: 
If [someone] says, a m¯al: you multiply it by two of its thirds to get ﬁve. 
Its rule is that if you multiply it by itself, it gives seven and a half. So you say, it is a root of 
seven and a half. (al-Khw¯arazm¯ı 2009, 193.4) 
At this point, al-Khw¯arazm¯ı has solved the problem without shifting to algebraic 
language, that is, without naming an unknown and setting up an equation. He has 
found that the unknown m¯al (“quantity”) is StartRoot 7 and one half EndRoot

7 1
2 based simply in proportional 
reasoning. In the rest of the solution he veriﬁes that his answer works: 
less than<Multiply itgreater than> by two thirds of a root of seven and a half. Multiply two thirds by two thirds 
to get four ninths, and four ninths by seven and a half is three and a third. So a root of three 
and a third is two thirds of a root of seven and a half. Multiply three and a third by seven 
and a half to get twenty-ﬁve. Its root is ﬁve. 
Why would the author of a Book of algebra include so many problems with 
non-algebraic solutions? Recall that the second part of the book covers the rule of 
three and mensuration. The rule of three was different from and much simpler than 
algebra, and among the ﬁfteen pages of the section on mensuration in the published 
Arabic edition, algebra is applied only twice. It was not al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s intention, 
then, to cover only algebra in the book. He may have included those ten problems 
with non-algebraic solutions to teach that sometimes it is easier to come up with the 
answer without shifting to the realm of algebra, as the oral practitioners themselves 
would have instructed. 
I have found only four later authors who give solutions by “arithmetical 
reasoning”, and all enunciations are similar to those in al-Khw¯arazm¯ı. Ab¯u K¯amil 
gives four solutions by this technique, and al-Karaj¯ı (ca. 402/1011-12), Ibn al-
Bann¯a (late 7th/13th c.), and Ibn al-Khaww¯am (675/1277) each give one.32 In four 
of these problems by three authors a second solution by algebra is also given, like 
this one from Ibn al-Khaww¯am: 
If [someone] says, a m¯al: you multiply it by three of its fourths, bringing back the m¯al. 
By the rule,33 three of its fourths is one, so it is one and a third.
32 These are Problems (14)–(17) in Ab¯u K¯amil’s Book on algebra (Ab¯u K¯amil 2012, 385.8– 
387.18) (Rashed numbers these as left angle bracket⟨20right angle bracket⟩to left angle bracket⟨23right angle bracket⟩); Problem III.22 in al-Karaj¯ı’s al-Fakhr¯ı (Saidan 
1986, 221.15); Problem III.2 in Ibn al-Bann¯a’s Book on the fundamentals and preliminaries in 
algebra (Saidan 1986, 575.1); and Problem (21) in Ibn al-Khaww¯am’s Magniﬁcent beneﬁts of 
the rules of calculation, which was copied in al-F¯aris¯ı’s commentary Foundation of the rules on 
elements of beneﬁts (al-F¯aris¯ı 1994, 549.16). Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s Problem (31) is the same as Ab¯u 
K¯amil’s (14), al-Karaj¯ı’s III.22, and Ibn al-Bann¯a’s III.2. The other problems are all different. In 
all of these authors other nearby problems are of the same basic type, and sometimes their algebraic 
solutions have no explicit assignment statement. 
33 Regardless what method is used to work out a problem, the solution to a problem in Arabic 
arithmetic usually begins “By the rule (qiy¯as)” or “Its rule is”. 

The Legacy of Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in History of Algebra
141
And by algebra, you make it a thing, and you multiply it by three of its fourths to get: three 
fourths of a m¯al equals a thing [three fourths x squared equals x 3
4x2 = x]. So a thing and a third equals a m¯al [1 and one third x equals x squared1 1
3x = x2], 
so the thing is one and a third. 
By introducing the second solution “by algebra”, Ibn al-Khaww¯am afﬁrms that the 
ﬁrst solution was not considered to be worked out by algebra.34 
Five of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s problems (T1) to (T6) begin with a statement that assigns 
names to the unknowns, like Problems (T4) and (T6) translated above, whose 
solutions begin “you make one of the parts a thing, and the other ten less a thing” 
and “you make your m¯al a thing”. But in Problem (T4) and in the 23 problems 
solved by algebra among the 33 additional problems, al-Khw¯arazm¯ı either makes 
the assignment obliquely, like “you know that one of the parts of ten is a thing” 
(Problem (1)), or more often, the assignment is omitted altogether. This happens in 
Problem (6), which begins: 
If [someone] says, ten: you divide it into two parts. You multiply one of the parts by itself, 
to get the same as the other eighty-one times. 
The rule for this is that you say, ten less a thing by itself is a hundred and a m¯al less twenty 
things [ellipsis. . .] (al-Khw¯arazm¯ı 2009, 167.10) 
There is no statement in this solution declaring that the parts are a thing and ten 
less a thing. We are to infer the assignments from the ﬁrst operation. (Note that the 
assignment is not determined by the enunciation. In many solutions of the divided 
ten, algebraists name the parts as “ﬁve and a thing” and “ﬁve less a thing” instead, 
and often they solved a problem twice with two different assignments.) Among the 
more than two dozen other medieval Arabic books that give collections of problems 
solved by algebra that I have read, with rare, accountable exceptions the assignment 
of an unknown is made explicitly in the beginnings of the solutions, by “making” 
(jaala) or “assigning” (farad. a) it to be some algebraic power or expression. 
It appears, then, that al-Khw¯arazm¯ı took over the 33 additional problems more 
or less unchanged from oral sources, and that he crafted the solutions to the ﬁrst six 
problems himself. His explicit shift to the language of algebra with an assignment 
statement became the standard in later Arabic authors, though the oral framing of the 
problems, beginning “If [someone] says” with the frequent “you say”, was retained 
in later books. 
The proofs I ﬁrst want to draw attention to are from the chapter covering the 
addition and subtraction of diminished quantities, like adding (in modern notation) 
StartRoot 200 EndRoot minus 10
√
200 −10 to 20 minus StartRoot 200 EndRoot20 −
√
200. Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı gives geometric diagrams to show why 
the operations work the way they do, but with one exception: the problem of adding 
50 plus 10 x minus 2 x squared50 + 10x −2x2 to 100 plus x squared minus 20 x100 + x2 −20x. He writes of this example that “no ﬁgure ﬁts 
it”, and “we have made a ﬁgure for it, [but] not a sensible one”.35 The fact that he 
could not come up with a sensible diagram shows, as Høyrup (1986, 474–5) ﬁrst
34 The other three problems with a second solution by algebra are Problems (14) and (16) in Ab¯u 
K¯amil, where the algebraic solutions are attributed to one Ab¯u Y¯usuf and are written in the margin 
of the Istanbul manuscript, and Ibn al-Bann¯a’s problem. 
35 Translation adjusted from (al-Khw¯arazm¯ı 2009, 140). 

142
J. A. Oaks
observed, that al-Khw¯arazm¯ı was actively looking to prove the rules himself. These 
proofs were thus not part of the traditional algebra that he had learned. 
If the proofs for adding and subtracting expressions are his own, then the proofs 
for the rules for solving the composite equations might be his, also. We ﬁnd strong 
support for this in the two different proofs for the type 4 equation a x squared plus b x equals cax2 + bx = c. As  
with his other proofs, these are conducted in the context of a particular example, in 
this case the equation “a m¯al and ten roots equal thirty-nine dirhams” (al-Khw¯arazm¯ı 
2009, 109.1). Here is the rule for its solution: 
Its way is that you halve the roots, which is ﬁve in this problem. You multiply it by itself 
to get twenty-ﬁve, you add it to the thirty-nine to get sixty-four, you take its root, which is 
eight, you subtract from it half the roots, which is ﬁve, leaving three, which is a root of the 
m¯al that you want, and the m¯al is nine.36 
The ﬁrst proof does not follow the rule. Instead of dividing the ten roots into two 
halves, it divides them into fourths, and the 2 and one half2 1
2 is squared and taken four times. In 
the diagram below translated from the Arabic, the m¯al is represented by the central 
square AB, so its side is one root. The four rectangles H, G, K, and T around that 
square make up the ten roots of the equation, so that each of the four small squares 
in the corners have side 2 and one half2 1
2 and area 6 and one fourth6 1
4. Then the square AB and the four rectangles 
correspond to the m¯al and the ten roots, which are 39 from the equation, and the 
four small squares total 25, so the greater square DE has area 64, and the solution 
follows (al-Khw¯arazm¯ı 2009, 111). 
B 
A 
D 
E 
six 
and a 
fourth 
six 
and a 
fourth 
six 
and a 
fourth 
six 
and a 
fourth 
the m¯al 
T 
H 
G
K
 
The second proof, instead, calls for the ten roots to be divided into two halves 
and the number of this half is squared to get 25, which is just what the rule says to 
do. In the diagram translated below, the m¯al is identiﬁed with the square AB in the 
upper right, so its side is a root. Then the ten things are divided into two halves of 
ﬁve roots each that are identiﬁed with rectangles G and N, so the completed square 
in the lower left has sides equal to 5:37 
36 (al-Khw¯arazm¯ı 2009, 101.5), taking into account the critical apparatus and the commentary of 
al-Khuz¯a¯ı. 
37 (al-Khw¯arazm¯ı 2009, 113) misplaces point B.

The Legacy of Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in History of Algebra
143
A 
E 
D 
25 
the m¯al
G 
N 
B 
Jens Høyrup has found a plausible link between the ﬁrst proof and a common 
problem-type in surveyor’s traditions that he calls “the four sides and the area”, 
which dates back at least to the Old Babylonian tablet BM 13901 (Høyrup 2001, 
112–116). He pointed out that al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s proofs conform to the style of the 
geometric arguments of these mensuration professionals, with the only hint of Greek 
inﬂuence being the letters that label points and areas in the diagrams. From this line 
of reasoning, al-Khw¯arazm¯ı is responsible for grafting the geometric arguments 
onto the rhetorical, numerical algebra of his time.38 And if the proofs are al-
Khw¯arazm¯ı’s own, then it is also likely that the classiﬁcation of equations into six 
types is his, also. 
All of this speculation is given support in a passage of Ab¯u K¯amil, who tells 
us in his introduction that al-Khw¯arazm¯ı wrote “the earliest book on algebra; he 
began it, and he invented its principles” (Ab¯u K¯amil 2012, 245.2). We know that 
al-Khw¯arazm¯ı did not invent algebra, that is, he did not invent the method of naming 
unknowns in terms of preassigned names of powers, then setting up and simplifying 
an equation to a standard type, and solving that equation by a predetermined rule. 
Both Diophantus and Brahmagupta had solved problems by this method much 
earlier. On the other hand, had al-Khw¯arazm¯ı merely related the method of the 
practitioners without any intervention, he could not be said to have “invented its 
principles”. Given our evidence, it seems reasonable to propose that the “principles” 
referred to by Ab¯u K¯amil consist of the classiﬁcation of the six equations and the 
proofs for the rules for the three composite equations. In other words, al-Khw¯arazm¯ı 
seems to be the person who organized and justiﬁed this part of what was perhaps in 
his time a loosely-organized technique. Compared with later authors, al-Khw¯arazm¯ı 
gives a minimal treatment of operations on algebraic expressions and roots, and he 
does not explain the simpliﬁcation of equations at all. 
To summarize, algebraists before al-Khw¯arazm¯ı knew the solutions to the 
three composite equations, perhaps without any justiﬁcation for those rules. Like 
Diophantus, they would not have needed to classify the three simple equations, 
since their solutions are trivial. It was al-Khw¯arazm¯ı who decided to classify all 
equations of degree 1 or 2 into six types, who constructed geometric proofs for
38 See also (Høyrup 1986, 473–475; 1996, 48–49; 2002, 412–414). 

144
J. A. Oaks
the composite equations based in mensuration practices, and who prefaced his 
collection of worked-out problems with six problems to illustrate those equations. 
6 Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s Inﬂuence on Arabic Algebra 
Just as translations of Euclid’s Elements and Ptolemy’s Almagest served as starting 
points for Arabic commentaries, scientiﬁc investigations, and epitomes in geometry 
and astronomy respectively, so too was al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s Algebra the seminal work 
in its ﬁeld. But where the books of Euclid and Ptolemy were mature, scientiﬁc, 
and comprehensive, al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s brief Algebra was only a ﬁrst step toward 
scientiﬁc investigations. So although the basic format of his algebra proper was 
copied by writers on algebra in Arabic, his book quickly became outdated. From 
the start his successors adjusted, expanded, rearranged, and added to his format to 
various degrees in useful, rigorous, and creative ways. To show how this standard 
format was adjusted in later authors, I will describe the contents of several algebra 
textbooks beginning with the books of three particularly inﬂuential authors: Ab¯u 
K¯amil (whose was introduced in Sect. 4), al-Karaj¯ı, and Ibn al-Bann¯a. 
Ab¯u K¯amil was the ﬁrst important successor to al-Khw¯arazm¯ı. As mentioned 
above, he modeled his “algebra proper” on al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s. He expanded each 
section, keeping the basic arrangement of its parts by covering in order the 
powers (roots, m¯als and number), the six equations and their proofs, operations 
on monomials and binomials, and operations on square roots, though he omits the 
section on adding and subtracting expressions with diminished terms. He also began 
his collection of solved problems, now 74 of them, with six that illustrate in order the 
six equations. But he diverged from al-Khw¯arazm¯ı by providing forty-four algebraic 
and arithmetical rules with geometric proofs based one way or another in Euclid’s 
Elements (Oaks 2011). For the three composite equations he gives a nod to al-
Khw¯arazm¯ı by offering an additional proof in the latter’s intuitive style. He is in 
fact one of the last Arabic algebraists to give such proofs. Ab¯u K¯amil also gave an 
additional rule, with proof, for each of the three composite equations to ﬁnd the m¯al 
directly, and among his worked-out problems he ﬁnds creative ways of naming his 
unknowns and he solves problems that exhibit his expertise in manipulating roots. 
Fakhr al-D¯ın al-Karaj¯ı (ﬂ. early 5th/11th c.) wrote his mathematical works 
in Baghdad. His textbook on algebra, al-Fakhr¯ı f¯ı s.in¯aa al-jabr wa-l-muq¯abala 
([Book of] al-Fakhr¯ı on the art of algebra, henceforth al-Fakhr¯ı), was completed 
ca. 402/1011-12 and was inspired mainly by Diophantus and Ab¯u K¯amil. Like 
those authors, he ﬁrst covers the rules of algebra and then presents a collection 
of solved problems. For the rules he took the lead of Diophantus. For example, 
instead of introducing only roots, m¯als, and numbers like Ab¯u K¯amil, he includes 
higher powers, up to the ninth in his case. Diophantus had organized his introduction 
to follow the steps of solving problems (Christianidis & Oaks 2013), and al-
Karaj¯ı followed suit by ﬁrst covering operations on algebraic expressions and 
irrational roots, useful arithmetical rules (which are all applied in stage 1) and the

The Legacy of Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in History of Algebra
145
simpliﬁcation of equations by al-jabr and al-muq¯abala (applied in stage 2) before 
taking up the six equations (applied in stage 3). But he preserves the classiﬁcation 
of the six simpliﬁed equations, with his own adjustments. He rearranged the simple 
equations as (1) b x equals cbx = c, (2) a x squared equals b xax2 = bx, and (3) a x squared equals cax2 = c, and the only sample 
equations he borrowed from Ab¯u K¯amil/al-Khw¯arazm¯ı are the three composite 
equations x squared plus 10 x equals 39x2 + 10x = 39, x squared plus 21 equals 10 xx2 + 21 = 10x, and x squared equals 3 x plus 4x2 = 3x + 4, and they are 
introduced only at the stage of proving the rules. Al-Karaj¯ı solved the composite 
equations three different ways corresponding to rules in al-Khw¯arazm¯ı, Ab¯u K¯amil 
(for ﬁnding the m¯al), and Diophantus (for ﬁnding the root without ﬁrst setting the 
m¯als to one m¯al). He gives his own variation on the geometric proofs, still grounded 
in Euclid’s Elements II.5 and II.6. After the proofs for each equation type he gives 
an arithmetical derivation of the rule by the “method of Diophantus” which amounts 
to making a substitution from the equation in the rule for squaring a binomial (Oaks 
2018). But where Ab¯u K¯amil had given a proof, sometimes two, to just about every 
rule in his book, in his book, al-Karaj¯ı scaled back his proofs to little more than the 
simpliﬁed equations. 
Al-Karaj¯ı’s vast collection of 255 worked-out problems is divided into ﬁve 
“categories” (t.abaq¯at), beginning with the easiest (Saidan 1986, 
169.20). A 
total of 101 of these problems, 83 of them indeterminate, are copied or adapted 
from Diophantus’s Arithmetica, 55 others are taken, sometimes in modiﬁed form 
and some of them indeterminate, from Ab¯u K¯amil, and the remaining problems, 
including the ﬁrst 72 in the book, appear to be taken from the oral tradition of the 
h. uss¯ab. He does not begin with six problems to illustrate the six equations, and none 
of the problems seem to come from al-Khw¯arazm¯ı. Just about the only features of 
al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s book that are still identiﬁable in al-Fakhr¯ı are the classiﬁcation of 
the six equations with proofs for the composite cases and the placement of problems 
in a separate section after the rules. 
Passing to the Islamic west, Ab¯u l-Abb¯as Ah.mad ibn Muh.ammad ibn Uthm¯an 
al-Azd¯ı al-Marr¯akush¯ı (654–721/1256–1321), better known today as Ibn al-Bann¯a
(“son of the architect”), spent his career in Marrakesh. In the late seventh/thirteenth 
century he wrote his own comprehensive algebra textbook, Kit¯ab al-us. ¯ul wa-l-
muqaddim¯at f¯ı l-jabr wa-l-muq¯abala (Book on the fundamentals and preliminaries 
in algebra). Like the books of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı, Ab¯u K¯amil, and al-Karaj¯ı, Ibn al-
Bann¯a divides his book into two parts, ﬁrst rules and then problems (he does 
not exhibit any inﬂuence of Diophantus). Here the organization of the ﬁrst part is 
entirely new. He subdivides it into three chapters, covering (1) arithmetical founda-
tions, (2) (algebraic) unknowns, and (3) equations. Chapter 1 covers classiﬁcations 
of number, including prefect squares, cubes, and arithmetical versions of the six 
binomials and apotomes of Euclid’s Book X. Next come all kinds of rules regarding 
operations on numbers—mainly what we today would call algebraic identities, 
but which in the Arabic context belong squarely to arithmetic. One example is: 
“Multiplying the sum of two numbers by the difference between them is the same 
as the difference of their squares, which is also the square of the difference between 
them with the product of the difference between them and the smaller of them

146
J. A. Oaks
twice”.39 Chapter 1 continues with an extensive assortment of problems of operating 
on square, cube, and higher roots. 
The names of the powers of the unknown up to the sixth power are introduced in 
Chapter 2. Ibn al-Bann¯a then covers operations on algebraic expressions, including 
those with irrational or unresolved roots. The traditional six equations are introduced 
and solved in Chapter 3 in the same order as Ab¯u K¯amil/al-Khw¯arazm¯ı, but without 
any sample equations for the simple types, and of his nine sample composite 
equations, only x squared plus 10 x equals 39x2 + 10x = 39 and x squared equals 3 x plus 4x2 = 3x + 4 are found in the earlier books. 
He gives four solutions to the composite equations: (a) the standard Arabic rule in 
al-Khw¯arazm¯ı and other authors; (b) a variation on that rule in which the order of 
operations is different; (c) the rule of Diophantus and al-Karaj¯ı for non-normalized 
equations; and (d) a rule for ﬁnding the m¯al directly for non-normalized equations. 
But instead of providing geometric proofs, he justiﬁes the rule (a) by completing the 
square in the context of the equation. For example, for the sample type 6 equation 
x squared equals 3 x plus 4x2 = 3x + 4 he subtracts 3x from both sides to get x squared minus 3 x equals 4x2 −3x = 4, then he adds 
the square of half of the 3 to both sides to get x squared plus 2 and one fourth minus 3 x equals 6 and one fourthx2 + 2 1
4 −3x = 6 1
4. Taking the 
square roots of both sides gives x minus 1 and one half equals 2 and one halfx −1 1
2 = 2 1
2, from which the root is found to be 4 
(Saidan 1986, 552.23; Oaks 2018b, 224–26). All of this is expressed rhetorically in 
the book. 
Ibn al-Bann¯a carefully organized his collection of 42 solved problems. They are 
divided into two chapters, the ﬁrst “on rational problems”, in which the calculations 
remain rational, and the second “on deaf (i.e., irrational) problems”, which involve 
calculations with irrational roots. The rational problems are subdivided into three 
groups: (a) 13 problems of dividing ten into two parts, six of which are taken from 
Ab¯u K¯amil; (b) 7 problems of men and their money; and (c) 11 problems asking for 
an unknown m¯al (“quantity”), some of them indeterminate from the Arabic tradition. 
The irrational problems are divided into (a) 4 problems of dividing ten into two parts 
and (b) 7 problems asking for an unknown m¯al (“quantity”), all seven taken from 
Ab¯u K¯amil. Again, the only echos of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in Ibn al-Bann¯a’s book are the 
classiﬁcation of the six equations, with proofs (which are no longer geometric), and 
the placement of problems after and separate from the rules. 
Two other books modeled on al-Khw¯arazm¯ı and Ab¯u K¯amil, but without any 
proofs, are Al¯ı al-Sulam¯ı’s tenth- or eleventh-century Sufﬁcient introduction on 
calculation by algebra and what one can learn from its examples40 and Ibn Badr’s 
ca. seventh/thirteenth century Brief book on algebra.41 Both authors follow al-
Khw¯arazm¯ı and Ab¯u K¯amil by covering the six equations and their solutions before
39 (Saidan 1986, 509.8). We can write this in modern algebraic notation as left parenthesis x plus y right parenthesis left parenthesis x minus y right parenthesis equals x squared minus y squared equals left parenthesis x minus y right parenthesis squared plus 2 left parenthesis x minus y right parenthesis y(x + y)(x −y) =
x2 −y2 = (x −y)2 + 2(x −y)y, but to Ibn al-Bann¯a this rule and the others he states are not 
part of al-jabr wa-l-muq¯abala since they are not stated in algebraic language and they do not ask 
for the value of an unknown number. 
40 Al-Muqaddima al-k¯aﬁyya f¯ı h. is¯ab al-jabr wa’l-muq¯abala wa m¯a yurafu bihi qiy¯asuh¯u min al-
amthila, Vatican MS Sbath 5. 
41 Kit¯ab f¯ıhi ikhtis. ¯ar al-jabr wa’l-muq¯abala, published in (Saidan 1986). 

The Legacy of Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in History of Algebra
147
explaining operations on algebraic expressions and roots. Ibn Badr gives the six 
equations in the same order as al-Khw¯arazm¯ı, but al-Sulam¯ı rearranges the simple 
equations as (1) a x squared equals cax2 = c, (2) b x equals cbx = c, and (3) a x squared equals b xax2 = bx. The only sample equations 
in al-Sulam¯ı that correspond to the earlier books are x squared equals 9x2 = 9 and x squared plus 21 equals 10 xx2 + 21 = 10x, 
and for Ibn Badr the common equations are only one half x equals 10 1
2x = 10, x squared plus 10 x equals 39x2 + 10x = 39, 
x squared plus 21 equals 10 xx2 + 21 = 10x, and 3 x plus 4 equals x squared3x + 4 = x2. Ibn Badr begins his collection of problems 
like al-Khw¯arazm¯ı with six illustrating the six equations, while al-Sulam¯ı chose to 
divide his problems into six groups in which the equations in the problems in the 
ﬁrst group simplify to a type 1 equation, those in the second group simplify to a type 
2 equation, etc. (Oaks 2015). 
The majority of Arabic books and chapters on algebra are structured differently 
from al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s algebra proper. Some, like al-Karaj¯ı’s al-Bad¯ı f¯ı l-h. is¯ab 
(Marvelous [book] on calculation) and al-Samawal’s (d. 570/1174–75) al-B¯ahir f¯ı
ilm al-h. is¯ab (The dazzling [book] on the science of calculation), presume that the 
reader is already familiar with the basics of algebraic problem-solving, and focus 
on more advanced topics. Many others, including al-Karaj¯ı’s al-K¯af¯ı f¯ı l-h. is¯ab (The 
sufﬁcient [book] on calculation), Ibn al-Y¯asam¯in’s (d. 600/1204) Talq¯ıh. al-afk¯ar 
f¯ı l-ilm bi-rush¯um al-ghub¯ar (Grafting of opinions of the work on dust ﬁgures), 
and al-K¯ash¯ı’s 830/1427 Mift¯ah. al-h. is¯ab (Key to calculation) are arithmetic books 
with chapters on algebra, so much of the material that went into the ﬁrst part 
of the algebra proper is scaled back, and operations on roots and arithmetical 
identities are covered in other parts of the book. The worked-out problems in these 
three books show no direct inﬂuence of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı. Still, all of them maintain 
the classiﬁcation of the six canonical equations, sometimes with the equations 
reordered. 
But although al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s treatment of algebra was adjusted and transformed 
by later writers, his book still occasionally imparted direct inﬂuence. We might 
not expect that his practical guide to have been a resource for al-Khayy¯am’s 
ﬁfth/eleventh century Risala ﬁ’l-barahin al¯a mas¯ail al-jabr wa-l-muq¯abala (Trea-
tise on the proofs of algebra problems). Al-Khayy¯am’s purpose was to classify and 
solve, with proofs, the twenty-ﬁve equations of degree three and less for use in 
theoretical geometric problem-solving (Oaks 2011b). Rather than a book intended 
for practitioners engaged in the digging of canals or the division of estates, al-
Khayy¯am’s treatise provides a means of producing solutions to abstract geometrical 
problems, and in keeping with this aim he presumes the reader has knowledge of 
Euclid and Apollonius. Yet al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s inﬂuence is transparent in the treatment 
of the type 4 equation. Al-Khayy¯am not only presents his rule in terms of al-
Khw¯arazm¯ı’s speciﬁc equation “a m¯al and ten roots equals thirty-nine in number” 
(x squared plus 10 x equals 39x2 + 10x = 39), but his second proof is precisely the odd ﬁrst proof from al-
Khw¯arazm¯ı that does not follow the rule.42 
Five mathematicians are known to have written commentaries on al-
Khw¯arazm¯ı’s Algebra. Three of them worked in the fourth/tenth century: Sin¯an
42 (Rashed & Vahabzadeh 2000, 120-1). 

148
J. A. Oaks
ibn al-Fath., Abdall¯ah ibn al-H. asan al-S. aydan¯an¯ı, and Ab¯u l-Waf¯a. Sin¯an, who 
hailed from H. arr¯an, was especially inﬂuenced by our polymath. In addition to his 
commentary he wrote treatises on other topics that al-Khw¯arazm¯ı had written about: 
one on Indian arithmetic; a Kit¯ab al-jam wa-l-tafr¯ıq; and a book on inheritance. 
He also penned an extant book on equations of higher degree in which he cites 
al-Khw¯arazm¯ı.43 Al-S. aydan¯an¯ı, for his part, also wrote a book commenting on 
al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s Kit¯ab f¯ı l-jam wa-l-tafr¯ıq. And as mentioned above, Ab¯u al-
Waf¯a is known to have written commentaries on three books of algebra: those by 
Hipparchus, Diophantus, and al-Khw¯arazm¯ı. All of the commentaries by these three 
authors are lost. 
We do possess the commentary of Muh.ammad al-Khuz¯a¯ı, completed in 
607/1211 in Yemen. His account of the oral tradition in algebra before al-
Khw¯arazm¯ı is translated above in Sect. 5. Al¯ı al-Nas.r¯ı, another ﬁgure working 
in Yemen in the seventh/thirteenth century, wrote a commentary on al-Khuz¯a¯ı’s 
commentary that is extant in a single, unstudied manuscript in Cairo. These two 
commentaries are part of the ﬂowering of mathematical activity in Yemen at the 
time. David King noted that “Yemeni interest in algebra was not on account of 
the delights of solving quadratic equations, but rather because of the complicated 
algebra involved in the application of Islamic inheritance laws” (King 2012, 224). 
The other two known commentaries, or perhaps two copies of the same commentary, 
are anonymous and are preserved in the  ¯Arif H. ikmat Bey Library in Medina. The 
dates are unknown to me and these books have not been studied. 
Even if few authors copied directly from al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s book, he remained well 
known as the ﬁrst person to author a book on algebra in Arabic. Ibn Khald¯un noted 
in his Muqaddima after describing the method of algebra, “The ﬁrst to write on this 
discipline was Ab¯u Abdall¯ah al-Khw¯arazm¯ı. After him, there was Ab¯u K¯amil Shuj¯a 
ibn Aslam. People followed in his steps.”44 That is, people followed in Ab¯u K¯amil’s 
steps. 
Returning now to al-Khw¯arazm¯ı, recall that the six equations, their solutions, 
and proofs come in stage 3, the last in the process of solving problems, but al-
Khw¯arazm¯ı presents them ﬁrst in his book. He also devotes proportionally more 
space to the six equations than later authors. His explanations of operations on 
algebraic expressions and roots are relatively condensed, and unlike later authors, 
he does not mention the steps of al-jabr and al-muq¯abala at all. Counting lines of 
text in the critical edition, exactly half of his introductory material where the rules of 
algebra are explained is devoted to the six equations. Compare this with the rules and 
examples in other authors: Ab¯u K¯amil devotes 37.5% of his treatment of rules and 
examples to the six equations, al-Karaj¯ı 29.6%, Ibn al-Bann¯a 28.7%, Al¯ı al-Sulam¯ı 
13.4%, Ibn Badr 33.5%, and the numbers are similarlylow for al-Haw¯ar¯ı, Ibn al-
43 MS Cairo, Riyad¯at 260/4, ff. 95r-104v. 
44 (Ibn Khald¯un 1967 III, 125–26). Rosenthal’s translation, with adjustments to the transliterated 
names. 

The Legacy of Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in History of Algebra
149
Khaww¯am, Fakhr al-D¯ın al-H. il¯at.¯ı, Ibn al-H¯aim, and al-K¯ash¯ı.45 Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s 
treatment is remarkably high, especially considering that both al-Karaj¯ı and Ibn al-
Bann¯a gave considerable attention to presenting a variety of rules and proofs for 
the six equations. 
Seen from the context of later works, it appears that al-Khw¯arazm¯ı chose to 
showcase his own contributions to the art of algebra, these being the six equations 
and the proofs, by presenting them ﬁrst and giving them more space than would 
ordinarily be warranted. The six equations, and especially the three composite 
equations, were naturally a focus for a few other Arabic algebraists as well, 
beginning with Ibn Turk (or at least the person who discarded the rest of his book), 
Th¯abit ibn Qurra, and al-Khayy¯am. In another direction, operations on polynomials 
became the focus of studies by al-Karaj¯ı and al-Samawal. Through all of this, the 
method of algebra remained a popular and practical means of numerical problem-
solving. It was not, as is sometimes supposed, a theory of equations centered around 
the six equations. 
7 A New Beginning: Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı and Ab¯u K¯amil in Latin 
It was the deliberate goal of the Umayyad caliphs Abd al-Rah.m¯an III (r. 316– 
350/929–961) and his son al-H. akam II (r. 350–366/961–976) to turn al-Andalus 
into a center of learning. They accomplished this both through the patronage of 
scholars46 and the building of libraries. Before he became caliph, al-H. akam had 
accumulated a vast personal library stocked largely with books bought in the Islamic 
east by his agents, and when he assumed power his books became part of the royal 
library in Cordova (Samsó 2015, 110). Scholarly activity in the region continued 
after al-H. akam’s death, though with diminished support and without the steady ﬂow 
of books from the East. Surveys of Arabic works later translated into Latin in Spain 
reﬂect this shift, as hardly any of the Arabic books written after ca. 340/950 are 
from the east (Samsó 2015; Lorch 2001). 
After the dissolution of the Cordovan caliphate in 422/1031, the Muslim portion 
of the peninsula broke into several small and thus weaker independent kingdoms 
(t. ¯aif¯at), which invited the incursion of Christian states. Alfonzo VI of Castile 
conquered Toledo in 1085 and Alfonzo I of Aragon conquered Zaragoza in 1118. 
Julio Samsó remarks that “these two cities were important centres of research in the
45 In what follows, the ﬁrst number is the number of lines devoted to the six equations, and the 
second number is the number of lines devoted to other examples and rules. Diagrams are not taken 
into account: Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı (185, 185), Ab¯u K¯amil (345, 574) (some rules are stated and proven 
among the worked out problems (2), (7), (61), (62), and (63)), al-Karaj¯ı (471, 1118), Ibn al-Bann¯a
(333, 827), Al¯ı al-Sulam¯ı (135, 871) (Not counting three pages of tables on the names of the 
powers. Numbers are from the Vatican manuscript), and Ibn Badr (85, 169). 
46 (Lamrabet 2014, 54–61) lists over 25 astronomers and mathematicians who are known to have 
worked in Cordova during this time. 

150
J. A. Oaks
ﬁelds of astronomy and mathematics, and their occupation by the Christians marked 
the starting point of the translation process” (Samsó 2015, 107). 
European Christians desired to imitate the culturally more advanced Muslims, 
and with the libraries of Toledo and Zaragoza now at their disposal they began the 
most productive period of the Arabic to Latin translation movement (Gutas 2006). 
The two most important books on algebra that were translated in this period are 
those of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı and Ab¯u K¯amil, both of which had been written before 
340/950. By the twelfth century these books were already outdated in the east, 
having been superseded by other books, most notably by al-Karaj¯ı’s al-Fakhr¯ı. Al-
Khw¯arazm¯ı’s Algebra was rendered into Latin at least twice. Robert of Chester 
made his translation in Segovia, north of Toledo, in 1145, and Gerard of Cremona 
(d. 1187) completed his in Toledo.47 Both translations stop after the short section on 
the rule of three, omitting mensuration and inheritance. Robert’s translation gives 
only 16 of the 33 additional problems from the “algebra proper”, while Gerard 
rearranges the problems into two groups and omits only one problem. Gerard’s 
translation begins by naming the author: “Liber Maumeti ﬁls Moysi Alchoarismi 
de algebra et almuchabala incipit [ellipsis. . .]” (“The book of Muh.ammad ibn M¯us¯a al-
Khw¯arazm¯ı on algebra begins [ellipsis. . .]”). Robert calls him similarly “Mahumed ﬁlius 
Moysi Alguarizmi”. The Arabic “ibn M¯us¯a” literally means “son of Moses”. 
One thirteenth-century manuscript of Gerard’s translation contains “a (near?) 
contemporary” (Hughes 1986, 223) gloss on the ﬁrst page that misattributes the 
translation to Guglielmo de Lunis. This Guglielmo is perhaps the same person as the 
mid-thirteenth-century translator of Ibn Rushd (Averroes). The gloss reads: “Here 
begins the book of geber (liber gebre) about the number, translated by the master 
Guillelmo de Lunis, very skilled in the disciplines of the quadrivium.”48 With the 
Arabic deﬁnite article restored, the “liber gebre” would have been “liber algebre”, 
and it would have been clear that it means “book of algebra” and not, say, “Geber’s 
book”. 
The Latin translator of Ab¯u K¯amil’s Algebra is unknown. The text survives in a 
single manuscript of the fourteenth century, Paris, BnF 7377A, fols. 71b-97a, which 
contains the algebra proper, the second part on the pentagon and decagon, and cuts 
off in the middle of the second problem of the third part of the book.49 Unlike the 
translations of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s Algebra, this one exhibits some Hebrew inﬂuence 
(Sesiano 1993, 322). The date of its composition is also unknown. Sesiano (1993, 
315, 322–3) holds that the manuscript is the autograph of the translator, whom he 
tentatively identiﬁes as Guglielmo de Lunis, while Hissette (1999) argues that the
47 Robert’s translation is published in (Hughes 1989) and Gerard’s in (Hughes 1986). 
48 “Incipit liber gebre de numero translatus a magistro Guillelmo de lunis in quadriviali sciencia 
peritissimo”, fol 80a, quoted in (Hughes 1986, 223). The manuscript is Florence, Biblioteca 
Nazionale Conv. soppr. J.V.18, ff. 80a-86b. 
49 The algebra proper is edited in (Sesiano 1993) and the second part on the pentagon and decagon 
is edited in (Lorch 1993). 

The Legacy of Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in History of Algebra
151
manuscript is a copy probably made in the late thirteenth or the fourteenth century 
of a twelfth century translation.50 
Other books in which algebra is routinely applied to solve problems were 
translated in the twelfth century, including the Liber augmenti et diminutionis (Book 
of adding and subtracting), whose Arabic progenitor shares the same title as a 
lost work of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı, and the Liber mensurationum, which was translated 
by Gerard of Cremona. Both of these books are lost in Arabic. 
There is also an anonymous Latin reworking of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s book, a Liber 
restauracionis (Book of restoration) made ca. 1250.51 It closely follows al-
Khw¯arazm¯ı’s algebra proper, borrowing most of the same sample equations and 
all of its sixteen problems, including the ﬁrst eleven in the same order. But the 
geometric proofs are different and rest on Euclid’s Elements Propositions II.5 and 
II.6. This brief book was most likely composed in Latin, and is not a translation of 
an Arabic book. 
In 1202 Leonardo of Pisa, better known today as Fibonacci, composed his Liber 
abaci in Latin mainly from Arabic material as a comprehensive guide to practical 
calculation. The second edition of this book, from 1228, is the version preserved 
in manuscripts today.52 Chapter 15, his long chapter on algebra, begins with the 
names of the powers and the classiﬁcation and solutions for the six equations, with 
geometric proofs for the three composite cases. The proofs seem to have been 
inspired by Ab¯u K¯amil, including the intuitive proof for the type 4 equation. It 
is curious that Fibonacci switches the order of the last two composite equations. 
He omits rules for operating on expressions and roots and does not explain the 
steps of al-jabr or al-muq¯abala. His use of the Latin restauratione, translated from 
al-jabr, does not match the Arabic use anyway. He then gives about 99 solved 
problems, depending on how one counts them. Many problems are borrowed from 
Ab¯u K¯amil, and there are some that are taken from Gerard’s translation of al-
Khw¯arazm¯ı’s Algebra as well (Miura 1981). Fibonacci does not mention Ab¯u K¯amil 
or al-Khw¯arazm¯ı, though “Maumeht”, a Latinized version of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s name, 
appears in the margin at the beginning of Chapter 15 in one manuscript out of the 
sixteen that carry that chapter: Firenze BNC, Conv. Soppr. C.1.2616 (Fibonacci 
2020, 808). Fibonacci also authored a book on mensuration in 1220 titled Practica
50 Hissette writes: “la traduction latine de l’al-Jabr d’Ab¯u K¯amil, dont P est assurément une copie, 
n’a pu être réalisée après la ﬁn du XIISuperscript normal ee siècle.” (1999, 313). For this date he cites an article by 
André Allard, which in turn cites (Karpinski 1911). But the only indication of the date of the 
translation I found there is merely implied: “The notation of fractions employed by this translator 
of Abu Kamil resembles the peculiar system employed later by Leonard [i.e., Fibonacci]” (p. 53). 
51 Marc Moyon published the critical edition (2019) and a French translation (2017). The word 
restauracionis is a translation of the Arabic al-jabr. Several scholars have attributed this reworking 
to Gugielmo de Lunis based in the gloss in the Florence manuscript of Gerard’s translation and 
remarks in two medieval Italian texts (to be investigated below), but Jens Høyrup has convincingly 
argued against Guglielmo’s authorship (Høyrup 2010, 13). 
52 The Latin edition was ﬁrst published by Baldassarre Boncompagni in (Fibonacci 1857), L. E. 
Sigler published an English translation in (Fibonacci 2002), and a new Latin edition was published 
by Enrico Giusti in (Fibonacci 2020). 

152
J. A. Oaks
geometriae.53 Many problems in that book are taken from “On the pentagon and 
decagon”, the second part of Ab¯u K¯amil’s Book on Algebra. 
Jordanus de Nemore composed his De numeris datis (On given numbers) in  
Latin around the same time that Fibonacci was active. Jordanus took a completely 
different approach to arithmetical problem-solving by repackaging the problems 
solved by algebraists as propositions expressed in the style of Euclid’s Data. In  
this way he gave practical, Arabic algebra a theoretical form rendering it suitable 
for inclusion in the classical quadrivium. The work is divided into four books, and 
of the twenty-nine propositions in Book I, eight are adapted from al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s 
Algebra.54 For example, al-Khw¯arazm¯ı stated the enunciation to Problem (3) as: 
Ten: you divide it into two parts. You multiply each part by itself and you sum them, and you 
add to them the difference between the parts before you multiplied them, to get ﬁfty-four 
dirhams. (al-Khw¯arazm¯ı 2009, 159.12) 
In Jordanus this becomes Proposition I-15: 
When a given number is divided into two, and if their difference added to the squares makes 
a given number, each of them will be given.55 
Later, in Book IV, the three composite equations are converted to Euclidean form 
as Propositions IV-8, IV-9, and IV-10. Instead of writing solutions in which an 
unknown is named in terms of the names of the powers, Jordanus gives proofs 
in which the different numbers are named by letters in the manner of Euclid’s 
number theory books, but without the lines.56 Jordanus’s project of reworking 
algebra in the image of Greek mathematics turned out to be an isolated experiment. 
European mathematicians would not make another attempt to legitimize algebra 
from a theoretical perspective until the sixteenth century, and then it would take 
different forms. 
Another important Latin work, this one from the following century, shows more 
substantial direct inﬂuence of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı. The Parisian scholar Jean de Murs 
completed his Quadripartitum numerorum in 1343 (Jean de Murs 1990). Like 
Fibonacci’s Liber abaci, this comprehensive book covers all aspects of arithmetic 
and algebra current in its time, with most of the material culled from earlier 
authors, including Boethius, Campanus de Novara, and especially al-Khw¯arazm¯ı 
and Fibonacci. Book III, from Chapter 9 to the end, consists of a slightly modiﬁed 
version of almost all of the “algebra proper” of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı (Jean de Murs 1990,
53 (Fibonacci 1862) contains Boncompagni’s Latin edition and (Fibonacci 2008) the English 
translation of Barnabas Hughes. 
54 Proposition I-3 is from al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s problem (1), I-4 from (T4), I-14 from (2), I-15 from (3), 
I-17 from (10), I-19 from (T3), I-20 from (4), and I-29 from (6). Of these eight propositions, all 
but I-4 and I-15 are also in Ab¯u K¯amil. 
55 (Jordanus de Nemore 1981, 52), translated in (Høyrup 1988, 333). 
56 These letters function like the letters in Euclid’s Books VII-IX and in Book II of Pappus’s 
Collection, and not like the letters used in algebra. Apart from concatenation to produce sums, 
they are not combined to form more complex expressions via operations (Oaks 2018c, §5.4). 

The Legacy of Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in History of Algebra
153
286–340). Without mentioning his source Jean covers the names of the powers, the 
six equations and their solutions, and operations on roots and polynomials, usually 
with the same examples found in al-Khw¯arazm¯ı. He even divides the worked-out 
problems that follow by ﬁrst giving nearly the same six problems illustrating the 
six equations as al-Khw¯arazm¯ı. Fourteen of the 45 problems after that come from 
al-Khw¯arazm¯ı too, and 20 more are from Fibonacci’s Liber abaci.57 All four of 
al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s proofs for the three composite types, with essentially the same 
diagrams, appear later in Chapters 26–28 of the Semiliber (the book between Books 
III and IV). 
8 Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s Inﬂuence on Medieval Italian Algebra 
Beginning in the late thirteenth century and extending into the sixteenth there 
ﬂourished scuole or botteghe d’abaco (abacus schools) in central and northern Italy 
where practical arithmetic and geometry were taught mainly to children of the 
merchant class. Associated with these schools are many trattati d’abaco, or abacus 
treatises, usually written or compiled by the teachers. Many of these books contain 
collections of problems solved by algebra, either with or without an introduction 
explaining the rules. There was no standard for spelling in Italian in that time, 
even within the same dialect, so we ﬁnd many different transliterations of al-jabr 
and al-jabr wa-l-muq¯abala, like “alcibra”, “algibra”, “arcibra”, “geber”, “aghabar”, 
“aligibra amichabile”, “algiebra e amucabala”, “alcibra amuchabile”, and “algeble 
amugabala”. 
Italian merchants had ﬁrst learned algebra through contact with Muslim traders in 
the Mediterranean, and they developed it in a different direction from what we read 
in Arabic books. The Italian books often classify a large number of equation types 
including the third, fourth, and often higher degree. And where al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s 
Algebra and other Arabic books present the rules for solving equations ﬁrst and 
give a collection of worked-out problems afterward, the Italian texts usually give 
a sample problem after each equation type and its rule, so rules and problems are 
mixed together. The earliest known vernacular treatment of algebra is found in a 
Libro di ragioni (Book of problems) written in 1328 (Van Egmond 1978). The 
author Paolo Gherardi classiﬁes ﬁfteen types of equation of degree 1, 2, and 3, with 
a sample problem for each. Fifteen types are not many for Italian algebra. At the 
other extreme is the 1344 Aliabraa argibra of Maestri Dardi of Pisa, which solves 
194 equation types up to the fourth degree (MSuperscript ring◦Dardi 2001). Of course, they were 
unable to solve irreducible equations of degree three and four—they would have to 
wait until the sixteenth century with the work of del Ferro, Tartaglia, Cardano, and
57 Three more problems are common to both books so we cannot identify their source. These three 
are also in Ab¯u K¯amil, which is Fibonacci’s source. 

154
J. A. Oaks
Ferrari—so authors would sometimes make up false rules that work for the speciﬁc 
examples they give (Høyrup 2007)! 
Some Latin books, most notably Fibonacci’s Liber abaci and al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s 
Algebra, imparted inﬂuence on medieval Italian algebra. A ﬁfteenth century 
manuscript of an Italian translation of Fibonacci’s chapter on algebra is extant, 
and we also possess Italian translations of Latin translations or adaptations of 
al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s Algebra. An unedited manuscript in the Biblioteca Nazionale in 
Florence from the end of the fourteenth century contains an Italian translation of 
what seems to be Gerard’s translation, and an Italian translation of the anonymous 
Liber restauracionis has been published (Franci 2003). 
I have found four Italian books that replicate al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s classiﬁcation, 
solutions, and proofs to the six equations. The earliest is Maestro Dardi’s Aliabraa 
argibra (1344) mentioned above. Dardi begins his book by explaining operations on 
polynomials and roots, and he ends the book with his 194 equation types and their 
sample problems. Between these two characteristically Italian sections is a loose 
translation of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s chapters on the six equations. Without naming his 
source, Dardi gives the same sample equations for the composite types as well as 
the same proofs as al-Khw¯arazm¯ı, including both proofs for the type 4 equation 
(Dardi 2001, 64–76). He also states and proves the rule for the second root of the 
type 5 equation that is absent in al-Khw¯arazm¯ı. 
Another book reproducing this part of the Algebra is Benedetto da Firenze’s 
(1429–1479) Trattato d’abacho, written ca. 1460. This encyclopedic treatise on 
mathematics is comprised of sixteen books, the thirteenth of which covers la reghola 
de algebra amuchabile (the rule of algebra). In the ﬁrst of its three chapters we are 
treated to a much closer rendition of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s text than is found in Dardi. 
Of the fourteen sample equations, only one of Benedetto’s is different (one third x squared equals 121
3x2 = 12
instead of one half x squared equals 18 1
2x2 = 18), and again the proofs all follow al-Khw¯arazm¯ı. Like Dardi, 
he also gives the second solution to the type 5 equation with proof, but the diagram 
is different from Dardi’s. In the other two chapters Benedetto reverts to typically 
Italian material, including the presentation of 36 equation types up to the 6th degree 
that include a repetition of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s six types. 
Benedetto’s introduction to Book 13 begins: 
We give thanks to the Almighty. Thus begins the text of Arabic algebra (Aghabar arabico) in  
the rule of algebra (reghola del geber) which we call algebra (algebra). This rule of algebra 
(reghola d’algebra), according to the translator Guglielmo de Lunis, is conveyed by seven 
names, which are: geber, el mechel, el chal, el el chelif, el fatiar, diffar el buram, el termem, 
and which names, according to the said Guglielmo, are are interpreted like this: Geber is 
like saying restoration (recuperatione) because, as will be understood in what understood 
in what follows, the case is solved by the restoration of 2 equal parts [ellipsis. . .]”58 
58 “Rendiamo gratie all’Altissimo, chosì chomincia el testo de l’Aghabar arabico nella reghola 
del geber la quale noi diciamo algebra. La quale reghola d’algebra, secondo Guglielmo de Lunis 
translatatore, inporta di questi 7 nomi cioè: geber, el melchel, el chal, el chelif, el fatiar, diffar 
el buram, el termem. É qualj nomi, secondo el detto Guglielmo, sono chosì interpretati. Geber è

The Legacy of Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in History of Algebra
155
As with the Latin gloss translated above in Sect. 7, this “rhegola del geber” could be 
misinterpreted as “Geber’s rule”. But Benedetto seems to have understood the term 
correctly, since soon after he relates the meaning of “geber”, which agrees with 
the meaning of the Arabic al-jabr. So now it seems that this Guglielmo is indeed 
responsible for a translation of a Liber gebre (Høyrup 2010, 13–21). The early date 
of the gloss in the thirteenth-century manuscript described above suggests that it was 
made from Arabic to Latin. Further, if the list of seven terms is part of Guglielmo’s 
translation and not his own commentary, then the original was not al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s 
Algebra. Whatever the case, the translation is lost. 
Eighteen manuscripts of Benedetto’s book on algebra are extant today, testimony 
to its unusual inﬂuence for an abacus treatise (Ulivi 2002, 13). In fact, another 
abacus text that reproduces al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s treatment of the six equations took the 
material from Benedetto. This is an anonymous Florentine Regole di geometria 
e della cosa (Rules of geometry and of the thing),59 also dating to around 1460. 
The text matches Benedetto’s closely, giving the same variant on the one equation 
and with the diagrams for the proofs lettered the same way. And again, the 
part that derives from al-Khw¯arazm¯ı is inserted between sections that are more 
characteristically Italian. Nothing from Benedetto’s introduction is copied here. 
The fourth abacus treatise that introduces the six equations in the manner of 
al-Khw¯arazm¯ı is the Ragionamenti d’algebra (Algebraic problems), written ca. 
1495 by Raffaello Canacci of Florence. After some introductory material Raffaello 
classiﬁes the six equation types with the same fourteen examples as al-Khw¯arazm¯ı, 
except that he has one third x squared equals 16 1
3x2 = 16 in place of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s one half x squared equals 18 1
2x2 = 18 and Benedetto’s 
one third x squared equals 12 1
3x2 = 12 (Procissi 1954, 303–307). He also adds two examples, x squared equals 8 xx2 = 8x and 
x squared equals 25x2 = 25. Only one of his proofs, the ﬁrst one for the type 4 equation, matches 
al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s. 
The introduction to Raffaello’s book begins: 
The rule of algebra, which rule Guglielmo de Lunis translated from Arabic into our 
language, and according to the said Guglielmo and others was composed by an Arabic 
master of truly great intelligence, while some others say that it was one whose name was 
Geber, to which Leonardo of Pisa said that algebra muchalbile is the interpretation of the 
rule in that language. 
The text of this rule begins: Giving thanks to the Almighty and following Guglielmo, the 
rule in that language contains seven names which are seven parts like this in the said named 
language: geber, el melchel, elchal, elchelis, eljatiar, diffar buran, eltiemin, and which  
names according to the said Guglielmo are interpreted like this: [ellipsis. . .]”60 
quanto a dire recuperatione inperoché, chome per lo seguente si chonprenderà, nella recuperatione 
di 2 parti igualj s’asolve il chaso [ellipsis. . .]” (Benedetto da Firenze 1982, 1).
59 (Anonimo Fiorentino 1992). Algebra was often called in Italian “regola della cosa” (“rule of the 
thing”) because of the name cosa (“thing”), translated from the Arabic shay for the ﬁrst-degree 
unknown. 
60 “l Aregola dellargibra la quale reghola ghuolelmo a lunis latraslato darabicho anostra linghua 
e sechondo el detto ghuol.mo e altri dichono questa esser chomposta dauno maestro arabo invero 
di grande intelligenza benche alchuno altrj dichono esser stati uno del quale il nome era Geber a 
che lionardo pisano dice che algebra muchalbile ella interpretatione della reghola inq.lla linghua el 

156
J. A. Oaks
What I have placed in a second paragraph, and which continues with explanations 
of the seven names, is copied from Benedetto.61 This suggests that the added phrase 
“into our language”, i.e., into Italian, for Guglielmo’s translation is Canacci’s own 
interpolation.62 And for another interpolation, “geber” has now become the name of 
the person responsible for the art of algebra, even if the meaning of the word “geber” 
is explained in the second paragraph. We will take up the issue of the ﬁctitious Geber 
again in Sect. 11. 
The Italian books show a mix of problem types, some taken over from the 
Arabic tradition and some that relate more to Italian mercantile concerns. A few 
of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s problems are sometimes found among them with the parameters 
intact. For instance, the well-known painter Piero della Francesca wrote a Trattato 
d’abaco around 1480 that has one rather complicated problem that originates 
from our third/ninth-century scholar: “Make for me from 10 two parts such that 
multiplying one by 5 and, what it makes, dividing [it] by the other part, and, what 
comes out [taking] the half, [and] adding with the ﬁrst product makes 50”.63 Another 
example is a problem of Maestro Biaggio (d. ca. 1340), whose Chasi exenplari alla 
regola dell’algebra was copied in 1463 by Benedetto da Firenze: “Find a number or 
a quantity such that multiplying the 1/3 plus 1 of the quantity by the 1/4 plus 1 of 
the same quantity makes 20”.64 One more example is from a particularly late abacus 
treatise, the Libro e trattato della praticha d’alcibra of Dionigi Gori, written in 1544. 
He gives two problems of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı framed in material terms. One of them 
reads: “Someone sends his servant to Florence and asks him after he returned: how 
much did you spend? The servant responds: the money that you gave me removing 
1/3 and 3 more, the remainder multiplied by itself, makes the same number. I ask 
how much money he spent”65 Authors rarely name the sources for problems, and 
these are not exceptions. 
testo (the edition reads “resto”) della detta reghola inchominca ’andano gratie allaltissimo ess.do el 
ditto ghuol.mo la ditta reghola inqu.lla linghua chontiene sette nomi coe sette parti chosi nella ditta 
linghua nominati: Geber el melchel Elchal Elchelis Elfatiar diffarel buran eltiemin e quali nomi 
sechondo il ditto ghuol.mo chosi sono interpretati [ellipsis. . .]” (Procissi 1954, 302).
61 The common phrase “and which names, according to the said Guglielmo, are interpreted like 
this" speaks for direct copying, as do other common elements not taken from Guglielmo. 
62 My interpretation of the passages involving Guglielmo de Lunis may be wrong, of course. Jens 
Høyrup has a different view of these passages, which he also translates (Høyrup 2019, 335–6). 
63 (Piero della Francesca 1970, 133). Translating from Problem (5) of al-Khw¯ariazm¯ı, it is: “If 
[someone] says, ten: you divide it into two parts and you multiply one of the parts by ﬁve and 
you divide it by the other. Then you cast away half of what you gathered and you add it to the 
multiplication by ﬁve, so it gives ﬁfty dirhams” (al-Khw¯arazm¯ı 2009, 165.7). Converted to modern 
algebra, the problem asks for a and b such that a plus b equals 10a + b = 10 and one half left parenthesis StartFraction 5 a Over b EndFraction right parenthesis plus 5 a equals 50 1
2( 5a
b ) + 5a = 50. 
64 (MSuperscript normal oo Biagio 1983, 23.11). The “plus” translates the Italian più, which takes a meaning like 
“more” or “further”. This is Problem (T4) in al-Khw¯arazm¯ı: “A m¯al: you multiply its third and 
a dirham by its fourth and a dirham to get twenty” (al-Khw¯arazm¯ı 2009, 151.2). Converted to 
modern algebra, it asks for a such that left parenthesis one third a plus 1 right parenthesis left parenthesis one fourth a plus 1 right parenthesis equals 20( 1
3a + 1)( 1
4a + 1) = 20. 
65 (Gori 1984, 27). Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s Problem (21) asks: “If [someone] says, a m¯al: you remove 
its third and three dirhams, then you multiply what remains by itself, it brings back the m¯al.” (al-

The Legacy of Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in History of Algebra
157
9 Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı and Ab¯u K¯amil in Hebrew 
From the late eleventh to about the sixteenth century Jewish scholars writing in 
Hebrew produced a wealth of books on mathematics in the same tradition as 
the contemporary writings in Arabic, Latin, and medieval Italian. This activity 
originated in northern Spain and southern France, and later, beginning in the 
ﬁfteenth century, shifted westward to Italy (Levey 1966; Wagner 2016). 
Algebra is not well represented in Hebrew texts compared with other mathemati-
cal topics. The earliest known Hebrew book giving solutions to problems by algebra 
is Moïse b. Tibbon’s 1271 translation of an arithmetic book of al-H. as.s.¯ar (8th/12th 
c.) made in Montpellier (Lévy 2003, 281). The problems in this book are solved 
by a variety of methods, including single false position, double false position, and 
algebra, and the equations set up in the algebraic solutions are all of ﬁrst degree.66 
The earliest known Hebrew text that explains the rules of algebra, including the 
quadratic equations, is The epistle on numbers of Isaac ben Solomon ibn al-Ah.ab 
(ca. 1350-ca. 1430). This book is a commentary written in Sicily on Ibn al-Bann¯a’s 
Talkh¯ıs. am¯al al-h. is¯ab (Condensed [book] on the operations of arithmetic), which 
contains a chapter on algebra.67 
What interests us more than these books is a reworking of the ﬁrst part of 
al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s Algebra that was added together with other material into the 
introduction of a manuscript of an anonymous Hebrew treatise on arithmetic (Lévy 
2002; Aradi 2013). This treatise seems to date from the twelfth or thirteenth 
century, and the three known manuscripts are housed in Geneva, Budapest, and the 
Vatican. Only the Geneva manuscript, copied in the fourteenth or ﬁfteenth century, 
contains the added material. The algebraic part follows al-Khw¯arazm¯ı through the 
classiﬁcation and solutions of the six equations, stopping before the proofs. Certain 
passages are clear translations from the Arabic, and of the eight sample equations 
for the six types, only 9 x equals 819x = 81 is not taken from al-Khw¯arazm¯ı. 
Much more well known is the Hebrew translation of Ab¯u K¯amil’s Algebra 
attributed to Mordekhay Finzi (d. 1475), a banker from Mantova with a keen interest 
in mathematics and science. This translation contains all three parts of Ab¯u K¯amil’s 
book.68 Tony Lévy (2007) has shown that the work is not a direct translation 
Khw¯arazm¯ı 2009, 181.7). The other problem, at (Gori 1984, 7), is about the buying of cloth. It 
ultimately comes from al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s Problem (T6).
66 The Arabic title of this book is Kit¯ab al-bay¯an wa-l-tadhk¯ar f¯ı s.anat amal al-ghub¯ar (Book 
of demonstration and recollection in the art of dust-board reckoning). An Arabic manuscript 
is available online: https://openn.library.upenn.edu/Data/0001/html/ljs293.html (accessed August 
14 2022). For an English translation of one of the problems solved three different ways, see 
(Abdeljaouad & Oaks 2021, 250-1). 
67 The text with English translation is published in (Wartenberg 2015). Some selections from this 
translation appear in (Wagner 2016, 362–374). 
68 The algebra proper is edited and translated into English in (Levey 1966), the second 
part, On the pentagon and decagon, was translated into Italian by Sacerdote in 1896, 
and all three parts are edited and translated into English on the Mispar project website, 

158
J. A. Oaks
from the Arabic, but depended in some way on a Castilian intermediary. He gives 
a multitude of examples of Castillan expressions in the translation as well as 
transliterations from Arabic that could not have passed through a Castillan version. 
Finzi also translated a large part of Maestro Dardi’s 1344 Aliabraa argibra, 
beginning his work in 1473. He apparently did not ﬁnish it, since the text breaks 
off after the 51st equation type. The part translated from al-Khw¯arazm¯ı is included, 
and because it includes the proofs it has more of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s original book than 
the text inserted in the Hebrew arithmetic.69 
10 Latin Manuscripts in Germany 
The surviving manuscripts of the Latin translations of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s Algebra date 
mostly from the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries. We do not know how closely 
the translations were studied before then, but they were clearly seen as important 
during the Renaissance. All four complete (or nearly so) manuscripts of Robert’s 
translation, as well as surviving fragments, come from German-speaking countries, 
and we can even identify some of the readers. Johannes Widman (d. after 1498), 
a professor at Leipzig, owned one of them, in which he added marginal notes 
expressed in the terms of the Italian/German cossist algebra of his time. This 
manuscript became the basis for his 1486 lecture on algebra, the ﬁrst in Germany, 
though in content the lecture largely follows contemporary algebra (Hughes 1989, 
12). His manuscript later saw its way to Erfurt, where Adam Ries acquired it in 1522 
and made notes in it (Vogel 1985, 202). Another manuscript was made by Johannes 
Scheubel in 1550, the same year he published his book on Euclid’s Elements that 
begins with a 76-page introduction to algebra. That introduction does not exhibit 
any direct inﬂuence from al-Khw¯arazm¯ı. Louis Karpinski wrote that Scheubel’s 
manuscript “was evidently intended for publication” (al-Khw¯arazm¯ı 1915, 50). 
Although Scheubel never published it, this late manuscript became the basis for 
Karpinski’s 1915 edition. 
The German astronomer and mathematician Johannes Müller (1436–1476), 
known also as Regiomontanus, owned a manuscript of Gerard’s translation copied 
in 1456, probably from his own hand. That same year he copied in Latin a brief 
introduction to algebra that originated in the medieval Italian tradition, and he also 
annotated his manuscript copy of the Quadripartitum numerorum of Jean de Murs. 
These three manuscripts are bound together with other treatises in a single codex: 
MS Columbia University, Plimpton 188 (Folkerts 2002, 414). 
https://mispar.ethz.ch/wiki/Mainnormal bar_Page. The third part extends only to problem (50) by Rashed’s 
numbering (Ab¯u K¯amil 2012, 702), omitting the last 20 problems and the section on arithmetical 
and geometric progressions. Even some of the ﬁrst 50 are skipped.
69 Finzi’s translation is described in (Lévy 2007; Wagner 2013), and Wagner’s partial edition, 
covering through the six standard equations, is edited in (Wagner 2013b). I thank Roi Wagner 
and Naomi Aradi for suggesting adjustments to what I wrote in this section. 

The Legacy of Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in History of Algebra
159
Regiomontanus was the ﬁrst European since antiquity to take note of Diophan-
tus’s Arithmetica, which he discovered in a Greek manuscript in Venice in 1463 
or 1464. Soon after, he wrote to the mathematician Giovanni Bianchini about 
the striking similarity between the structure of Diophantus’s method and that of 
contemporary algebra, which he was familiar with from his Latin/Italian sources.70 
His public announcement of the discovery of this Greek algebra came in 1464, in the 
inaugural lecture he gave in Padua at the start of a series on the third/ninth century 
astronomer Alfragani (al-Fargh¯an¯ı).71 In it he brieﬂy recounted the origins of the 
various branches of the mathematical sciences. Under astronomy, for example, he 
highlighted Hipparchus, Ptolemy, Theon, Albategnius (al-Batt¯an¯ı), Geber (J¯abir ibn 
Aﬂah.), and some recent European ﬁgures. In optics the founders were Euclid, 
Archimedes, Alhazen (Ibn al-Haytham), Witelo, and Roger Bacon. Algebra was 
covered in the middle of the section on arithmetic: 
But no one up to now has translated from Greek into Latin Diophantus’ thirteen most subtle 
books, in which the ﬂower of all Arithmetic lies hidden, namely the art of the rei & census,72 
which today they call by the Arabic name Algebra. Now and then Latins consider many 
fragments of this most beautiful art, but in our day I have met very few men learned in it 
beyond Giovanni Bianchini, the best of men.73 
The lack of any mention of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı is not due to a desire on the part 
of Regiomontanus to create a Greek origin for algebra at the expense of Arabic 
and Latin sources, but rather to the severe brevity of his account. In other ﬁelds 
Regiomontanus freely wrote about Arabic scientists, and it is clear from his overall 
approach to history in the oration that he was interested in the continuity of each 
subject, from the Greeks through Arabic and Latin books to his own time.74 Denial 
of medieval contributions on the part of some algebraists would come later, in the 
following century. Regiomontanus was of course correct to identify Diophantus’s 
book as a book on algebra, just as Qust.¯a ibn L¯uq¯a and other Arabic mathematicians 
had done centuries earlier. Note that he made no claim that Diophantus invented 
algebra. Others would later read that into what he said. 
Regiomontanus’s early death in 1476 prevented him from following through 
with his plan to translate the Arithmetica. It was over a century later, in 1575, that 
Xylander (Wilhelm Holtzman) ﬁnally published the ﬁrst Latin translation. Three 
years before that, in 1572, Rafael Bombelli’s L’algebra gave translations of many 
problems from the Arithmetica which are mixed with typical Italian abacus-style 
problems, very much like the way al-Karaj¯ı included so many of Diophantus’s
70 (Morse 1981, 60ff). On the date, see (Zinner 1990, 69). The whole story is recounted in more 
detail in (Christianidis & Oaks 2023, 183ff). 
71 For a discussion of the oration see (Rose 1975). 
72 The words rei and census are Latin translations of shay and m¯al respectively, the names of the 
the ﬁrst two powers of the unknown in Arabic. 
73 (Regiomontanus 1537, 4th page of the oration, which is the ﬁrst item in the book after the letter 
to the reader). Translated in (Morse 1981, 58–9). 
74 For a contextual account of the oration, see (Swerdlow 1993). 

160
J. A. Oaks
problems with the usual Arabic problems in his al-Fakhr¯ı over ﬁve and a half 
centuries earlier. 
11 Printed Latin and Vernacular Algebra in the Sixteenth 
Century 
The earliest important mathematics text to appear in print was Luca Pacioli’s (ca. 
1447–1517) 1494 Summa de arithmetica geometria proportioni & proportionalita. 
This guide to practical arithmetic and geometry, written in Italian and published in 
Venice, was an encyclopedic work similar to Fibonacci’s Liber abaci and Benedetto 
da Firenze’s Trattato d’abacho. In fact, the Liber abaci was one of Pacioli’s main 
sources. There is no direct inﬂuence of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı here, though Pacioli does 
classify, solve, and provide geometric proofs for the six equations that he took from 
Fibonacci (Pacioli 1494, fols. 144bff). Pacioli’s Summa served in the following 
decades as a kind of starting point for European arithmetic and algebra. Where the 
abacus manuscripts were often written for the use of the author and his students, 
printed books like Pacioli’s reached a much wider audience, and readers in the 
following century came to take on a more theoretical interest in algebra. 
During the sixteenth century books on algebra, as well as arithmetic books 
with chapters on algebra, were published in several countries and in a number of 
languages, including Latin, Italian, French, German, Spanish, Dutch, and English. 
There is a shift in al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s inﬂuence in these books. Where earlier we 
saw that some Italian manuscripts reproduced part of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s treatise 
without mentioning his name, the sixteenth century printed books often mention his 
name without reproducing anything from his book. Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s name appears 
because many authors were now making a small attempt to write something of 
the origin of algebra. There are three ﬁgures who are cited in these books as 
being the inventor, or one of the inventors, of algebra: Diophantus, Geber, and al-
Khw¯arazm¯ı.75 
References to Diophantus prior to the 1572 publication of Bombelli’s L’algebra, 
as well as many that came after, derive from Regiomontanus’s 1464 Padua oration, 
which appeared in print in 1537 (Regiomontanus 1537). 
References to Geber can be traced back to Raffaello Canacci, whose error is 
quoted above in Sect. 8, and which appears to have been caused by ambiguous 
phrases like “liber gebre” and “reghola del geber” from the thirteenth-century 
gloss and Benedetto da Firenze respectively. Francesco Ghaligai (d. 1536), whose 
Summa de arithmetica was printed in Italian in Florence in 1521, copied from both 
Benedetto and Raffaello. He begins his treatment of algebra by citing the former
75 Stedall (2012) also gives a rundown of sixteenth-century authors who name the inventors of 
algebra. 

The Legacy of Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in History of Algebra
161
while paraphrasing the latter: 
Benedetto says the rule of algebra (regola dellarcibra), which Guglielmo de Lunis translated 
from Arabic to our language, and according to this Guglielmo this rule was composed by 
an Arabic name of great intelligence, & which some say is one whose name was Geber, 
& Leonardo of Pisa says that Algebra amuchabole is the interpretation of the rule in that 
language.76 
Immediately after, he writes “Following the text of Guglielmo”, and then quotes 
what amounts to the ﬁrst, long paragraph from Benedetto’s introduction: “We give 
thanks to the Almighty. Thus begins the text of Arabic algebra (aghabar Arabico) in  
the rule of algebra (regola del geber)” with nearly the same spellings as Benedetto, 
and not Raffaello.77 The rest of the book gives a contemporary treatment of algebra, 
using the same notation as Canacci, but which he adopted from the teaching of 
Giovanni del Sodo (1419/23–1510/1), another Florentine abacus master. The rules, 
solutions, and proofs of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı are not given in Ghaligai’s book. 
The propagation of the error of Geber was subsequently aided with the reprinting 
of Ghaligai’s book in 1548 and 1552, where it carried the new title Pratica 
d’arithmetica. Michael Stifel (1487–1567) may have been the ﬁrst to identify this 
Geber with the twelfth-century Arabic astronomer J¯abir ibn Aﬂah., whose Latinized 
name Geber was spelled the same way. In his inﬂuential 1544 Arithmetica integra, 
published in Latin in Nuremburg, Stifel wrote that “Gebro Astronomo” was the 
founder (autore) of algebra.78 
The following year the Italian mathematician Girolamo Cardano (1501–1576) 
published his famous Ars magna, also in Latin and in Nuremburg. There he wrote 
that “[t]his art originated with Muh.ammad son of M¯us¯a the Arab. Leonardo of 
Pisa is a trustworthy source for this statement.”79 As mentioned above, the one 
manuscript of Fibonacci’s Liber abaci shows no more than the word “Maumeht” 
in the margin, and Fibonacci’s other books do not mention al-Khw¯arazm¯ı at  
all. Perhaps someone had copied al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s name into the manuscript that 
Cardano read, or maybe he really read it from the incipit of Robert’s or Gerard’s 
translation of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s Algebra.
76 “Dice Benedecto la regola dellarcibra quale Guglielmo Delunis la traslato Darabo a nostra lingua 
& sicondo decto Guglielmo decta regola e composta da uno nome Arabo di grande intelligentia: 
& che alcuni dicono essere stato uno elquale nome era Geber: & Lionardo Pisano dice ch Algebra 
amuchabole e la interpretatione della reghola in quella lingua.” (Ghaligai 1521, fol. 71b), with 
corrections from the 1548 printing. 
77 “Segue el Testo di Guglielmo. Rendiamo gratie allo altissimo cosi comincia el testo dellaghabar 
Arabico nella regola del Geber quale noi diciamo Arcibra:& sicondo decto Guglielmo importa 7 
nomi cioe [ellipsis. . .]”. 
78 (Stifel 1544, fol. 226b). “Diende tuo quo que consilio usus, Algebram (quam persuasisti bonis 
rationibus, a Gebro Astronomo, autore eius, ita esse nuncupatam) [ellipsis. . .]” 
79 (Cardano 1545, fol. 3a), translation adapted from (Cardano 1968, 7). “Haec ars olim a 
Mahomete, Mosis Arabis ﬁlio initium sumpsit. Etenim huius rei locuples testis Leonartus 
Pisauriensis est”. 

162
J. A. Oaks
I have already mentioned the “book” on algebra that the German mathematician 
Johannes Scheubel (1494–1570) inserted at the beginning of his treatise on Euclid’s 
Elements, published in Latin in Basil in 1550. On the ﬁrst page he writes: “Further-
more, they attribute the discovery of these rules to the Greek writer Diophantus, 
who, according to the author Regiomontanus in the preface to the Alphragani, 
wrote them down in thirteen books”80 Of course, it is Scheubel who infers from 
Regiomontanus’s speech that it was Diophantus who discovered the rules. Scheubel 
copied his own Latin manuscript of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s book that very year, and we 
can only surmise that he mentioned Diophantus and not al-Khw¯arazm¯ı because the 
former wrote before the latter. 
Jacques Peletier (1517–1582) is the earliest of several algebraists to mention 
all three names. He wrote his 1554 L’Algebre in French, and in the beginning he 
addresses the origin of the art: 
The ﬁrst inventor of this art, according to some, was Geber the Arab [ellipsis. . .] According to 
others it was a Muh.ammad son of M¯us¯a the Arab, as Girolamo Cardano said, following 
Leonardo of Pisa [ellipsis. . .] I have also seen the book of Johannes Scheubel, Mathematician at 
Tubingen, who attributes the invention of this art to a Greek, Diophantus [ellipsis. . .] I do not think  
that this Art, nor most of the others, was invented by a single author.81 
Giovanna Cifoletti explains that Peletier “followed Herodotus’ criterion for the 
invention of the arts, according to which they should be ascribed to a people, and 
not to an individual, avoiding mythical ﬁgures” (Cifoletti 1996, 130). Even if his 
reasoning might not have any basis in the texts, Peletier was right on this point. 
Two years later, in 1556, the German astronomer Caspar Peucer (1525–1602) 
similarly mentioned all three inventors: “Gebro Arabi”, “Mahometen Moysis 
Arabis ﬁlium”, and “Diophanto Pythagoraeo”. But he explained that of these three 
Diophantus was ﬁrst, and that his algebra was translated into Arabic after the 
Muslims conquered the East and nearly extinguished the Greek language. His basic 
chronology is correct, and he even noted that the Muslims took up the cultivation of 
knowledge more or less eight hundred years ago, i.e., ca. 756 CE, singling out the 
caliph “Almansor” (al-Mans. ¯ur, reigned 136–158/754–775).82 
Most later books give two or three of these names, too. Antic Roca’s Arithmética 
(Barcelona, 1564) mentions Diophantus and Geber, citing Regiomontanus and 
Scheubel respectively (Massa Esteve 2012, 108). Pedro Nuñez (1502–1578), in his 
1567 Libro de algebra en arithmetica y geometria, also mentions “the Moorish 
mathematician whose name was Geber” (“Mathematico Mouro, cujo nome era
80 (Scheubel 1550, 1). “Porro harum regularum inventionem ascribunt Diophanto Greco scriptori, 
qui, ut autor est Regiomontanus in praefatione Alphragani, libris tredecim eas descripsit”. 
81 “Le premier inuanteur de cet art, selon aucuns, fùt Geber Arabe [ellipsis. . .] Selon les autres, fùt vn 
Mahommet ﬁz de Moïse Arabe : Lequel, comme dìt Gerome Cardan Millãnoes, apres vn Leonard 
de Pesare [ellipsis. . .] I’è ancores vù le liure de Ian Scheubel, Mathematicien de Tubingue : lequel attribue 
l’inuancion de cet art a vn Diophante Grec [ellipsis. . .] je ne panse point que cet Art, ni la plus part des 
autres, doeuet leur inuancion a vn seul auteur.” (Peletier 1554, 1–2). 
82 (Peucer 1556), in the middle of the book, on the ﬁrst page of the chapter on algebra, titled 
“Logistice Regulae [ellipsis. . .]”. 

The Legacy of Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in History of Algebra
163
Gebre”) and Diophantus, citing Regiomontanus’s oration (Nuñez 1567, second 
page of the preface). Christoph Clavius (1538–1612), who may have met Nuñez 
during his time in Portugal, also mentions both “Gebrum Arabem Astronomum” and 
Diophantus as inventors of algebra (Clavius 1608, 4). He published his Algebra in 
Rome in 1608, though he may have written it much earlier. Later in the book, among 
his worked-out problems, he copied 49 problems from the Arithmetica, most likely 
directly from a Greek manuscript in the Vatican Library, without mentioning the 
source (Christianidis & Oaks 2023, 216–8). Juan Pérez de Moya (d. 1596) published 
his Tratado de mathematicasen in 1573, where he wrote “The inventor of this art, 
following Leonardo of Pisa, was a Muh.ammad son of M¯us¯a the Arab. Alfragono (as 
mentioned by Regiomontanus) said it was Diophantus, who wrote thirteen books 
on it. Others say the inventor was an Arab called Geber, and that from this name 
derives Algebra.”83 Now it is Alfragano (al-Fargh¯an¯ı) who attributes the invention 
of algebra to Diophantus, and we are also told that the word “algebra” derives from 
the name “Geber”, when in fact it is the other way around. 
The English physician and mathematician Robert Record (ca. 1512–1558) may 
have read both Ghaligai and Stifel, for in the beginning of his chapter on solving 
equations in his 1557 book Whetstone of witte he writes: “This Rule is called the 
Rule of Algeber, after the name of the inventoure, as some men thinke: or by a name 
of singular excellencie, as other iudge” (Record 1557, fol. Eeiiib). The title he gave 
to that chapter is “The rule of equation, commonly called Algebers Rule”. 
Niccolò Tartaglia (1499/1500–1557), working in Italy, attributed algebra to al-
Khw¯arazm¯ı right on the title page of part six of his General trattato de numeri, et 
misure in 1560: “The sixth part of the general treatise on numbers and measure 
by Nicolo Tartaglia; in which is explained that speculative practice of the great 
art, called algebra and almucabala in Arabic, or rule of the thing, discovered by 
Maumeth, son of Moses the Arab” (Tartaglia 1560). 
12 Censuring the Middle Ages 
Beginning around the 1540s there was a movement in some authors to elevate 
algebra from an art to a science, which, combined with the humanistic orientation 
of many scholars in Italy, France, Germany, and Holland, encouraged them to 
distance algebra from its practical, medieval roots and connect it directly with 
ancient sources. Jean Borrel (ca. 1485-ca. 1560), who wrote his 1559 Logistica in 
Latin for a better educated French readership, even dropped the name “algebra” in 
favor of the Latin word quadratura. He gives no account of the origins of the art,
83 “El inuentor desta arte, segun Leonardo Pisano, fue vn Maumetho hijo de Mosis Arauigo. 
Alfragano (come reﬁere Iuan de MonteRegio) dize que Diophanto, y que escriuio treze libros 
della. Otros dizen que el inuentor, fue vn Arauigo, dicho Geber, y que deste nombre se deriuo 
Algebra” (Pérez de Moya 1573, 429). 

164
J. A. Oaks
but he criticizes medieval algebra as being confusing, and he identiﬁes Book X of 
Euclid’s Elements as conveying this “quadratura”. 
Rafael Bombelli (1526–1572/3) published his L’algebra, parte maggiore dell’ 
arimetica divisa in tre libri in 1572, though he had completed a draft of the work 
probably in the late 1550s (Jayawardene 1965, 304). He also wished to present 
algebra as a theoretical rather than a practical discipline,84 and his discovery of 
a manuscript of Diophantus’s Arithmetica in the Vatican library, probably in the 
1560s, gave him the material to replace the medieval terminology and mercantile 
problems common in algebra books of the era. In describing the earlier books on 
algebra that he had read, he tells us that “the Arab Maumetto of Mosè is believed to 
be the ﬁrst, and one sees a short work of his, but it is of little value, and I believe 
that it is from this that the word Algebra originates”85 It does not seem to have been 
Bombelli’s intent to distort the origin of algebra like Borrel did. Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s 
algebra is indeed elementary when confronted with the algebra of Bombelli’s time. 
François Viète (1540–1603) more forcefully rejected medieval Arabic mathe-
matics as well as the medieval European mathematics that came from it, writing 
that algebra had been “spoiled and deﬁled by the barbarians”.86 For his work in 
astronomy he remained faithful to the Greek tradition by grounding the calculation 
of tables in the non-arithmetized geometry of Euclid. But at the same time, he 
recognized the power of algebra for generating the numbers in those tables, so 
he devised an algebra in which the knowns and unknowns are not the numerical 
measures of magnitudes, but are instead their non-arithmetized “sizes”, which 
participate in Aristotle’s genus of quantity through ratio and proportion (Oaks 
2018c). This new algebra, which he called logistice speciosa to distinguish it from 
the old logistice numerosa, deserved a classical origin, and Viète chose to attribute 
its invention to Diophantus. But there was the problem that Diophantus clearly 
worked with a numerical algebra, so Viète claimed that Diophantus had in fact 
practiced logistice speciosa covertly: 
Diophantus used zetetics most subtly of all in those books that have been collected in the 
Arithmetica. There he assuredly exhibits this method in numbers but not in species, for 
which it is nevertheless used. Because of this his ingenuity and quickness of mind are all 
the more to be admired, for things that appear to be very subtle and abstruse in numerical 
logistic [logistice numerosa] are quite familiar and even easy in specious logistic [logistice 
speciosa]. (translation adjusted from (Viète 1983, 27)) 
Naturally, Viète made no mention of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı. 
Where Viète accounted for the apparent shortcoming in the Arithmetica by 
claiming that Diophantus secretly worked in specious logistic, other mathematicians 
acknowledged that Greek authors could be misguided, and took the Hermetic view 
that there was a golden age before the time of the Greeks during which oriental
84 (Jayawardene 1973, 511; Christianidis & Oaks 2023, 197ff). 
85 “Maumetto di Mosè Arabo è creduto il primo, e di lui vna operetta si vede, mà di picciol valore, 
e da quì credo, che uenuto sia questa uoce Algebra” (Bombelli 1572, p. 3 of the letter to the reader). 
86 Translated by J. Winfree Smith in (Klein 1968, 318). 

The Legacy of Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in History of Algebra
165
sages possessed perfect knowledge, and that this knowledge later became corrupted 
in Greek authors and declined even further in postclassical times. Different versions 
of this myth circulated widely in the sixteenth century, and various names were said 
to have been among the ancient purveyors of this eastern wisdom, including, as we 
shall see, al-Khw¯arazm¯ı. 
The earliest text I know that relates the “golden age” story in the context of 
algebra is an anonymous German commentary on a Latin algebra book preserved 
in four manuscripts, the earliest copied in 1545. The title is given as Algebrae 
Arabis arithmetici viri clarissimi liber ad Ylem geometram praeceptorem suum, and 
in Curtze’s edition it takes up 161 pages (Curtze 1902 II, 449–609). The story is 
presented in the prologue, occupying the ﬁrst page and a half. Here “Algebra” is the 
name of the inventor of algebra: 
Here is the book of Algebra, the great arithmetician, written in the time of Alexander and 
Nectanebo II, the great Greek and necromancer [respectively], written for Yles, the great 
Egyptian geometer, in Arabic called Gebra and Almuchabola, which is what we call the 
book of the things of the unknown number, and which was translated from Arabic into 
Greek by Archimedes and from Greek into Latin by Apuleius, and is called by the Italians 
the “book de la cosa”, which is then spoken as “the book of the thing”; [ellipsis. . .] And from this 
book we ﬁnd that Muh.ammad reports on these rules in his Qur¯an, also calling them Gebra 
and Almuchabola. They are also used by the Indians, who call them Aliabra and Aluoreth. 
This is the book that Aliabras set from Arabic to Indian in the time of Alexander and they 
say the “book of Aluoreth”, that is again “of things”, or the “Book of coniecturation” [ellipsis. . .]87 
(Curtze 1902 II, 449)88 
87 “Hie hebet sich an das Buch Algebrae, des grossen Arismetristens, geschrieben zu den zeithen 
Alexandri vnd Nectanebi, des grossen Grecken vnnd Nigromantis, geschrieben zu Ylem, dem 
grossen Geometer jn Egypten, jn Arabischer Sprach genant Gebra vnnd Almuchabola, das dann 
bey vns wirdt genant das Buch von dem Dinge der vnwissenden zall. Vnd ist aus Arabischer Sprach 
jn kriechisch transferirt von Archimede, vnnd aus kriechisch jn das Latein von Apuleio, vnd wird 
genandt bey den Welschen das Buch de la cosa, das dann aber wird gesprochen das Buch von 
dem ding; wann aus einem vnbekanten dinge ﬁndet man das wesen der zal vnd gantzen essentz, 
das dann gewesen ist die frage ze wissen. Vnnd aus disem Buch ﬁnden wir, das der Machomet in 
seinem Alkoran vermeldet vin disen Regeln, vnnd nennet sie auch Gebram vnd Almuchabolam. 
Sie werden auch gebraucht von den Indiern, vnnd nennen sie Aliabra vnd Aluoreth, das ist das 
Buch, das Aliabras zu den zeiten Alexandri aus Arabischer sprache jn jndische gesatzt hat, vnd 
wird bey jnen gesagtt das Buch Aluoreth, das ist von dem Dinge abermals, oder das Buch der 
Coniecturation [ellipsis. . .]” 
88 The origin of algebra in Egypt in the time of Alexander speaks for a connection with alchemy, 
especially the reference to Nectanebo, the last native Egyptian pharaoh (reigned 358–340 BCE). A 
ﬁctitious story in the ancient Alexander romance relates that after he was deposed by the Persians, 
Nectanebo traveled to Macedonia where he posed as a magician and seduced Olympias to became 
Alexander’s father. The German commentary mentions after this passage that (the ﬁctional) Yles 
taught geometry to Euclid. Of course, there is no evidence that either Archimedes or Apuleius 
translated any algebra book. But Italian books were called books “of the thing (cosa)”. There is 
no record of any person named Aliabra who translated Arabic algebra into Sanskrit, and algebra 
was not called Aliabra or Aluoreth in India. The term coniecturation comes from the commented 
Latin text and refers to the stage of simplifying an equation. I have not seen this term applied in 
any other book.

166
J. A. Oaks
Christoff Rudolff had also given the Indian name of algebra as “Alboreth”, a 
variation on “Aluoreth”, in his 1525 Coss (Rudolff 1525, f. Aiiia). It is not surprising 
that the author of the commentary names a great number of classical Greek writers, 
but of medieval authors he names only Avicenna in one place (p. 470). 
Curtze (1902, 441) notes that the mathematics in this commentary does not 
descend from al-Khwarazm¯ı’s Algebra, but there is one trace of al-Khwarazm¯ı in  
the beginning of the book. There the ﬁrst six propositions if Book II of Euclid’s 
Elements are explained, each one associated in turn with one of the six equations. 
Proposition II.6 corresponds to al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s normalized type 6 equation b x plus c equals x squaredbx+c =
x2, and in this case the diagram and the argument of the proof match those in the 
Arabic text (Curtze 1902 II, 465-6). 
The French philosopher Petrus Ramus (1515–1572), a critic of Aristotle, also 
adopted the idea of an earlier golden age (Malet 2006). He writes nothing about 
the origin of algebra in his 1560 textbook Algebra, but he does cover the origin of 
the mathematical sciences in his 1569 book Mathematicarum, libri unus et triginta. 
There he describes a tradition anterior to the Greeks, but without mentioning any 
names. He then lists several Greek authors, including Diophantus, and then skips to 
Regiomontanus and later European mathematicians (Ramus 1569, 5, 37; Cifoletti 
1996 132–33). 
Ramus’s Algebra was posthumously reprinted in 1586, this time with a paragraph 
on the pre-Greek origin of the art. We do not know if Ramus is its author, but it 
agrees with his humanist leaning. The similarities that it shares with the German 
commentary cannot have occurred by chance: 
The name of algebra is thought to be Syriac, signifying the ‘art and doctrine of an excellent 
man’. Now Geber in Syriac signiﬁes ‘man’; it is often a title of honor, as ‘master’ or ‘doctor’ 
with us. For, there is said to have been some unknown mathematician who sent his algebra, 
written in the Syriac tongue, to Alexander the Great, and he named it almucabala, that  
is, a “book of unknown things”. Others preferred to call his doctrine algebra. This book 
is still today very precious among the erudite nations of the East, and it is called by the 
Indians, who are very studied in these arts, aliabra or alboret, since they are ignorant of the 
origin of the proper name. Algebra has been called by some Ars rei et census in Latin, as in 
Regiomontanus. By the Italians it is called ars de la cosa, by others  cossa. ((Ramus 1586, 
322), translation slightly adjusted from (Cifoletti 1996, 134)) 
Cifoletti writes of this origin story: 
In this genealogy the ‘Geber’ is translated as vir, i.e. as a man of status; he is interpreted as 
a magus, belonging to the Semitic melting pot which is identiﬁed with the prisca theologia 
or Chaldean wisdom [ellipsis. . .] While the Syriac name could indicate the third century AD, 
the reference to Alexander transforms him into a mythical ﬁgure of the alchemical type. 
(Cifoletti 1996, 135) 
For Ramus, as for the anonymous German commentator, “the Greek authors are not 
the inventors, but the depositories and transmitters of ancient wisdom” (Cifoletti 
1996, 136). Incidentally, the Latin word translated as “unknown” in “book of 
unknown things” is occultis, and in the German commentary it is unwissenden. It  
could be translated as “book of hidden things” or “book of occult things”, the latter 
suggesting a link with the Hermetic tradition.

The Legacy of Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in History of Algebra
167
The French mathematician Guillaume Gosselin (ca. 1552-ca. 1590) cites the 
usual three inventors in his algebra book De arte magna (Latin, 1577): 
There are some who attribute the invention of this science to Geber, since it received its 
Arabic name from this man, others to Mahomet, the son of Moses the Arab; others to the 
Greek Diophantus. But I am convinced that this art existed before these times, since it 
[belongs] wholly to the sciences. It should occupy the principal place of honor, since it 
teaches how to carry out all calculations, and if anything is obscure to us, it is the fault of 
the artisan, not the art. (Gosselin 1577, 3b) 
The implication that algebra had existed before men invented it echoes a statement 
that Ramus had earlier attributed to Aristotle: “the arts are of eternal and unchanging 
things, yet men’s knowledge of them is by no means eternal”.89 Gosselin knew 
Ramus’s book, for he cites it on folio 13a. 
In the following year, in his 1578 French translation of Tartaglia’s book on 
arithmetic, Gosselin clariﬁes the chronology. In the Au Lecteur he names the most 
excellent algebraists of all nations, 
these being for Arabia Moses, Muh.ammad, who is said to be the inventor of algebra, Alguc, 
Rabbi Abraham & Rabbi Isaac. For Greece, Diophantus who some others say is the inventor 
of algebra, Planudes, Pythagoras, Plato & Hypatia a woman of Alexandria, who commented 
on Diophantus. For Italy, Brother Luca [Pacioli], Commandino, Leonardo of Pisa, Tartaglia, 
Cardano, Louis de Ferrara, François Peuenel. For Spain, Pierre Nunes, [ellipsis. . .]”90 
The list is divided into groups, “Arabia”, “Greece”, “Italy”, “Spain”, etc. The order 
of the groups is chronological, and the placement of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in the ﬁrst 
group together with Biblical ﬁgures suggests that he lived in a time before the 
Greeks. The mention of Moses just before al-Khw¯arazm¯ı could even suggest that 
al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s father might be identiﬁed with the Biblical Moses. 
Then, Gosselin writes in the beginning of the main part of the book, 
Our author [i.e., Tartaglia] does not mention in this place the main inventors of num-
bers, who have been Mahomet inventor of algebra, Geber, Algus, Diophantus, Barlaam, 
Xenocrates, Thales the Milesian, Archimedes, Eudoxus, who invented the whole ﬁfth 
[Book] of Euclid, Jordanus [de Nemore], Laac, Brother Luca [Pacioli], & Villefranche.91 
Again, the order of names is to be understood to be chronological by civilization. 
After al-Khw¯arazm¯ı and the ﬁctional Geber and Algus we are treated to a parade of 
Greek mathematicians and then to later Europeans. 
Gosselin brings up the origin of algebra again in Part 2 of his translation, this 
time citing only al-Khw¯arazm¯ı: “Of this Great Art, called in Arabic algebra &
89 (Ramus 1569, 1), translated in (Goulding 2010, 38). 
90 (Tartaglia 1578 Part 1, 2nd page of letter “Au Lecteur”). The passage begins: “ont esté pour 
l’Arabie, Moyse, Mammeth son ﬁls, qu’on dit estre inventeur de l’Algebre, Alguc, Rabbi Abraham, 
& Rabbi-Issac. Pour la Grece, Diophante, qu’aucuns aultres disent estre inventeur de l’Algebre, 
Planude, Pythagore, [ellipsis. . .]”. In medieval European legend, Alguc, also Algus or Algos, is the name 
of the ancient Indian philosopher who devised the decimal “Arabic” numeration system. I do not 
know who François Peuenel is. 
91 (Tartaglia 1578 Part 1, fol. 2r). For Algus, see the previous footnote. Villefranche is Etienne de 
la Roche. I do not know who Laac is. 

168
J. A. Oaks
almucabala, or rule of the thing, invented by Muh.ammad son of M¯us¯a the Arab”.92 
And later, in explaining that the ﬁrst degree unknown is called a “root” (racine), 
he (again, not Tartaglia) writes of “Maumeth ﬁls de Moyse Arabe inventeur de 
l’Algebre” (Tartaglia 1578, Part 2, fol. 10b). So now al-Khw¯arazm¯ı is  the inventor 
of algebra, and he predates Diophantus, something that any educated person should 
have known was false, as we saw above in Caspar Peucer. Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı has now 
been transferred to the realm of mythical Eastern sages whose knowledge was later 
passed to the Greeks. 
Tartaglia himself seems to have been sympathetic toward this view of history, too. 
In his translation of Euclid’s Elements he lists famous geometers, beginning with 
“Hermes Trismegistus, philosopher, priest, and king of Egypt”.93 But it is doubtful 
that he consided al-Khw¯arazm¯ı as writing before the Greeks. For him, “Maumeth, 
son of Moses the Arab” was probably still the medieval algebraist. 
Simon Stevin’s (1548–1620) primary quarrel with the Greeks stemmed from the 
indivisibility of the unit as expounded in Euclid’s Books VII-IX. The Dutch engineer 
and mathematician instead argued that fractions and irrational roots are as legitimate 
as the positive integers, a conviction that might have played a role in his adoption 
of the idea of a golden age of science before the time of the Greeks and other 
ancient peoples. Stevin was also inﬂuenced by Ramus, even if he does not cite the 
French scholar (Dijksterhuis 2021, section 5; Malet 2006, 77). The second volume 
of Stevin’s 1605 Wisconstighe ghedachtenissen (Mathematical memoirs) contains 
a chapter called “Wijsentijt” (“Age of the sages”), which begins: “The Age of the 
Sages is what we call that time in which exceptional learning was to be found among 
men, something that we perceive with certainty from certain signs, but without 
knowing among whom, where, or when” (tr. in Dijksterhuis 2021, 182). Stevin 
then discusses these signs, which he categorizes according to topic, beginning with 
astronomy, then arithmetic, followed by brief notices for geometry, the terrestrial 
atmosphere, alchemy, and magic (Stevin 1961 III, 593–607). The part on arithmetic 
begins with a description of algebra, where we are told that the algebra in Arabic 
books predates Diophantus: 
The second sign is the wonderful experience in arithmetic which it has been found man 
formerly possessed, one of the curious peculiarities of which may be considered to be 
Algebra, which came to light again a few years ago from Arabic books, which subject, from 
the writings they left, is seen not to have been known to the Chaldeans, the Hebrews, the 
Greeks (for Diophantus is more recent) or the Romans, all of whom were no arithmeticians 
worth the name.94 
92 “De la Grande Art, dite en Arabe Algebre & Almucabale, ou Reigle de la chose, inuentée de 
Maumeth ﬁls de Moïse Arabe” (Tartaglia 1578, Part 2, on the page after the title page). 
93 “[ellipsis. . .] come furno Mercurio Termegisto philosopho, sacerdote, & Re d’Egitto: similmente 
Pithagora, Platone, Plotino, Aristotele, Averrois, Hypocrates, el nostro Euclide, Ptholomeo, 
Archimede, Appollonio Pergeo, Iordano, Vittruvio Architetto, & molti altri” (Euclid 1543, f.  
iiiia.38). 
94 Translation adjusted slightly on the advice of Jan Hogendijk from (Stevin 1961 III, 599). The 
emphases and parentheses are Stevin’s.

The Legacy of Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in History of Algebra
169
Stevin had published his comprehensive l’Arithmetique two decades earlier, in 
1585. It is there that he laid out his approach to algebra, and where he gave his 
translation of the ﬁrst four Books of Diophantus’s Arithmetica. In his discussion of 
polynomial equations he lists the people who ﬁrst solved different equation types: 
for quadratic equations it was “Mahomet ﬁlz de Mose Arabien” (al-Khw¯arazm¯ı), 
for third degree equations “some other unknown author”, and for fourth degree 
equations “Louys de Ferrare” (Lodovico Ferrari). Below on the same page he noted: 
“As for Diophantus, it seems that in his time only the inventions of Mahomet were 
known, as can be collected from his ﬁrst six books.”95 Thus al-Khw¯arazm¯ı wrote  
before Diophantus, which is consistent with his mention of “les Arabes inventeurs 
de l’algebre” earlier on page 28. 
Stevin had read al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s Algebra, and he even borrowed two proofs 
from it. Beginning on page 286 he solves what are essentially the three composite 
equations repackaged as problems of ﬁnding a fourth proportional, which are 
presented in the order of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s types 6, 4, then 5. He gives the standard 
rules for their solutions that begins with halving the roots, followed by both 
arithmetical and geometrical proofs. The geometrical proof for the type 4 equation 
follows the same reasoning and with the same diagram as al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s second 
proof, and his proof for the type 6 equation also follows al-Khw¯arazm¯ı, again with 
the same diagram. His two type 5 proofs are different, but unfold in the same general 
way, without any direct or implied reference to Euclid. In fact, Stevin attributed the 
rules for the solutions of the composite equations to al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in the beginning 
of the following section: “We have amply given to the preceding constructions their 
demonstrations, both geometrical and arithmetical. But still is not well-known how 
it is that Muh.ammad invented such a rule.”96 So for Stevin, too, al-Khw¯arazm¯ı, the 
inventor of algebra, lived before the Greeks in that “learned age”. 
13 Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s Swan Song: Adriaan van Roomen’s 
Commentary 
Contrary to other sixteenth-century European authors, the Dutch mathematician 
and physician Adriaan van Roomen (1561–1615) saw al-Khw¯arazm¯ı not simply 
as a name associated with the origin of algebra who might also provide a proof or 
two, but as a mathematician whose book was worthy of a commentary. But ﬁrst, 
some background. In his 1597 Apologia pro Archimede van Roomen had defended 
Archimedes’s use of numbers to estimate the ratio of the circumference of a circle
95 “Quant à Diophante, il semble qu’en son temps les inventions de Mahomet aient seulement este 
cognues, comme se peult colliger de ses six premiers livres” (Stevin 1585, 268). 
96 “Nous avons amplement faict aux constructions precedentes leurs demonstrations tant 
geometriques, qu’arithmetiques. Mais encore n’est pas notoire, par icelles l’occasion qui a faict 
inventer a Mahomet telle riegle” (Stevin 1585, 298). 

170
J. A. Oaks
to its diameter against the criticism of Justus Scaliger (1540–1609). Scaliger had 
maintained, following Aristotle, that one cannot apply arithmetic to problems in 
geometry. Van Roomen gave a foundation for his argument in Chapters 6 and 7 in 
which he presented deﬁnitions, axioms, and theorems common to arithmetic and 
geometry, a prima mathesis as he called it, which would justify the kind-crossing 
prohibited by Aristotle.97 
It was very likely the result of a month-long visit with François Viète in Poitou, 
probably not long after he wrote his 1597 book, that inspired van Roomen to 
propose algebra as a universal problem-solving technique.98 He had a different idea 
about how this should be done than his French colleague, though. Rather than hold 
Diophantus as his model, he began this project by writing a draft of a commentary on 
al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s Algebra. It was probably in 1598 or 1599 that he had this 72-page 
draft printed, bearing the title In Mahumedis arabis algebram prolegomena (van 
Roomen n.d.).99 He afterward abandoned the project, leaving no account of it in his 
later writings apart from a brief mention in a 1602 book (Bockstaele 2009, 454). Two 
copies of this draft are known to have been extant at the beginning of the twentieth 
century. One was destroyed when German soldiers burned the library of Leuven 
University in 1914, and the other was destroyed when the Douai Municipal Library 
suffered the same fate as a result of bombing in 1944. Fortunately, manuscript copies 
of each had been made, so the work survives. 
Van Roomen makes several remarks on the origin of algebra that he attributes 
to the Swiss alchemist Leonard Thurneisser (1531–1595/6) (van Roomen n.d., 2, 
6). Rather than examine each of van Roomen’s borrowings individually, it will 
be clearer to translate his source directly. The passage that van Roomen read is 
from Thurneisser’s 1583 book Onomasticum und interpretatio oder aussführliche 
Erklerung, which is a lexicon expounding on the ideas of Paracelsus in which each 
term is given ﬁrst in its original script, whether Arabic, Hebrew, Greek, Latin, 
Amharic, or Armenian. Under the Arabic al-Muq¯abala, miswritten as al-muh. ¯abala, 
he writes (the parentheses are his): 
“Almuchabola” is Arabic and means something like “a book of the unknown thing”, namely 
the number, which Algebra, the highly experienced mathematician, dedicated to King 
Alexander 1909 years ago, and that through Aristophanes, who at the time, namely in the 
1st year of the 112th Olympiad, was town magistrate or mayor of Athens, was allowed
97 (van Roomen 1597, 22–32; Bockstaele 2009). The example of “kind-crossing” at stake for this 
book is the use of arithmetic to prove a result or solve a problem in geometry. The capital letters in 
Chapter 7 representing numbers or magnitudes (or any other kind of quantiﬁable objects) are not 
an indication of any kind of algebra. They agree with the use of letters in Pappus of Alexandria’s 
Book II, in al-F¯aris¯ı, and in Jordanus de Nemore (Oaks 2018c, section 5.4). In particular, the letters 
are not operated on to form new expressions, and no equations are set up. 
98 The visit is reported in (De Thou 1734, 163–4). Bockstaele (2009, 455) notes that van Roomen 
was not yet familiar with Viète’s algebra when he wrote his Apologia, but by 1598 he had in his 
possession some of Viète’s works. 
99 Bockstaele (2009, 455) claims that “printing could not have started before 1600” but without 
an explanation, while Rabouin (2009, 238) agrees with Bosmans’s (1906, 269–70) estimation of 
1598–99. 

The Legacy of Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in History of Algebra
171
to spend the ﬁfth year of his reign with the king of the dominions, and for this reason he 
obtained great favor and grace. In the Indian language it is held in high regard as Aliabra, 
and by learned people in Indian as Alboreth (this is the book of Coniecturation which the 
Italians call the libro della cosa).100 
Mahometh the conqueror of Asia recalls these mysteries in his Alcoran and calls them 
Almuchabolam because his doctrine, as with the ancients, is thought to be conﬁrmed 
through numbers [ellipsis. . .]101 
So we have here another version of the story that we have already read in the 
German commentary and in what would be related three years later in the reprint 
of Ramus’s Algebra.102 Van Roomen accepts and repeats nearly all of it, but he 
maintains that the inventor of algebra was not Algebra, but al-Khw¯arazm¯ı, siding 
with other authorities he cites, which include Cardano, Gosselin, and Stevin: “The 
ﬁrst [ellipsis. . .] who is recorded to have found anything in Algebra, was, by the consent of 
all learned men (so far as I know), Muh.ammed the son of Moses.”103 He dispensed 
with the supposed Geber on the grounds that none of the ancients ascribe algebra to 
that name, and Diophantus is the ﬁrst listed among the later practitioners of the art 
(van Roomen n.d., 1, 8). 
Van Roomen had acquired a copy of Robert of Chester’s Latin translation 
“handwritten by the generosity of D. Thaddaeus Hageccius”, his friend,104 and 
he read in al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s translated words conﬁrmation of his idea on the prima 
mathesis: 
Those who have hitherto dealt with algebra have treated algebra as if it were a part of 
arithmetic, although it can be adapted no less to geometry than to arithmetic. On the 
contrary, the demonstrations of algebraic propositions which he [i.e., van Roomen] has so 
far happened to see are all taken from geometry, so that it should rather be called a part of 
geometry than of arithmetic. Hence also the ﬁrst inventor of algebra, Mahomed, made his
100 Alexander reigned 356–323 BCE. The ﬁrst year of the 112th Olympiad was 328 BCE, which 
was 1909 years before 1582. The playwright Aristophanes died in 386 BCE. 
101 “Almuchabola: Ist Arabisch und bedeut so viel als ein Buch von dem unwissenden ding 
Nemlich der Zahl welchs vor 1909 jahren Algebra der hocherfarn Mathematicus dem König 
Alexandro dedicirt, und das durch den Aristophanem welcher der zeit Nemlich in dem 1 Jahr 
der 112 Olympiadum Stadtvogt oder Oberster zu Athen war dem König der domalen das fïnffte 
jahr seiner Regierung besasz besasz zubringen lassen und derhalb ben ihm grossen gunst und gnad 
erlanget hat. Es wird auff Indische sprach do es noch hoch gehalten wird Aliabra ben etlichen die 
besser hinein in Indiam wohnen Alboreth (das ist das Buch der Coniectuation genant die Welschen 
heissen das libel de lacosa. 
“Es gedenckt Mahometh der Berführer Asiae dieser mysterien in seinem Alcoran und nennet sie 
Almuchabolam weil er seine Sect wie ben den Alten im brauch was durch die Zahlen” (Thurneisser 
1583, 11), his emphases and unmatched parenthesis. 
102 Poking around Google Books I found other books relating this basic story by different authors 
published in 1588, 1613, 1626, 1646, 1655, 1670, and 1795, not counting reprints. 
103 “Primus igitur omnium qui aliquid in Algebra invenisse scribitur, fuit omnium doctiorum (quod 
sciam) consensu Mahumed ﬁlius Moysi” (van Roomen n.d., 7). His wording in the next sentence 
(not translated here) shows that he was paraphrasing Stevin (1585, 268). 
104 (van Roomen n.d., 7). This manuscript is now lost. Hageccius (1525–1600) was a Czech 
physician. 

172
J. A. Oaks
algebra common to numbers and magnitudes [ellipsis. . .] We therefore prefer to recall algebraic or 
analytical science back to the ﬁrst mathesis, which considers universal quantity.105 
Of course, al-Khw¯arazm¯ı did not present any theoretical foundation of a universal 
algebra. That work fell to van Roomen: “what our author has omitted, and which 
is well-known to those familiar with algebra, it will be our task here to supply”.106 
Van Roomen thus imitates Viète: where Viète claimed to present the pure specious 
algebra based in geometry that Diophantus had kept hidden, van Roomen will 
present the theoretical justiﬁcation of the universal algebra that al-Khw¯arazm¯ı did  
not explain. 
Very little of Robert’s translation is commented on. The ﬁrst passage is the 
incipit, quoted on page 16: “In nomine dei pii et misericordis. Incipit Liber Restau-
rationis & Oppositionis numeri qvem edidit Mahumed ﬁlius Mousis Algaorizim.” 
After a few remarks on the formulaic nature of this opening line, van Roomen 
launches into sixteen pages of deﬁnitions, axioms, postulates, and theorems for 
his own version of a universal algebra, which is expressed in an algebraic notation 
adapted for numbers from Viète’s specious logistic. He returns to al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s 
text on page 33, where he quotes the part of the introduction describing the base 
ten system in arithmetic, corresponding to (Hughes 1989, 29.7–19; al-Khw¯arazm¯ı 
2009, 97.1–8). The next seven pages are devoted to an explanation of the notation for 
Arabic numerals. On page 40 he takes up the last passage that he cites from Robert’s 
translation, the short explanation of the names of the powers “radicibus, substantijs 
& numeris” (“roots, m¯als, and simple number”) corresponding to (Hughes 1989, 
30.1–10; al-Khw¯arazm¯ı 2009, 97.9–16), stopping just before al-Khw¯arazm¯ı intro-
duces the three simple equations. The remaining 32 pages of the commentary deal 
with proportional sequences and numerical calculations related to the binomial 
theorem, all of which would be useful for root extraction of polynomial equations 
that Viète explained in his De numerosa potestatum ad exegesim resolutione (1600). 
Van Roomen may have known something of the contents of this book from his recent 
visit with Viète. 
It was convenient for van Roomen to regard al-Khw¯arazm¯ı as the pre-Greek 
scholar who invented algebra. He wanted an ancient precedent for the use of 
numbers in geometry, and who would dare challenge the authority of the inventor 
of algebra, who practiced kind-crossing before Aristotle? Cardano, Gosselin, and 
Stevin had already identiﬁed al-Khw¯arazm¯ı as the ﬁrst algebraist, while Viète 
had already made Diophantus into the practitioner of a logistic grounded in non-
105 “Qui hactenus de Algebra egerunt, ita Algebrica tractârunt, tamquam si pars esset Arithmeticae, 
cum tamen non minus Geometriae quam Arithmeticae possit accommodari. Imo demonstrationes 
propositionum Algebricarum quas hactenus videre contigit, omnes ex Geometria desumptae 
sunt; ut potus Geometriae, quam Arithmeticae debeat dici pars. Hinc etiam primus inventor 
Algebrae Mahumed suam Algebram fecit communem numeris & magnitudinibus [ellipsis. . .] Nos itaque 
maluimus Algebricam sive Analyticam scientiam revocare ad Mathesin primam, quae quantitatem 
universalem considerat.” (van Roomen n.d., 2). 
106 “quae author noster, tanquam ei qui ad Algebram accedit notissima, omisit, ea nostri muneris 
erit hic supplere” (van Roomen n.d., 17). 

The Legacy of Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in History of Algebra
173
arithmetized geometry. Van Roomen, like Gosselin and Stevin before him, dislodged 
al-Khw¯arazm¯ı from his home in medieval Baghdad and reestablished him in 
remotest antiquity. What is more, in the commentary al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s algebra is 
now interpreted through the lens of van Roomen’s particular idea of universal 
mathematics. Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı thus becomes a character of van Roomen’s own 
creation much more than he had been in Gosselin and Stevin. 
14 The Last Echoes from the Textbook Tradition and the 
Beginning of the Historical al-Khw¯arazm¯ı 
Throughout the seventeenth century and extending well into the eighteenth, Euro-
pean books teaching cossic, i.e., pre-Vietan, algebra continued to be written and 
older books were reprinted. Some books even teach cossic and Vietan algebra 
side by side. During this period several authors, more often those working with 
the old algebra, continued to cite Diophantus, Geber, and al-Khw¯arazm¯ı as the  
inventors of the art, and all of them were simply copying what they read in earlier 
books. Without trying to be exhaustive, I have found ten such books published 
between 1620 and 1727. Three of them mention all three inventors: Didier Henrion’s 
1620 Traicté d’algebre (in French), Ioannis de Luneschlos’s 1646 Thesaurus 
mathematum reseratus per algebram novam (in Latin), and Tomás Vicente Tosca’s 
1727 Compendio mathematico (in Spanish). After listing the three inventors, de 
Luneschlos even repeats the alchemical origin story (de Luneschlos 1646, 1). Five  
authors name only Diophantus and Geber, one names only Geber, and Giuseppe 
Maria Figatelli’s 1678 Trattato aritmetico (in Italian) mentions only al-Khw¯arazm¯ı. 
The ﬁrst truly historical account of algebra in Europe is given in Jean Etienne 
Montucla’s (1725–99) Histoire des mathématiques, which appeared in 1758. Based 
on an examination of the Arithmetica of Diophantus he explains that “It is not 
possible to determine if Diophantus is the inventor of algebra.”107 For Geber, 
“Whatever the origin of algebra among the Arabs, it is a puerile opinion which 
attributes its invention to Geber, and which thereby claims to explain the name it 
bears.”108 Then, “The oldest authors of algebra among the Arabs are Muh.ammad ibn 
M¯us¯a & Th¯abit ibn Qurra.”109 He goes on to say that al-Khw¯arazm¯ı lived during the 
time of the caliph al-Mam¯un, that Th¯abit wrote proofs for algebraic calculation, and 
that there is another book on algebra in the Leiden library by “Omar-ben-Ibrahim”
107 “Il n’est pas possible de déterminer si Diophante fut l’inventeur de l’Algebre” (Montucla 1758 
I, 315). 
108 “Quelle que soit l’origine de l’algebre chez les Arabes, c’est une puérile opinion que celle qui 
en attribue l’invention à Geber, & qui prétend par-là rendre raison du nom qu’elle porte” (Montucla 
1758 I, 367). 
109 “Les plus anciens Auteurs d’Algebre chez les Arabes sont Mohammed ben-Musa & Thébit 
ben-Corah” (Montucla 1758 I, 368). 

174
J. A. Oaks
(Umar al-Khayy¯am) that covers cubic equations. All of this is true, and he expresses 
his wonder at the potential for learning more: 
What curious facts, & perhaps interesting in other respects, would there not be to collect in 
many of these manuscripts! It is to be regretted that among those who are within reach of 
consulting them & who know the language in which they are written that there is no one 
who has the zeal to go beyond the title.110 
People of later generations would indeed take up this task, and with zeal. 
15 Summary 
The art of algebra is very old. The few texts we have concerning algebra before the 
time of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı allow only for isolated glimpses of its early development. It 
is beginning with al-Khw¯arazm¯ı, whose book stands at the head of a long, unbroken 
textual tradition extending to our own time, that algebra becomes amenable to full 
historical treatment. 
It would have been enough for al-Khw¯arazm¯ı to have occupied his place at the 
beginning of the written Arabic tradition, which allowed his own innovations to 
shape the way later Arabic authors presented the art, for him to be an important 
ﬁgure in the history of algebra. If my analysis of his own contributions is correct, 
he is the one who ﬁrst classiﬁed simpliﬁed equations into six types, who thought to 
prove the rules for solving equations via geometric diagrams, and who standardized 
the way solved problems are presented in books. But his Algebra became a seminal 
text for a second time when it was translated into Latin. From the twelfth through the 
ﬁfteenth centuries, in Latin, Italian, and Hebrew, al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s book was copied 
and read, and different parts of it were incorporated into the books of others. 
This changed in the sixteenth century when new developments in algebra 
intensiﬁed. Now the contents of al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s Algebra were outdated, and 
although some authors copied his proofs, they more often merely named him as 
one of the inventors of the art. Then, in the last quarter of the century, through a 
humanistic drive to ﬁt algebra into a narrative that passes from oriental wisdom to 
Greek knowledge and then directly to the moderns, al-Khw¯arazm¯ı was recast as 
the ancient oriental inventor of algebra who wrote before Diophantus. And at the 
end of the 1500s, Adriaan van Roomen could use both this alchemical myth and 
al-Khw¯arazm¯ı’s book as the backdrops for his own vision of a universal algebra. 
It was ﬁnally in the eighteenth century, just as the last authors of practical guides 
stopped listing al-Khw¯arazm¯ı as an inventor of algebra, that history of mathematics 
in the modern sense was born, and our Arabic algebraist regained his place as the
110 “Que de faits curieux, & peut-être intéressans à d’autres égards, n’y auroit-il pas à recueillir 
dans plusieurs de ces manuscrits! Qu’il est à regretter de ce que parmi ceux qui sont à portée de 
les consulter, & qui connoissent la langue dans laquelle ils sont écrits, il n’y ait personne qui ait le 
zele d’aller au delà di titre.” (Montucla 1758 I, 369). 

The Legacy of Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in History of Algebra
175
Abb¯asid polymath of Baghdad. What is just as interesting as his own contributions 
to algebra is his persistence and curious transformations over the course of eight 
centuries in mathematics books written in more than half a dozen languages. 
Bibliography 
Abdeljaouad M, Oaks J (2021) Al-Haw¯ar¯ı’s Essential Commentary: Arabic arithmetic in the 
fourteenth century. Max Planck Institute for History of Science, Berlin. Available online: 
https://edition-open-sources.org/sources/14/ 
Ab¯u K¯amil (1986) Kit¯ab f¯ı al-jabr wa’l-muq¯abala. (A facsimile edition of MS Istanbul, Kara 
Mustafa Pa¸sa 379, copied in 1253 C.E. Edited by Jan P. Hogendijk.) Institute for the History of 
Arabic-Islamic Science, Frankfurt am Main 
Ab¯u K¯amil (2012) Algèbre et Analyse Diophantienne. Edited, translated, and commented by 
Roshdi Rashed. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin 
Anonimo Fiorentino (1992) Regole di geometria e della cosa: Dal Codice Palatino 575 (sec. XV) 
della Biblioteca Nazionale di Firenze. Ed. Annalisa Simi. Servizio Editoriale dell’Università di 
Siena, Siena 
Aradi N (2013) An unknown medieval Hebrew anonymous treatise on arithmetic. Aleph 13:235– 
309 
Benedetto da Firenze (1982) La reghola de algebra amuchabale: dal Codice L.IV.21 della 
Biblioteca Comunale di Siena. Ed. Lucia Salomone. Servizio Editoriale dell’Università di 
Siena, Siena 
Mo Biagio (1983) Chasi Exenplari alla Regola dell’Algibra nella Trascelta a Cura di Mo Benedetto, 
dal Codice L.VI.21111 della Biblioteca Comunale di Siena, ed. Licia Pieraccini. Servizio 
Editoriale dell’Università di Siena, Siena 
Bockstaele P (2009) Between Viète and Descartes: Adriaan van Roomen and the Mathesis 
Universalis. Archive for History of Exact Sciences 63:433–470 
Bombelli R (1572) L’algebra, parte maggiore dell’ arimetica divisa in tre libri. Giovanni Rossi, 
Bologna 
Bosmans H (1906) Le fragment du commentaire d’Adrien Romain sur l’Algèbre de Mahumed ben 
Musa el-Chowârezmî. Annales de la Société Scientiﬁque de Bruxelles 30:267–287 
Cardano G (1545) Artis magnae, sive de regulis algebraicis lib. unus. Ioh. Petreium excusum, 
Nurnberg 
Cardano G (1968) The great art, or, the rules of algebra. Translated by T. Richard Witmer. MIT, 
Cambridge, MA 
Christianidis J, Oaks J (2013) Practicing algebra in late antiquity: the problem-solving of 
Diophantus of Alexandria. Historia Mathematica 40:127–163 
Christianidis J, Oaks J (2023) The Arithmetica of Diophantus: A complete translation and 
commentary. Routledge, London 
Cifoletti G (1996) The creation of the history of algebra in the sixteenth century. In: Goldstein 
C, Gray J, Ritter J (edd) L’Europe Mathématique: Histoires, Mythes, Identités = Mathematical 
Europe: history, myth, identity. Éditions de la Maison des Sciences de l’Homme, Paris 
Clavius C (1608) Algebra. Apud Bartholomaeum Zannettum, Roma 
Crossley J, Henry AS (1990) Thus spake al-Khw¯arizm¯ı: A translation of the text of Cambridge 
University Library Ms. Ii.vi.5. Historia Mathematica 17:103–131 
Curtze M (ed) 1902. Urkunden zur Geschichte der Mathematik im Mittelalter und der Renaissance. 
Teubner, Leipzig
111 Error for L.IV.21. 

176
J. A. Oaks
Mo Dardi (2001) Aliabraa argibra: Dal manoscritto I.VII.17 della Biblioteca Comunale di Siena. 
Ed. Raffaella Franci. Servizio Editoriale dell’Università di Siena, Siena 
De Thou J-A (1734) Histoire universelle de Jacques-Auguste De Thou depuis 1543 jusqu’en 1607, 
vol. 14. Londres [i.e., Paris] 
Dijksterhuis FJ (2021) The wise origins of the Consten. In: Davids K, Dijksterhuis FJ, Vermij 
R, Stamhuis I (edd) Rethinking Stevin, Stevin rethinking: constructions of a Dutch polymath. 
Brill, Leiden 
Diophantus (1893–95) Diophanti Alexandrini opera omnia cum Graeciis commentarii. Edidit et 
latine interpretatus est P. Tannery. B. G. Teubner, Leipzig 
Diophantus (1959) Les six livres arithmétiques et le livre des nombres polygones. Translated by 
Paul Ver Eecke. Albert Blanchard, Paris 
Diophantus (1986) Les Arithmétiques. Edition of the Arabic text with French translation by Roshdi 
Rashed. Les Belles Lettres, Paris 
Euclid (1543) Euclide Megarense philosopho: solo introduttore delle scientie mathematice, trans. 
Tartaglia N. Venturino Rofﬁnelli, Vinegia 
al-F¯aris¯ı (1994) As¯as al-qaw¯aid f¯ı us. ¯ul al-Faw¯aid, edited by Mus.t.af¯a Maw¯ald¯ı. Mahad al-
Makht.¯ut.¯at al-Arab¯ıyah, Cairo 
Fibonacci (1857) Scritti di Leonardo Pisano matematico del secolo decimoterzo. I. Il Liber abbaci 
di Leonardo Pisano, ed. Baldassare Boncompagni. Tipograﬁa delle Scienze Matematiche e 
Fisiche, Roma 
Fibonacci (1862) Scritti di Leonardo Pisano matematico del secolo decimoterzo. II. Practica 
geometriae et Opusculi, ed. Baldassare Boncompagni. Tipograﬁa delle Scienze Matematiche 
e Fisiche, Roma. 
Fibonacci (2002) Fibonacci’s Liber Abaci: A translation into modern English of Leonardo Pisano’s 
Book of Calculation, translated by L. E. Sigler. Springer, New York 
Fibonacci (2008) Fibonacci’s De practica geometrie, ed. Barnabas Hughes. Springer, New York 
Fibonacci (2020) Leonardi Bigolli Pisani vulgo Fibonacci Liber abbaci, ed. Enrico Giusti. Leo S. 
Olschki, Firenze 
Folkerts M (2002) Regiomontanus’ Role in the Transmission of Mathematical Problems. In: Dold-
Samplonius Y, Dauben JW, Folkerts M, Van Dalen B (edd) From China to Paris: 2000 Years 
Transmission of Mathematical Ideas. Franz Steiner, Stuttgart 
Franci R (2003) Una traduzione in volgare dell’Al-Jabr di al-Khwarizmi (MS. Urb. Lat. 291 
Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana). In: Franci R, Pagli P, Simi A (edd) Il Sogno di Galois: Scritti 
di storia della matematica dedicati a Laura Toti Rigatelli per il suo 60o compleanno. Università 
di Siena, Siena 
Ghaligai F (1521) Summa de arithmetica. B. Zucchetta, Firenze 
Gori D (1984) Libro e trattato della praticha d’alcibra: dal Codice L. IV.22 della Biblioteca 
Comunale di Siena. Edited by Laura Toti Rigatelli. Servizio Editoriale dell’Università di Siena, 
Siena. 
Gosselin G (1577) De arte magna. Aegidium Beys, Paris 
Goulding R (2010) Defending Hypatia: Ramus, Savile, and the Renaissance rediscovery of 
mathematical history. Springer, Dordrecht 
Gutas D (1998) Greek thought, Arabic culture: The Graeco-Arabic translation movement in 
Baghdad and early Abb¯asid society. Routledge, London 
Gutas D (2006) What was there in Arabic for the Latins to receive? Remarks on the modalities of 
the twelfth-century translation movement in Spain. In: Speer A, Wegener L (edd) Wissen über 
Grenzen: Arabisches Wissen und lateinisches Mittelalter. De Gruyter, Berlin 
Hissette R (1999) Guillaume de Luna a-t-il traduit Ab¯u K¯amil? In: Endress G, Aertsen JA (edd) 
Averroes and the Aristotelian tradition. Sources, constitution and reception of the philosophy of 
Ibn Rushd (1126–1198). Proceedings of the Fourth Symposium Averroicum (Cologne, 1996). 
Brill, Leiden 
Hogendijk JP (2003) The Geometrical Problems of Nuaim ibn Muh.ammad ibn M¯us¯a (ninth 
century). SCIAMVS 4:59–136

The Legacy of Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in History of Algebra
177
Høyrup J (1986) Al-Khwârizmî, Ibn Turk, and the Liber Mensurationum: On the origins of Islamic 
algebra. Erdem 5:445–484 
Høyrup J (1988) Jordanus de Nemore, 13th century mathematical innovator: an essay on 
intellectual context, achievement, and failure. Archive for History of Exact Sciences 37:307– 
363 
Høyrup J (1996) The formation of a myth: Greek mathematics — our mathematics. In: Goldstein 
C, Gray J, Ritter J (edd) L’Europe mathématique: histoires, mythes, identités = Mathematical 
Europe: history, myth, identity. Éditions de la Maison des Sciences de l’Homme, Paris 
Høyrup J (2001) On a collection of geometrical riddles and their role in the shaping of four to six 
“algebras”. Science in Context 14:85–131 
Høyrup J (2002) Lengths, widths, surfaces: a portrait of old Babylonian algebra and its kin. 
Springer, New York 
Høyrup J (2007) What did the abbacus teachers really do when they (sometimes) ended up doing 
mathematics? Filosoﬁ og Videnskabsteori på Roskilde Universitetscenter. 3. Række: Preprints 
og Reprints 2007 Nr. 4 
Høyrup J (2010) Hesitating progress: the slow development toward algebraic symbolization 
in abbacus and related manuscripts, c. 1300 to c. 1550. In: Heeffer A, Van Dyck M 
(edd) Philosophical Aspects of Symbolic Reasoning in Early Modern Mathematics. College 
Publications, London 
Høyrup J (2019) Selected essays on pre- and early modern mathematical practice. Springer, Cham 
Hughes B (1986) Gerard of Cremona’s translation of al-Khw¯arizm¯ı’s al-jabr: A critical edition. 
Mediaeval Studies 48:211–263 
Hughes B (1989) Robert of Chester’s Latin Translation of al-Khw¯arizm¯ı’s al-jabr: A New Critical 
Edition. Franz Steiner, Stuttgart 
Ibn al-Nad¯ım (2009) Kit¯ab al-Fihrist. Ed. by Ayman Fu¯ad Sayyid. Al-Furq¯an Islamic Heritage 
Foundation, London 
Ibn Khald¯un (1967) The muqaddimah: an introduction to history. Second edition, translated by 
Franz Rosenthal. Princeton University Press, Princeton 
Jayawardene SA (1965) Rafael Bombelli, engineer-architect: Some unpublished documents of the 
Apostolic Camera. Isis 56:298–306. 
Jayawardene SA (1973) The inﬂuence of practical arithmetics on the algebra of Rafael Bombelli. 
Isis 64:510–523 
Jean de Murs (1990) Le Quadripartitum Numerorum de Jean de Murs: Introduction et édition 
critique. Ed. Ghislaine l’Huillier. Droz, Genève 
Jordanus de Nemore (1981) De numeris datis. Ed., tr. Barnabas Hughes. University of California, 
Berkeley 
Karpinski LC (1911) The algebra of Abu Kamil Shoja‘ ben Aslam. Bibliotheca Mathematica 
11.3:40–55 
al-Khw¯arazm¯ı (1915) Robert of Chester’s Latin translation of the Algebra of al-Khowarizmi. 
Translated by Karpinski LC. Macmillan, New York 
al-Khw¯arazm¯ı (1997) Die älteste lateinische Schrift über das indische Rechnen nach al-Hw¯arizm¯ı. 
Edited, translated and commented by Menso Folkerts with the colaboration of Paul Kunitzsch. 
Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Munich 
al-Khw¯arazm¯ı (2007) Al-Khw¯arizm¯ı: Le Commencement de l’Algèbre. Texte établi, traduit et 
commenté par Roshdi Rashed. Blanchard, Paris 
al-Khw¯arazm¯ı (2009) Al-Khw¯arizm¯ı: The beginnings of algebra. Edited, with translation and 
commentary by Roshdi Rashed. SAQI, London 
al-Khw¯arazm¯ı (2009b) El libro del Álgebra. Traducción, introducción y notas de Ricardo Moreno 
Castillo. Tres Cantos, Nivola 
King D (1988) A medieval Arabic report on algebra before al-Khw¯arizm¯ı. Al-Mas¯aq 1:25–32 
King D (2012) The invention of algebra in Zab¯ıd: Between legend and fact. In: Opwis F, Reisman 
D (edd) Islamic philosophy, science, culture, and religion: Studies in honor of Dimitri Gutas. 
Brill, Leiden

178
J. A. Oaks
Klein J (1968) Greek mathematical thought and the origin of algebra. Translated by Eva Brann. 
MIT, Cambridge, MA 
Lamrabet D (2014) Introduction à l’histoire des mathématiques maghrebines, 2nd edn. Driss 
Lamrabet, Rabat 
Levey M (1966) The Algebra of Ab¯u K¯amil: Kit¯ab f¯ı al-j¯abr wal-muq¯abala in a Commentary by
Mordecai Finzi. Hebrew text, translation and commentary with special reference to the Arabic 
text. University of Wisconsin, Madison 
Lévy T (1996) Hebrew mathematical literature in Europe (XIth–XVIth centuries). In: Goldstein 
C, Gray J, Ritter J (edd) L’Europe mathématique: Histoires, mythes, identités/Mathematical 
Europe: History, Myth, Identity. Edition de la maison des sciences de l’homme, Paris 
Lévy T (2002) A newly-discovered partial Hebrew version of al-Khw¯arizm¯ı’s Algebra. Aleph
2:225–234 
Lévy T (2003) L’algèbre arabe dans les textes hébraïques (I). Un ouvrage inédit d’Isaac ben 
Salomon al-Ah.dab (XIVe siècle). Arabic Sciences and Philosophy 13:269–301
Lévy T (2007) L’algèbre arabe dans les textes Hébraïques (II). Dans l’Italie des XVe et XVIe 
siècles, sources arabes et sources vernaculaires. Arabic Sciences and Philosophy 17:81–107 
Lorch R (1993) Ab¯u K¯amil on the Pentagon and Decagon. In: Folkerts M, Hogendijk JP (edd.) 
Vestigia Mathematica: Studies in medieval and early modern mathematics in honour of H.L.L. 
Busard. Rodopi, Amsterdam 
Lorch R (2001) Greek-Arabic-Latin: the transmission of mathematical texts in the Middle Ages. 
Science in Context 14:313–331 
de Luneschlos I (1646) Thesaurus Mathematicum Reseratus per Algebram Novam tam Speciebus 
quam Numeris Declaratam et Demonstratam cui Praeﬁxa Universae Philosophiae Mathemati-
carum in primus Disciplinarum Synopsis. Cribellianis, Patavii 
Malet A (2006) Renaissance notions of number and magnitude. Historia Mathematica 33:63–81 
Massa Esteve, MR (2012) Spanish “arte mayor” in the sixteenth century. In: Rommevaux S, 
Spiesser M, Massa Esteve MR (edd) Pluralité de l’algèbre à la Renaissance. H. Champion, 
Paris 
Mispar project https://mispar.ethz.ch/wiki/Main_Page, accessed September 16, 2022 
Miura N (1981) The algebra in the Liber Abaci of Leonardo Pisano. Historia Scientiarum 21:57–65 
Montucla M (1758) Histoire ses mathematiques, tome premier. Ant. Jombert, Paris 
Morse, JoAnn (1981) The reception of Diophantus’ “Arithmetic” in the Renaissance. Ph.D. 
dissertation, Princeton University 
Moyon M (2017) La restauration et la comparison, ou l’art de résoudre des équations quadratiques 
dans l’Europe latine. Revue d’Histoire des Mathématiques 23:233–299 
Moyon M (2019) The Liber Restauracionis: A newly discovered copy of a medieval algebra in 
Florence. Historia Mathematica 46:1–37 
Nuñez P (1567) Libro de algebra en arithmetica y geometria. An casa de los herederos d’Arnoldo 
Birckman a la Gallina gorda, Anvers 
Oaks J (2011) Geometry and proof in Ab¯u K¯amil’s algebra. In: Actes du 10ème colloque 
Maghrébin sur l’histoire des mathématiques arabes (Tunis, 29-30-31 mai 2010). L’Association 
Tunisienne des Sciences Mathématiques, Tunis 
Oaks, J (2011b) Al-Khayy¯am’s scientiﬁc revision of algebra. Suhayl: Journal for the History 
of the Exact and Natural Sciences in Islamic Civilisation 10:47–75. Available online: 
http://www.ub.edu/arab/suhayl/volums/volum10/2 paper2Vol10.pdf 
Oaks J (2012) Algebraic symbolism in medieval Arabic. Philosophica 87:27–83. Available online: 
http://logica.ugent.be/philosophica/fulltexts/87-2.pdf 
Oaks J (2015) Series of problems in Arabic algebra: The example of Al¯ı al-Sulam¯ı.
In: Bernard A (ed) Les Séries de Problèmes, un Genre au Carrefour des Cultures. 
Les Ulis: EDP Sciences. 16 p. Available online: https://www.shs-conferences.org/articles/ 
shsconf/abs/2015/09/shsconf-sdp 00005/shsconf-sdp 00005.html 
Oaks J (2018) Diophantus, al-Karaj¯ı, and quadratic equations. In: Sialaros M (ed) Revolutions and 
continuity in Greek mathematics. de Gruyter, Berlin

The Legacy of Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in History of Algebra
179
Oaks J (2018b) Arithmetical proofs in Arabic algebra. In: Laabid e (ed) Actes du 12`e Col-
loque Maghrébin sur l’Histoire des Mathématiques Arabes: Marrakech 26 au 28 mai 2016. 
École Normale Supérieure, Marrakech. Available online: http://www.uindy.edu/cas/mathemat-
ics/oaks/ﬁles/oaksmarrakech.pdf. 
Oaks J (2018c) François Viète’s revolution in algebra. Archive for History of Exact Sciences 
72:245–302 
Oaks J (2019) Proofs and algebra in al-F¯aris¯ı’s commentary. Historia Mathematica 47:106–121 
Oaks J (2023) Arithmetic and algebra. In: Brentjes, S (ed) Routledge handbook on the sciences 
in Islamicate societies: practices from the 2nd/8th to the 13th/19th centuries. Routledge, 
London 
Oaks, J (forthcoming) Algebra according to early Arabic authors. In: Chemla K, Miao T (edd) A 
worldwide approach to the early history of algebra. Springer, Heidelberg 
Oaks, J, Alkhateeb H (2005) M¯al, enunciations and the prehistory of Arabic algebra. Historia 
Mathematica 32:400–425 
Oaks, J, Alkhateeb H (2007) Simplifying equations in Arabic algebra. Historia Mathematica 
34:45–61 
Pacioli L (1494) Summa de arithmetica geometria proportioni & proportionalita, pontinentia de 
tutta lopera. Paganino de Paganini, Venetijs 
Peletier J (1554) L’algebre. Ian de Tournes, Lyon 
Pérez de Moya J (1573) Tratado de mathematicas en que se contienen cosas arithmetica, geometria, 
cosmographia, y philosophia natural. Juan Gracian, Alcala de Henares 
Peucer C (1556) Logistice astronomica hexacontadon et scrupulorum sexagesimorum. Vitebergae 
Excudebant Haeredes Georgii Rhavv. 
Piero della Francesca (1970) Trattato d’abaco. Dal Codice Ashburnhamiano 280 (359*-291*) della 
Biblioteca Medicea Laurenziana di Firenze. Ed. Gino Arrighi. Domus Galilaeana, Pisa 
Procissi A (1954) I ‘Ragionamenti d’algebra’ di R. Canacci. Bollettino della Unione Matematica 
Italiana 9:300–326, 420–451 
Rabouin D (2009) Mathesis universalis: l’idée de « mathématique universelle » d’Aristote à 
Descartes. Presses Universitaires de France, Paris 
Ramus P (1569) Mathematicarum, libri unus et triginta. Per Eusebium Episcopium & Nicolai 
Fratris haeredes, Basil 
Ramus P (1586) Arithmetices libri duo, et algebrae, ed. Lazarus Schöner. De Marre and Aubry, 
Frankfurt. 
Rashed R, Vahabzadeh B (1999) Al-Khayy¯am mathématicien. Blanchard, Paris 
Rashed R, Vahabzadeh B (2000) Omar Khayyam, the Mathematician. Bibliotheca Persica Press, 
New York 
Record R (1557) The whetstone of witte. J. Kyngstone, London 
Regiomontanus (1537) Oratio in praelectione Alfragani. In: Schöner L (ed) Rudimenta astronom-
ica Alfragrani. Johannes Petrejus, Nurnberg 
van Roomen A (1597) Apologia pro Archimede. Wurceburgi 
van Roomen A (n.d.) In Mahumedis arabis algebram prolegomena. Georg Fleishnann, Würzburg 
Rose PL (1975) The Italian Renaissance of Mathematics: Studies on Humanists and Mathemati-
cians from Petrarch to Galileo. Librairie Droz, Genève. 
Rudolff C (1525) Behend unnd hubsch Rechnung durch die kunstreichen regeln Algebre, so 
gemeincklich die Coss genennt werden [. . .]. Cephaleus, Argentorati 
Saidan AS (1971) T¯ar¯ıkh ilm al-h.is¯ab al-Arab¯ı. Jamiyat Um¯al al-Mat.¯abi al-Ta¯awin¯ıa,
Amman 
Saidan AS (1974) The arithmetic of Ab¯u’l-Waf¯a. Isis 65:367–375 
Saidan AS (1986) T¯ar¯ıkh ilm al-jabr f¯ı l-¯alam al-Arab¯ı, 2 vols. Al-Majlis al-Wat.an¯ı lil-Thaq¯afah 
wa’l-Fun¯un wa’l- ¯Ad¯ab, Qism al-Tur¯ath al-Arab¯ı, Kuwait 
Saidan AS (1987) The Takmila ﬁ’l-H. is¯ab of al-Baghd¯ad¯ı. In: King DA, Saliba G (edd) From 
deferent to equant: A volume of studies in the history of science in the ancient Near East in 
honor of E. S. Kennedy. New York Academy of Sciences, New York

180
J. A. Oaks
Samsó J (2015) Al-Andalus, a bridge between Arabic and European science. Alhadra 1:101–125 
Sayili A (1962) Logical Necessities in Mixed Equations by Abd al Ham¯ıd ibn Turk and the 
Algebra of his Time. Türk Tarih Kurumu Basimevi, Ankara 
Scheubel J (1550) Evclidis Megarensis, philosophi & mathematici excellentissimi, sex libri priores, 
de geometricis principijs [. . .] algebrae porro regvlae [. . .]. Hervagius, Basil 
Schub P, Levey M (1970) Indeterminate problems of Ab¯u K¯amil. Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei, 
Rome 
Sesiano J (1977) Les méthodes d’analyse indéterminée chez Ab¯u K¯amil. Centaurus 21:89–105 
Sesiano J (1982) Books IV to VII of Diophantus’ Arithmetica in the Arabic translation attributed 
to Qust.¯a ibn L¯uq¯a. Springer, New York 
Sesiano J (1993) La version latine médiévale de l’algèbre d’Ab¯u K¯amil. In: Folkerts M, Hogendijk 
JP (edd) Vestigia Mathematica: Studies in Medieval and Early Modern Mathematics in Honour 
of H.L.L. Busard. Rodopi, Amsterdam 
Stedall J (2012) Narratives of algebra in early printed European texts. In: Rommevaux S, Speisser 
M, Massa Esteve MR (edd) Plutalité de l’algèbre à la Renaissance. Honoré Champion, Paris 
Stevin S (1585) L’arithmetique. De l’imprimerie de Christophe Plantin, Leiden 
Stevin S (1961) De wysentyt. The age of the sages. Partially reproduced with English translation. 
In: Pannekoek A, Crone E (edd) The principal works of Simon Stevin, Volume III: Astronomy, 
Navigation. C.V. Swets & Zeitlinger, Amsterdam 
Stifel M (1544) Arithmetica integra. Iohan. Petreium, Nurnberg 
Swerdlow NM (1993) The recovery of the exact sciences of antiquity: mathematics, astronomy, 
geography. In: Grafton A (ed) Rome Reborn: The Vatican Library and Renaissance culture. 
Library of Congress / Yale University Press, Washington / New Haven 
Tartaglia N (1560) La Sesta Parte del General Trattato di Numeri, et Misure. Curtio Troiano, Venice 
Tartaglia N (1578) L’arithmetique. Translated into French by Guillaume Gosselin. Chez Gilles 
Beys, Paris 
Th¯abit ibn Qurra (2009) Th¯abit ibn Qurra : Science and Philosophy in Ninth-Century Baghdad. 
Edited by Roshdi Rashed. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin 
Thurneisser L (1583) Onomasticum und interpretatio oder aussführliche Erklerung. Nicolaum 
Voltzen, Berlin 
Tosca, TV (1727) Compendio mathematico: en que se contienen todas las materias mas principales 
de las ciencias, que tratan de la cantidad. Impr. de A. Marin, Madrid 
al-Uql¯ıdis¯ı (1978) The arithmetic of al-Uql¯ıdis¯ı: The story of Hindu-Arabic arithmetic as told in 
Kitab al-fusul ﬁ al-hisab al-hindi, by Abu al-Hasan, Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Uqlidisi, written in 
Damascus in the year 341 (A.D. 952/3). Translated and annotated by A. S. Saidan. D. Reidel, 
Dordrecht 
Ulivi E (2002) Benedetto da Firenze (1429–1479) un maestro d’abaco del XV secolo. Bollettino 
di storia delle scienze matematiche 22:7–243 
Van Egmond W (1978) The earliest vernacular treatment of algebra: the Libro di ragioni of Paolo 
Gerardi (1328). Physis 20:155–189 
Van Egmond W (1983) The algebra of master Dardi of Pisa. Historia Mathematica 10:399–421 
Viète F (1983) The analytic art: nine studies in algebra, geometry, and trigonometry from the Opus 
Restitutae Mathematicae Analyseos, seu, Algebrâ novâ by François Viète. Translated by T. 
Richard Witmer. Kent State University Press, Kent, Ohio 
Vogel K (1985) Die übernamhe der Algebra durch das Abendland. In: Folkerts M, Lindgren U 
(edd) Mathemata: Festschrift für Helmuth Gericke. F. Steiner Verlag Wiesbaden, Stuttgart 
Wagner R (2013) Mordekhai Finzi’s translation of Maestro Dardi’s Italian algebra. In: Fidora A, 
Hames HJ, Schwartz Y (edd) Latin into Hebrew: Texts and studies. Volume two: Texts in 
contexts. Brill, Leiden 
Wagner R (2013b) Mordekhai Finzi’s translation of Maestro Dardi’s Italian algebra, a partial 
edition. In: Fidora A, Hames HJ, Schwartz Y (edd) Latin into Hebrew: Texts and studies. 
Volume two: Texts in contexts. Brill, Leiden

The Legacy of Al-Khw¯arazm¯ı in History of Algebra
181
Wagner R (2016) Mathematics in Hebrew in Medieval Europe. In: Katz V (ed) Mathematics of 
Medieval Europe and North Africa. Princeton University Press, Princeton 
Wartenberg I (2015) The Epistle of the Number by Ibn al-Ah.dab: The transmission of Arabic 
mathematics to Hebrew circles in medieval Sicily. Gorgias Press, Piscatawy, NJ 
Zinner E (1990) Regiomontanus: His life and works, translated by Ezra Brown. North-Holland, 
Amsterdam

