

From Zero to Blogger in 30 days

Contents
From Zero to Blogger in 30 days
About Sarah Arrow
How to use this guide
A little about WordPress
WordPress.com vs. WordPress.org
Things you will need to build a WordPress website:
Step 1: Brainstorm Potential Domain Names
Step 2: Check for Availability
Step 3: Choose the One You Want
Step 4: Choose Registration Length
Step 5: Complete Checkout
Step 6: Access Your Domain
Step 7: Set Your Nameservers
Posts
Media
Links
Pages
Comments
Appearance
Plugins
Users
Tools
Settings
Updates
Posts Vs. Pages - What’s the Difference?
How to Create a New Blog Post
Categories, Tags & Featured Image
Creating a New Page

How to Search for and Install Themes within the WordPress Dashboard
How to Upload Your Own Theme Zip File
Do I need to use a WordPress Framework?
So what does a framework do?
Genesis.
2.         Thesis 2.0.
3.         Thematic.
4.         Reverie.
5.   WhiteBoard.
6.         Howling Dog Theme Framework.
7.   The Upthemes Framework.
8. PageLines.
9.  Woo Themes.
10. Headway Themes.
So What Plugins Should You Install?
How to Install a Free WordPress Plugin Through WordPress
How to Install a Free or Paid WordPress Plugin from a Zip File
Updating Your WordPress Plugins
How to Use WordPress Widgets
How to Access Widget Options
How to Delete A Widget
How to Add New Widgets to Your Site
Top 10 WordPress Security Tips
Keep Your WordPress Install Up To Date.
2. Make Backups.
3. Don’t Use “Admin” or Your Email Address For Your Username.
4. Limit The Number of Failed of Login Attempts.
5. Make Sure Your Themes are Secure.
6.  Additional Login Authentication.
7. Do a Security Scan.
8. Consider a Multi-Tiered Security Manager.
9. Secure Your wp-config.php File.

10. Protect Your WordPress Directories.
When Plugins go nuts…
Plugin Mania
Coding or Plugins?
Plugin conflicts.
How to De-bug Faulty Manual Plugin Installations
Plugins: To Zip or Unzip?
Dealing with a plugin conflict
Of course there can be other reasons why plugins go nuts
Publishing Your Content
What’s Evernote got to do with my website?
What is Evernote?
Evernote is a great time saver, but it won’t do you any good if it’s unorganized
Evernote Notebooks User Tips
9 reasons you should take part in a blogging challenge?
Day 1 of the 30 day blogging challenge.
Day 2 of the 30 day business blogging challenge.
Day 3 of the 30 day business blogging challenge.
Day 4 of the 30 day business blogging challenge.
Day 5 of the 30 day business blogging challenge.
Day 6 of the 30 day business blogging challenge.
Day 7 of the 30 day business blogging challenge.
Day 8 of the 30 day business blogging challenge.
Day 9 of the 30 day business blogging challenge.
Day 10 of the 30 day business blogging challenge.
Day 11 of the 30 day business blogging challenge.
Day 12 of the 30 day business blogging challenge.
Day 13 of the 30 day business blogging challenge.
Day 14 of the Business Blogging 30 Day Challenge
Day 15 of the Business Blogging 30 day Challenge

Day 16 Business Blogging 30 Day Challenge
Day 17 of the Business Blogging 30 Day Challenge
Day 18 Business Blogging 30 Day Challenge
Day 18 Business Blogging 30 Day Challenge
Day 20 Business Blogging 30 Day Challenge
Day 21 Business Blogging 30 Day Challenge
Day 22 Business Blogging 30 Day Challenge
Day 23 Business Blogging 30 Day Challenge
Day 24 Business Blogging 30 Day Challenge
Day 25 Business Blogging 30 Day Challenge
Day 26 Business Blogging 30 Day Challenge
Day 27 Business Blogging 30 Day Challenge
Day 28 Business Blogging 30 Day Challenge
Day 29 Business Blogging 30 Day Challenge
Day 30 Business Blogging 30 Day Challenge

About Sarah Arrow
I’ve always loved the internet and when I got my first email account back in 1995, I recall
sitting with my 2 month old daughter on my lap, marvelling how I could send a letter to
anyone else with a PC and an email address. 
Later that year, I recall (fondly) of arguing with one of my bosses that we needed to have
electronic CVs to send to clients, and how by doing so we’d have the edge over other
recruitment companies. She gave my ideas a chance, and the processes I put in place way
back when are still being used to this day. I wish fervently that I’d known about blogging
then, as it would have transformed so many lives, but I didn’t really get a grip on it until
2007.
I’ve never forgotten that fateful day in 2007 when my husband walked into the lounge
with a serious look on his face. I was playing with my daughters (aged 12, 2 and 1) and he
said “We need more business or we’ll be bust in 6 weeks. You love that computer so
much, go and do something with it to win business”.
So I did. I love a challenge.
My first blog post wasn’t self-hosted, and it consisted of 50 words. It took me 3 hours to
write 50 words.
Yes. Really.
And I had to do it three times a week according to the instructions. So I did.
Fast forward to now.
My blogging challenges are tough, they stretch you and they help you grow as a blogger.
It will make you sweat to get 30 posts published in 30 consecutive days. It’s a marathon
not a sprint, but at the end of it you’ll feel a real positive sense of achievement.
Did I save the business? Why yes I did, and over the years we’ve won multi-million pound
contracts, fired blue-chip clients and blogged our way through the credit crunch and one of
the toughest business trading periods in history.
Forbes has listed one of my blogs as a top website for women, 3 times, not bad for a Brit
blogger. So have MSN, and I’m known as one of the UK’s leading online marketers and
bloggers. I’ve got a great audience and that’s lead to lunch with Guy Kawasaki, drinks
with Tony Robbins (he paid) and a party with Martha Stewart (I sent someone else). I’ve
discovered when you have an audience, you can speak to pretty much anyone you like and
interview them on your blog, and if you do it like I do, they’ll come to you.
This book isn’t about getting famous, it’s about getting found by your ideal customers
online so you can make money. The side benefit of that of course may be fame.
Will blogging increase your business?
Try it and see.


How to use this guide
This book comes in two parts. The first part covers setting up your own self-hosted
WordPress blog, and the second part covers blogging for 30 consecutive days.
It will read like a long, chatty conversation with me, about blogging.
If a housewife and mum in Essex can use a blog to save a business and launch a new
publishing business, then you CAN do it too.
If you’d like to join the Facebook support group for encouragement and accountability
you can find it here: https://www.facebook.com/groups/30DayBloggingChallenge



A little about WordPress
Most people who are doing business today on the Internet talk a lot about WordPress,
considering that WordPress is the base for over 70 million websites, it’s not surprising that
it’s one of the most talked about topics.
WordPress is a fantastic open-source website building software that cannot be beat for
functionality and usability, and has a thriving community of developers and experts
supporting the software.
Most people who try to use it to build a basic website are easily able to do so alone, or
with just a little minor help. If you can write and send an email, you can use WordPress.
The fact is you’re reading this guide on your Kindle and that indicates to me that you have
enough ability to set up a WordPress website with ease.
WordPress can be used to build a simple blog, or a full featured ecommerce website or an
online community. It is essentially a content management system (CMS). This is the best
term to use to describe what WordPress software can do. It helps you manage all the
content that you want to distribute to the world about your business. Whether that content
is a blog post, articles, products and services, or a beautiful portfolio, WordPress can
deliver everything you need in a website.

WordPress.com vs. WordPress.org
Many people get confused by the term “WordPress” because they immediately think about
the WordPress.com website. WordPress.com is a multi-user blogging platform that uses
WordPress software to operate, but it has limitations.
First, it’s hosted on WordPress.com’s servers. Secondly, you are very limited regarding the
functionality of the website that you create unless you upgrade for a fee.
Plus, you do not really own your own content when you host it on WordPress.com’s
servers, while you can back it up, if you don’t and they decide to delete you, you’ve lost
everything. In addition, you have to follow all their rules as to what content you can
display and it’s quite expensive hosting once upgraded.
But more importantly that all of that, WordPress.com has to earn revenue for supporting
all of these free sites. So it will allow advertising in your content. And sometimes the
competition will advertise in your content and cream off the leads from your expertise.
The information in this guide pertains to WordPress.org, or the self-hosted version as it’s
known.

Things you will need to build a WordPress website:
Although WordPress is open source software and therefore free, you will still need a
domain name and website hosting.
Domain name
Website hosting
You can get a free site that will have the suffix .WordPress.com at the end of your domain
name. This is free but has its limitations. If you choose to go with this option you may not
be able to complete all the suggestions in this book. You will be restricted to what plugins
you can use and the results that you can achieve.
More importantly, you can be ejected from the site at any point you breach the T&Cs and
you will not be able to monetize your blog effectively.
In this guide we look at domain names through Go Daddy, although there are plenty of
other domain name services out there. You can also get Domain name and hosting through
Hostgator. We’ve been able to get discounted hosting for you of 25% of you use the Zero
to Social Media coupon code at the checkout.
In short, with Zero to WordPress Blogger you can create a pretty good, search engine
friendly blog (or website) in a matter of hours or over a few days depending on your skills
and abilities, even if you have zero skills!
The aim of this book is to enable the complete beginner to get a foot on the business
blogging ladder and then to show them how to climb right to the top.
If your WordPress website is already set up then please skip to the content creation
section. Zero to Blogger can be read back to back, or used as a reference guide as each
chapter is a standalone.

Choosing and Setting Up a Domain Name
The domain name you choose will influence the rest of your business for as long as you’re
in business. It completely colors how someone sees your website. Could you imagine if
Match.com was called “bestdatingsite.com”? They may never have reached the level of
success they’re at today!
Your domain name is your brand online. It’s what customers will remember you by. It’s
what goes on your business cards and your marketing materials. It’s what you tell people
you meet at an event. It shapes and defines your blog’s whole identity.
That’s why it’s so important to come up with a fantastic domain name. Here’s a step by
step guide to coming up with a good name, then registering that name and setting it up
with your hosting account.
Step 1: Brainstorm Potential Domain Names
This process should take several days and should involve multiple people. Try to come up
with as many good possible names as you can think of. Talk to others in the industry, talk
to your peers, talk to your family members, and talk to your friends.
Whenever you have an idea, jot it down. Here are a few guidelines to follow:
1)      Only register domain names that you can get .coms for unless your business is a
strictly local business in which case a co.uk, .eu or .us is acceptable.
2)      The fewer words the better.
3)      Don’t use hyphens or underlines.
4)      Don’t use numbers. You don’t want to have to say “that’s 36, in numbers” every time
you say your website to someone.
5)      Don’t use a word that’s awkward to spell… unless you are prepared to buy every
possible variation on that name.
6)      Pick a name you can grow into. A name that’ll work just as well 5 years from now as
today. Don’t pick “TommysTeddies.com” if you might expand into other lines of toys,
for example. “TommysToys.com” might work better.
7)      Don’t use your own name as the domain name. If you are setting up your WordPress
website with business in mind, at some point you will exit the business. When the
domain is your name it becomes harder to sell and a business liability rather than an
asset.
8)      Avoid trademarks – names of other businesses like Twitter and Facebook are
trademarked, so you may have to take your site down and cancel your domain if you
use a trademark.
9)      If your name is taken then try adding blog to it ie sarkemediablog.com

10)  Come up with a lot of possible names, and then pick the best one.
You’re probably going to have to come up with two or three word domain names. Some
people recommend having a keyword in your domain name, but there is no advantage for
having your domain as your exact keyword.
Single word domains are almost always going to be taken. You may occasionally be able
to pick up a single word domain name from Sedo’s Great Domains auction or from
various domain name forums, but you won’t be able to register it from scratch unless
you’ve made the word up.
Jot all your possible domain names down in a text file.
Step 2: Check for Availability
There are two ways to check for domain availability on GoDaddy. If you’re just checking
one domain off the cuff, you can just type it into the box on the main page.
But if you’re typing in a large batch of potential domain names, you’ll want to use the
bulk domain search. Just click the “Bulk Domain Search” button in the lower right corner.
Paste all your potential domain names into the box, then check which extensions you want
to check for. This mass checking tool will allow you to check all your ideas in one fell
swoop.

Step 3: Choose the One You Want
GoDaddy will tell you which of the domains you entered is available. Choose the one you
want to use, then click “Proceed to Check out.”
Step 4: Choose Registration Length
Choose how long you want your domain name for. By default, GoDaddy registers you for
two years. If you don’t want to pay for two years upfront, you can change it to one year.
Alternatively, you can register for 5 years if you want a discount.
Step 5: Complete Checkout
Enter your payment details to complete the checkout process.
Once your payment goes through, you’ll have your receipt. Congratulations! You’re now a
proud owner of your brand new domain name.
Step 6: Access Your Domain
Once you own your domain, you need to point your domain’s nameservers towards your
hosting account. This links your domain to your hosting so people who type in your
domain name will be able to access your website.
To get started, you need to go to your domain’s control panel. Start by clicking “My
Account” in the upper left corner.

Then click on “Domains.”
Choose the domain name you want to edit and click “Launch.”
Step 7: Set Your Nameservers
Your nameservers are like a digital street address. It tells GoDaddy where to send your
traffic when people type in your domain name. To set your nameservers, click on
“Nameservers” at the top of the GoDaddy domain menu.
Get your nameserver information from your hosting company. This is usually in your
registration email, but could be located somewhere in your cPanel.

Enter your nameservers into your domain setup screen.
Some notes on website hosting.
When you choose your hosting package it will probably be shared hosting, this means you
rent your hosting space with a lot of other people.
As your WordPress website becomes popular you will find you need to increase your
bandwidth with your hosting company that you will need to increase the amount of disk
space that you lease from them and so on. If you don’t upgrade your hosting package as
your traffic increases you will find that you are throttled by your host, that your site is
slow and unresponsive and that you cannot do all the things you want to do with your
website.
Remember as you become more successful with your website and blogging activity then
your costs will increase. The good news is that if you need to upgrade you should have the
revenue to cover the costs.
That’s all there is to it! You now know how to brainstorm for domain names, how to
choose a good domain name, how to check your domain names en mass, how to register
your domain and how to set your nameservers. Your new domain name is ready to go and
you are ready to install WordPress!

How to Install WordPress
Installing WordPress isn’t really all that difficult.
There are a couple of different ways in which it can be accomplished. You can
hire someone to do it for you, but there honestly isn’t any reason unless you
just want to scrub that task off your to-do list fast.
I really don’t recommend that as a newcomer you do a manual install. This
involves building a MySQL database on your hosting account. Then using
FTP to upload and install WordPress. There is a lot of room for error and
frustration.
Since this is for beginners, let’s focus on automatic installation. Your hosting
account provider probably has a way for you to automatically install
WordPress. The most popular option is to use Fantastico (and some hosting
accounts use something called Softaculous which is similar to Fantastico)
which this tutorial will guide you through.
It’s really just a matter of following the instructions. Seriously! Here are the
steps…
Log in to your cPanel. Your log in and password should have been provided
by your website hosting provider.

Scroll down until you see the Fantastico icon. It is in the Software/Services
area of your hosting cPanel. Click on the icon.
On the left of that page look for the word WordPress and click it.
Now click New Installation.

Now it’s time to configure your installation. We will walk you through the
main steps.
SECTION 1: Installation Location
Section 1 is where you choose where to install your WordPress blog. If you
need to install it on a subdomain or addon domain, click the dropdown box
and select the correct domain. If you want to install it in a directory, e.g.
yoursite.com/blog, rather than just yoursite.com, enter that in the directory
box.
Otherwise, you don’t need to select anything here.
SECTION 2: Admin Access Data
This is where you need to enter your admin username and password. Do not
choose anything obvious here. This means choosing an admin username that’s

hard to guess (not your own name or the word ‘admin’).
For your password, don’t use a password you’ve used on any other sites, and
include a combination of letters, numbers, special characters and capital
letters. This is to help protect your WordPress site against hackers.
SECTION 3: Base Configuration
Now you can enter your name as you want it to show on your website to the
public. In this section you can just use something obvious like your name or
the word “admin”.
You’ll also want to enter an email address (this is where you’ll receive
notifications about your blog e.g. new comments) and your site name and
description.
You can change this information at a later date, so don’t worry about it too
much for now.
Once you’re done, click Install WordPress.
Next you’ll be asked if you want to create the database. Click Finish
Installation.

Now you’ll see the results of your installation. Note that you are now given
the login link to your WordPress dashboard - this is circled in red in the
example above. Make sure you note down this login URL, as well as your
username and password. You’ll need it to make changes to your site!
You can also enter your email address in the box to have the details emailed to
you. To protect your details, you’ll want to make sure your email account is
also secured with a strong password if you choose to use this option!
Now you’re done! Easy, right?!

Introducing the WordPress Admin Panel (the Dashboard)
WordPress is so easy to use, it’s really just a matter of familiarizing yourself
with the admin panel otherwise known as the “Dashboard”.
When you finish installing WordPress you’ll get an address to sign into
WordPress that usually looks something like this:
http://www.yourdomainname.com/wp-admin
This is where you go to change all the options behind the scenes, including
your design, blog settings and your pages and posts. Here’s an illustrated guide
to help you get familiar with everything that’s there.
Don’t worry - it might look colorful (and  overwhelming) at first, but
WordPress is easy to get to grips with.
This is a view of what you’ll see when you login to WordPress for the first
time - it could look a little different, but you’ll still have the same features.
On the right you’ll see the white boxes, these can be dragged and dropped so
that they are positioned how you like them. The little triangle in the top right
of the box means you can toggle open or close the boxes.
See that menu on the left (highlighted in a red square)? That’s the menu you’ll

use to reach all of the WordPress admin functions.
Let’s go through each section one by one. Note that this list will vary
depending on your theme and on which plugins you’ve installed. We’ll go
through the default options.
Posts
First you’ll see the Posts menu:
All Posts: This will take you to the screen that shows all of your blog posts.
Add New: This takes you to the new post screen.
Categories: This lets you add, delete and edit your blog post categories. Posting
different posts in different categories helps organize your blog and make it easier to
navigate.
Tags: This lets you manage your post tags. Tags are labels for each post, like
keywords, that help you to organize your site better.
It’s okay to try out each link to see what it does. Don’t be scared, you won’t
break it!
Media
The Media menu lets you manage uploaded files - things like images, videos,
PDFs, MP3s etc.
Library: This lets you view all the media you’ve uploaded in the past. You can rename
and delete files if you need to.

Add New: This brings you to the screen where you can upload new files. Note that, if
you want to add files to a post, you can also upload them directly from the post screen
Links
Next you’ll see the Links menu. This is all tied to the Links widget, so if
you’re not using that widget to showcase links you choose, then don’t worry
about these options:
All Links: This will let you view and edit all the links you’ve previously uploaded.
Add New: This lets you add a new link.
Link Categories: As with posts, you can also categorize your links for better
organization.
Pages
The Pages menu is very similar to the Posts menu:
All Pages: This is where you can view all the pages you already have on your blog.
Add New: This will take you to an on-screen editor to add a new page.
Remember that a page is different from a post. A post is a blog post, and an
easy way to give updates to your audience. Whereas a page is an actual new
page of your website that should be considered more “static” like the old days
of Web Pages. However, with WordPress, it’s really just as easy to add and
subtract a page as it is to make a blog post.
Comments

Most WordPress blog users want users to be able to leave comments. These
comments will show at the end of each post. Rarely, some people decide to
turn off comments. If that’s you, then you won’t need this menu. Otherwise,
you’ll be able to use it for a number of functions.
Clicking the Comments menu will take you to a page where you can
moderate comments (check for spam), edit comments, delete comments, and
reply to comments.
Appearance
Next up we have the Appearance menu. This is where all the options are for
changing the way your site looks. Let’s go through them one by one:
Themes: This section will allow you to search for themes to install, or upload your
own themes. Themes are templates that completely change the look of your site.
Widgets: Widgets allow you to add specific elements, like a list of recent posts, a
search box, HTML code etc. to the sidebar of your blog.
Menus: This section is used to choose which pages will be shown on your navigation
menu.
Theme Options: This may or may not show depending on which theme you have
installed. If it’s there, it’ll allow you to change elements of your theme like the layout
or colors.
Editor: This is for more advanced users, for those who want to edit their theme’s code
to make more customizations.
Plugins

Plugins can add a lot of functionality to your WordPress site, without you
having to know any code. You don’t need to use plugins, but most people do.
Here are the plugin menu options:
Installed Plugins: This will let you view a list of all the plugins you’ve installed. You
can also delete, activate and upgrade plugins from here.
Add New: Use this to search for free WordPress plugins or upload plugin zip files.
Editor: This is for advanced users to edit the coding of plugins for further
customizations.
Users
In some situations, you’ll have several users signed up to your blog. This
could be customers, or it could be virtual assistants who help you post to the
blog, or even a co-owner with the same admin privileges as you. Even if you
don’t have other users, you may still need to use this menu to change your
own profile/ password:
All Users: This is where you view all the users signed up to your blog. You can delete
and edit them when necessary.
Add New: You can manually add new users this way. Useful when you want to grant
access to other people - you can let assistants, for example, edit your posts but not
change your settings.
Your Profile: This is where you can change your own settings, like your password,
email address or avatar and in this section you can also choose the color of your
WordPress dashboard! As you can see from the images mine is green and purple.
Tools

You probably won’t need to use the tools menu until you install a plugin that
adds an extra menu option here. However, it’s worth noting the Import and
Export links that will let you backup your content (blog posts and pages) and
media to transfer it somewhere else, or import another blog’s content into your
new WordPress installation.
Settings
You’ll want to go over the Settings menu when you first install a new blog.
Don’t worry if some things are over your head. These are the most important
settings to check:
General: This is where you can change your blog’s name and tagline, your URL, time
zone, and your main notification email address.
Writing: You probably don’t need to change these settings. But use it if you want to
post via email (an advanced feature) or change the default post and link categories.
Reading: Use the settings here to change how many posts show on your homepage,
and whether you want your site to show up in search engine results.
Discussion: Here, you can change various settings for people commenting on your
blog, and the notifications you get. You can probably keep these as-is.
Media: It’s unlikely you’ll need to change these settings, which determine thumbnail
sizes for images and the location of uploaded files.
Permalinks: You definitely want to change your permalinks. By default, every new
post you publish will have a URL like yoursite.com/?p=336 - doesn’t look great does
it? Instead, select the Post Name option for a URL more like yoursite.com/your-post-
title - much better! Not only that you can remember your URLs to specific pages!

Updates
One more tip about the Dashboard. If WordPress, or your theme has released
an update this is where you’ll see the announcement. It is recommended to
keep WordPress itself updated at all times.
Remember that if you update your actual Theme, if you’ve customized it in
anyway, those changes may be lost. Always read directions when it comes to
your WordPress website and themes that you use. If you use what is known as
a child theme, you will not lose customization with an upgrade. More on that
in the chapter on Frameworks.
The very best way to familiarize yourself with your admin panel or
“Dashboard” is to just get in there, click around and familiarize yourself with
which buttons does what. Don’t be scared. You can always uninstall it all and
start over if something goes wrong.

How to Create WordPress Posts & Pages
Now that you’ve installed WordPress to your domain name, it’s time to start
creating some content!
You’ll do this in the form of “posts” and “pages”. This tutorial will guide you
through the differences between the two, and teach you how to get started with
your business blog.
Posts Vs. Pages - What’s the Difference?
POSTS
You can think of posts as a diary type listing, except businesses and
information sites all use them too. Posts are dynamic. Depending on how you
set up your posts they’re usually listed in reverse chronological order (just like
a diary) with the most recent date being at the top of the list.
All posts appear on the home page, or the blog page, or even a “news” section,
depending how you set up your blog posts to appear in your settings area of
your dashboard. You also have an archive of posts in which anyone can see
old posts and entries by looking.
Readers can read posts via a few methods, such as clicking on categories,
recent posts, and archives and even via RSS feed. They all have a category and
can be tagged too. The great thing about WordPress is that you are in complete
control of whom, how and when anyone sees your blog posts via your settings
area of your Dashboard.
PAGES
Think of pages as static website pages just like “old style” websites used to
have. Pages don’t use categories or tags to differentiate themselves.

Like blog posts, there is no limit to the number of pages you can make on your
WordPress website or blog. You can hide pages from view, and link to them on
other pages, or make them private completely. You can make pages main
menu items, and submenu items using various plugins and features depending
upon the theme you choose.
Unlike a blog post, when you create the new page, you will create it and
usually not change it very much. A good way to think of this is that every
menu item is a page including your Contact page, your About page and so on.
How to Create a New Blog Post
There are two ways to create a new page. Either click the + New button in the
top toolbar, or click Add New under the Posts menu.
Now you’ll see an editor that looks like this. As you can see from the image
above, you can enter a title into the space indicated. This is the title as it’ll
show up in public on your website, so make it catchy! We’ll talk more about
headlines later on.

You can then use the editor in the box below to enter your post content. Let’s
look at the formatting options a little more closely…
As you can see, the formatting options are very similar to what you’d use if
you were typing a document on a word processor like Microsoft Word.
You can make your text bold, center-aligned, or change its color. You can also
create sub-headings within the post to make it easier for your visitors to read.
This is all very easy to get used to and the best way to learn is by playing
around with it yourself.
There are just a few options that aren’t the same as a word processor that are
worth going over.
Add Media: This button is what you click if you want to add pictures, videos,
audio files or any other media files. You can either upload them straight from
your computer hard drive, or you can select a file that you previously uploaded
to the Media Library.
The More Tag: You may have noticed that many websites include an excerpt
of the content on their homepage, with a link that says “read more”. If you
want to do this on your own site, click this button to insert the “more” tag at
the point at which you want your excerpt to end.
You may have also noticed the Visual/ Text toggle button on the right hand
side. You don’t need to worry about this unless you need to insert some HTML
code into your post. If so, make sure you do so using the Text editor. We’ll talk
more about this later on.
Categories, Tags & Featured Image

Once you’ve written your post, you’ll probably want to change some of the
settings on that same post screen. Before you do, though, always save your
post as a draft to make sure you don’t lose anything!
Categories: In the categories box, you can choose an appropriate category to
assign to this post. If you haven’t created one yet, click “Add New Category”
It is well worth using categories, as this helps visitors better navigate your site
better and find content related to what they’ve just read. You can also add
categories to your navigation if you have topics that you want to highlight.
When you first set up your site you will need to edit “uncategorized” from
your categories. You do this by editing the category and changing the name. I
use the generic word “blog” to replace uncategorized. It’s worth remembering
that this will be the default setting if you forget to add your post to a category.
Featured Image: If your theme supports it, you can use this option to choose
an image from your Media Library, or upload one from your computer. The
image will then show however your theme is set to display it.

For all other images, you can just add them directly within the post editor.
Tags: These are another way to label your posts. It’s a good idea to add
keywords related to your posts here, but it’s totally optional.
Publishing Your Post & Changing Privacy Settings
Here’s an explanation of the other settings there:
Status: Here you can save posts as Drafts or as Pending Review. Both are not visible
to the public and are useful for your own organization.
Visibility: Public posts will be visible to everyone (once you press Publish). Private
posts will be visible only to logged in WordPress admin users. Password Protected
means only those who you provide with the password will be able to view the content.
Publish Immediately: Don’t want to publish your post right now? Click the edit
button here and you can schedule the post for a date in the future.
NOTE: Even if your post is set to Public, and is scheduled immediately or in
the future, you must press Publish before it will show up on your blog or set
up the future scheduling option.
Creating a New Page

Note that the Page creation process is almost exactly the same as the Post
creation process. The only difference is that you won’t be able to add
categories and tags to your posts. You can still add media to the page, change
the privacy settings, schedule it in advance and so on.
Viewing Posts and Pages You’ve Already Created
Any time you want to view the posts or pages you’ve already created, select
All Posts or All Pages. This is where you go if you want to delete posts, too.
Be sure to delete the default post added when you first install WordPress! And
make sure you remember to edit the About page straight away and delete the
sample page.
Remember, although there are a lot of powerful options included when you
create pages and posts, it’s actually very easy once you get used to it. So go in
there and play around with some options. And have fun creating all the new
content for your website!

How to Install a WordPress Theme
The theme is the look and feel of your website or blog. It can not only
command the design, but also with some themes the functionality of your site.
But mostly, it’s the design. It’s how it looks. It’s like frosting on a cake.
Some themes are very basic, but others are outrageously complicated. There
are free and premium (paid) themes to choose from.
What kind of theme you choose depends on what you’re using it for. If you’re
just making a personal blog, there are plenty of free themes to choose from.
Heck, even if it’s a business website, there are still free themes to choose from
that will work great. Most themes are easily modifiable in terms of colors,
headers, and layout.
One thing you must make sure your theme is and that’s mobile responsive. In
the US more people have a mobile device than a desktop or laptop. I think that
statistic will replicate world-wide as time goes on, so mobile responsiveness is
a must.
A great thing about WordPress is that you can try out different themes, and
most of the time you’ll be able to keep the information already on your site as
it is.
Some people like to have a different header every season, for example. If you
choose a theme where it’s simple to modify the header it means that will only
take you as long as it takes to create a new header and upload it in the
Dashboard (a matter of minutes). If you choose a theme where it’s more
complicated to upload a header, you may come to dread changing the header
and stop doing it.
How to Search for and Install Themes within the WordPress Dashboard

Some really useful free themes can be found by searching via your Dashboard.
Simply click on Appearance, Themes [1], and then Install Themes [2].
There’s a tiny downside to installing themes that are free, and that’s you might
have a link in the footer that you are not allowed to remove to a gambling site
or another location that conflicts with your business.
Support may not be free with a free theme, and sometimes the theme will not
be updated when WordPress is, leaving your site at risk.
On the theme installation page you can search for a theme via keywords, or
choose certain design options to find the right theme for you.

Overwhelmed with all the options? Then we recommend you just click
Featured at the top of the Install Themes page. On that featured page, you’ll
see some of the best examples of WordPress themes.
Like the look of a theme on that page, but want to preview how it’ll look on
your website? Simply click the Preview button under a theme you like the
look of.
For this tutorial, we’re going to install the Responsive theme. Here’s what it
looks like on the preview.
Note - you can either exit the preview to see other themes by pressing Close
[1], or you can press the Install button [2] to install the chosen theme.

Once you click to install a theme you get another option to view a Live
Preview. This is another preview of the theme, but this time you’ll see how it
looks with the content and widgets you already have on your site.
Once you’re happy, click Activate.
Your theme is now live! Time to visit your blog and see how it looks.
NOTE: You can go back to your Manage Themes page at any time to view
your theme and any updates that might be available. Many themes come with
their own option panels, and there is usually a link in this section to get
support if you need it.
How to Upload Your Own Theme Zip File
Many themes are available to download from external websites, and won’t be
found when using the Dashboard search method above. Thankfully, installing
a theme from a zip file is extremely easy!

Simply go to the Install Themes page as you did before, but this time select
Upload.
Next, select Choose File to select the file location from your hard drive. Then
click Upload.
Once the file has uploaded, you get the same options as before. You can either
preview the theme on your site or click Activate.
That’s it - simple!

WordPress Frameworks
After you’ve spent a little bit of time working with a WordPress website –
particularly if you’ve ever shopped around for a new theme for your site –
you’re likely to come across the term “Theme Framework” or “WordPress
Framework”.
A theme framework is a library of code that makes it relatively easy for a user
to develop a unique look on their WordPress website or use a design straight
out of the zip file. It often makes using certain plugins obsolete, and it can
decrease page loading time.  A framework can only be used on self-hosted
WordPress websites, so if your site ends in .WordPress.com then you’ll be
unable to use them.

Do I need to use a WordPress Framework?
I think when you are starting out using WordPress it’s not essential, but as you
start to grow your blog and increase usability and functionality then you’ll
hanker after a framework. If you’re an existing client of mine, you’ll already
know that you have a framework in place and are reaping the many benefits of
using one.

So what does a framework do?
Theme frameworks generally make use of the “parent theme” and “child
theme” capabilities of WordPress so that you can create multiple custom
themes and variations without permanently altering the foundations of the
theme (or messing with the code), so when you want to create a new look it’s
much faster, and you don’t lose much (if any) of the functionality you have in
place.
This list of frameworks is in no particular order and where I’ve used the
framework I’ll share my experiences with it, for each one I’ve tried to include
a downside where possible.

Genesis.
Genesis is one of the leading premium WordPress frameworks, and for
good reason. The code is clean and optimized for SEO purposes, and
the framework follows the best WordPress security practices. The
Genesis framework automatically updates itself, so your website code
will always be current and fully optimized. My site Sarkemedia.com is
built using Genesis and the Minimum Pro Child Theme.
There are many tutorials and educational resources available on
the StudioPress / Genesis website to get you up and running quickly. Of course
the real bonus to this WordPress framework is that it comes with unlimited
lifetime support – this can be extremely valuable for a website owner who
isn’t completely comfortable with the ins and outs of WordPress and needs
extra support.
SEO and Google Authorship are built into Genesis, making it easier for you to
benefit from better search rankings. Genesis can be taken further with
the Dynamik theme and the Genesis Extender plugin. Both of which I
recommend highly.
Many of the child themes are HTML5 ready, mobile responsive and have rich
snippets ready to be activated. SEO is built in, and you can pretty much use
one of the child themes straight out of the zip file. When you purchase
the Studiopress pro plus pack, you get all the themes they have available plus
the ones they add in the future. There’s also a community of developers that
sell the child themes that they create for Genesis.
The support is excellent; I recently had a query that was answered in two
hours! I’d spent 3 days trying to work it out myself and the support team
answered it in just two hours!
The downside?
Some of the child themes take a background image and no sizing is given, this
can make it very hard to get the right sized image as your background. You
may have to experiment a bit to get the look that you want. Not much of a
downside, but the creators have spent a lot of time and effort to make things as
easy as possible for their users.

2.         Thesis 2.0. 
Thesis is another leading premium WordPress Theme Framework. Thesis was
my first love of all the WordPress Frameworks. The Thesis framework is built
upon a three-pronged approach to site design: “Boxes” allow you to add
discreet elements of functionality to a new website you are creating without
having to write any code yourself.
“Skins” provides you with a drag and drop interface for creating exactly the
type of look and feel you’re after. One of the skins on offer is the “Social
Triggers” skin, so if you are a Derek Halpern fan, then you can hack up the
Social Triggers skin to look awesome. I don’t recommend that you use any
design based on someone else’s blog straight out of the box, always add your
own branding and customizations so the skin is completely yours.
“Packages” let you make precise CSS customizations without having to know
any CSS code or ever have to dig into a single style sheet. Thesis was the first
framework to include Rich Snippets. Rich Snippets will become more
powerful as time goes by and is something that gives Thesis the advantage
when it comes to search. In short, I’ve found Thesis to lead the way when it
comes to functionality and the speed of which things are implemented into
their framework.
SEO is built into Thesis, along with typography and Google fonts, so you can
pretty much hand customise any area of your website…
The downside? Thesis can blow your head up with the functionality and time
that it takes, using a skin will help speed things up a lot, but I’ve found when I
use Thesis I spend hours in WordPress heaven just tinkering… Our transport
website was on Thesis for a very long time, I recently moved it to Genesis so
that my husband could tinker with it. When it comes to downsides, there’s not
much of one.

3.         Thematic.
Thematic is a very popular free and open source WordPress theme
development framework. Thematic contains a top notch starter theme, and can
also be used to quickly build custom themes from scratch. The framework
contains 13 widget ready areas in the basic framework, a grid layout and the
possibility for even more in a child theme. The framework is fully compatible
with leading SEO plug-ins such as All-In-One SEO and Platinum SEO.
Thematic also offers options for multi-author blogging which is very handy.
There are paid child themes available if you don’t want to create something
yourself.
Thematic is created by Automattic, the creators of WordPress, so you can
expect this framework to be incredibly powerful and versatile with no loss of
performance.
Downside? I’ve not had the opportunity to use this theme, so I cannot say. And
yes, that’s a valid downside!

4.         Reverie.
Reverie is another popular free design framework for WordPress. Reverie
leverages the power of the increasingly popular HTML5 Boilerplate standard
to help users create fast, dynamic and responsive WordPress themes.
The framework allows for tight and easy integration with bbPress 2.0, which
can be extremely valuable if you anticipate wanting to include bulletin board
functionality on your WordPress site. Reverie automatically uses a media
query to adjust the display for smart phones and tablets, and the framework is
particularly optimized for the iPhone and iPod. You may wish to consider this
framework if you anticipate a significant number of your users visiting your
site from these devices.
Downside? This framework has a very specific aim – mobile users. If you are
not getting a lot of mobile traffic, then this may not be useful to you at all.

5.   WhiteBoard. 
Speaking of frameworks optimized for mobile devices… WhiteBoard is
another powerful free option. WhiteBoard is built using the leading CSS3 and
Less Framework standards, which ensures that your WordPress site content
will be as attractive and functional on smart phones and tablets as it is on a
traditional computer monitor.
The underlying WhiteBoard code is well noted and commented, so if you or
your development staff ever needs to take a deeper look inside the inner
workings of the framework, it will be easier to get the information you need.
Finally, WhiteBoard claims to utilize more dynamic Classes and IDs than any
other WordPress framework, which has the potential to help you with your
SEO efforts.
Downside? If you are not familiar with classes you might not appreciate what
this framework can do.

6.         Howling Dog Theme Framework.
The Howling Dog Theme Framework (and its “K9 Control Panel”) is a
premium framework that provides a great deal of control over visual aspects of
your custom theme. You can quickly adjust virtually any layout parameters in
order to achieve exactly the look you have in mind, and your typography
options are extremely broad with built in support for the Cufon library of free
fonts. This framework also has a particular focus on making sure that
whatever themes you come up with will display properly in just about any
type of browser your visitor may be using.
About 2 years ago I put Howling Dog through its paces, and I didn’t find it
lacking in anything! I found it very intuitive to use, and the support is
extensive.  Genesis Dynamik reminds me a lot of the Howling Dog
Framework, and if you want the functionality of Dynamik but don’t have the
budget then get Howling Dog, and start saving for one of their premium
themes or the paid version of the framework to have even more functionality.
Downside?
Some of the functionality that you might like is in the paid version, that said
Genesis and Thesis are both paid (premium) frameworks, so it’s not really a
downside at all.

7.   The Upthemes Framework.
Upthemes is a WordPress framework that takes a different approach to custom
theming. Rather than starting out from scratch, you can use the Upthemes
Framework in conjunction with a WordPress theme you already have. You can
use Upthemes to customize the layout and color schemes of your theme,
quickly change the header and background images and colors, and take a
quick live preview of any changes to make sure they’re exactly what you’re
looking for. If you are completely new to working with a framework, this
makes a great starting point, although truth be told you’ll never really want to
leave.
I can’t think of any downsides to Up themes other than there’s a small cost, as
it’s a premium framework. But you shouldn’t let cost put you off, if helps pay
for amazing support and keeps your framework in good working order.

8. PageLines. 
PageLines is a popular “drag and drop” premium framework that makes it
easy for users who want to stay as far away from the code as possible to create
custom themes for their sites. Pricing is on a monthly basis and of course
includes awesome support. The framework is mobile ready, uses Google Fonts
and has good eCommerce capabilities. The overall effect from Pagelines is a
sleek and responsive WordPress website.
Downsides?
The monthly subscription may be off-putting for some, but the design options
will probably make up for that! I think there may be a free version with
limited functionality, but never having used Pagelines I couldn’t find it on
their website. Having said that, this could be the framework for you if you
want a simple, sleek design that looks professional without having to touch a
line of code.

9.  Woo Themes.
Woo Themes are incredibly popular with the WordPress/eCommerce crowd.
The Framework is free with certain themes and there of course is a range of
premium themes that are easily customisable. Woo Themes operate a club
system as well as the option to purchase individual themes. They also have a
range of premium WordPress plugins that will enable you to create online
courses etc.
I’ve done a little work with Woo themes and their Framework, but I think I’ve
been spoiled by Genesis and Thesis and I prefer working with them. But
there’s a huge amount of people that totally adore Woo and all the things it can
do (custom shortcodes and auto thumbnail resizer etc), so it’s well worth
checking out. They also have extensions for Amazon payments so that your
customer never has to leave your own site… yes the extensions are well worth
checking out too.
Downsides?
Cost could be a big factor with Woo, new licensing means support is payable
after your license expires, but don’t let that stop you from trying out their
framework and a huge range of themes. The Canvas theme is popular with a
lot of bloggers and small business owners.

10. Headway Themes.
Headway was one of the original drag and drop frameworks like Pagelines.
HTML 5 ready, you can drag and drop things till your heart’s content. I had a
thing with Headway a few years back, but sadly we never lasted. Like Thesis,
everything is customisable from the dashboard, and if you have a bit of time
you can create something really spectacular. Like Thesis, StudioPress and
Woo, the code is search engine friendly, although I have to be honest and say
that if any of the frameworks I’ve mentioned weren’t search friendly with
good, solid code, then they wouldn’t have been mentioned. Again, support is
good and the visual editor is highly recommended!
Downsides?
Getting used to the grid layout after using Thesis / Studiopress was awkward
and time consuming; however a lot of people pick it up quickly and have
found it quite intuitive.
WordPress frameworks can make your website or blog look pretty awesome in
a short amount of time, they can improve how you’re found in search and they
can enable your WordPress website to do pretty much anything. All you need
is the time to create!
As the frameworks tend to use child themes you won’t lose any customisations
to your design when you have to upgrade.

How to Use WordPress Plugins
One of the best things about WordPress is the ability to use plugins! Plugins
are very special additions or add-ons to WordPress that lets it go from an old-
fashioned static site to fabulous and impressive in a very short space of time.
A plugin can take you from inactive to interactive, from nothing special to
spectacular!
It is essentially software or an app that you add on to your instance of
WordPress to make it do something you want it to do, or behave in a certain
way.
One plugin may add a contact form, another clickable social media icons,
another a discussion forum, or even a shopping cart. Honestly, there isn’t
enough room to explain all that plugins do for WordPress. It’s what makes
WordPress so special. Instead of buying or using bulky software, you can
customize your WordPress instance to do what you want and need it to do.

So What Plugins Should You Install?
You don’t actually need to install any plugins to get going. However, once you
get more familiar with WordPress, adding new plugins will definitely help
create a better site.
Most people do use some form of the following plugins on their site:
SEO: A plugin that allows the owner of the site to make their WordPress more SEO
friendly.
Contact Forms: A plugin that allows you to insert a contact form on any page you
desire.
Backup: A plugin that helps you automatically back up your website or blog so that if
something ever goes wrong you’ll have it.
Social Media: Most people have “like” buttons, “tweet” buttons and more on their
blogs and websites today, and plugins make it easy to add them without knowing any
code whatsoever.
Security: Always add some sort of security to your blog or website to ensure safety
from hackers. You may think no one cares about your little blog but these hackers are
often not even people today, they are computer programs designed to find security
holes and it can happen to the most obscure blog or website.
How to Install a Free WordPress Plugin Through WordPress
Most free plugins you hear people talking about will be available to download
right from within your WordPress dashboard they are stored in what’s known

as the WordPress repositary. To search for one, click Add New on the
WordPress plugins menu.
Now you can enter your search term into the box before pressing Search
Plugins. For this tutorial, we will be searching for and activating a contact
form plugin.
You can search for anything you need, whether that’s the exact name of a
plugin someone told you about, or a type of plugin you need e.g. a Facebook
posting plugin, an SEO plugin etc.
Now you’ll see your search results. Simply read the names and descriptions on
the list and click Install Now for the plugin you want to install and use. You’ll
be asked if you’re sure you want to install the plugin, click OK.

Alternatively you can click Details to view more info about any plugin before
you choose to install it. Then you can either press the X button to go back to
the search results, or Install Now.
After you install a plugin, you’ll see a screen like this. You won’t be able to
use your plugin until you click Activate Plugin.

Now that your plugin is installed and activated, you can go ahead and use it, or
you can repeat the process to install further plugins.
Note that every plugin is designed differently. Many of them will add an
option to the WordPress Settings menu. Many, however, will add their own
options link.
If you can’t find a settings page for the particular plugin you just installed,
click Installed Plugins from the WordPress plugins menu, and scroll down the
list of plugins until you find a documentation link for the one you’re interested
in.
For the contact form plugin example, you can see it’s now installed and
showing up on our plugins list. Within that list there’s also links to the plugin
FAQ and support sites for more information.

How to Install a Free or Paid WordPress Plugin from a Zip File
Some plugins aren’t available through the WordPress dashboard. This is true
with paid plugins and some free plugins. Not to worry, it’s still easy to install
them!
Simply download the plugin zip file from the developer and then click Add
New in the WordPress plugins menu, like you did before. When you get to the
search screen, click Upload instead of searching for a plugin.
Next, click the Choose File button, and select the plugin file from its location
on your hard drive.
Like you did in the steps above, be sure to click Activate Plugin once your
plugin zip file has uploaded.

Easy, right?! Now all you need to do is use your plugin like any other plugin.
Some paid plugins may require you to enter a product key, so be sure to refer
to their own documentation.
NOTE: It is important to pay attention to your installation of any plugin and
read the writings on each plugin you may want to use. Some plugins do not
play nice with each other so you’ll need to pick and choose based on your
theme and compatibility issues.
Updating Your WordPress Plugins
Bear in mind that things on the internet are always changing and being
improved. WordPress plugins are no different, which is why you need to look
out for plugin updates.
When updates are offered for your plugin, it is very important that you go
ahead and upgrade as soon as possible. Do read all instructions and issues
first, and get help if you need it, but most updates involve closing security
loopholes as well as added functionality.
You will know if your plugin needs updating by looking in your Dashboard.
In the example, there’s a number “4” next to the Updates section. This shows
that there are 4 updates available - this total number includes plugins, themes
and your WordPress installation. Click the Updates button to see more.

Now you’ll see exactly what needs updating on your WordPress installation.
On the example website, you can see that there are only two themes that need
updating. You can click the blue links, as highlighted above, to view more
about these updates and check for any compatibility issues or security
vulnerabilities.

Now you can select which plugins you want to update.
IMPORTANT NOTE: Make sure you backup your WordPress installation
before updating any of your plugins! Backing up is a good idea before you
make any major changes on your site, because things can go wrong.
To update, select the checkbox next to the plugin name, and click the Update
Plugins button. In this example, I am updating the Jetpack plugin.
Now you’ll see a page while the update is in progress. It’s very important that
you do not close this page or click away until you see the update completed
message, as shown above.
Now your plugin has been updated - easy! You can go back and repeat this
progress whenever you need to.


How to Use WordPress Widgets
Like plugins, widgets add superb functionality to your website, making it
easier to change and add things without coding it yourself.
You may see a theme advertised as “widget ready”. Really a widget is a
plugin, but it’s a special plugin designed to arrange how your site is laid out.
For instance, widgets are used to add content to the sidebar, add a search bar,
or other content that you can arrange, show, or remove from various areas of
your website or blog.
Many widgets are already included with WordPress, but others are added
when you install plugins.
You don’t need to understand any code at all to use widgets in your WordPress
site. There are many widgets that come with basic WordPress that you may not
think of as widgets such as post categories, tags, site navigation, search boxes,
and so on.
Also remember that a plugin sometimes adds widgets as well. They simply
make your site more user friendly to anyone who visits by providing a clean
layout to your content. What’s really awesome is they’re as easy to take away
as they are to add. Don’t like the look? Just uninstall it, or inactivate it.
Here’s how to do it…
How to Access Widget Options

You can see widgets by going to your Dashboard, then Appearance, and then
click on Widgets.
Now you can see what widgets you already have. Many themes give you a
basic selection of widgets already added to your blog, but some will be blank.

Let’s take a closer look at that widget screen. On the right hand side, you’ll see
the different areas available for you to add widgets.
As you can see from this example, the theme we’re using lets us add widgets
to the main sidebar, as well as different footer areas. Your theme may have
more or less widgets areas, but the sidebar is almost always included and this
is the most popular place for adding widgets. This is what we’ll focus on for in
this section of the book.

Not sure what the sidebar is? Here you can see it in the example - it runs all
the way down the page to the right of the main blog content.
Different themes have different sidebars - some are on the left of the page
instead of the right, some have more than one, and some may not have a
sidebar at all (although this is rare).
How to Delete A Widget

To remove any widget that’s already there, first click the arrow next to the
widget name, then press Delete.
How to Add New Widgets to Your Site
To add a new widget, select the type of widget you’d like from the Available
Widgets section of the widget page, and drag it over to the area you want it to
be placed. In this example, we’ll be installing a search box widget.
Note, you can also click and drag the widgets around once they’re already in
the sidebar, if you want to reorder them.

Next, click the arrow next to the widget name that you just installed, and you
can configure the settings for that particular widget.
In this case, we are able to enter the title for the widget (e.g. “Search this
Site”). When you’re done, click Save.
You can always go back and edit the options again at a later date, or delete the
widget, by clicking the grey arrow to expand the widget options.
Continue adding and rearranging the widgets you want. Now you can see what
they look like by visiting your site. As you can see, our search widget is now
there!


Top 10 WordPress Security Tips
You cann install WordPress, add a post, page, theme and adjust the widgets… it’s now
time to look at securing your WordPress website.
It would be hard to overstate the popularity of WordPress as a web publishing platform.
Between the fully hosted blogs at WordPress.com and the self-hosted blog software that’s
available for download WordPress.org, there are hundreds of millions of sites running on
the WordPress platform. This makes WordPress a great resource for individuals and
businesses looking to create their first websites.
But it also makes WordPress websites a popular target for hackers. Since having your
website hacked can be devastating to your business, it’s important to make sure you’re
doing everything you can to stay secure.
Here are the top 10 WordPress security tips you should consider. (Note that some of these
tips will apply only if you host your own WordPress installation, but not if you use the
services at WordPress.com.)
Keep Your WordPress Install Up To Date.
Sometimes the strongest security tips are also the easiest to implement.
Every time you login to your WordPress dashboard, check the top of the
screen to see if a new version of WordPress is available. Because security
fixes to the underlying WordPress code are distributed through these
updates, it’s important to make sure you’re always running the current
version of the software. You should also make sure all your WordPress
plugins are also up to date.
2.              Make Backups.
Having backups of your WordPress site not only provides protection in case your site is
compromised, it also acts as an insurance policy in case something happens with your web
host. It’s certainly possible to manage the backup process manually, but there are plugins
you can use to make the process much easier, including UpdraftPlus Backup and Simple
Backup. Make sure to keep those backup files in a secure location as well.

3.              Don’t Use “Admin” or Your Email Address For Your Username.
Not all hacking consists of high-level computer manipulation; quite often WordPress sites
are compromised by someone guessing the site administrator’s username and password.
Unfortunately, if you use “admin” or your e-mail address for your username, then a hacker
is already halfway towards reaching their goal. It’s much more secure if you make your
username something that would be as difficult to guess as a strong password.
 
4.              Limit The Number of Failed of Login Attempts.
A persistent hacker may not be sufficiently dissuaded from attacking your site if they can
simply use a “brute force” attack to try to guess your username and password. You can use
a plugin like Simple Login Lockdown to detect failed logins from a particular IP address
and significantly reduce the threat of these brute force attacks. This plugin will block an IP
address from accessing your login page for one hour when there are five successive failed
attempts — although the lockout time and number of attempts can be changed.
5.              Make Sure Your Themes are Secure.

Hackers should not be your only security concern. Given the seemingly endless number of
sources for WordPress themes, you need to be confident that you’re not using a theme
with any malicious code. You can use a plugin such as Theme Authenticity Checker to
identify any potential he problematic code that may have been added to an otherwise valid
theme.
6.               Additional Login Authentication.
The Login Dongle plugin provides an additional layer of login protection. This plugin
installs a bookmarklet in your browser, and asks you to create a secret challenge and
response text. When you go to your login page, after entering your standard username and
password, you then click the bookmark and fill in the proper response code before you can
log in. This creates an additional level of authentication security for your blog.
 
7.              Do a Security Scan.
Unfortunately, it won’t always be clear to you when you’ve been hacked. Sometimes
hackers want to use your server space for activities that may not be apparent simply by
viewing your site. You can use a plugin such as Exploit Scanner to automatically search
through the files on your site for anything potentially suspicious.
 
8.              Consider a Multi-Tiered Security Manager.
Wordfence Security is a multi-pronged security plugin that adds a firewall to your website,
as well as virus scanning, real-time traffic analysis, the ability to see any changes to your
core WordPress files, and many other functions. Wordfence is installed in my site and all
my clients sites.

9.              Secure Your wp-config.php File.
Your wp-config.php file contains very important information about your WordPress site,
including details on the databases that contain all of your posts and comments. You can
keep this file more secure by following the tutorial here.
Don’t give a hacker access to your private information in this file:
 
10.              Protect Your WordPress Directories.
Finally, you can protect your underlying WordPress directories by adding the code
“Options –indexes” to the very beginning of your .htaccess file. If you’ve never worked
with a particular file before, then this is another one that you may wish to contact your
web host or Webmaster for help on. You can also consult this tutorial.
 
WordPress provides you with the ability to make a powerful and professional website
without spending a penny on software. Make sure to get the most out of your site by
keeping it secure.


When Plugins go nuts…
If you use WordPress as your blogging software (and why wouldn’t you ;))
you’ll know all about the extended functionality you can add to you blog as
via Plugins. As we are also talking about WordPress security, it’s only right
that we should discuss that to do when plugins go wrong…
Plugin Mania
One of the first things I get asked when I hand over the key to a new
WordPress blog is “what plugins do I need?”, which always leads to the
conversation about what you want to use the plugins for.
Sometimes you don’t need a plugin at all as the functionality is in the theme.
An example of this is “breadcrumb navigation”, if you use
the Genesis framework this is a standard feature. If you use another theme
(Thesis) it may not be a standard feature and you may have to code it in or use
a plugin.
It can be a heady thing seeing the variety of plugins and knowing that there are
free as well as premium plugins that will take your WordPress site beyond just
blogging.
Coding or Plugins?
Coding every single time…. if you can’t add some code to your theme then
talk to someone who can.
If you have no budget you can attempt it yourself, but be prepared to have to
get an expert in if you wreck your blog :).
What do you do when plugins go nuts?
Plugin conflicts.
Too much of anything can be dangerous, moderation is best, except for when it
comes to chocolate.. There are two things to keep in mind when installing
plugins:
Too many plugins can slow down your site and eat up bandwidth.
Too many of the same plugin type can cause conflicts and clashes.
Even the best plugin can also let unexpected security risks slip through your
“doors” — if they are not regularly updated.
Plugin developers provide new versions frequently. They provide updates to
address glitches and bugs, but often the reason there’s an upgrade is because

someone has discovered a security leak, or leak potential etc in the plugin’s
coding. So to help prevent plugin conflict you need to update your plugins
often.

How to De-bug Faulty Manual Plugin Installations
One of the most frequent causes of plugin conflict can be through manually
installing a plugin via your FTP.  Occasionally this manual upload process via
FTP won’t work which can be incredibly frustrating. There are two things you
can do to fix it…
Make sure your plugin is there – Open your FTP program again to make sure
it’s actually in the right folder (wp-content/plugins). If it’s not there (it does
happen!) upload it again.
If it is there breathe a sigh of relief and delete right from the server, then
upload again
If it still doesn’t work, check out your unzipped plugin folder very thoroughly:
Is there a second folder within the folder (“double wrapping”)? If so, delete
the unsuccessful upload and start again, this time using the folder within the
folder only.
Plugins: To Zip or Unzip?
Remember, if you’re manually uploading via WordPress, keep your plugin
folder zipped.
If you’re uploading via FTP, unzip first (unless the plugin developer states
otherwise). Remember to click “Activate”, once your plugin appears in your
installed plugins page.
Read the instructions first when it comes to installing the plugins you want,
it’s the difference between a perfect blog and a mess that you have to sort out
over a day or so whilst you are trying to do other things.
Dealing with a plugin conflict
Not all plugins play nicely with each other! If you have a plugin conflict,
deactivate the last plugin you installed and chill out for a moment.
Is the plugin essential?
Is it vital, will your whole world fall apart without it?
If so then the next step is deactivate all of the plugins and then reactivate them
one by one to see which one is causing the grief. Can you live without that
plugin? If so, un-install it and delete it. As I recently found out even un-
installing and deleting some plugins isn’t enough to get rid of them and the
hassle they have caused! In which case you need to pick up the phone and call
someone in as quite clearly it’s a plugin gone rogue.

Of course there can be other reasons why plugins go nuts
Too many of the same types of plugin  can cause problems. Do you really need
6 different versions of stats on your blog? Or 4 different SEO plugins? Choose
one type and stick with it. When you change plugins for one thing often, you
undo the work that you have already done. Some SEO related plugins take a
little while to kick in and if you are not using them correctly then they may
never deliver the results that you think they will. Installing another SEO
plugin on top of that is not the cure 
Incorrectly configured plugins may be a pain, again read the instructions, and
dare I say it… do as you are advised.


Publishing Your Content
After all the hard work of setting up your business blog, it now comes down to the most
important reason of having a blog in the first place - getting your content, your message
out to the world.
For some, this is an easy process.  For many others however, publishing useful and unique
content regularly can be severely daunting.  Distinguishing yourself from other business
bloggers takes a bit of understanding of who your core readers are.
Put some time aside to research your audience and find out what they would like to read
about. Here are some considerations to bear in mind when publishing your content:
Should I make my posts educational, newsworthy, informational, entertaining and
debatable or, a combination of all those?
 
How long should my posts be?
 
Should I consider blogging partnerships (like getting guest bloggers to write unique
content for your blog)?
The initial excitement of publishing a blog can quickly dissipate when your “content well”
starts to dry up.  So where do you turn to for ideas and inspiration to get readers queuing
up to read your work?  Well, let’s start with how you can categorize your content in a way
that could potentially skyrocket your readership:
The infamous Top 10 lists
 
How-To information
 
Reviews
 
Interview someone within your business niche
Present relevant business case-studies
 
Latest trends and newsworthy information

Recommend other business blogs that might be of interest to your readers
But all the above may be rendered useless if you can’t get to a source for inspiration.  So
here are some of the best places to visit when you need to get those creative juices
flowing:
News sites – CNN, Yahoo News, Google News are just some of many News websites
available to spark an interesting idea for a blog post.  Dig into News stories and press
releases to see what is significant for your blog.  Cast your opinion on it and you’ve
just got yourself a new post.  But don’t stop there. 
 
Look for News sites that are specific to your industry as well.  For example, if
you’re blogging about finance, head on over to Bloomberg Financial News and get
ideas from there.  About.com is another site that covers a gamut of topics that makes
for such a great source for content ideas.
 
Online Groups / Social Networking sites / Forums – Message board forums, Facebook
Groups and Yahoo Groups are a wealth of information.  Your potential readers and
customers could be lurking within these groups, freely exchanging the kind of
information a market research company would pay thousands of dollars for. 
 
Don’t ignore forums that are relevant to your industry. Like social networking sites
and online groups, forums attract the kind of audience that could be interested in the
information you are offering.
Social Bookmarking Services – Like social networking sites, social bookmarking
services are all the rage today.  These services allow users to rate and recommend
topics that are popular with them.  They are a portal into the hottest and latest trends as
deemed by public opinion. 
 
Visit sites such as Technorati.com, Delicious, StumbleUpon.com, Reddit.com and
Digg.com to get blogging ideas.  While there are a great number of other social
bookmarking sites springing up onto the web quite regularly, those are the most
referred to by professional bloggers for research.
High Traffic Sites – Another fantastic source of blogging ideas can be found at high

traffic sites such as Alexa.com, Amazon.com, Ebay.com, Craigslist.org and
Wikipedia.org.  A wealth of ideas can be mined just from sifting through these sites’
categories.
Article Directories – Article directories offer you the option of re-printing the articles
of your choice on your blog.  This can come in handy if you’re having an off day but
need something to whet the appetite of your readers.  Even if you don’t intend to
publish any of those articles, use them as a source of ideas for writing your next post. 
Some of the more popular directories are EzineArticles.com, GoArticles.com and
ArticleCity.com.  These articles are free to re-print but, read the terms on these sites
on how to go about re-printing them. I don’t recommend doing this, but I do
recommend curating content from these sources, see the content curation section.
Some Other Sources – Another idea-generating method is to look out for what people
are searching for and decide if you could blog about these search terms. Visit popular
sites like Google Zeitgeist and MetaCrawler.com for this purpose. You can use
keywords tools like WordTracker.com.
 
Try searching for ideas using blog search engines as well. Try Technorati.com and
AllTop.com for potential ideas.
The next step is to create a folder on your desktop for ideas. Call it an idea
bank, call it resources or inspiration. Choose a name that will remind you the
purpose on the content inside. My folder is called Inspiration.
There’s also a brilliant online tool that will help you collate your inspiration
and populate an idea bank online. It’s called Evernote. In this section I’m
going to show you how to set up and use Evernote.

What’s Evernote got to do with my website?
Once your website is set up you’ll need to manage it and create a constant stream of
content to grow an audience. Evernote is an easy way to remember your daily to-do lists,
your memories or just your daily reminders.
Evernote allows you to store everything you want to remember in your account. It’s then
synced across all your devices, from your smartphone to computer to tablets. This makes
it easier to capture, browse edit or search your notes from anywhere. This means your time
is used more efficiently and you’re more productive.
When you are stuck for an idea Evernote is a great starting point. When you need to add
your sources to a post, then Evernote is a place to link them together so you don’t lose
them.
This guide serves as an overview and introduction to using Evernote the how to get your
account set up.
What is Evernote?
With Evernote you can create lists, reminders, images, web pages and much more. 
Evernote is a free application that allows you to capture all your ideas and experiences and
access them from anywhere.  You can make a note to remind you of something, record
audio or capture a video.
You can use it to stay more organized. Or design and manage all your projects. Use
Evernote to plan a trip. You can capture a moment you want to remember and easily find it
later.
Evernote Premium
Although the basic Evernote system is free, there is an option to upgrade to a premium
account for more storage space.  For a few dollars a month or a small annual fee, you can
get 1 GB of upload space each month. You can then store more notes, photos and files.
With the premium account, you can search smarter.  With the upgrade, searching inside
PDFs or other attached documents is easier. There is also the Related Notes feature that
allows you to see your previous relevant notes while you create or view the new ones.
Premium loads notes faster on your mobile devices. And with the PinLock you get peace
of mind with an added layer of protection on your mobile devices.

The language of Evernote:
Here are a few terms you need to know
Note:  A single item stored in Evernote.
Notebook: A container for notes, where your notes are stored.
Sync: This is the process of how your Evernote notes are kept up to date across all of
your devices, including computers, phones and the Web.
Account: This is simply the username and password you need so Evernote can identify
your notes and make them available to you anywhere.
Install Evernote
First you need to download the installation software. Open your web browser to the
Evernote web site, http://evernote.com/.  Evernote will detect the type of device you are
using. So if you have a Mac or a PC you will be installing the right software for you
device.
To download, click the “Get Evernote for Windows” button – or the dropdown arrow to
change the device.
For PC’s download the setup executable file. When the download finishes, double-
click the file to launch the setup program. Click finish when the setup is complete.
For Macs, click on the link to install.
To launch Evernote, click on the Evernote icon. 
Log in to your account if you have already registered by entering your username and
password. If you haven’t registered for an account, go to the “Get a free account now”
button.

This link opens a new window so you can put your information in and choose a username
and password.  Go ahead & click the Register button when you are done. Your account is
now created and you can immediately login.
Creating Your First Note
The most common form of content saved in Evernote is simple text. It can be as simple as
a note to yourself or a part of a web page or email you want to remember.  Here is how
you create your first note with this type of content.
At the top of the main Evernote page is a button labeled “New Note”. Click this.
Evernote creates the new note with the cursor in the body of that note. Title it with
whatever you like. Now you need to click anywhere in the main part of the note.  Go
ahead and begin typing here. You can change the style of the text font, increase or
decrease the size of the font or even change the color while working on your note.  There
are options for bold, italicize or underline the text as well.
When you finish, Evernote automatically saves and synchronizes the new note to Evernote
on the web. Your note can then be accessed from any device you have Evernote installed.
Understanding Evernote Sync
Evernote’s true power is in its synchronization ability. By synchronizing your notes to the
Evernote on the Web, you are able to create and find your stuff on any web browser,
mobile phone or any computer.
So basically, when you clip a recipe from the web on to your Mac, you can read it on your
iPhone when you go the grocery story to get ingredients. That same recipe can be accessed
from a friend’s Windows PC. Evernote on the web is continually updating all your devices
with the most current versions of your notes.
Evernote automatically synchronizes your information every few minutes. If you want
however, you can sync manually anytime by clicking the “Sync” button.

Reminders
Reminders let you keep track of your time-sensitive notes.
A reminder can be set for any note by clicking the Reminder icon on that note.  You can
also set a due date with the date picker.
Reminders will appear in your To-do list located at the top of your NoteList. You can sort
them, put them in order, and edit them and much more
.
That’s the basics of installing Evernote onto your devices. Within the Evernote website
you will find more information on using Evernote for different devices in the
Knowledgebase section. Evernote is the perfect way to get and stay organized using any
device anywhere you are.
Evernote is a great time saver, but it won’t do you any good if
it’s unorganized.
Notebooks are the most common way users organize notes. They can be used to separate
them by locations, purpose or categories.
Evernote gives you many ways to keep your notes organized, so that you can browse,
search and remember in the way that works best for you.
When you create notes and put them into notebooks, Evernote creates a default notebook
where all your notes are placed. You can add more notebooks and stacks of notebooks to
completely organize your life and business.
Creating a New Notebook
When you are ready to create a new notebook, click on Notebooks in the sidebar. This
brings up the Notebook List.

To create a new Notebook, click the “+ New Notebook” button. This creates an unnamed
Notebook in your list. Give it a title and press enter.
You can begin adding notes immediately or at any time.
Tip: Try not to create too many notebooks. The idea of Evernote is to help you get
organized, not to get overwhelmed.
Notebooks you might want to create: Business blogging ideas, Business or work, Bills,
blogging schedule, holidays and dates of interest of target audience, Daily or any interest
or business you are currently participating in or exploring.
Adding Notes to a Notebook
Click on the Notebook in the Notebook List you want to add notes to when you are ready
to begin.
Click on the +New Note button to open the note pad. Enter your information. It will
automatically be saved.
To Move a Note
Click on the Notes/All Notes in the sidebar. The Note list is displayed.
Click on the one you want to move. It will show up in the Note Editor.
In the Note editor, click on the notebook drop-down list in the upper-left corner. All of
your notebooks will show. Click on the one you want to move your note into. Evernote
automatically saves and syncs the change.
Rename a Notebook
Sometimes you need to rename your notebooks for some reason. This can be done by
selecting the one you want to change in the Notebook List. Right-click on to the notebook

name. Then click on rename. Enter the new name in the box that opens..
Delete a Notebook
You can delete a notebook. Just remember that all the notes within that notebook will be
moved to the Trash Notebook.
Click on the Notebook in the Notebook List. To delete it, control-click or right-click on it
to bring up the menu. Click on Delete Notebook. A confirmation box appears. Click delete
to remove the notebook.
Organize Your Notebooks
You can organize multiple notebooks by using Notebook Stacks.
Notebook Stacks are most often used for grouping similar topics or theme notebooks
together. For example, you could create a Stack called School then add Notebooks for
each child or each sport or other activity.
Notebook Stacks appear in your Notebook List as a notebook with a white banner with the
name of the stack and how many notebooks it contains.
To create a Notebook Stack, click on Notebooks in the sidebar. Drag one notebook onto
another notebook in the same category. A stack that has both notebooks is automatically
created. Give the stack a name.

Add to a notebook to a Notebook Stack
Adding a notebook to an already created Stack by dragging and dropping the selected
notebook to the Stack.
Delete a Notebook Stack
You can delete a Notebook Stack without deleting any of the notebooks or notes it has in
it.
Control-click or Right-click on the Notebook Stack you want to delete. Click on delete
from the menu. Click delete on the confirmation box.
Shortcuts
Shortcuts are another way to access the notes and notebooks you frequently use.
You can find shortcuts listed under the SHORTCUTS at the top of the sidebar. Shortcuts
can be created for notebooks, notes, Notebook Stacks and Tags.
Add a shortcut by dragging and dropping the notebook anywhere on your shortcuts
sidebar. Evernote allows you to have up to 250 shortcuts.  To create multiple shortcuts at a
time, hold the Shift key while clicking on the notebooks you want to select. Drag these
anywhere into the shortcuts sidebar.
You can delete a shortcut by clicking on it and dragging it out of the shortcuts sidebar.

Evernote Notebooks User Tips
Forward reference material form you email inbox to your notebooks using your
personalized Evernote account mailing address that can be found in your account info.
Add the “@” symbol in front of your emails that you want associated to current or active
projects.
Use the “@” in the front of your notebook name. This places the active notebooks at the
top of your list.
Keep your travel plans organized by keeping itineraries, contact information, reservations
and anything else need for your trip in a “Travel” notebook. Forward itineraries from you
inbox or take pictures and put into your notebook.
Evernote Notebooks are the main tool users use to organize their notes in Evernote. The
Evernote Notebook has features that let create a system of organization that works for you
and keeps your content ideas in a safe place.

Section 2
Welcome Challenger…
Your blog’s set up and you’re raring to go!  These daily challenges will push you out of
your comfort zone and help you become a stronger, more efficient blogger and set you up
to blog successfully.



9 reasons you should take part in a blogging challenge?
1.  Blogging can be a solitary activity at times. It can seem like you’re calling into a void,
and the only response is an echo. When you take part in a blogging challenge there’s
camaraderie; you make friends fast.
2.  You meet new people. Yep, you might comment a lot on the blogs in your own niche,
but what about outside of it? The best ideas and inspiration often come from other
niches and then adapted to your own. A blogging challenge is a great way to meet new
people in diverse niches.
3.  It’s a marathon and not a sprint. You complete blogging challenges while building up
your discipline and stamina. I call it exercising your writing muscle.
4.  When you blog for a set period of time you establish a solid writing routine.
5.  You get a good set of data to analyse. When you do a blogging challenge you work a
little bit harder on your blogging. This means you’ll start using keywords, an editorial
calendar and all the things you should be doing but don’t currently do
6.  You’ll increase traffic and you’ll grow subscribers, but as you can see traffic isn’t the
only great thing about a blogging challenge.
7.  You’ll uncover what you truly love when it comes to content creation and what you
don’t
8.  At the end of a blogging challenge you’ll have enough material for a book, a new lead
magnet or something else
9.  You’ll become smarter at marketing your blog posts and knowing what works for you
Who’s this blogging challenge not for?
If you sign up for everything, to every shiny thing out there then this isn’t for you.
If you have no intention of growing your writing muscle, if you prefer to do things
your way and are not open to learning other ways and from other people (not just me),
then you won’t like this at all.
If you can’t make your business work, and you’d like a distraction from the pressures
of life, then this really isn’t for you.
If you expect perfection. Perfection is an ideal not a must have. If you are caught in
the trap of perfection you’ll not enjoy this blogging challenge.
If you don’t like being accountable and if you don’t like sharing your successes as well
as what’s not worked, then this really isn’t for you.
If your blog posts are thinly disguised sales pitches then trust me when I say this will
not work for you at all, and not only that, unless you’re willing to shape up, we don’t
want you.
If you’re still here and you like the straight talking, then let’s get started, right now. You’ll
love it.

Day Zero: Welcome to the 30 day blogging challenge.
I love blogging. By the end of this challenge you will too.
Let’s talk rewards… there’s risk and reward associated with
everything you do, and blogging is no different. If you complete
all 30 days consecutively you’ll be rewarded with a weekly
badge to go on your website so the world knows you’re not a
quitter.
Other rewards include being found better in the search engines,
increased social proof and the ability to network with others
building their blog too. Some of the Challengers have doubled
and trebled their traffic in the first few days, another gained a
client on her 3rd post. Her first ever through blogging.
Housekeeping and what you need to know.
If you have questions please ask them in the Facebook group.
My inbox is a mess, and as much as I’d love to give you a
private answer, I just don’t have the time. 
If you’re struggling to find the time to write your blog posts
getting up a little earlier is the way to make sure it happens.
Click the links. Not all the daily challenges and encouragement

will be on my site. I’m blessed with blogging friends who will
host a day. If you don’t click the links you’ll miss out. You’ll
also miss out on your badges.
Join the Facebook accountability group.
When you’ve done your post for the day go in and post in in the
group. If you see others posted give those a “like” and a
comment to keep them encouraged.
Any questions? Ask in the Facebook group. If your inbox is
anything like mine, questions will be missed and you’ll feel
unloved. Ask in the group. Tag me in the group. And if you
know the answer to someone’s question then answer them.
Be prepared to comment.
Comments benefit you in many ways. I’m going to ask you to
comment on the challenges. When you comment you get leave a
link back to your website. This is a good thing.
People read a blog post and then look at the comments. And if
they like what you’ve said then they’ll click the link and visit
your website. 
Comments lead to traffic. They lead to people discovering you
and your blog.If you have a few minutes to spare, comment on
other people in the group.

By supporting each other you’ll find your tribe.


Day 1 of the 30 day blogging challenge.
Posting for 30 consecutive days is no easy thing to do… it’s really tough at times. So we
have to toughen up and prepare ourselves for writing 30 different posts.
On our first day we’re going to take a look at what we can write blog posts about and I’ve
also put together a list of blog post prompts you can use.
http://www.whatisablog.co.uk/what-do-i-blog-about/
Remember to leave a comment on the post (they’ll be extra gifts for regular commenters). 
Bonus tip not mentioned in the article - BCC any emails you write to clients and
prospects to yourself. Over a few weeks you’ll create a fantastic swipe file of questions
and answers that can be used to create blog posts with. Remember, you saw it here first :)


Day 2 of the 30 day business blogging challenge.
Yesterday we looked at what you can blog about, I shared 31 different blogging prompts
and showed you how they work.
Today we’re going to look at Keywords. 
Keywords help you get found by both your readers and the search engines. They are not
the only search engine ranking factors though, so don’t go keyword crazy.
http://www.sarkemedia.com/using-keywords/
Don’t panic if keywords are not coming to you naturally. I’ve been blogging since late
2006, and did my first 30 day challenge in 2007 and they still get me. 
We’re on day 2 of this 30 day challenge and by day 30 you’ll understand keywords a
whole lot better than you think.
You know if you start dreaming in keywords it’s time to pack it up ;), so don’t dwell on
them.
Today’s challenge - create a list of Keywords and Phrases you’d like to be known for. Use
one of those phrases in your blog post’s headline, again in the opening paragraph and in
the closing paragraph.
Post your completed blog post in the Facebook group.
Any questions, ask in the Facebook group. We’re here to help you get the most from your
blogging. There are no silly questions, just questions that we’ve not yet covered!
Bonus Tool
I use this tool here to source keywords. There’s a 30 day free trial and if you wish to buy
it, please wait for a few days as then the company will give you a 50% discount.


Day 3 of the 30 day business blogging challenge.
Yesterday we covered keywords and touched upon optimising the blog post in order to
get found.
To get the most benefit from writing, publishing and promoting you’ll need
to optimise your blog posts. If you’re on WordPress self-hosted you’ll like WordPress
SEO by Yoast. Here’s a tutorial on how to use it 
http://www.sarkemedia.com/wordpress-seo-optimization-tutorial/
If you’re not using self-hosted WordPress, why not? Don’t make your business look cheap
by trying to promote a premium service via a free site. A self-hosted WP is a terrific
credibility booster.
If you’re not on WordPress then you need to take a look at what you can do to boost your
SEO. 
1. Make sure you’re using the title tags
2. Complete any meta description areas
3. Make sure your post is able to be optimized for social
For today’s activity please optimize your post for search engines and human beings. 
When you’ve hit publish please post it up in the Facebook group and comment under the
post.
Any questions? Ask in the Facebook group. We’re here to help you get the most from your
blogging.


Day 4 of the 30 day business blogging challenge.
We’ve looked at what you can blog about and there’s a whole page of ideas for the 30
days.
Today we’re going to look managing the whole editorial process (managing the ideas into
blog posts).
Writing and publishing 30 blog posts consecutively is challenging, but you can actually
post 365 days of the year, multiple times per day, if you have an editorial calendar.
Here’s an editorial calendar checklist for you to get you motivated and on track:
http://www.sarkemedia.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/Checklist.pdf
And in today’s post is an editorial calendar template.
Check it out here:
http://dannybrown.me/2014/08/26/3-types-of-editorial-calendar-to-manage-your-business-
blog/
Please leave a comment and tell us what you use already or what you’re planning to use.
There’s a free Excel spreadsheet editorial calendar in the post for you to use as well.
Post your completed blog post, pop it in the Facebook group.
Any questions? Just ask in the Facebook group. We’re here to help you get the most from
your blogging. There are no silly questions.


Day 5 of the 30 day business blogging challenge.
Writing faster is the way to get more done. Sure, you can learn to type faster. I vary
between 40-50 words per minute which is a fraction of the speed I typed at 20 years ago.
Cue the violins.
With this in mind you’ll love today’s post as it’s about a writing technique that we were
taught in school and found no use for… until now.
Here’s today’s technique for better blogging.
Leave me a comment on the post and let me know if you’re using outlines already or if
you’ve got plans to.
Your outline is short, to the point and takes less than 10 minutes to create, yet can be used
over and over again. Would you feel robbed if I told you this email was based on an
outline that’s 4 years old? Of course not, the information is updated and fresh.
Every time I use the outline, it becomes a different piece of content on the same topic.
http://mycoachclass.co.uk/how-to-create-blog-posts-faster-using-outlines
Any questions, ask in the Facebook group. We’re here to help you get the most from your
blogging and encourage and support you.


Day 6 of the 30 day business blogging challenge.
We’re writing 30 blog posts and publishing them for 30 consecutive days. Well done, this
isn’t easy but the benefits are immense!
So exactly how much writing do you need to do?
That depends of course on the length of the blog post. How much is too much and how
much is too little?
If you think your blog post is too short, ask yourself what problem does it solve? If it
doesn’t solve a problem ask what message does it send? 
If it’s not sending the right message then you might find your blog post is the wrong
length!
http://www.sarkemedia.com/how-long-should-a-blog-post-be/
Remember you can also write in batches.
If you’re in the writing flow- carry on!- don’t just stop because you have today’s blog post
done - Write another. Write as many as you can until the creating muse has gone. You can
always add these blog posts to your calendar and schedule the posts.
If you know you’ve a busy weekend coming up, write and then schedule the post.
If you’ve created 5 or 6 short and pithy posts schedule them for the next 4 Mondays or
when they’ll work best in your editorial calendar.
You can work smarter when you batch, write, and schedule them.
Have you noticed what incredibly strong foundations your building for your blogging
activity?
Any questions, ask in the Facebook group. We’re here to help you get the most from your
blogging.


Day 7 of the 30 day business blogging challenge.
With any type of writing that’s is going to be published online you want to take the time to
come up with compelling headlines. A good headline will attract your website visitor’s
attention immediately, and this will entice your reader to read the entire article. 
When writing your headline or title do not use all capital letters in it and avoid using
punctuation. If you place a full stop or period at the end of your headline it will make the
reader want to stop reading. By eliminating this punctuation your reader is more likely to
continue reading your full article.
Examples of great titles are:• Titles that ask questions or provoke opinions• How to
titles• Step by Step titles• Titles which stir feelings in your reader
When writing content, for online purposes, you want to try and include keywords in your
titles. This will help boost your content within the search engines. 
Place yourself in your reader’s shoes and think of how you would search for this particular
information. Then try to include these termsinto your titles, headlines and sub titles.
Headlines & Your Heart’s Desire
http://www.sarkemedia.com/how-to-write-an-astonishing-headline-that-gets-clicked/
Goodies are at the bottom of this post so get on over there!
You’ve got 7 posts done in the last 7 days? Then get in the Facebook group and tag me for
your 7 consecutive day’s badge. I’m so proud of you.


Day 8 of the 30 day business blogging challenge.
Blog post promotion and the myth that’s known as free traffic.
The more visible you are, the more likely you are to be remembered. This is why Guy
Kawasaki tweets a link 4 times a day; it reaches readers in all time zones.
Tweeting more often about your own content can feel a bit icky at first. But not everyone
sees the tweet the first time, and there’s power in repetition, ask any toddler :)
That said, you shouldn’t promote your post everywhere. You should promote it where
your ideal clients are. If your perfect client is on LinkedIn, that’s where you should spend
the majority of your time promoting your post.
If she’s on Facebook… then promote there. 
Paid promotion. 
This isn’t for everyone, but if you want to reach a specific audience then consider paying
for the traffic.
Paid for traffic is the most laser-targeted traffic ever. 
Facebook ads enables you to narrow down your audience and promote it to fans of other
people’s pages. This is the reason why I don’t build a fan page. I just target the pages that
have my audience. You won’t hear me grousing (much) that my reach has dropped
because I can reach literally anyone within a few minutes and it costs me between $20 and
$80 a week.
Of course if you’re posting every day to grow your writing and blogging skills this
will become incredibly expensive, so you should only do it with your most popular
content. Make sure that content has a call to action that invites people to subscribe, you
want to make the most of your paid traffic.
Stumbleupon has a good advertising program for content, if your content is in the food or
fashion niche you’ll do incredibly well. Serious posts? Erm, not so well. But if it’s quirky,
for $25 you can generate a whole heap of traffic.
Twitter Ads.
Never tried them. And I don’t know anyone that has! That doesn’t mean they’re no good,
it just means that they’re not mainstream yet. If your ideal prospect is on Twitter then you
need to think about how you can use this.
LinkedIn Advertising
Expensive. Looking for potential clients with money to burn? You’ll find them advertising
on LinkedIn ;), again I don’t know any bloggers that use this method. It might be worth
looking into if your perfect client is on LinkedIn.
What about free traffic?

Well the biggest myth of free traffic is that it’s free. You’re paying for and free traffic with
a more powerful, finite commodity; time. You have options though, so that it doesn’t cost
you as much time:
1. Automate part it (tools like Hootsuite, Tweetadder and CoSchedule).
2. Get a VA to do it
3. Use things like the Stumbleupon URL shortner
4. Use syndication sites like http://atcontent.com/ (if you use a syndication site make sure
you have a call to action in every post)
There’s a lot of talk about cascades of traffic through SEO but as we’re open and honest
here, SEO is a slow burner. It takes time to build it up and get traffic from. It might be
free, but it’s still costing you time.
5.Triberr. 
Tribber is like a syndicate where a group of people share each other’s blog posts via
Twitter. A lot of people love it and network there like crazy. Some people hate it. Try it
and see what you think.
The hardest thing about blog post promotion?
What works today, might not work tomorrow and combinations of the above are what will
probably work best for you.
Here’s how I promote my blog posts.
http://birdsontheblog.co.uk/get-more-eyeballs-on-your-blog-posts/
Sarah
PS If you want to get really deep with blog post promotion then you’ll love
this http://www.sarkemedia.com/promotion


Day 9 of the 30 day business blogging challenge.
You’ve had a really busy 9 days. And a lot of you are digging in and getting your posts out
there. Well done. I’m so proud of you.
So let’s have a quick recap
You’ve visited What is a Blog on Day 1 and grabbed your blogging prompts. You’ve
visited Danny Brown and got an editorial calendar template. You’ve visited Paula Jones
and discovered outlining so you can create your blog posts faster… how about recapping
for your readers?
Do a link round up style post and share with them the posts of the last 7 days.  
1. Call it the Best of xxx week one. With xxx being the name of your blog. 
2. List the titles of the last week’s blog posts. 
3. Add a description of the item on the list and press publish.
4. Add your call to action “Never miss out on another blog post subscribe here”
5. Publish
More on a link posts here http://www.sarkemedia.com/creating-an-effective-link-post-
blogging/
A well thought out Link Post is powerful for networking and sucking in traffic. It also
makes your blog post a resource and these get bookmarked and send you more traffic.
Come and share your link post in the group.


Day 10 of the 30 day business blogging challenge.
Sit down and pull up a pew. We need to talk about us.
Many of the group are sharing their increase in traffic and we’ll also cover how to get the
most from your blog. So that means we need to talk about us.
No, not me and you. We’re good right? I keep on turning up in your inbox, you keep on
blogging and sharing in the FB group; we’re good, right?
Your about us page is a very popular page on your blog and you need to give it the once
over. Is it working for you as effectively as it could be?
http://www.sarkemedia.com/writing-about-us-pages/
Polish up your about page and share it with us in the group. Use this as a networking
opportunity and to get to know your fellow challengers better.


Day 11 of the 30 day business blogging challenge.
I love blogging. By the end of this challenge you will too.
Thank you all so much for the feedback:
You love that you can choose your own topics
You love that you’re discovering the “why” something works on your blog
You love visiting other brilliant bloggers and seeing their sites and their work
You love the surge in traffic
You don’t love the amount of time taken
I get that. You need to build a strong foundation for your blogging. You’re building up
your writing muscle and that takes time. I’m sure you already know it’s stronger than it
was on day zero.
There are options for speeding the writing aspect up:
Use the outlining method - it truly works - if it didn’t I wouldn’t do it. You can use the
outlines for video as well as text and we’ll cover repurposing in a few days.
Remember good enough is good enough. Perfect will suck up a huge amount of time.
Do your best and be done.
Outsource it (this can be time consuming to find the right person, but it’s worth it if
you don’t want to get up a fraction earlier).
Have you got feedback from your blogging activity?
Everyone’s an expert about what you should and shouldn’t be doing. There’s only one
person that matters when it comes to feedback and that’s your ideal customer.
If your ideal customer is loving it, then carry on. If they’re not tell us in the group and we
can brainstorm a solution.
Give some feedback to others in the group, tell them what they’re doing well and be
encouraging. People love encouragers.
Thinking about a post to write today? Why not share some feedback from your clients
with your audience. It’s not you saying it, so it’s not bragging. If you get really great
feedback you can turn it into a case study, and these are incredibly powerful for your blog.
http://www.sarkemedia.com/case-studies-for-your-blog/
Any questions, ask in the Facebook group. We’re here to help you get the most from your
blogging. There are no silly questions, just questions that we’ve not yet covered in these

emails.
Oh and tomorrow I’m going to share with you the reasons why you should never, ever
copy the “competition”.


Day 12 of the 30 day business blogging challenge.
I mentioned yesterday about why you shouldn’t bother copying the competition. Aside
from cooking up a batch of bad karma, you’re making the big assumption that your
competition have got it right, that their product and your product do the exact same thing
and, that you have the same audience.
There’s a guy called Jon McCulloch and one of his business books is called Grow Your
Business Fast. It’s a great book. I love it. In it Jon shares the story of how a businessman
regularly blows 10k on advertising. Not because advertising works in his industry
(because it doesn’t), but so his competition go out and blow their budget too. 
Yep, they blow their cold, hard cash on a method that doesn’t work.
If you were observing that company, you’d be thinking right now that advertising
is fabtastic and they’re getting great results from it. And you’d be very tempted to go out
and book up all the advertising you can afford. Which is exactly what the businessman
wants you to do: waste your money, so he can suck up the customers.
And I do it too. I know through my stats when someone scrapes the keyword data from
my site. If it’s a one-off I’ll ignore it. If it happens again in the same week, I’ll go on the
offensive and start rapidly blogging on a related topic. You’ll see me do a nice little
pirouette into Kindle books, or some other marketing topic. And I’ll deliberately do it to
throw out a false trail to keep the copy cats on the edge of their seat.
Don’t fall into the trap of copying someone else and doing what you think works for them.
When you are you, you will attract people who will like and love you.
Now, you’re going to read and see articles that will encourage you to copy someone else.
To “steal” someone else’s work and write it with your own voice. You really don’t need to
do that. 
You need to do this instead:
http://www.firepolemarketing.com/blog-content-strategy/
When you acknowledge your sources and your inspiration, you lift everyone involved. 
When you are your true, authentic self you’ll discover that people like you for who you
are, and not because you’ve re-written someone else’s content, used them as a muse and
then flung them away with the trash. 
A true artist is inspired and acknowledges the source. 
Why? Because they know it’s bad karma if they don’t, and they know that people trust
them even more when they do.
And ultimately it’s about trust. You need it with your readers. If you share flawed data
with your readers then you’ll be the one to take the rap for it, unless you’ve mentioned
your source.
When you credit people it’s also a great way of networking and connecting with them.

They may like and share that blog post too. I make a point of actively promoting any
content that mentions me. And if you search, you’ll find people that have mentioned
you too and you can share that :).


Day 13 of the 30 day business blogging challenge.
Can I tell you about the worst tuna sandwich in my life? It was at a Hilton hotel, and after
7 hours driving without a break, I fell into the restaurant. Well rolled, I was 8 months
pregnant at the time. It was “after-hours” and for a hotel they weren’t very forthcoming
with the food. I played the pregnancy card… and they made me a tuna sandwich.
The bread was an inch thick on each slice. I could smell it as they carried it to my table
and it looked and smelled sublime, and my tummy growled (or maybe it was the baby)
and I bit into that sandwich only to discover there’s no tuna in it.
Okay, to say no tuna was an exaggeration, there was possibly a tea spoon of tuna spread
over some butter scrapings, and that was my sandwich.
Hotel food isn’t cheap, and Hilton hotel food is quite expensive so to pay £15 for a tuna
sandwich that smelt like heaven, yet tasted like the bottom of a parrot’s birdcage, was
disappointing to say the least.
And quality is a lot like that tuna sandwich. On the surface it had all the makings of the
best tuna sandwich ever:-
I was hungry and receptive to the sandwich; it was just what I was looking for
Hilton is a big brand, they talk a lot about quality and the Hilton experience
I could smell the bread and my tummy and my brain we’re going into over drive
And here I am 19 years later telling you about the worst tuna sandwich in the world. 
There’s a lot of talk about quality content, and quality is a very subjective area. You see,
even the most grammatically correct blog post may fall short in the quality arena.  It can
be all bread and no filling.
When this happens you‘re disappointed, readers are disappointed and the thing is… a little
tuna is easy to add. The sandwich becomes edible.
Making your content better in quality can be done in a number of ways and over the next
few days we’re going to explore some of the options. Yes, you’re in the tuna sandwich
section of the blogging challenge now :)
http://www.sarkemedia.com/how-to-create-more-effective-content/
Let me know what you think and remember to leave comments so you build links back to
your site.


Day 14 of the Business Blogging 30 Day Challenge
Yesterday you got to hear all about the world’s worst tuna sandwich. I got quite a few
replies back about how Hilton have improved over the years :), so thank you for those.
We touched upon quality and how grammar is part of quality content. Notice I said part of
quality content. 
Quality consists of many components. Meaty filling, nice bread and a lovely
garnish… but what if the plate’s dirty? Eww. 
And that’s the thing about quality, it’s very subjective. If you hadn’t eaten for a week,not
even the Hubble telescope would be able to see the iota you care about that plate. You’d
eat the sandwich.
If English isn’t your first language, or you have Dyslexia, or grammar was never covered
in your English lessons (this happened in the UK in the 1980s), then you might need a
little help.
Grammarly is a great place to start and they have a free trial. You can run your last few
posts through Grammarly (and any up and coming ones), and catch any snafus.
I know not everyone uses WordPress so in the post there are tools that you can use with
your browser :). 
https://bobwp.com/wordpress-plugins-spelling-grammar
There’s no excuses ;)
PS My best blog post ever earned a contract with an international motor company worth
£2 million. Yeah, you read that correctly. The post had two typos and the grammar
would’ve given the nearest grammar police a heart attack. The right components, in the
right place at the right time will trump grammar any day of the week. I have the contract
to prove it.


Day 15 of the Business Blogging 30 day Challenge
Well the grammar police hated yesterday’s email. 
How dare I earn money and not be grammatically perfect *yawn*.
Three people unsubscribed as I clearly don’t know what I’m talking about. 
What I should’ve said was grammar is the most important part of a blog post. I should
have said it was more important than captivating headlines, more important than laying
your content out correctly and more important than any other aspect of your content.
I don’t believe that. But according to them, I should have said how
marvellous grammatically correct content is. Along with I should have
legitimised “stealing” other people’s content as there’s nothing really wrong with doing it,
right?
Quality is made up of many, many factors. Don’t get het up on one of the factors. 
But before I talk more about quality, I want to talk a little about the controversy….
http://www.bloggingwizard.com/blogging-controversy/
Did you see how I manoeuvred you into the controversial post with a little email
controversy? ;)


Day 16 Business Blogging 30 Day Challenge
Controversy? That was so yesterday!
Today, let’s talk about trust.
Trust is another quality indicator. You’ve visited a lot of sites the last 15 days. You’ve left
comments and you’ve seen how hard people are working on their blogging.
But you may have found some sites that you just didn’t feel right about. And you trusted
your intuition, and didn’t comment or share. 
Do you know why?
http://www.sarkemedia.com/build-trust-through-your-blog/
You need reassurance and one of the ways of getting that reassurance is to display your
social proof. Personally, I hate this. Truly, I do. But I have the testimonials and logos of
important places on the front of my website as they’re trust builders.  I’ve had them in the
sidebar, but I saw them everyday, and they mocked me:
“You need us, but you don’t like us”
“Oh look, here we are and you have to have us here!”
I moved them to the front of my website where I never, ever have to look at them,
however, I have rotating testimonials in the sidebar. I see a different one every day and
that’s cool.
Your task for today is to pop some social proof into a blog post. A testimonial from a
client, a place that’s listed you as awesome. You might need to ask permission if the
testimonial has come by email. 
And if you haven’t asked for any… Ask. You can blame it on me, I have big shoulders. 
Simply email a few existing clients and say “I have to write a blog post and have some
testimonials in it from clients. Would you mind giving me a few lines about how I’ve
helped you / saved you money / made you money. If I don’t have these in a blog post
Sarah Arrow will be sitting on my doorstep making even more unreasonable demands”. 
Feel free to paraphrase that however you like :)
Remember to share your post in the Facebook group. The group is an open group so feel
free to leave encouraging comments for the other participants too. Comments increase
your visibility :)
PS you’re over the half way mark now. You CAN do it. Just imagine how big your writing
muscle now is!
PPS Want to see one of my testimonials for this blogging
challenge? https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_cwSqo8lnh8 I’d love it if you would
share the video :)


Day 17 of the Business Blogging 30 Day Challenge
Images can make or break a post. With the steady increase of image sharing sites, you’re
missing a blog post promoting trick by not great images in your blog post.
Where do you get great images?
Well, let me tell you now, Google Images is not a sweetie jar to raid every time you need a
new pic. Images that you create and own are the best to have in your post as you’re not
violating anyone else’s copyright.
Let’s talk about copyright violation for the moment… You can have your photo taken by
someone and you do not own the copyright. You may be in the image, but you do not own
that image. You have to use it with permission, preferably written, so no one can argue.
If you take a photo of a celebrity, you own that image, not the celebrity. So it works in
your favour too.
So what do you do if you want topical images? You have three options:
1. Take your own photo
2. Buy an image
3. Use a site like http://photopin.com/
I have subscriptions to image sites and I buy image packs all of the time. The fines for
copyright violation start at £3,000 per image. And ignorance is no defense in the eyes of
the law. If you value yourbusiness then you need to consider where you need to invest in
your images.
Today’s post is about finding and using images: 
http://www.sarkemedia.com/choose-right-images-content/
This post contains 20 different places you can get Royalty Free images from.
Your task is to create an image using Canva and insert it into your blog post. Make your
call to action on your post “if you like this post please pin it to your xxx pinboard”.
Change xxx to the topic the blog post is about.
Which reminds me: calls to action. We’ll cover them in tomorrow’s email.
PS graphicstock run a 83% off deal which means you can download unlimited graphics
for a year for approx £60/$99. They have a 7 day trial you might want to check out to see
if the images suit you. This is the best budget option that I can find.


Day 18 Business Blogging 30 Day Challenge
The first time I gave my dog a mustard sandwich I was cringing inside. I’d been reassured
that I wouldn’t hurt her, and that she’d learn her lesson and all would be good. But I still
didn’t want her to have it.
I made the sandwich and then I popped it on the empty kitchen counter. I didn’t have to
wait long, within minutes, my dog was up the counter stealing the mustard sandwich. And
she ate it in two bites. Maybe even one and half bites, it was so quickly eaten I’m not
entirely convinced I didn’t imagine it.
Well, it wasn’t enough to teach my dog not to steal food. I’ve come to terms with the fact
that as she’s half Labrador that means her tummy is only marginally denser than a black
hole, and sucks everything into it.
I’ve tried everything to stop her stealing, well, everything except electrifying the food,
that’s just a step too far.
No one likes someone who steals.
The thief feels guilty; like a fraud. And the victim? Well, they feel a whole range of
emotions. 
You’ll see a lot of blogger’s talk about legally stealing anything from Keywords to
Inspiration. Oh please! It’s still stealing and when you do this you have to be sure of many
things, least of all that you’re stealing something that works!
What if you riffed instead?
Not only is it great Karma, you’ll make a completely new piece of content instead. 
http://www.firepolemarketing.com/blog-content-strategy/
Go take a look at the post, and then create your own riff. If you’ve been active in the
Facebook group, find someone whose content has inspired you and then write a little
about what they do and how it relates to you, link to them, add an extract and then close
the post.
If someone links to you, go and share the post with your audience. 
If you do this, you’ve not only riffed off of someone else’s content, you’ll have increased
your reach, and that’s something stealing never does.


http://www.sarkemedia.com/calls-to-action-for-your-
content/Each type of blog post requires a different call to
action. 
The very least you should ask for in your call to action is a
social share. 
If a call to action feels too much like selling, then definitely ask
for the social share.
If you’re struggling with calls to action post up in the Facebook
group and if we get 10 people interested then we’ll do a quick
webinar in 30 minutes (no fluff, no sales pitches, all content) one
evening. Just let me know (it’s that important to
get these right).A good call to action will earn you more readers,
subscribers and cash. However the wrong call to action will
leave you feeling like the guy in photo above.Your challenge for
today is to edit your existing content and improve your calls to
action. Share with the Facebook group your very best call to
action :)I’ve procrastinated about this email, it’s one that I should
have written days ago, but for some reason I got into a funk
Day 18 Business Blogging 30 Day Challenge
 

about it, and in a few emails time we’ll look at overcoming
blogger’s block, as it will hit all of us at some point.


Day 20 Business Blogging 30 Day Challenge
Not got time to post? I totally get that, here we are on day 20 and your blog will be
gaining momentum. Traffic will be growing, and community will slowly be taking shape
around it.
And you’re terrified about taking your foot off of the accelerator, as you don’t want to lose
what you’ve gained already and you don’t have the budget to hire in a ghost blogger….
What can you do?
Meet Content CurationContent Curation isn’t too dissimilar to what we covered in the
blog post round up email, nearly two weeks ago.There are two steps in the process of
content curation. 
The first is to find great content that your audience will love. You can do that through
feeds, alerts and other tools. 
The second step is to present the content. There are many different places where you can
share content with your readers.
You can find more on content curation best practice
here: http://www.sarkemedia.com/content-curation-7-best-practice-tips/
1. Your BlogCurating content on your blog expands your audience, gives it SEO power,
and helps you keep posting fresh content when you’re low on ideas. When you’ve been
doing a blog for a while, it’s easy to run out of gas. 
Curating content for your blog helps you create original posts that your audience is
interested in. One advantage is that you don’t have to be an expert on a topic to find
articles on that topic and comment on them.2. Facebook Fan PagesFacebook Fan Pages
offer an even more “social” place to publish curated content. But they also offer up
sources of content for you to include in your curated post.3. InfographicsInfographics are
really nothing more than curated content presented in a graphic form. You take content
from various sources and create a graphic that presents this content to your readers so that
they can take it in at a glance. Infographics are especially good for taking complex ideas
and breaking them down into a more easily digestible form. A quick search for your topic
and the word “infographic” will give you list of infographics you can “legally” republish
on your blog. Remember to link to the source of the infographic.4. Social Curating
SitesSites like List.ly and Pinterest are social media networks designed for
curating content. These are wonderful because they allow you to find and publish content
in one place, as well as interact with other users. Look for sites that are loaded with
features that help you customize your content curation.No matter where you publish,
always remember to add something of your own to the curated content. Just sharing a link
on Twitter isn’t content curation; neither is copying and pasting sections of someone else’s
article to your blog, even if you give them attribution. 
Try using your curated content as the basis for explaining your opinions, giving insights
on a new topic, or exploring the opinions of others.

Your challenge today is to curate a post, time yourself and see how fast it is.
PS If you picked up this software several emails ago, you’ll be able to do this challenge
in less than 10 minutes


Day 21 Business Blogging 30 Day Challenge
Put the kettle on, and sit back with a cuppa. Today’s email is one packed with useful
information, and right at the end of the email you’ll find out how to get a fr*e gift for
completing today’s challenge.
Yesterday I mentioned infographics as a way to curate content and have something to post
when you haven’t much time. And there was a flurry of questions about infographics, so
let’s unpack infographics and how they can work for you as a blogger.
When you create an infographic it’s a powerful tool to send you back traffic. It will get
shared on Pinterest (one of mine has been repinned over 10,000 times), curated by other
bloggers and generate you inbound links, what’s not to love?
Let’s be honest here and admit that most people are not talented when it comes to graphic
design. It’s a specialized field that requires a great degree of talent and
practice. Infographics utilize elements of graphic design so if you’re creating one from
scratch, without the use of templates or software, you’d probably need to be highly skilled.
Yet, there are templates and software products that you can use which eliminate the need
for a graphic designer. In fact, many of these step by step products and templates are
created by highly skilled graphic designers. All you need to do is plan your infographicand
follow the wizard tool for your chosen software. 
If you can plan your information and follow directions, you can easily
create infographics using free tools online. That’s where we’ll begin. 
Let’s take a look at the seven most popular free online infographicstools.
We’ll break down the pros and cons of each product and highlight the features.
. 
Part 1 – Top Free Infographic Creation Tools There are dozens of
great infographic creation tools. The functions and features vary from tool to tool. For
example, some infographictools provide you with templates while others let you create
your graphic from scratch. Some tools are focused on a single functionwhile others are
broader in nature. The following is a list of the top free infographic creation tools as well
as a breakdown of the pros and cons for each tool. 1.
Visual.lySite: www.visual.ly Visual.ly is a fantastic tool that allows you to accomplish
many tasks. Using their directory you can share your infographic. You can also use the site
to find, and embed, other relevant infographics onto your blog or social media page. 
Additionally, you can use Visual.ly to create your own infographics. It takes less than
three minutes to accomplish using their handy tool. Additionally, using the creation tool is
about as easy as clicking a button. 

All you have to do is:- 1 Register at Visual.ly (registration is free).- 2 Click on Create, or
visit http://create.visual.ly/, and begin creating your infographic. There are only a handful
of infographicsthat you can choose from and each of them relates to your social media
interactions and reputation. That’s the downside of Visual.ly; it’s limited to information
that they can automatically find and calculate using their applications. 
There are presently about 15 different types of infographics you can create. They range
from the Life of a Hashtag to an exploration of your Facebook Brand page. You simply
enter the details for your social media site, allow Visual.ly access to your information and
let it create the graphic for you. It takes less than 60 seconds to create your graphic when
you can then download and/or embed. 
The Pros – Visual.ly is a quick and easy tool to use and it provides a number of other
useful functions including the ability to embed other relevant infographics. It’s also a good
research tool to identify what makes a good infographic. 
You also have the ability to sign up for a free infographic template, you can explore the
marketplace to find ideas or use the system to get matched with a graphic designer. 
The Cons – As far as free tools go, you can only create a narrow range
of infographic topics and they’re limited to your website or social media presence.
2. Piktochart Site: http://piktochart.com With Piktochart, you get to create an innovative
Infographic using a combination of different types of visualizations which include:
themes, icons, vectors, images and a chart exporter. You’ll enjoy a broad range of color
schemes, shapes, and fonts. It’s a super easy tool to use with a shallow learning curve. If
you can click, drag, and drop, then you can create an infographic with Piktochart. 
Drag-and-drop and click your way through color schemes, shapes and fonts. Once your
image has been created you can then export or embed the infographic to your website. 
 Piktochart has more than 300,000 users and more than 100 included themes. You’ll likely
be able to find several themes that are relevant to your infographic goals and to your
niche. The Pros – Piktochart is easy to use and there are more than 100 themes to choose
from.
The Cons – It’s only free for the first month. After that, it’s $29 a month, although you
may find that the results you get frominfographics make $29 look like a fantastic
investment.
3. Infogr.amSite: http://infogr.amInfogr.am is free, and it’s one of the most popular free
online tools available. It’s been used to create more than 800,000 infographics.There are a
wide variety of options with Infogr.am including:• The ability to make more than 30
different types of charts.• The ability to download files in PNG or PDF format. • The
ability to publish your infographic online, including the ability to embed it, which makes it
sharable. • You can also password protect your data and create a private link.The Pros –
It’s a quick and easy tool to create visually friendlyinfographics and charts. It’s free and
the developers are actively working to add features and functionality.The Cons – It’s still

limited when it comes to adding icons and shapes to your infographic. The templates are
also a bit limited. 4. Google Chart
ToolsSite: https://developers.google.com/chart/ Google Chart Tools is powerful, simple to
use, and like all Google Applications, it’s free. You can choose from a variety of charts
which you can then customize and configure to display the information in a cohesive and
visually pleasing way. 
Additionally, because it’s Google your data is gathered in real time and Google
Developers are always on the job and working to improve their applications. 
The Pros – It’s free and there are a seemingly infinite number of charts and customizable
options. Google makes the interface intuitive and easy to add to your website or blog.
The Cons – It’s limited to charts. Not all infographics are charts; many are simply a varied
collection of images and text that flow seamlessly together. 5. Wordle
Site: http://www.wordle.net/ Be careful with Wordle, it’s addictive. You may find yourself
creating dozens of these fun word clouds. A word cloud is a visually appealing collection
of words. Ideally, you’d choose words related to your business like “Innovator,” and then
let Wordle get to work. You provide the text and choose a theme, and then Wordle creates
an automatically generated word cloud. 
You can then customize the image by choosing different fonts, layouts, and color schemes.
You can then save the image to the Wordle gallery, share, and post on your
blog. Wordle is free and it takes less than thirty seconds to create an image. 
The Pros – You can create an infographic in about thirty seconds. It’s super easy to do and
to embed onto your website or blog.The Cons – It’s limited to Word Clouds. 6.
PixlrSite: http://pixlr.com/ Pixlr is an online photo editor. You can upload images from
your computer, from the Internet, or from an image library. It works like many other photo
editors. You can add text, you can also use the Pixlr-o-matic to take photos of yourself
with your computer’s webcam and to add graphic elements to that photo.
The Pros – A simple editor that’s free and easy to use. You can add a quote to a photo in a
matter of seconds and have an image that’s ready to Pin, post, and share. 
The Cons – It’s a photo editor, which means that it has a learning curve. Adding text to a
photo is one thing, but creating a full scaleinfographic is another. It may take some time to
become a pro with this tool. 7. Easel.lySite: http://www.easel.ly/This free web-
based infographic tool offers you a dozen free templates which they call “vhemes” or
visual themes. Each vheme is customizable. You can create an infographic using their
collection of shapes, arrows and lines, fonts, and colors. 
And unlike many free online infographic tools, Easel.ly lets you upload your own
component graphics and position them onto your infographic. This tool is one of the most
comprehensive and easy to use infographic tools available. It uses a simple drag and drop
process. However, it’s a drag and drop process that you guide, and there isn’t a wizard tool
to walk you through the steps.
The Pros – Easel.ly is easy to use. What’s easier than drag and drop?The Cons –

Easel.ly is currently in beta. 
So there we have it! 5 good tools to create infographics.
These are not quick and easy to create, but have a go and see what you come up with. 
If you create your own infographic, please tag me as I have an extra special reward for
you - a copy of my Zero to Infographics guide currently selling for £7.99, as your reward.
Remember, it’s your own infographic with your branding / name and information on it.
PS It’s not as hard as you might think, you can buy and edit Infographic template with
some very user friendly software. Here’s where I get mine - Infographic Templates


Day 22 Business Blogging 30 Day Challenge
How To Generate Traffic Using Linky PartyA very simple, free but effective means of
increasing your blog traffic and creating more backlinks is through a linky party. 
You can find linky parties through hashtags like 
#linky
#linkyparty
#linkup
Or searching your niche + Linky via Google.
What is a linkupWhether you call it a “linky tool”, a “linky”, a blog party, a grid or a
blog hop, the linkup is a very efficient way to connect with your readers. It is an active
social blogging event that brings bloggers together. The way linkups work allows you, the
blogger that runs thelinkup, to create a different kind of relationship with your
readers.What usually happens is that the blog reader acts as a content consumer. They
visit, they read and leave. There are some occasions when they may leave a comment here
and there but that is all. As soon as the blog post is read, it is discarded and the reader just
waits passively for your next post to repeat the process.What needs to be done is to engage
the reader and make them feel this is their blog too; that there is something they own in
this blog post. This will turn them into a more loyal, active reader and a contributor to
your blogging success. This is where the linkup comes in:How it worksThe InLinkz
linkup tool will let you create a widget within your blog post, that allows your readers to
add their own links to your linkup. This produces a colorful gallery that is built by your
readers with their own posts:- See more at: http://blog.inlinkz.com/how-to-throw-a-
successful-blog-party/#sthash.xLDTMiFh.dpuf
This isn’t one of my posts, but it will show you everything you need to know about link
parties, and how to have one on your blog to bring you traffic.
This is something that will bring you a lot of traffic if you do them on a monthly / weekly
basis. Yes, they take time, but you will reap the rewards!
Take a step into the linky world for increased traffic.
I’ve started to run a linky on Tuesday for business tips. If you have a post with tips in,
please stop by and submit your link http://www.sarkemedia.com/category/linky/


Day 23 Business Blogging 30 Day Challenge
Blogger’s block… If you ask me, it’s worse than writer’s block.
Time has strengthened my resistance to it, and I can slay the dragon 99 times
out of every 100 attempts, but there’s still the one time it gets past my
discipline, past my strategies and leaves me lost for words.
One of the reasons I prefer to batch write my content is so that I can power
through blogger’s block and still have a steady, consistent stream of content. 
So, let’s look at how you can power through blogger’s block.
1. Stop Writing. The brain can be really contrary at times and when you don’t
want to do something and think about something else, then the words will
magically appear in your mind.
2. Use your editorial calendar. There’s a reason why the first email in this
series is blogging prompts and the 4th one in the series is the editorial
calendar. These powerful tools help keep you on track.
3. Stop researching. Research can be a form of procrastination. So stop it. Go
and share mindless memes on Facebook for 20 minutes, you’ll soon be able to
create the content that you want :)
4. Use your outlines. If you recall from our first week I share about outlining
your posts. These outlines can become video scripts, ideas for curated posts
and the base for audio posts. When you outline you enable yourself to create
stronger content, faster.
5. Read something that’s not work / blogging related. Read something for fun.
There’s a magazine called Take a Break here, I use that. 5 minutes of reading
how “my sister ran off with my best friend’s dog and now they’re happy and
I’m getting paid to tell you about it” and I’m all raring to go again. Its poles
apart from my usual read and it kick starts me writing (and no, you’ll never

see a post from me titled “10 things I learned when my sister ran off with my
best friend’s dog” although I can only imagine how many clicks that headline
would get).
I’m pretty sure you have your own techniques for overcoming a block in your
business. 
Your challenge today is to write about how you overcome blocks in your
niche. Remember to post up in the Facebook group so we can like, share and
comment.


Day 24 Business Blogging 30 Day Challenge
You’ve achieved so much in the challenge so far:
Optimised your posts
Tailored your headlines
Learned to riff not steal
Curated, and created a weekly round-up
Discovered why case studies are essential for your business blog
Revamped your about page
In today’s email we’re going to look at another thing you need to consider…
Are you mobile responsive?
Does your site look good on a mobile device, including a tablet and a smartphone?
As well as looking good, you need to take a look at the sharing buttons - are they mobile
responsive too? Do they even work on a mobile device?
And the sliders and headers? How do they all look on a mobile?
Now try and leave a comment from a mobile device on your website. Does your
commenting system work on mobile?
Given that 87% of social sites are now accessed via a mobile device it won’t be long
before websites that aren’t mobile responsive, well… they’re going to be in a lot of
trouble.
The plus side of a mobile responsive site is how much better it does in local searches.
Today’s task (aside from finding out if people on mobile devices can read you) is
to optimise a blog post for local search. This will mean using your location as a keyword.
Post it in the group when you’ve done it :)


Day 25 Business Blogging 30 Day Challenge
Did you know you’re now 5/6th of the way through the challenge? Well done for sticking
with it, for getting back up when you‘ve fell over and getting your content out there.
A few emails back we looked at your about page and gave it a bit of a revamp. Today
we’ll put your contact page under the microscope.
Are you contactable?
Today we visit Eunice Flynn, you may have seen her in the group :)
http://www.euniceflynn.co.uk/contactable/
Why should you leave a comment here? Well, everyone gets these emails, they hop on
over to the post and they read the advice and then they look at the comments. Some smart
people, and I know that’s you, will leave a comment and be seen by all the people that
come afterwards. 
Comments are a powerful way of increasing your visibility, which is why I actively
encourage you to comment on posts and comment in the Facebook group. And in a few
days’ time we’ll look at comments in a bit more detail.
Check the post out and then share your contact page in the group
PS You should have 3 badges by now as well. A 7 day, a 14 day and a 21 day badge. Well
done on getting this far, and if things haven’t quite gone as you’ve planned, get back up,
dust yourself off and start again.


Day 26 Business Blogging 30 Day Challenge
The power of comments.
You may have noticed that throughout this 30 day blogging challenge I’ve encouraged you
to comment on the blog posts, on other people’s blog posts and in the Facebook group.
Why?
http://botanicallinguist.com/?p=1216
Go and leave your comments on the post
PS When people wonder why they don’t get comments on their blog, they need to
remember they need to give them out first!
You can check out Comment Luv and see if it will grow your comments and add value to
your blog here


Day 27 Business Blogging 30 Day Challenge
A list post is one of those posts that you need have on your blog. It’s a post that’s an
ordered list of things that are really useful to your reader. As a writer they’re usually fast
to write as they have an easy outline or structure to follow.
In this list post I’m going to share with you the 5 secrets that will take your list post from
good to great so that you get the traffic and the traction you want. I’ll take it for granted
that you know how to write a list post, you just want to give it some extra polish to make it
really awesome.
http://www.sarkemedia.com/great-list-post/
Want to create an epic list post? Then check out this mini-course on how to put together an
attention grabbing list post. http://www.sarkemedia.com/epic-list-post-success/


Day 28 Business Blogging 30 Day Challenge
It’s day 28, can you believe you’ve nearly done it!
Let’s discuss selling on your blog…
Some bloggers grab their readers by the throat and shout their promotional message into
their faces. Yes it’s a tried and tested technique for astonishing headlines that get clicked,
but it can be painful to read if we are not the intended audience. This is day three of the
blogging income booster series, and we’re covering selling on your blog.
Others (like me) focus on building a relationship where they can make relevant offers,
indirectly, as part of the relationship.
http://www.sarkemedia.com/selling-on-your-blog/
Leave me a comment and let me know your approach


Day 29 Business Blogging 30 Day Challenge
Day 29 and I get to use the word penultimate for the first time in my life ;), tomorrow I
may get to use “zenith” in the title.
Whilst chatting with a coaching client the other day, the topic of blog post conversion
came up. She felt that her posts should be converting better and despite the wisdom and
advice I was sharing, she felt there had to be a magic plugin that would make her blog
posts convert into more sales.
There is no magic plugin, it’s down to you. It’s down to what you write. It’s down to what
information you share, the words that you use.
You’ve got 29 blog posts posted consecutively, or as near as possible. It’s time to look at
conversion
http://www.sarkemedia.com/3-reasons-why-your-blog-posts-are-not-converting-blogging/


Day 30 Business Blogging 30 Day Challenge
Woo-hoo! You made it.
But it’s not over yet. Nope, we still have today’s post. If you haven’t got something lined
up already, will you review this 30 day challenge?
Reviews are not only great for building trust, but they also attract in other items for
review. If you’re blogging for business reviewing business tool and business books make
you a go-to resource, even if the content is written by someone else.
I frequently review other blogger’s books and tools, there’s plenty enough work for all of
us (I have an abundant mindset) and one day they might review something for me.
http://www.sarkemedia.com/product-reviews-that-are-remarkable/
When you write your review, remember to back it up with facts and stats, quote some
experts (me?) and then tag me in the group so that I can share the post.
When I get 10 reviews, I’ll create a list post about them and share them on my blog,
sending traffic right back at you! What more can you ask?
As you’re reading the Kindle version would you leave me a review? Pick your favourite
section of the book and write about that, and then post it to Amazon.
Thank you. It means a lot to me.
PS It seems that I can’t work the word “zenith” into this email after all *sob*.
PPS what happens now?
In the next few days I’m going to email you the details of two different email courses
one is about traffic and the other is about conversion. Be ready for that email when it
comes in, go over your stats and work out which one you need. You won’t get these emails
unless you subscribe for the challenge itself, so message me if you’d like to see them –
sarah@sarkemedia.com and ask me to add you in at day 30.
I’ll also email you more blogging tips, about twice a week, again if you’re not subscribed
you’re going to miss out on these too. Feel free to continue to post your content in the
group and like and comment, it increases your visibility tremendously.
PPPS
I hope you feel that you’ve got great value from this 30 day blogging challenge, and I’d
love for you to share your success stories with me. A blog coach is as only as great as the
results she gets 


