So this, thank you very much Fedor, actually Fedor did not mention that he wrote the index
for one of the books based on the podcast, or at least one of them, maybe more than one
of them, and we know each other for a long time, so it's great to be here at his invitation.
This indeed is going to be a presentation of some of the work I did in this ERC project,
especially together with one of the then postdocs who's now at Fordham University named Blyosoma,
and it's about a philosopher theologian named Fahradin Arasi, who lived in the 12th, just
barely into the 13th century, and what he thought about animals.
The payoff of the talk is that he thought that animals can be rational or intelligent,
depending on how you want to translate the key term, which is a very surprising thing
for someone to have thought in the 12th century.
Just think about the fact that in the Aristotelian tradition, it's very common to just define
human as rational animal, implying that all the other animals are non-rational.
That's maybe a definition they just kind of throw around without thinking about it very
much, but it is also something that they seem to be committed to.
In this talk, I'm going to present that idea, the sort of orthodox view, that only humans
are rational, why they might have thought this, and then I'm going to talk a little
bit about a philosopher who's the immediate context for understanding Fahradin's position,
who's the most important philosopher of the Islamic tradition named Ibn Sina, maybe more
famous under the name of Avicenna, and the reason I need to talk about him is that it's
really to him that Fahradin is responding when he makes this argument that animals can
also be rational.
But first, let's start with the conventional, or orthodox view, and of course we have to
start with Aristotle as so often.
Aristotle has a lot to say about animals.
In fact, one of the kind of mysterious things about ancient philosophy is that Aristotle
writes this vast corpus of works on zoology, so we've got the parts of animals on the generation
of animals, on the motion of animals, history of animals, and unlike other works of his
on logic, on physics, on the soul, on metaphysics, on ethics, these works don't receive any commentaries
in late antiquity.
In fact, there's no Greek commentary on any of his zoological works until the Byzantine
period when a group of commentators who are gathered around a queen, or at least princess
named Anna Komnena, decide to write commentaries on all the texts by Aristotle that haven't
already been commented on in antiquity.
So this is a kind of underappreciated feature of Aristotle's corpus in antiquity.
In the medieval period it gets some attention in Latin, especially from Albert the Great,
the teacher of Aquinas.
So he writes about zoology, he also writes about botany, he was a very intrepid natural
philosopher, did things like repelling down cliffs to look at nests of birds.
Very cool.
They don't call him Albert the Great for nothing.
But it's also true that the zoological works are quite valued in the Arabic tradition.
So they were translated into Arabic, they were translated as a single work, just called
a hayawan, so animals, that's just one big text.
And they were known to people like Ibn Sina, Ibn Rushd and so on, Ibn Sina actually writes
a work of his own on animals that's kind of based on it.
So Aristotle's absolutely a fundamental source of information about animals.
And the information is often quite detailed.
So the anatomy of animals, the way that their embryos look, the way that they move, like
the difference between flying animals, four footed animals, two footed animals, what do
they eat, where do they live, and so on.
History of animals also has some information in it, which is a little bit fanciful, like
animals healing themselves by deliberately eating certain herbs or things like that.
But by and large, Aristotle's observations of animals are very impressive.
He himself did dissections of animals, often of marine life, and he described many, many
animals and animal structures for the first time.
So the dude is really into animals.
Okay, that's what I'm trying to communicate to you here.
And in fact, I would say it's really amongst his most amazing achievements is his empirical
work on the animal world.
Yet, in some sense, he rates animals kind of low in another respect, namely that he doesn't
really ascribe to animals very high cognitive powers.
In particular, he draws a really kind of rigorous divide between humans on the one hand who
have the capacity for reasoning and what he calls a noose, which means intellect.
So we've got humans on the one hand, and we've got animals on the other hand who only have
animal souls and are capable of sensation and motion.
So in other words, they can move around.
That differentiates them from plants, because plants can only engage in the powers of the
vegetative soul.
In other words, the plant soul.
So that's kind of tautologist.
But what that would mean is the ability to reproduce and the ability to engage in nutrition.
So plants can take in food and water.
They can make more plants.
They can reproduce.
Animals can do those things.
They can also perceive.
They can also move around.
But only humans can think rationally.
That's something that we share in common with God, which is not an insignificant fact.
So there's something divine about humans.
At the end of the ethics, Aristotle says that the life of philosophy is almost more than
human, because it allows us to partake in divinity.
So even for all that he has a lot to say about animals and for all that he was extremely
interested in them, he still draws this very hard and fast divide between non-human animals
on the one hand and humans on the other hand.
Something else that we're going to see is going to be important is that he says that
the mind, the human mind, does not have a bodily organ through which it is exercised.
So he does not think that you're thinking with your heart, well, he doesn't think you're
thinking with your brain, because he doesn't think the brain does very much.
He thinks it's a kind of cooling element in your body.
But also he doesn't think you're thinking with your heart, even though your sensation
and some of your other cognitive powers are seated in the heart, like probably your imagination
is seated in the heart, but not your mind.
Also your intellect, noose, is exercised without any bodily organ.
And later philosophers, and we're going to see this in Sinai, later philosophers thought
that this is a sign that Aristotle would believe that you can survive the death of your body,
because if you don't need a bodily organ to think, then why wouldn't you be able to keep
thinking after you die?
Now here's a question that people, I think, don't ask themselves enough.
Why in the world would Aristotle have thought this?
Why would he think that animals can't think, or can't engage in reason or intellect?
After all, animals do all kinds of problem-solving.
They build amazing things like webs and nests.
We're going to see later on that this is important for Fahddin, they even apparently
can do geometry, think about beehives, perfect hexagons that tessellate, I wouldn't be able
to build something like that.
So animals do all kinds of amazing things.
And if there's anyone in the entire ancient world who's extremely aware of the amazing
things that animals do, it's Aristotle, as I just said, due to superintent animals.
So why does he think that animals fall not just below humans in this respect, but why
does he see this very striking difference between animals and humans?
Well there's maybe two reasons.
One is that animals are not capable of language.
So he may have a very strong connection in his mind between rational thinking and language,
especially if you think about the Greek words involved here.
So the word for language is logos, and that's also the word for reason, or the word rational
is logike.
So there's a very strong drive, even through the Greek language itself, to associate reasoning
with language.
That's one thing.
Another thing is that he may have quite a narrow understanding of what intellect or reasoning
actually involves.
If you think that what it means to engage in intellect or reasoning is something like
to engage in abstract thinking about general features of the universe, and that does seem
to be what he thinks is a long story, what he thinks intellect is, so we don't have time
to get into.
We can talk about that in the Q&A if you want.
But if it's something like that, abstract thinking about general features of the universe,
then it's actually quite plausible to say that animals don't do that.
Basically animals don't do philosophy.
So that's why we should say they don't engage in reasoning.
Of course most humans don't engage in philosophy either.
So there's us.
So the people in this room are better than animals.
Whether everyone else outside the room is, I mean it's a university, but there may be
this kind of elitist attitude that all of the non-scientists, non-philosophers are kind
of like cows.
And this is something you see again and again actually in the later history of philosophy.
For example, Ibn Rushd or Averwes, the great medieval Muslim commentator on Aristotle,
says at one point that most humans are human in name only because they don't do philosophy.
And this actually is not an unimportant, I mean it's kind of funny, but it's also got
a very dark side.
So when they discovered the Americas, they were like, well these people don't do philosophy,
so we can basically treat them as if they were herd animals.
So this is not unimportant, this feature of Aristotelianism.
So that's Aristotle's position.
We don't need to put the blame for all of that on Aristotle, but he sort of kicks off
this way of thinking about humans and animals.
And for the most part other ancient philosophers agree.
So in particular the Stoics agree, and the Platonists maybe agree sometimes.
So there are exceptions, and they come mostly in the Platonic tradition.
In particular there's a second century philosopher who's a Platonist named Plutarch, and a third
fourth century philosopher named Porphyry, who is the student of Plotinus, the founder
of Neoplatonism, if that means anything to you.
Porphyry wrote a work using some material from Plutarch in which he argues explicitly
that animals can use language, and he gives a whole bunch of reasons to think that they
can use language, as he says, we don't understand them, but we don't understand people from
Skithia either, but we don't say that they're not rational.
So when the animals seem to be communicating with each other, so probably that just speaking
a language we can't understand, he also gives examples of animals that can respond to linguistic
commands.
Because he had a pet bird who could do this, and what he says is, so attacking this link
between reasoning and language in the Stoics rather than Aristotle, he says that the Stoics
are wrong to deny intelligence to animals on the basis that they can't talk, because
in fact they probably can talk, at least some of them can talk.
But Plutarch and Porphyry, it's interesting as they aren't really relevant for us today,
because their works were not translated into Arabic, or at least these works by them were
not translated into Arabic, so they kind of fall out of the story.
And what's communicated to the Arabic tradition is basically a unified view, according to
which animals are non-rational, and that completely differentiates them from humans.
Okay, now let's think a little bit more about what I was saying just a moment ago, namely
that animal cognition falls below human cognition, because it doesn't involve thinking abstractly
about general features of the universe.
So I want to flesh that out a little bit.
What this would mean in the terms that become familiar in the Arabic tradition, but to some
extent this is all pretty well grounded in Aristotle himself, would be that animals can
only grasp particulars, they can't grasp generalities.
So what this would mean is that, for example, a mother giraffe could see that another animal
is a giraffe, maybe, and they would certainly be able to recognize particular giraffes,
like the mother can recognize her own offspring, that's not a problem, and of course they
can sort of differentiate between giraffes and non-giraffes, like if you put another giraffe
in front of a giraffe, the giraffe will be like giraffe, okay, whereas if you put a lion
in front of the giraffe, the giraffe will be like, oh, crap, and it will turn and run
away with that loping stride that we're so familiar with, right, so they react appropriately,
but to do that they don't need to have the notion of giraffes as opposed to lions, right,
like they don't need to think about the species of lion or the species of giraffe, they just
have to be like, oh, there's a dangerous animal, I'm going to run, there's a safe animal so
I'm not going to run.
Now obviously we also grasp particulars all the time, right, and in fact, as I was saying,
a lot of humans may not think at the level of generalities very often or even at all,
so you can do things like enjoy a nice piece of cake without engaging in any general abstract
reasoning about cake, right, so you don't have to think, ah, here's a piece of cake
that falls under the species of cake, which falls under the genus of baked goods, and
I've had other baked goods and I enjoyed them, therefore I may enjoy, you can do that if
you want, but most of us are just like, ah, cake, right, and you just eat it.
You also, at least I spend very little time thinking about whether, and in retrospect,
the members of my own family fall under the species of human, I don't know about your
own family lives, but basically for practical purposes we don't need to think about, think
like this very much, we think like this when we're doing science.
Now the examples I've just given are really about sense perception, right, like giraffes
seeing other giraffes or lions, us seeing pieces of cake, but even when we're engaging
in what you might think of as somewhat more abstract forms of cognition, we're still actually
dealing with particulars most of the time, so for example, show of hands, who had cake
yesterday, that's it, this is great Britain, come on, this is the best thing about the
country, okay, so those of you who had cake, so those of you who raised your hand or those
of you who thought I did have cake but I'm not admitting that in front of all these people,
you were remembering the cake you had yesterday and you were remembering a particular piece
of cake, namely the particular piece of cake you had yesterday, right, some of you may have
foregone a piece of cake yesterday because you're unlike me, you're very, you know,
abstemious and self-controlled, so that was a particular piece of cake that you remember
not eating, also everyone in the room is now imagining a piece of cake, right, because
how could you not, that's sort of what cake is, it's the kind of thing that you imagine
when people talk about it, and you were also imagining a giraffe looking at a lion or a
giraffe a minute ago, what you were imagining was a particular giraffe, not necessarily
a particular one you've seen, but if you have a kind of image of the giraffe, it's an image
of a particular giraffe that you kind of cobble together from story books, safaris, nature
documentaries, whatever it is that's giving you your image of giraffes, so that actually
means that you can get through a lot of your mental life just dealing with particulars,
right, sort of constructed imaginary particulars or actual particulars, when you remember,
when you imagine, you're dealing with particulars, and this would help explain how it is that
animals can do some of these amazing things that they do, right, so why are they capable
of apparently complex behaviors, recognizing things, maybe building things, making apparently
making plans, something like apparent means and reasoning, they're doing it all with memory
and imagination, according to the conventional view, and this has an important consequence,
so as I said before, Aristotle is of the view that the intellect doesn't have a bodily organ,
but the imagination and memory do have a bodily organ, he would have thought, as I said before,
that it's the heart, but by the time we get to the Arabic tradition, they know that it's the
brain, and the reason they know that it's the brain is because Galen, the great doctor in
the second century, has done empirical studies that prove that all of your cognitive powers
are seated in the brain, in particular he shows that the commands that move the limbs travel
through the nerves down from the brain, in the time of Aristotle they didn't even know
the nervous system existed, actually, that was first discovered in Alexandria, a couple
of hundred years before Galen, and Galen does experiments actually on animals, in which
he proves that it's really the brain that's the most central organ, at one point he says
that if you want to show people how important the brain is, a really good way to do this
is to take a pig, put it on a stage, expose the nerves coming down from the neck, and
then snip the nerves that go to the vocal cords, because the pig will be making this
incredible racket and screaming in pain, and then suddenly it will be silent, it's obviously
a very gruesome experiment, but a very impressive one. By contrast, interlection doesn't involve
a bodily organ, so the difference between us and animals, as I said before, really is
along this line between material powers and immaterial powers, even the things that we
might think of as part of our mental life or consciousness, by the way this is a real
difference between the way we tend to think about it in philosophy of mind nowadays, and
the way that ancient and medieval people thought in their philosophy of mind, so for us all
the mental stuff is kind of whatever involves consciousness, so for us something like imagination
or memory would be just as much on the mind side of things as abstract thinking, whereas
in the Aristotelian tradition there's a huge difference between something like imagination
and intellect, the difference is precisely the difference between particulars being grasped
with a power that's seated in a bodily organ, and universals, abstract generalities, being
grasped with an immaterial power, namely intellect, so this particular versus universal thing
tracks material versus immaterial powers, and this is all the kind of background for
Ibn Sina's view, so Ibn Sina, like I said, is the most important philosopher in the Islamic
tradition, he died in 1037, and he actually proves, or tries to prove, that the intellect
is realized immaterially and that the rational soul does not have a bodily organ on the
grounds that the rational soul or mind or intellect, so the Arabic word here for intellect
is akl, which can also be translated as a reason sometimes, that power he thinks can't
be realized in a bodily organ, just as Aristotle said, but he gives a different argument that's
not found in Aristotle, and his argument is precisely on the basis of universals versus
particulars, and this is a little bit complicated and probably won't convince you, but here's
the argument anyway for what it's worth, so his idea is that if a universal were received
in a particular, like in an organ, then the universal would somehow be rendered particular,
and his idea here is something like this, if you think about the abstract idea of giraffe,
that's just a kind of form or essence or something like that, and it becomes a particular giraffe
because it's found in some matter, namely the matter that the giraffe is made of. He compares
this to the way a color could be received in a body or on a surface, so if a color appears
in a surface, then it will be rendered a particular instance of that color, and there'll be some
over here and some over here, so similarly when giraffeness is received by matter, you
get a particular giraffe of a certain size with a certain location, and it's really
matter that generates the particularity in some sense, or that explains the particularity.
Another way of thinking about this is in terms of individuation, so what makes this giraffe
and this giraffe, I should have brought two giraffes with me as display objects, but the
budget would not allow for it. I did ask Fedor, but apparently your university wouldn't support
me. Now you have to use your imagination, much-a-vanted imagination, which we share
with animals, so imagine there's a giraffe here and a giraffe here. What do they have
in common? What differentiates them? Well, in the first instance, what they have in common
is that they're both giraffes, so it's not giraffehood that makes them different. What
makes them different is things like there's one here and one there, spatial location, and
there's a long story, which actually Fedor has worked on, about how individuation works
in the scene, but to make a long story short, we can say that individuation is at least
correlated with matter, so when you have one hunk of matter turned into a giraffe over
here, and another hunk of matter turned into a giraffe over here, you get two giraffes,
whereas giraffehood is just one thing, so to speak. Similarly, if we were to receive
a universal idea in a bodily organ, like the brain, then that would constrain it or particularize
it. It would no longer be universal, it would be rendered particular, just as giraffehood
is rendered particular by being realized in one bit of matter rather than another bit
of matter. That's his proof for the immateriality of the rational soul. But, he thinks that
just as we've seen in the rest of the Aristotelian tradition, he holds on to this part of the
traditional view. He thinks that our other cognitive powers are all realized in the brain,
so the intellect is the only thing that we exercise without using a bodily organ. Obviously,
things like digestion, reproduction, or eyesight or hearing, obviously these things are manifested
and executed through bodily organs. It's less obvious that that's true with things like
imagination and memory, but he thinks that those are just as much seated in the brain
as, for example, your eyesight is seated in your eyes and your optic nerve and so on,
your whole visual system. Intellection is the exception. Only intellect is exercised
immaterially. The more that you think about this and the more detailed your story about
cognitive powers other than intellect becomes, the more you are accepting that there's quite
a large degree of overlap between humans and animals. Actually, although we're going
to get on to Faridina Razi, who argues against Ibn Sina by saying that there's even more
commonality between animals and humans than Ibn Sina thought, actually, in my opinion,
Ibn Sina is someone who should be recognized as really going very far in the direction
of admitting that there's a lot of overlap or a lot of commonality between humans and
animals. This is precisely because he was so interested in the cognitive powers that
we have that are shared with animals. In other words, the cognitive powers that somehow
fall short of intellect because they only deal with particulars. This brings us to his
celebrated theory of the internal senses. We have five external senses, hearing, sight,
hearing, smell, taste, touch, right, five. Similarly, this is very neat. We have five
internal senses. We've got five external senses, hearing, sight, et cetera. We have five internal
senses, the common sense, the retentive imagination, the estimation, which I'll say more about
in a second, memory and the compositive imagination. It actually doesn't matter very much how these
all work and what their functions are. As we can see from this Latin medieval drawing,
which is supposed to show Ibn Sina's theory, or what they would have called Abyssinus theory,
they're all seated in the brain. They're in different what he calls ventricles of the
brain. I think memory is in the back, for example. Actually, you can almost see them
in my case because they're so little in the way. He actually tells you where they are
in your brain, which lobes of the brain contain which powers. Again, what they all have in
common is that, of course, they're internal. They're in the brain. They're not realized
through something like eyes or ears or whatever, but also they deal with particulars. A really
nice example of this is the so-called estimation, or wahm in Arabic. Estimation is a misleading
translation here. The reason we often translate this word into English as estimation is that
it was translated as estimatio into Latin, but in English it conjures up the idea of
guessing or approximating, and that's not what we're talking about at all. I usually
just say, I just usually use the word wahm for it because there is no easy good translation
into English. This is a capacity that both humans and animals have, which allows them
to register the properties that particular things have that aren't detectable by the
external senses. His example is the, I couldn't believe I found this picture, by the way,
online, because it's so perfect. I'm going to use this in every slideshow for the rest
of my life as I talk about how to send a theory of wahm. His example is a sheep seeing
a wolf and doing what these sheep are doing, which is running away from the wolf and hoping
that they're not the slowest sheep. Why would a sheep do this? Ask yourself. Imagine you're
in an Aristotelian universe. A sheep can do whatever Aristotle would say the sheep can
do. The sheep can smell the wolf. The wolf smells, I don't know, have a wolf smell? Musty,
I'm thinking, and a musty. It can see that the wolf has a gray coat, and maybe can hear
the snarl, but none of these things are worth running away from. You don't run away from
the color gray, and you don't run away from the snarling noise just because of the noise.
If you ran away from the noise, it would be because of what the noise represents, which
you can't hear. Probably the sheep doesn't have memories of wolves that it's met in
the past because the sheep is still alive. In any case, sheep will run away from a wolf
the first time they see a wolf. They don't need to have experienced a wolf before. The
sheep doesn't need to imagine the wolf. Also, if it were imagining a wolf, it wouldn't run.
It would just go, ooh, wolves, I hate wolves. Rather, what's happening is that the sheep
looks at the wolf and is like, what the draft is with the line, oh, crap, that looks dangerous
or as Ibn Sina says, it's hostile, it's dangerous. It turns and runs like hell. How is it doing
this? Actually, I think Ibn Sina would say, well, Aristotle wouldn't be able to explain
this. But I can explain it. My explanation is that the sheep has a faculty called Wahm.
Wahm is the ability to detect things like hostility. Another cozier example is that
the sheep can also perceive the familiarity of its own offspring. That's why it kind of
nuzzles or takes care of its lamb, but it doesn't run from the lamb and it doesn't cozy
up to the wolf. It runs from the wolf and cozy's up to the lamb. The reason it is able
to do that is it has this power called Wahm. We have it too. What we're seeing here is
that actually, Ibn Sina has, in a way, gone quite far in the direction of expanding our
conception of what animals are capable of. I would say he offers us a picture of animal
mental life, which is very rich, because what he's left for humans to do uniquely is very
thin. It's just this kind of abstract universal thinking. Again, it's really important that
all of these complicated things and sophisticated things that animals can do are always going
to involve particulars as their cognitive content. The sheep will never start thinking
about, why do the wolves hate us so much? Is it because we're so delicious? They don't
think about it in that level. They're just like, here's a wolf. That's dangerous. I'm
running. That's all they do. There's no abstract thought.
Now, I gave not this paper, but a paper that had some of this material in it before. Teresa
Antirouard pointed out something to me that she had just been writing about in a paper
which wasn't published at the time, namely that there's a passage in part of the logic
of Ibn Sina's biggest philosophical work, the Shifa, that suggests that animals can
use Wahum to discriminate between species. This would be like my example, Gazintide.
As we say in Germany, Gazintide. This would be like the case I gave before, the giraffes
are like, oh, giraffes versus lions. You might think, well, doesn't that start to suggest
that animals do have the capacity to think at the level of universals? Maybe, but even
in this very passage, he still draws this hard and fast distinction between Wahum and
intellect, Akku. Even there, he's saying, well, if animals can classify particulars as
being of a certain type, they still can't engage in an intellect. Maybe there's some
ambiguity here between exactly how much he wants to pack into Wahum as opposed to Akku.
I find this passage quite puzzling, actually, how he can say this. Ultimately, it's going
to be really important for him that proper, as such, universal thinking is only going
to be possible for humans, and of course, God and angels, because only we have this
immaterial rational power. If you start saying that animals can grasp universals, then his
proof for the immateriality of the soul will go for them just as much as for us, and then
animal souls would be able to survive the death of their body, right? And you wouldn't
want that. Or would you? Maybe you would want that. Even Sino doesn't, so even Sino surely
does not think that animals survive the death of their body, but that doesn't necessarily
represent a kind of unified, unanimous opinion amongst Muslim scholars, because in fact,
in the Islamic theological tradition, the tradition that goes under the name of Qalaam in Arabic,
is commonly thought that animals also enjoy an afterlife. And there's good reason for
this, namely that there are passages in the Quran that suggest an afterlife for the animals.
For example, this is a passage from Quran 6.38, there's no creature on the earth or bird
that flies with its wings, except that they are communities like you. So it seems to imply
some kind of political life, maybe, for animals. But then the important part is, unto their
Lord they will be gathered. Well, that sounds like they're all going to heaven or something,
right? Or going to paradise. And on the basis of this, and also on the basis that you don't
want injustice in God's creation without it being somehow counterbalanced by some kind
of justice, some motakalimun theologians said things like, oh, well, when animals are savagely
torn to bits by predators, that's sad for them. But the good news is then they go to
paradise and they get lots of nice food to make it up to them. So as an author who's
written about this has said, for this particular school of Qalaam, God is like a cosmic bookkeeper
who's like, oh, well, this giraffe got savaged to death by lions. So the giraffe will get
you know, 30 years of really nice acacia leaves or something in paradise. And then God is
like, okay, you've been rewarded enough to make up for that. It's sorry about that thing
that happened to you, 30 years in it. I know that was rough. But look at all the nice leaves
you've got, right? That might be a little bit too crude a way of thinking about it, but
somehow God makes it up to them in the afterlife. And in general, there's a very strong trend
in Qalaam of thinking that animals somehow participate in the afterlife, which brings
us to Fahad al-Nirazi, because it is precisely in the context of talking about the afterlife
in a work of his called the Molachas, which was only just recently edited. But actually
when we started working on this, we were looking at the work in manuscripts. So this
is like a very recently, a work that's only very recently started to get studied. So it's
one of several works he wrote that kind of survey philosophical and theological questions,
across a variety of topics. So he's talking about the afterlife. And then without really
explaining that that's the relevant context, he says, now here's a question. Do animals
have rational souls or not? Do they have rational souls like humans, or do they have a different
kind of soul like the philosophers would say? And although he doesn't spell this out, I
think that, and I've written a paper about this with Bly, we think that he must be thinking
the reason why it's worth discussing this is that if animals didn't have rational souls,
then at least according to Ibn Sina's arguments for the immateriality and hence immortality
of our soul, if they don't have rational souls, then they must die when their bodies die,
and then they wouldn't have an afterlife. But as a theologian, he wants to at least be
open to the possibility that animals do have an afterlife. Now, so this is actually, typically
for him, this is quite a complicated thing going on here, because what he's thinking
is, well, if I were an Avicenan philosopher, then I would think that the only way for animals
to have an afterlife is for them to be rational. Now, actually, he's not an Avicenan philosopher,
he's a critic of Ibn Sina, but what he wants to do, I think, is to suggest, well, I'm going
to give an argument that would show Ibn Sina that he should admit that animals have an
afterlife. And then if I can show that, since theologians, also with their own kind of theory
of the soul and whatever, if they would also think that animals would have an afterlife,
then everyone could sort of agree. So this is almost like a way of saying, well, even
the kind of toughest nut to crack, namely an Aristotelian slash Avicenan position, should
still think that animals have an afterlife, because they should admit that animals are
rational, and if they admit that animals are rational, then they should admit that animals
have an afterlife. Now, that's obviously imputing a lot to him, because he doesn't spell anything,
any of that out in the text, but I think that's the kind of basis for the argument. In any
case, even if you kind of set that aside, what's really worth our interest is the way
he argues for animal rationality. And as we're going to see, he really kind of presupposes
the truth of Ibn Sina's own way of thinking about rationality. Because if you think about
it, there's two ways you could go at this, right? You could say, well, you say that
intellection or rationality, akka, is characterized by universal abstract thought. But that's not
true. I'm using my intellect when I decide what to have for dinner, right? Cake, maybe.
Bad choice, but a choice nonetheless. But then he knows that Ibn Sina would say, no, no,
no, no, that's just imagination. Or you know, you're remembering some cake you had, you're
imagining the cake you could have, you're engaging in something that's not full blown
intellection. So that doesn't count. So what he's going to do is maybe for the sake of
arguments, he's going to say, let's suppose that intellection is what you say it is. And
I'm going to show you that animals by that criterion must have intellect. And this is
really clear from the first argument he gives. There's five arguments I'm going to give you
two of them. And the first argument comes in kind of free with three cases to illustrate
it. So the first argument is that animals must have the ability to grasp universals as
such. They don't only grasp particulars. Why? Well, first of all, even exercise, and this
I think is a really remarkable thing to say, even the exercise of sense perception involves
grasping universals. Because to see a wolf and see it as something other than just a
patch of gray is to see it as a wolf. Now, this is actually an interesting question in
Aristotelian philosophy. So what would Aristotle say about this? What does Aristotle think
about seeing something as a wolf? He might say, well, properly speaking, what you see
is something gray. But then you kind of layer on top of that the information that it's a
wolf or something like that. But Fahredin is thinking, well, take this example that
we have for the Messina, the sheep seeing the wolf, seeing that the wolf is dangerous.
It must be able to perceive the wolf as a wolf, as a member of a hostile species, in
order to react appropriately. So all of that kind of abstract universal content is already
built into sense perception. It's a profoundly un-Aristotelian thing to say, or at least
if not un-Aristotelian, it's against the Aristotelian tradition. There's exactly what
Aristotelians have been denying for literally more than a thousand years. So they've always
said sense perception is of particulars, not universals. And Fahredin is like, ah, if you
think about it, sense perception is of universals too, because you're classifying or you're
sort of subsuming the particular that you see under a particular universal in order to react
to it appropriately. And it's obvious that animals can do this. There's quite a remarkable
move on his part. And the next case he gives, another illustration of the fact that animals
can grasp universals, is if anything, even more clever. So let's imagine that the sheep
sees the wolf, and it turns to run. So now it's intending to run, okay? And an Aristotelian
would say, no problem, it runs. But Fahredin says, well, hang on a second. Is it intending
to perform the particular act of running it's about to perform? No. It's not like, oh, I'm
going to run exactly in this way, away from this wolf, like I'm going to put my foot exactly
there and exactly there. No. It's going to just run like hell. Any act of running would
be fine, right? Any act of running that will get it away from the wolf would be perfectly
adequate. In fact, probably it couldn't think, it couldn't intend very exactly to perform
a particular act of running. This might actually connect to something that you, there's an argument
that you sometimes get in Calam, which is that God and not we must be the creator of
our acts, because we aren't able to create particular acts down to the level of finest
detail. Why? How do we know this? Well, an example that he gives, imagine you write your
name and then someone says to you, okay, now write your name again, exactly the same, down
to the molecule. No chance, right? You wouldn't even be able to come close. You could make
something, you could make a signature or something that looks basically similar, but of course
you couldn't make something exactly identical in every detail, whereas God could. And then
they say, well, if you can't do it the second time, then obviously you can't do it the first
time. If you were capable of producing this, then you could do it again, but you can't.
So it must be God creating your signature and not you. This is an argument for occasionalism.
Whether that's in the background here, I'm not sure, but it's very similar, it's a very
similar thought. So the idea is that the sheep is not going to be able to intend to perform
exactly the act of running that it performs. It can only intend generically to run. And
that's, I think, is a brilliant argument. So this is showing that what is in them, as
it were, in the mind of the sheep is a universal, namely running and not a particular, namely
the particular act of running it's about to perform. Very clever. Third example, and this
may be the easiest, is imagine a sheep that's looking for grass. And he actually gives the
example of looking for grass, of an animal looking for grass. He says, the animal's not
looking for some particular grass. Oh, no, not that one. I had some different grass in
mind. They don't care, they're just looking for grass. In other words, they're looking
for something that instantiates the universal grass. So again, what is, as it were, in their
mind has to be a universal, not a particular. I mean, think about it like this. All of the
particular examples of grass that the sheep have ever seen are precisely the ones that
aren't relevant, because they've already been eaten by the sheep and the sheep's friends.
What I'm looking for is some grass that I've never experienced yet. So I'm precisely looking
not for the particular grass as I've seen, but for a new one, like, I'll go over there.
He also has this nice example of smelling that there's some grass and being like, oh, that
must be some grass. Not some particular grass, but just grass. Now, I think this is interesting
now to think about what an Aristotelian slash Abyssinian would say in response. Maybe they
would say, well, the animal is not grasping these things qua universal. So they're somehow
operating as if they had a universal in their mind, but they don't because they're not sort
of explicitly entertaining the universal and thinking about it as such. But if that's the
answer, I think it's not a very good one. Because remember that Abyssinian's argument
was in order to receive the universal at all, you have to have an immaterial power. And it
looks like they are, and it looks like to operate with a universal concept, the animal needs
to have such an immaterial power whether or not it's thinking about it as such. So I actually
think Fakhredin's argument here is very convincing. Oh, sorry, these slides are in the wrong order.
There's another argument, the fourth one, where he just reels off a very short list of amazing
things that animals do. And there's a parallel text in another work, which I also wrote an
article about, about all these sort of amazing things that animals, like amazing behaviors
that animals display. He gives the example of hexagonal cells in a beehive. He gives
an example that our colleague Sarah Vergi wrote a whole paper about. This is an example
that comes up already in antiquity and then a whole series of texts in the Islamic world.
The example is a mouse wants to get at some oil in a bottle, apparently mice like to
sip oil, I didn't know this. And the bottle has a narrow neck, and it's too narrow for
the animal to poke its head in and lick the oil. So what it does is it sits on top, dips
its tail into the oil, sort of swirls its tail around, pulls it out and licks its tail.
I don't know if mice actually do this, but you can sort of imagine a mouse doing this.
And the idea is if animals can do this, then they must be just as capable of reasoning
as humans are. This is just supposed to amaze you with the things that animals do. So the
upshot is that animals can grasp universals, they can engage in reasoning, means and reasoning
like we just saw with the mouse, the kind of universal reasoning that is needed to engage
in sense perception, look for food, perform motions. And that should show that animals,
whatever you say about human reasoning, you should say about animals too. So if humans
can do this because they have immaterial souls, then you should say that animals have immaterial
souls. There might be another thing that's in play here, namely that in general Farhaddin
is quite skeptical of what you might call the faculty psychology theory that we find
in Aristotelianism where you have like sensation and imagination and memory and so on. Farhaddin,
along with some other philosophers of the period, especially someone named Abu Barakat
al-Baghdadi, who's going to be relevant again in a second, they thought that this is kind
of a wrong way of approaching philosophical psychology and that what you should say is
that you have a soul, which is just one kind of power, and it can do a whole bunch of things.
So rather than, I mean this is kind of a tendentious way of thinking about the Abbasin and Slash
Aristotelian position, but they would say, well they think that you see that what sees
is your vision and what imagines is your imagination, whereas we think that when I imagine the
person, the thing that's imagining is just me, right? So it's just one of many actions
that I can perform. So they're trying to articulate a view according to which there's this single
subject of cognition, which we might call the self, and this self is just what does everything.
And the reason why I think that might be relevant is that it's, given what we've seen from Fahaddin
about animals, it looks like he's trying to question this very hard and fast kind of
leveled theory of cognition, where you have reason up here and imagination and sensation
down here. So for example, think about what he said in the first argument here. You can't
even do sense perception without using intellect, right? So that would kind of push you in the
direction of thinking that different forms of cognition kind of involve each other, and
that would go along very nicely with the idea that it's just one self or soul doing all
the cognition rather than the idea that you have these separate faculties which somehow
get put together to form a rich mental life. Okay, in any case, what we've seen is that,
as I say, we have all these examples of clever things that animals do, some of them actually
drawn from in the Sina, and even going all the way back to Aristotle, and this should
show that animals too are intelligent. And all of this is within, to some extent, within
the framework of the conventional view, right, the traditional Aristotelian view, because
he's assuming that the possession of reason somehow goes along with the ability to outlive
the death of the body, right? That's, I think, the whole point. Now then, one thing about
Razzi is that he always will consider objections on every side of every dispute, so he will
very rarely advance a position without then saying, well, but there's an objection to
this position, so that's what he does to here, and he says, well, here's an objection.
If animals were rational, then there'd only be one kind of soul, and probably he's not
thinking about plants, right? Because he has to argue that plants are rational, or that
plants can engage in sense perception. So there'd only be a single kind of soul, which
is jointly shared by humans and animals, and so he wouldn't even have a distinction between
these different kinds of soul anymore, right? Now, actually, this is an interesting, there's
an interesting kind of long running debate here. If you think about it, we kind of very
naturally associate, in the Aristotelian tradition, the idea that we very naturally associate
different types of soul with different kind of levels of existence, right? So there's
human rational souls, there's animal souls, and then there's plant souls, so we think
there are three kinds of souls, but you wouldn't have to do it like that, right? So for example,
you could say there's plant souls, and there's non-plant souls, so you could be less fine
grained, or you could be more fine grained, right? So for example, you could say there's
the kind of soul that really smart people have, and then there's the kind of soul that
kind of dumb people have, and then in between there's sort of the mediocre souls, and then
there's the animal souls, right? Or you could say that there's the carnivorous souls and
the plantiferous souls, herbivorous, yes, herbivorous souls, right? You could have carved
it up in all kinds of ways, to use a very apt metaphor given all the tearing apart of
limbs we've been discussing during this talk. So why do it this way? And in fact, just in
an immediate environment of Fakhreddin, there's been a slightly earlier philosopher named
Abu Barakat Al-Baghdadi who said, well, actually, maybe different humans have different kinds
of souls, so maybe courageous people have one kind of soul, and cowardly people have another
kind of soul. This is an idea that has just been flirted with in the tradition. But Fakhreddin
doesn't really like, he doesn't really want to smash all the different kinds of souls
together, nor does he want to say that there are different species of human soul. He wants
to adhere to the traditional idea that there are human souls and non-human souls, animal
souls, and that you can somehow distinguish them. Yet, now he's saying, well, I can't
define human souls just in respect of their rationality, because I'm now suggesting that
animal souls can be rational as well. So what he says is, there might be, and by the way,
sorry, I should have gotten to this slide first. He actually mentions this thing from
Abu Barakat about courageous and cowardly souls, and he says, this is like lions and rabbits.
So lions have one kind of soul, rabbits have another kind of soul, lions are brave, rabbits
are timid. But the fact that, and so you can find these differences if you want, but the
fact that there might be some kind of shared commonality between human souls and animal
souls doesn't prove that there's no difference between human souls and animal souls, because
maybe animals have reason, and we have reason, but we have more of it than they do. So we're
intelligent to a much greater degree than animals are intelligent, and that's really
the difference. So his idea here would apparently be that there's a kind of continuum of intelligence
from animals up to humans with us at the top, or maybe we're not at the top actually,
because probably angels, and for sure God, are more intelligent and rational than we are,
so maybe we're actually sort of in the middle. But if you leave these exalted beings out
in the natural world, we're the most intelligent, rational creatures, and then animals are less
rational and intelligent than us, and plants are not rational and intelligent at all. Something
he doesn't get into, one would really like to know what he thinks about this. He doesn't
get that much into the question of whether non-human animals are at different places
on the scale, but it's kind of suggested by these passages where he gives you all of these
examples of clever animals, because of course not all animals are capable of this kind of
clever behavior, like slugs don't do things like dipping their tail in oil and licking
it, and it's not just because they don't have tongues. Maybe slugs do have tongues. Slug
ologists in the house? Anyone? No? Okay, let's say for the sake of argument, slugs don't have
tongues. Even if they had tongues, they couldn't do this, right? Dogs are smarter than turtles.
I have no idea how smart turtles are. They're very smart, just rather slow. But you see what I
mean, right? So there's probably a continuum of smartness of intelligence within the animal
kingdom. He doesn't really get into that. He kind of gestures towards it by talking about what some
animals can do. But the really interesting thing would be that if you have human intelligence as
the kind of gold standard, then you would have some like, at least fairly smart animals that are
less intelligent than us, but still rational, and that would secure their participation in the
afterlife. So hence the title of the talk. So I said that the talk would be about an Islamic
thinker who's denying human exceptionalism. And it's true that we're not exceptional on his view,
at least if you, I mean, there are some texts where he is kind of noncommittal about all of this,
but at least in the mulachas, this one text we've been looking at, he seems to be quite committed
to the view that animals are intelligent. But they're not as intelligent as we are. And in that
sense, we do remain exceptional. And of course, that is important for him as a theologian too,
because God's relationship towards animals may be benevolent. He may give animals an afterlife. He
may even accept praise from animals. There are texts that say that animal calls and the noises
they make are prayers to God that we don't understand and so on. But still God's relationship to
humans is going to be very different from his relationship to the rest of the animal kingdom.
And he would want it that way. Thanks very much.
