Welcome to the Bayesian Conspiracy, I'm Inyash Brotsky.
I'm Steven Zuber, and I'm excited to welcome back our guest, David Youssef.
Howdy, howdy, everyone.
Hello, David.
I think our listeners may remember you from the episode where it was just you and Steven,
and I finally have the pleasure of getting to talk to you, too.
I'm excited to speak with you as well.
Huzzah.
We have you on here because you want to talk to us about being intentionally crazy.
Yes.
In a safe way.
Yes, that's the important part.
So my thesis goes along the lines of this.
The universe is always going to be stranger than we imagine.
And making new discoveries and updating our maps in really significant ways often is a
combination of a lot of really wrong incorrect ideas and one very correct one and a moment
of epiphany.
And I think that if you look at history, a lot of the people who've made the biggest
pushes in the way we think forward have had a little bit of a crazy streak in them.
I think a little bit is an understatement based on what I've read about basically everyone.
Well, one of the things I like to bring up is Sir Isaac Newton was really into magic.
And that was actually instrumental in him coming up with the theory of gravity because
in magic you have ideas like voodoo dolls.
You can affect something at a distance, right?
Until then, as far as physics was concerned, there was no such thing as a force that acted
without direct contact.
It was by using the idea of acting at a distance and then combining that with the hard math
that he knew that he was able to come up with theories like gravity.
Can I get a couple of quick questions?
Absolutely.
So on one, was Newton interested in magic in the sense that he was interested in...
So there's a few senses of magic, right?
There's stage magic like pen and teller.
There's stuff we don't understand, the unknown.
And then there's legit magic.
If I wave my wand and say abracadabra, you get shot by green light and die.
Which kind of magic was Newton interested in?
So the first type, the stage magic or trickery, that's closer to barting historically.
It was an entertainer thing and everyone has always known that.
The idea of abracadabra wand-waving magic is less than 100 years old.
It is extremely modern.
If you want to go into a little bit of esoteric stuff, he was really big into alchemy.
Do you ever wonder why the rainbow has seven colors indigo and violet when really it kind
of looks like there's six?
Oh, yes, I just learned this a few weeks ago.
This is amazing.
Yeah, so it's because there were seven planets at the time and he thought every color corresponded
to a planet like magically horoscope kind of alignment.
Seven was a popular number back in the day.
Yeah, it had a lot of significance.
Well, so I guess that puts up the other kind of magic, I mean, so like there's also the
kind of magic that the Salem witches were accused of conducting, right?
Or you're doing seances or casting spells that didn't involve wand-waving and light,
but were involved like you said, boo-doo dolls or that sort of thing.
So I guess what I'm asking was he into like the bullshit hocus-pocus magic of how we wanted
to find it or was he into like, I don't think alchemy falls under that category.
Alchemy is like the worship of the unknown or maybe just bad science.
I guess I'm curious, was he a full-on occultist or was he a confused scientist?
He was a legit occultist by every measure that I'm aware of.
Oh, that's awesome.
Galileo, one of the main reasons that they, you know, that the church would crack down
on Galileo as much as they did wasn't just because of his heliocentrism, although I mean,
that had something to do with it too, but because he was a heretic.
He would, you know, believed in these sort of occult things as well.
And if we want to use a more recent example, Jack Parsons anniversary of his death day
just passed and Jack Parsons was one of the first rocket scientists to help start NASA
and a huge researcher into like chemical rocket fuels.
And that dude hung out with Alistair Crowley and a pre-scientology Elron Hubbard, which
is about as crazy into the esoterica as a person can go, in my opinion.
Yeah.
And there was a lot of, God, now that I think about it, the old hermetic traditions had
a lot of geometry and chemistry and a bunch of other things mixed in with them as well.
You know, they weren't just like trying to summon up the spirits of your ancestors.
They were like trying to do it with these weird kind of pre-scientific wrappings around everything.
They were trying to approach a lot of different problems.
Okay.
So I'm going to give you guys first a disclaimer.
So in preparing for this, I've been rereading a lot of my old grimoires, including one of
the most powerful grimoires I have, rationality from AI to zombies.
I consider it a grimoire.
Yes.
And there's a part at the end where Yudkowsky is talking about levels and strength as a
rationalist.
If I'm a white belt rationalist, I'm below white belt magician.
So please, anything I say, people in the actual occult community.
Though I can't imagine there's a large listener base for them here, but they're probably going
to be very upset because I'm going to butcher a lot of this.
So when you say magician here, you mean, did you listen to the episode where Vivian and
Cannonball Jenkins and Ynash and I talked about ritual and stuff?
Yes.
And in fact, I do have an answer for you guys, a good definition of ritual.
Okay, I can't wait.
That didn't change it from habit.
But just really quick.
So that's, you're talking magicianry in the same sense that Vivian's talking witchcraft, right?
Yes.
In the sense that it's not what really anybody means by witchcraft.
Except people who use that term.
Well, I'm going to give you the exact four things that magic historically and the kind
of magic I think about says it can do.
And then I'm going to give you the rationalist explanation where it's all in my head.
And then I'll give you the completely insane theoretical explanation.
I'm stoked.
Sorry to keep interrupting.
So I study and have been pulled into chaos magic, which has an illustrious tradition going back
to the 1970s when two mathematicians and some artists like started looking at all of the
ancient occult traditions and realized there were only a few things that all of them said.
All magic systems say they can, one, summoning and communing with the others, question mark.
Two is they all say they have a way of predicting the future.
Third, they say that there's a way of getting information that you shouldn't be able to get,
like astral projecting, right?
And the fourth would be probability manipulation.
Wait, what is probability manipulation?
Is that funneling the future like a more desirable outcome?
Essentially, yeah.
The way I think about these is I think that 95% of this stuff is probably in my head or 99%.
Can I jump in there really quick?
Yeah.
I'm sorry.
Go ahead.
No, no, I don't want to drop.
It sounds like you're on a flow.
Well, I still don't know.
Wait, I'm still not sure what probability manipulation means.
That is practical enchantment.
The way a wizard thinks about doing a spell is we don't know what causes it,
but for some reason, when you concentrate real hard and then you allow your focus to
dissipate into your subconscious, that's what casting a spell is.
It's building up a lot of energy, mental or emotional or physical,
and then releasing it with an idea attached to it into the void, essentially,
and the goal is to manipulate the odds in your favor.
You can't make impossible things happen with magic,
but the closest thing I could have is, did you read Unsong?
Yeah.
Placebo Mansi.
Oh, okay, nice.
Placebo Mansi is actually the best description I've ever read of what
people in the Chaos Magic community actually are trying to do with sigils.
I've never heard of any magical tradition that actually says you can turn into a wolf or a cat.
There's a few that say you can project into them,
but most of them say that they can give you a little bit of extra luck in battle
or maybe push it so that rain cloud that might have avoided your village goes over it instead.
Right, things that are completely not provable.
That is one of the big issues with it,
but I do think that one of the values of practical enchantment,
especially if you want to be an effective wizard,
is you have to be really good at project management,
because one of the things that I was introduced to as an idea is,
if I do a spell to try to win the lottery, right,
maybe I've changed the odds from 1 in 300 million to 1 in 11 million,
and I'm a great wizard if I somehow managed to do that,
but you know what, I'm still probably going to lose.
And how could you possibly know if you succeeded?
Yeah.
No, I'm serious.
So how could you know if your spell has succeeded?
Well, if it went from 1 in 300 million to 1 in 11 million,
you would have no way of knowing.
You still lose a losing ticket.
Like any losing ticket isn't any closer to winning than another losing ticket.
I agree.
Here's an example of one I did recently.
I told you this like a week ago, which is kind of why I'm here.
About a week ago, I did a bunch of sigils,
which is a way of essentially turning a spell or a wish into an image.
And then I draw it out.
I do a little bit of concentration and a little ritual at my altar.
I put it in my little place.
And one of them was financial opportunities will fall towards me,
and like luck will help me even when I don't deserve it.
I think I put that in specifically.
Less than 12 hours later, I got a phone call from a phone number in Maryland,
and I answered and it was a person going,
hey, I saw you a year and a half ago in an open house,
and I found your card today, and me and my husband are looking to buy a house,
and I'm a realtor.
So I was like, I'd be happy to help you.
And it turns out they might end up being like legitimately more than half the money I make this year.
But wouldn't that require your magic to literally travel back in time
to affect them having picked up your card a year and a half ago?
Yes.
Retro causality.
Time is very weird.
I had a lot of really great experiences that have, I mean, in large part,
their luck, like the way I got burning my tickets,
I don't remember if I said this before or not,
was just someone who listened to the methods of rationality podcast
was coming through town, said, you want to meet?
I said, sure.
And you know, there's a whole confluence of coincidence
and things just happening to work out.
But if as long as you keep doing things and putting yourself out there every now
and then you'll get hits.
And like I was extremely lucky and I cast no sigils at all.
So like I said, that last one is both the hardest to believe
and in one way the easiest to test.
And this is something I sincerely believe,
whether it's working by tricking my perception or changing something in the universe.
There's never been a time I've done sigils and they haven't worked,
which is weird to say because like each time I've done it,
it's been in a semi tongue-in-cheek manner.
But like you don't actually have to believe it at all.
No, I mean, I think it's great if people do things that make them feel better
about their lives and more in control or whatever.
But I think there's a definite danger of wasting time and effort on things
that literally don't do anything when one could be doing things that actually help.
It's the whole thoughts and prayers thing.
You know, please stop sending us thoughts and prayers and send us some actual aid.
That is absolutely fair.
And that's one of the, when we were starting this conversation
about like safe forms of crazy, right?
Like for me, the expenditure of energy and time in this is about a total of one hour per week.
Okay. And yeah, I waste more than an hour a week just trying to get motivated
and do good things too.
So if that helps you get motivated, that is probably a definite time savings overall.
Yeah. And so part of the reason I have started doing magic, as I said,
I think 95% of it is in my head.
But there's 5% just weirdness that I really do think pushes the edges of credibility.
Like here's my question, Enias.
Let's say on a lark, I convinced you to make one sigil a week for six months.
And let's say three out of four weeks, something like it happened.
And it happened in a way that was not just kind of what you envisioned, but above and beyond.
That isn't enough evidence to prove it scientifically,
but it would definitely make you feel weird, wouldn't it?
No, because I know the psychology behind it.
It's the same reason I don't do these sorts of things and I feel silly doing them
because I realize that if I am making things that are wishes that are plausible,
and I'm working towards them, and the world, now that I have these sigils drawn,
I am primed to look for hits, I would expect most of them for me to count it as a hit.
And be like, oh, okay, so I didn't get that date with the hot chick that I saw the other night,
but I met this other person and got their number, and oh my god, that totally counts,
even though, you know, like, I'm out there putting myself out trying to get people's numbers.
What if, okay, so an example similar to that is I did, I had a crush.
One of my first, like, I think intentional magic things was I had a crush in high school
on a girl named Lauren, and I tried for weeks and failed utterly.
And then a week later, I was asked out by a girl at another school
who I randomly saw named Lauren. I got the Lauren, just not the one I was hoping for.
And to be fair, I literally could not have met her or predicted it at all.
Like, I was a very introverted person, or I was never introverted,
but I was not very emotionally communicative in high school.
I guess I want to take this a step back. So the four principles of magic that
you talked about, what were they again? Summoning slash communicating with the others.
Future prediction, and then astral projection.
There were four, weren't there? There was something about it.
The fourth one is probability manipulation. Okay, so talking with others.
Actually, can I interrupt you for just a second, Steven?
Yeah, go nuts.
Okay. Well, I was just going to say that I don't think it would be a productive use of
our or our audience's time to actually go into the magic stuff, because those of us who are...
If they're interested, we can put some links at the bottom, but I agree.
It's not like, I don't think I'm going to convince or no one wants a lesson in it.
Right, exactly. There's plenty of skeptics podcasts out there that have covered this for
hundreds of hours. There's plenty of believers' podcasts out there that people can go into.
So I'm more interested in would be like, how is incorporating this controlled craziness into
one's life beneficial, even if one doesn't actually believe in supernatural stuff?
That's fair. I was just going to say that I think I could do all of those four things
without leaving my bedroom if I had my phone with me.
Yes, that's nice.
I think that means you're a very good wizard.
It means that my cell phone is very magical, right?
So I think things that are that loosely described, it sounds almost, dare I say,
Jordan Peterson-ish to disingenuously be like, oh yeah, no, that's what I mean by magic.
Not what everybody else means. Not what you think I mean.
Not what the popular use is. But yeah, your cell phone is literally magic,
just like religions are literally true.
So is that the sense? I'm feeling the same sort of-
No, when I said the others, that was my generic term because I didn't want to say things like
fairies or angels or demons or spirits or ghosts.
Okay, so it's something I could do without leaving my room if I had my cell phone and some DMT.
Yeah, actually, probably.
I mean, I think that there's a lot to be said about taking your time and not going far,
but that's something else.
I want to bring up the little passage that I sent to Steven that made him interested enough to at
least consider this.
Excellent.
I might have forgotten to share that, so please go over in detail.
So the person who got me started in this was a writer named Gordon White.
He has a blog called Roon Soup, which I highly recommend.
Even if you ignore all the magic stuff, he worked in international finance and branding for many
years and his takes on geopolitics are surprisingly good.
Fairly enough, but he has a series on magic and here's what he wrote.
Debt is magic.
It is a literal pact with the future.
Little wonder that emerges from the gloom of prehistory into the minuscule light of recorded
history more or less fully formed.
We got it from something sitting at the campfire's edge.
When a Babylonian farmer summoned debt, he would bring forward from the future his own wheat
harvest to pay for the equipment or land he actually needed to materialize said wheat harvest
in the first place.
This feat of imaginal time travel and when it works, it is once again literally a successful
act of actual magic.
It is a manifestation of something from nothing.
The time travel always has a cost and of course on the other side of the trade are the gods,
represented by the intervening years that could bring drought or locus or war or the death of
your sons.
So the farmer pays for his equipment with money from another dimension, unbound by time,
but then binds both himself and that money two time.
Debt is hugely powerful, albeit dangerous system of actual magic, freed of any morality about
its use.
It is the devil's money.
Okay.
For the most part, I really like that because it is a wonderful new way to think about a
financial instrument, which really puts into, like gives you emotional feel for what it is
and the powerful things you can do with it.
So yeah, that was awesome.
Yeah, I love that.
I remember it now.
It was fantastic.
That is why I explore esoterica because some of the most beautiful and important ideas and
new ways of framing it are out in the chaos and the mess that stands at the edges of the crazy.
And I think it's good for humans to do that too because I personally think that everyone has
a certain amount of like irrationality as a pressure inside of them.
And if you don't let it out in controlled bursts, either by going to parties and getting drunk
and letting it out there or in play in some form, it will bubble up in the rest of your life.
So instead of maybe being crazy for some other reason, I get to be crazy at my little altar
at home in a very controlled setting.
And I get to read awesome things like this and think about problems in new ways.
Another benefit is in one of the magic podcasts I was listening to,
I was introduced to a word in the language from New Zealand.
I can't remember it now.
But in the native Kiwi, there is a word that means all of the things as your forebearers
that end up making you who you are.
And that word can obviously mean your parents.
But if your family has been drinking from the same river for 30 years and all your atoms change
every seven years, then legally that river is a forebearer to you.
And in their law, it specifically says that the natives there can treat landmarks as like
literally like family members.
And when you view it in that light, you're like, I am much more closely related
to the farms I get my food from than my great aunt.
I'm processing that.
I'm not sure how to...
I don't know if that's actually the case because unless there's something really
unusual in a particular farm and you get all your food from it, you'd still...
I guess the concept of genetically related, does it matter?
Yeah, I'm not saying this as like an objective truth, but it's a really weird
recontextualization of place versus person.
And this is one of those things that...
It honestly was one of the ideas that has led me to focus a lot of my time into like
ecological real estate and like how you can make land healthy because if you grow your food in
your backyard and you eat it and you live at a place for seven years, then in a very real way,
you and your house are like family.
And like it's a silly idea, but I think people feel those kind of things more deeply,
even if they are not necessarily rational.
And hey, if I can get more people planting trees and eating healthy in the process,
that seems pretty good.
Yeah, so how would you incorporate these sort of things into your, I don't know,
thinking into your life to be more, I don't know, creative or scientific or whatever?
How does this help us discover the next gravity?
I think of it like exercise.
It's mental, we literally say about people who hold these beliefs in seriousness
as doing mental gymnastics, right?
I think that's a very accurate term and that's what it is.
It's keeping your mind limber and willing to entertain ridiculous ideas and really think
them through and then dismiss them.
Like if they're really not worth it, it's fine.
But take them at their ridiculous assumptions and play them out in your head first.
And then when you do have the opportunity to hit an idea like gravity,
you won't just dismiss it because how can forces act on each other at a distance?
You'll really think it through.
You know, I've recently read a, I think it was a really brief post on Less Wrong
about a very similar concept, fake frameworks, where the author mentioned that basically all
of our models are imperfect and there is a danger in thinking that our models are too perfect.
And if we can every now and then entertain an idea and say to ourselves,
I know this is not really how the world works.
But for the purposes of argument or whatever, I'm going to assume that, you know,
there's only two types of people in the world, X and Y.
And you can make some useful predictions with that while at the same time realizing
that it is a fake framework and it should not bind your thinking very strongly.
And so this seems almost similar like that being having the mental agility to
consider things without taking them completely seriously and binding yourself to them.
Yeah. And I think it would be very easy to become lazy about a habit of doing this.
So adding the magical like ritualistic component is a way of forcing me to do it on a regular
basis so I don't let it slide like a workout routine. Plus, it's a really useful psychological tool.
Like a lot of the best interpretation of demons, somebody I've ever heard is,
there's a great quote from Frank Herbert.
The psychologist, the priest and the shaman all have the same job, which is to heal people's
souls. And I think that's kind of correct in the sense that if you had bipolar disorder or
schizophrenia in an ancient village, right, that's a real liability. That's a real risk.
But you also might be really nice the rest of the time or a female in a tribe where there's not a
lot of females or maybe you're really big and strong and you only go crazy in your bloodlust.
Like there's a whole bunch of scenarios where giving up on you as a person is not the best thing
for the tribe, but they need to deal with this issue. And so since manpower was so limited back
then, you needed everyone if you could. So you go to the shaman and he's like, huh, let me think.
And he gives you some mushrooms and he tells you like your anger is a demon.
And it's not a bad one, but we've got to bind it.
So you're like losing it and you see the demon that is your anger, maybe you get a tattoo and
you bind it, you now control it. And next time you start to get angry, the shaman just has to say,
hey, your demon is getting like, your demon is rising and then you're not the one socially
responsible. But you also have a trigger that allows you to notice it as well. So in a way,
like humans are way better at dealing with other humans than we are with dealing with
the abstractions about ourselves by turning your mental processes into an other and then
making a deal with it or or dealing with it in some way. I think that's how a lot of psychotherapy
was done for most of human history. I remember hearing about when people used to come back
from war, they and obviously not in all Christian societies, but in some, they had a tradition of
the people who came back, even if they were, you know, fighting in a holy war that that was bitten
to them by God and you know, the king ordered it and they acted honorably, they still had a period
of penance to do because they were just involved in a large scale violent affair. And it was during
this time period that they slowly reintegrated into normal daily life and society again. And I
almost think that it would be good for us to have some sort of similar ritual nowadays because
now people just like come home from war and like, hey, you're back, start being you again.
And they're, you know, it's just going through one of the most traumatic events a human can go
through. I hope you're ready to go to McDonald's on Wednesday. Yeah, seriously, there should be a
period of like penance and asking for forgiveness or doing what one needs to do to show that, you
know, I am leaving behind the place of war and coming back to the place of civilization.
And think about how much that would probably alleviate survivor's guilt. Like I bet you
that's probably one of the other functions. So that's actually something that brings us back to
Jordan Peterson. I can do this too. Specifically, this is something that Peterson talks about badly.
Like I have some criticisms of the way Peterson communicates. But Nassim Taleb really does it
better, which is to say that our ancestors were very smart, the ones who survived because things
were tougher. And they had a lot more free time to be bored and to think. So when you see a lot of
the weird social institutions and practices that we don't make sense from our perspective now,
it's not that they were crazy. I would say 95% of the time they were doing what I would call
ecological rationality. They were doing something that made sense in the time, because it had a
good purpose. And maybe that the context has changed and they haven't changed the ritual yet.
And that does deserve criticism. But try not to throw out the baby with the bathwater.
So how do we do this without going crazy and, you know, buying into the belief that, I don't know,
God hates fags or whatever it is nowadays that that is a crazy talk, you know,
that I can heal someone's wounds by touching them.
I mean, one of my first things when I got into all of this stuff is I refused to believe anything
that told me to disbelieve science. Like I was allowed to add on top of it, but I wasn't allowed
to contradict anything that was there. And I think that should still be fundamental to anyone's way
of looking at the world. If your way of looking at the world says, Oh, yeah, I can just disregard
the rules of biology and entropy, then probably not correct. I have another
concern, I guess, regarding the pseudoscientific interpretation of this, because, like,
the, what you mentioned earlier on about probabilistically deter, you know,
influencing the future. That reminds me of that. It was a terrible book. Rhonda Burns wrote The
Secret in like the mid 2000s. And that if you're lucky enough to not know what that is.
I do. And I wish I didn't. And I hope your audience doesn't.
I think everyone knows what the secret is. Yeah, well, it was a, it was widely touted by Oprah. It
was a big deal. They made some stupid movie about it. The idea is that if you basically,
if you believe in what you want hard enough, if you visualize it, sometimes the extent of
making a vision board or a sigil, then you could make it happen. And conversely,
when bad things happened to you, that's because you didn't want them not to happen enough.
Or like it was your fears overtaking you.
You guys, you guys know that feeling you get when you read a pop science article that talks
about biases. And you're just like, Oh, wow, this is dumbed down to the point where it's no
longer valuable. It might actually be confusing people and giving them the wrong view.
I can one up that my company made it mandatory for every developer to watch this stupid one hour
course on machine learning and AI. Because it's like, Hey, these are these big buzzwords
going around. How is machine learning and AI influenced this? And it was very clearly written
by somebody who, well, if it was written by somebody who knew anything about any of this,
it was not, it was, it was edited far too much. So it was just this bullshit list of buzzwords.
So it might be like that. But yeah, that is, that's how wizards and people in the
community feel when they read the secret. That is the closest way I can describe it. Like,
even if you were the most powerful wizard believing that they were correct, like, you don't
control every moment of everything in your life. And mostly I hate the woman who wrote the secret
because do you guys remember that giant tsunami that hit India? Yeah, yeah, they asked her about
and she's like, Well, I guess they were putting out tsunami waves. And anyone who says that can
go fuck themselves. Like I have no pity for such a human. And I am really, really upset by it.
But it also has the terrible fallback of blaming people for things that happened to them. You
know, like if somebody's raped, well, they most have not, not wanted it enough to make it not
happen. Yeah, like victim blaming is a really disgusting worldview. Like you can push things
a little bit at best. Like, if anything, I think that the actual people I've communicated with
in that community are really humble about the things they believe they can do, which is good.
Like even if they can't do any of the things, it's best that they believe in small things
than that they can fly or something. As long as I go ahead, I was just gonna make fun of something
on my shelf. But we can do that some other time. I was gonna just say real quick. So David, if
you're, if you're, if you're incantation to make this this windfall of money come through,
if it's in the end the resulting phone call you got, if that deal fell through, would that be
evidence against the efficacy of your wizardry? Or would it mean that you didn't believe hard enough?
No, it would, it would really mean that like I was doing something wrong. Well,
would it mean that your spell was wrong or that the, that the enterprise is mistaken?
I don't have to do experiments and try to figure that out.
Like I was-
If you start experimenting and get something that you can, that you can show us,
I'm really curious, but I don't know, I don't know if you need to put on it too bad.
And so like-
No, no, honestly, the biggest, the biggest magical scientific undertaking I'm doing,
that's a weird sentence to say, is I've been doing a 22 card tarot read for myself
once a week for like six months. I'm gonna keep doing it for a few years and I'm gonna do a
statistical analysis and see if there's anything compared to major life events of mine. And if
there's no pattern there that I'll just just like, you know, it'll be a fun little silly project.
Well, you should publish the results in either case.
Yeah, I really enjoy the tarot because Vivian, you know, the one we had on our ritual podcast,
she reads tarot sometimes professionally. And the thing about it is she's also a
author, science fiction fantasy author, right? And when you see her lay down the tarot,
you realize, oh my god, what she's doing is creating a story on the fly from,
you know, this random list of prompts, the deck that's given to her.
And it's awesome because she is-
She's such a good storyteller that when she reads someone's tarot,
she always puts together something really interesting.
And since humans don't have really that much variety in their lives, like everyone is struggling
to make money and to find someone they love and to be accepted by their peers. And everyone has these
fears and insecurities. And so like, you always play to a few key themes and you change the details
based on what the cards are drawn. And it just works beautifully. It is amazing. She can read
tarot with cards against humanity cards. She's done it before. Yeah. And it worked. And I was like,
this is fucking fantastic. And I need to obviously visit and see that because that's
something that I've never even heard of. That's incredible.
Oh dude, it was the best. She did it to me. And at one point I just like got up and walked away.
I was like, fuck you and your stupid cards doing everything about my life perfectly.
But I don't, I don't in any way shape or form believe in any sort of supernatural stuff. I was
just like, this is some incredible storytelling. And I wish you were making more money for this
because damn, that's some, some highly good skill. I think about it like this. So you guys know that
if you get your brain bisected and the two halves are not in communication, that you can
essentially communicate with the both of them separately, right? Yes. Right. It's both fascinating
and terrifying because then you're like, what the fuck if there's two personalities living in my
body and I don't feel it? And oh my God. And yes, the real kicker, there's probably two in there
right now. You just can't hear them both. Well, that's why you do tarot. That's why you do tarot.
Think about it like this. The part of your brain that is older, in my opinion, and the part that
Jordan Peterson talks about a lot is the subconscious symbolic part. And it operates in
story tropes and images. That's how it communicates. And that's why if you read the right passage and
the right book at the right time in your life, it'll just like hit you like a ton of bricks and
you're not even sure why. Because it's communicating something that this part of you is trying to
tell you, but it doesn't use language. So it's really hard for you to get it. The tarot is an easy
way for that part of your brain to communicate to you. By doing exactly that, you're giving it
like essentially 72 tropes. Each card represents a trope or an idea and then you just put them in
order. And then that part of your brain gets to imprint the story it wants to tell you using those
as like its pieces. But so how do we going really quickly to the book that I have on the shelf?
I feel there's always this danger because I have this book on my shelf because it was just so
beautiful. I found it in a thrift store. And it starts, it's called Busting Loose from the Money
Game. And it's supposed to be one of those financial independence books, right? Okay. And
it starts out talking about how money isn't like, it doesn't have a, about the illusion of money,
right? It says the human game is a game created and played entirely in the consciousness, which
is true, right? Like the economy is humans working together and can essentially agreeing that this
money has value because we'll accept it as a payment. And it goes from there, after a while,
it gets to start saying things that are more controversial, such as numbers were created
specifically to give you an experience of limitation. And that's their real purpose.
Wait, what? First of all, yeah, I don't think that's actually the purpose of numbers.
As far as I know, numbers were invented in ancient Mesopotamia to keep track of debt.
So they do have like track of things. Yeah, to keep track of money and value of like sheep and
shit. Oh, but it gets better. It gets to the point where they start using some of their own
terminology for these things, like they refer to the field as I guess some sort of analog for
markets or whatever. And it gets to the point where it says, the illusion of money comes from a
pattern in the field, and you have the power to create any pattern, apply power to any pattern
and pop any pattern into your hologram, which is how you view the world, appearing to be real.
Can you have anything you want? Absolutely. You have anything you want. The only limits are
your your own experience and and what you see in your hologram. And I'm like, you literally just
went to craziness. And it's, I believe that is that is always one of the problems. And why people
have, you know, such problems with these sorts of things is is the worry that we're going to get
starting to talk like crazy people and believing crazy things. And that's a very reasonable thing
to be worried about. I really wish I had a better answer. But mine, like the way I deal with it is
I simply have people who are touchstones who don't who have their own crazy things they believe that
I keep them in check in. And they help me keep myself in check when I start to go too deep down
the rabbit hole and worrying about the Martian Wars. Yeah. By the way, that's a great conspiracy
theory. I don't actually have I've never seen a good rebuttal of it either, which is why I like
it so much. I've never even heard of this Martian Wars thing. Oh my god. So the basis of it is that
there is an isotope xenon 115. I'm gonna double check what it is. But there is an isotope of a
noble gas that only appears during nuclear fission reactions. Like it's a byproduct. It doesn't happen
in nature any other place. And the entire atmosphere of Mars is coated in it, almost like a bomb the
size of the Empire State Building went off and literally eradicated everything that was on that
planet in a giant nuclear holocaust. And like it's a very strange one. And I like the I think
their chemistry is real. Like I believe that chemicals in there. And I just don't think NASA
has a good answer or doesn't know yet why that happened. Like I'm sure there's a perfectly
good natural explanation. But it's a fun conspiracy theory you've got to admit. Yeah.
I really wish I had a better answer for you, Enya. The only one I can say is make sure you have friends
who are both willing to entertain your craziness and who have their different craziness so that
they won't let you go too far. Oh, I see. I have to have friends now. Okay, so yeah, that is a bird
and I'm going to play songs with a listener. The only real thing I'll say is I sent you guys
three links. The Slate Star Codex one is probably the one that's closest to how I feel a lot of magic
on a metaphysical level works. Did you guys read that? That was the I know I have because
I've read every Slate Star Codex post. Eternal love said the cactus person. Oh, okay. Yeah.
See, he wouldn't talk to the others. Like I said, DMT.
Yeah, like the newest brand of chaos magic is being described as space shamanism and says that
like, okay, here's one of those weird things that you learn and I don't have a good answer to it,
which is ayahuasca invented in the Amazon is a mixture of DMT plant and then an MAOI inhibitor
and they grow in different parts of the jungle and you have to cook the two of them in a pretty
complex way in order to nullify everything except for the two chemicals you want. And when they asked
the Amazonians, like, how did you figure out this very complex and extremely like rare? Like
there's 26,000 plants in the Amazon. How did they know to mix these two and one of them is like a
root of a plant? And their answer was the plants told us. Well, I mean, that's because they don't
know it was someone deep in their history that did it. It I would really be curious to see the
combinatorics odds on that because it seems way outside the bounds of someone who isn't aware
of how to do it ahead of time. Well, like we talked about people people were bored and had a lot of
free time back then. That's true. You know what? You're mashing two plants, you're mashing every
combination of plants together that you can't. You know what? There was probably like one weird
there was just one really weird dude who was like, I'm bored. I don't really like living that much.
Let's see what we got. Dude, and there is so much motivation to find the next good thing that gets
you high. You know what? I believe I believe Scott said like that the the two major advancements
in the fields of medical psychiatry in the past several decades have come from hippies trying
to find new ways to get high. I mean, I would. Yeah, I'm trying to think back over my psychology
history and that seems pretty accurate from what I've seen ketamine and mushrooms.
Yeah, I'm really excited. Maps is doing good work. They finally got approval.
Oh, the multi-clinical area association for psychedelic research.
Yeah, excellent. Those are the legit ones, right? That they're going to hopefully be able to find
just finished round two clinical trials with mushrooms for PTSD. Excellent.
Yeah, I think that that's another value of the weird. And so you've read the Slate Star Codex
where he talks about the dangers of early psychedelic users taking too much and being
permanently too open. I think everyone who starts to dive into the weird should be forced to read
that article first just to be aware of that's where you're going. And it's fun to go there,
but it's not good to stay there. It's not a safe or functional place to stay. But there is a lot
of value in being willing to explore and entertain a false mind frame and realizing that even while
it is not true, there are things that this way of looking at the world reveals that are still valuable.
Man, that went way less controversially than I thought it would. So that's good.
Well, yeah, I basically agree with you. It takes being weird and being willing to entertain crazy
shit to make breakthroughs sometimes. I can tell you about my magical incidences. I did a ritual
in the pyramids of Egypt. I want to hear about that in one second, but I want to draw a listen to
something that, no, I do, but this was related to a post that was just on the Denver Less Wrong
Facebook page about Ozzy and Scott Alexander disagree about whether or not you should diversify
your charitable portfolio, basically. On the one hand, there is one best cause to give your money
to. So you should be doing that. It seems pretty ironclad. And then Ozzy points out that you can't
really be sure if it's the best one. And even if it is, what if they're not handling their money well,
maybe it's an odds game and it happens not to work out. So you should probably diversify. Plus,
if you diversify, you can feel better about giving. So that's a good instrumental reason to do it that
way. And I kind of come down right in the middle because that's how I tend to do things when I
have a strong opinion that I think Scott's probably right that there is one ultimate goal and that's
where all your money should go. But if you're not going to give all your money to one charity,
because it doesn't feel as rewarding or it feels too risky, and the only way you'll give anything
is to diversify, then I'm all for that, right? Whatever gets you to do the thing. And so,
similar to this, or the reason I thought about it was, and hold on, my brain's crashing.
Yeah, doing weird stuff. If that's what gets you going, if you're not going to do anything cool
without being also weird, go forth and be weird, right? I want your advice then on if someone is
willing to do some weird things and try to crazy up their life a little bit and control doses,
what would you recommend they do if they are pretty new to this whole thing and a fairly
rational person and want to dip in, but don't want to go straight to the sacrificing their
firstborn on the altar of Molly? I have a submission for the first thing. I want to see if David
agrees. Psychedelics. Yes, I was actually going to say that as well. Well, let's assume that this
is someone who doesn't want to do psychedelics for whatever reason, wants a more mystical,
nonchemically induced experience. Now, we can talk about your thing in the Temple of Egypt,
or in the Egyptian pyramid. Yeah, this is essentially the same idea. You need to have
an experience that is so strong that if you were not a rationalist, you could fall into the pit.
That's really the true answer. You need to have an experience that strong because then you can
empathize. You really get why people fall into it then. For me, I was visiting, I'm Egyptian,
and a few years ago I was lucky enough to get to go back to Egypt for the first time and visit a
bunch of my family there. One of my buddies had lent me a copy of the Egyptian Book of the Dead,
and it was in English. Well, I had a friend named Hong, who I play Pathfinder with occasionally,
who is an Egyptologist. While I was in Egypt, I exchanged photos from the Cairo Museum with him
translating one of the spells in there for me. So I did one of the tours and I got to be in the
center of the pyramid by myself. So I encanted an ancient Egyptian spell from the Book of the Dead
to imbibe a god into my body. I chose Thoth, the god who invented writing and magic,
because a god who invents books is probably the most rational of all gods.
And nothing really weird happened that night, but then every day, since then,
I think I've gotten a book. It's been two years. I have too many books. I have way too many books.
It is actually a legit problem. You've gotten a book every day for the last two years?
Yeah, legit. How many days does it take you to read a book?
More than one. Definitely an issue. Totally Southern Gothic right there.
At first, it was kind of a joke, but then there would be days I would go to the beach with my
family and I'd be like, okay, nothing's going to happen today. And then I'd literally find a book
sticking out of the sand. You realize you can throw away books, right?
I don't understand the words coming out of your mouth.
I didn't know you spoke Chinese. You know, I have many hidden talents.
But that was a small one. I actually do have a crazier story, which is I almost sacrificed a
goat once to Thor. I would feel really silly sacrificing something to Thor or really any of
the Nordic gods now just because there's been Marvel movies and other movies before that even.
At this point, they almost feel like a joke. I feel the opposite. They're definitely the
gods to be worshipping. Everyone's paying attention to them. You don't want to worship shitty,
non-popular gods like secondary ones. Do you think that the... I'm sorry, go ahead.
Oh, it's just like the Neil Gaiman American gods theory that gods are strong in proportion to how
many people are paying attention to them. Then do you think that the Thor of Asgard is
more empowered or pissed because everyone's worshipping the false idol, Chris Hemsworth?
As long as they're using the name Thor.
Oh, so that counts, okay. I wonder if the god of Abraham agrees with that, as long as you're
saying god. That's why this tradition is always sealing out god during sex, right? He's getting
fueled by all the sex magic. Oh my god, don't even get me started on how much magic the Catholic
church does. But if Helsing, the anime, has anything to say about this, they do all the magic.
Yes. So what happened was many years ago, I took psychedelics and a bunch of my friends,
we were at a hurricane party because there was a hurricane hitting the east coast.
That sounds like a responsible thing to do. We were, I was like 21 at the time. I wasn't making
good decisions. We all decided to run naked through the hurricane, and I remember doing so.
And legitimately stopping in the middle of the road as everyone ran in front of me, and I was
just like, this is not actually that bad of a storm. It was a thunderstorm, but I was like,
this was way overhyped. They were shutting down the city of Philadelphia and stuff,
and I looked up at the sky and I don't know why, but I looked at the sky and I literally screamed
Thor is a pussy. And then like every mortal in a mythological event where you insult a god,
I needed to be humbled. So every time I tried to take psychedelics for two or three years after
that, and I have multiple friends who can cite this literally every single time, terrible freak
weather, like six inches of snow coming out of nowhere, like torrential downpours in the middle
of sunny days. And I was like, oh man, I think I pissed off Thor. So I will say, well, I can't
necessarily advocate doing things that are dangerous. Doing something like running naked
through a hurricane at the age of 21. It just seems like a thing that you would remember for the rest
of your life. And it's just such a good bonding experience. It and honestly, I'm not saying
nobody would have done it if we thought we were truly at risk. Like if the storm was bringing
down trees and stuff, we definitely wouldn't have and we would have stayed indoors. But like the
very fact that it was a mild risk, but the biggest risk honestly was being seen nude less the storm
itself. Right, you could get some some felony charges for that. Could you get felony or is
that just Mr. Meener? And we could because we live next to a police station at the time.
Oh, good. We when I said no good decisions, I really meant it. Yeah. I worked at men's warehouse.
And I remember we were partying on the 4th of July and the weather was nice. And my friends were
like making fun of me and they're like, you've got to do something so Thor isn't pissed at you.
And I was like, I think I should sacrifice a goat to Thor. And this is very
did you try saying you're sorry first? It didn't work. Like gods don't care about your work.
I definitely did not want to do that first. But so side caveat, my family as Middle Easterners
has no problem with the slaughter of animals as long as it is for food. And I have heard many
people talk about barbecues as essentially like a burnt offering and a community ritual.
Like they're the same thing. So we also have an open air market. So I was like, I'm gonna be
serious about this. I taught I talked to my parents because I lived with them at the time. And I was
like, I'm gonna do this. And they're like, Yeah, just give us some goat meat. We don't care. And
I got all of this stuff ready. I had a goat named Delilah. You don't name your sacrificial goats.
I didn't name her. I got her with a name. God damn it. And then wouldn't accept the sacrifice
unless it hurts. So yeah. And then the day of it, like, like, torrentially downpour. And I'm
like, Well, I can't really have a bonfire and do this. So I guess Thor saying that I don't need to
do this. And like, so the next day at work, I had to call off for this. And my bosses were like,
how the sacrifice go because I am far too honest for my own good. And I was like, I told them what
happened. And they were like, David, you're just kind of like wimping out. And I was like, kind of,
yeah. And part of my job at men's warehouse is, you know, you get tuxedos back from a wedding,
and you have to like, open them and make sure everything's inside. Well, the very first tuxedo,
I open up the bag, and I hear some jingling at the bottom, like, did someone forget their keys?
And I go in the bottom and I pull out a set of cuff links. And they say Thor on them.
And I showed them to my boss. And he doesn't believe it.
For a worthwhile, like, if I didn't already trust you as a sensible person, this sounds
so made up, which is really, really cool. I will send you two people who were there. One of them
was my boss, and he didn't believe it. Like he was next to me when it happened. And he's like,
this is not real. I think this is outstanding. This is, I think I had this realization a few
years ago when I was talking to my uncle, and he has telling me some crazy stories. And I had said,
if I didn't know you for a trustworthy person, I'd say that's bullshit. And I think when I
thought about it, I think that's like a really flattering thing to say. And I wasn't going to
say that about me. I want my life to be so ridiculous that somebody's like, I think that's
bullshit. And like, I totally get that you don't believe me, but it really happened.
Yeah. And so, and look, they were the cufflinks from Marvel, right? Like, there are
Avengers themed cufflinks for a groomsman's party, and I guess this groomsman just left
his in the bag. But if you're going to believe in probability manipulation and signals from gods,
that's about as clear as they get. That's when you and Thor were homies again.
Yeah, at least we were neutral, which is the way I like it.
I gotta say, while those are awesome stories, I think there's also something to be said for
things that you can do easily at home. I am reminded of a conversation I had through email
with someone after the episode on Ritual with Vivian, where they said, yeah, I mean, I don't
believe in magic at all, but I do it all the time. Like, sometimes if I really want to do something,
I'll just say, I'm doing this thing, I'm doing this thing, I'm doing this thing six times. And
as I'm doing it, I'll get out my Sharpie and just draw a little pentagram on the back of my hand,
six times over. And it really works for me. And I was like, you know, that's cool, because that is
something easy that you can do at home that you don't have to go out and find a goat and get
a bonfire going and everything. And there's something to be said for like the little
Jesdan Files practical magics. Then my role of practical magics is I'll send you guys two more
links from RuneSoup, but make sigils, you can do it at home with pencil and paper. And more
importantly, and I said it before, they work even if you don't believe them, which is I think
the most interesting part, like if it's really fooling your perceptions, it's doing it at a
very deep level, because I've seen people who are skeptical do them and then get the result,
which is really amazing when you think about it. Like it's like the placebo effect worked
while you looked at someone and showed them the box that said sugar pill.
Well, that's the crazy thing about placebos, they do work even when you know they're placebos.
Well, in that case, more placebo mancy for everyone.
Yeah.
I tell you what, you've convinced me, I will, I'll check out your, your sigil writing thing,
and I will, I will do one for science and I'll report back next time we chat.
Because if I can, if I can make things, if I can fix a couple of little things, you know,
that are probably fixable from the inside of my mind for 10 minutes of effort,
I'm all about that easy path.
I mean, the best technique, and I do think this is what they call a shoaling and robo fishing.
So a shoal is like a group of fish. So you make a group of sigils all at once.
And robo fish is they found out that you can't control an individual fish in a shoal.
But if you put a robot fish in a shoal, and you control that one,
you can get the whole shoal to move, right?
So you make five sigils of things that you want to happen, and then you make a sixth
sigil of something that's already true in your life to attract it into reality.
And all that's a really easy one that anyone can do, just set it up for like one week.
And I'm, you know, they're always fun to hear.
One of my favorites was a guy did like one where he did a sigil that wanted to lose weight
and fix his relationship. And then another one to like get a better job.
And it turns out he got a better job that was closer to his house.
So he could walk home every day and have lunch with his partner and walk back.
And because he wasn't eating out anymore, he lost weight, his relationship improved,
and he got more money.
Thanks.
Yeah, it's a hard drug to do with results, right?
It's also handy that if you do five sigils at once, you know,
you only need one of them to hit for it to work.
Exactly. If you're going to try to fool yourself, use your brain and be clever about it.
You're a very smart person. It takes a lot of work to fool yourself.
Oh, I believe the exact opposite is true. And I think Feynman is the one who said you,
you, the greatest fear is not to be fooled. And you are the easiest person to fool yourself
or something along those lines. I will have to look up the exact quote, but yeah, I think
fooling yourself is the easiest thing to do and much easier than it is to fool other people.
But you know, sometimes you can use that power for good.
I think the quote was the first principle is that you must not fool yourself and you are
the easiest person to fool.
There we go. Thank you.
Yeah.
Steven with the research.
Fast on the keyboard.
This is like, I think there's two levels of this conversation we'll be taking place on.
We're like, everybody's having this conversation super seriously and they believe it with magic
capital M. And then there's like this laid back. It's like, you know, no man,
it's kind of like meditation and like focusing, you know, your own energy, lowercase energy,
not the magic energy, just your own efforts towards life betterment and looking out for
positive things and you know,
you know what it is?
No, this, this, this is straight up perfect example of Montin Baileying.
Yes.
It's the whole, no man, it's just looking for positive vibes and stuff. And then, you know,
sneaking in the back door. Yes, but you can actually control the fabric of the universe.
So only if only one of us actually step back and said that, right?
Well, it's a societal Montin Bailey. There's a few people that are like, yeah, it's just for
fun. And then there's the people that are like, no, you can, you know, remove your
fatins and see through walls. All you got to do is give Hubbard's to your money.
That's why I think that a sense of history helps. Like all four of the things that I
mentioned that magic claims it can do are not really the type of superpower things that people
think of today. Like I don't know, man.
Astral projection is just kind of like lying, like even exciting people who think they can
actually astral project are essentially just meditating and imagining stuff or lying down.
Yeah. Like I'm okay. This might be me over tolerating seriousness or silliness,
but I'm pretty okay with people who do silly things that don't infringe on others and don't
hurt them. Like everyone's entitled to waste some of their own time. God knows I do.
Totally. And if you're wasting it in a way that turns out to be productive for you, you know,
focused meditation or something, you know, it's hard to say that it's a waste, right?
If you're relaxed afterwards and you feel better and things are, you know,
you're making a concerted effort or something. You know, like what if your outcome from doing
this was like, you know what, I do have the energy to go to the gym today because I felt,
I feel like I do because I feel like my ritual worked or something, right?
I think the thing that the thing that really kind of
worries me is that this sort of thing is okay. Oh God, I'm going to sound like such an
elitist prick saying this, but with that caveat, this sort of thing is like okay for us where we're
like, yeah, man, you know, we're just helping to, to motivate ourselves and whatever. It's not real.
And I do believe that, but there's also this person that I don't see very often.
At this point in the episode, I detailed some really wacky beliefs of someone I know.
He doesn't listen to the podcast, but it still seemed kind of mean in retrospect.
So in the interest of not outing anyone, we're removing the details.
Just let it be known that the beliefs are really very weird and not supported by any physical
evidence. And that's like, even if there's those of us who can accept. That's a lot. That's a lot.
Even for me. Oh dude, it is straight up wackiness. And that the problem is that even though there's
people who can like take this magic into their lives and use it to like
help themselves in small ways to be more motivated, the, the, I feel there's a like the,
it's sort of like a not taking a vaccine sort of thing. Sure, we're okay, but the rest of society
suffers because now the people who are more vulnerable, who have a compromised magnetic
immune system are buying into the wholesale magic is real and I can fly and stuff.
And that's the kind of things that like, you know, am I hurting the rest of society because
most people are not as rational and will be sucked into the, the actual seeing the future magic?
That is, this is Colorado is a weird placement.
I'm determining from here on the east coast.
There's people like that on the east coast too, they're everywhere.
Oh yeah, they definitely are.
I know several of them.
I can see where you're coming from and I don't want to be party to hurting people,
but at some point I just have to believe that if it wasn't magic, I don't know,
maybe they'd all be Mormon.
Like I, I believe that the flaw that makes them susceptible to that memology
would have, they would be infected by something one way or another.
Crazy's got to be cray.
Yeah, and it's not like to be fair to the wider population.
It's a lot.
Like, I don't know.
I've been reading the sequences on and off and trying to integrate rationality into my life for
like six years.
And I would say I'm, if the martial arts metaphor is working, I'm just about to leave white belt.
It's really, really hard.
Yeah.
Oh no, I, yeah, it is very difficult.
I find myself failing constantly.
I mean, I'm now at the point where I know when I'm failing constantly.
Which I think is, is maybe, maybe I don't know how the belts work in, in martial arts,
but I feel like learning the moves and knowing, you know, your stances and stuff
is what it takes to get out of white belts, right?
I know I'm torturing this metaphor, but like, I feel like you're not giving yourself enough credit.
You know, I don't think that we can all run around like Harry, James Potter, Evans, Varys,
or Professor Quarrow and be, you know, these, these beacons of rationality that are constantly
running, you know, just crushing it on a rationality judo level, right?
But I think it's like, all right, when crunch time happens, I know that I can set aside some time
and actually think about this in a way that I now have tools to approach this problem in a more
rigorous and reliable way, right?
It's, it's true.
And it does help to form some habits as well.
Yeah.
Like, I mean, I think a lot of them, you know, you don't give yourself credit for,
but you, you consider alternate viewpoints.
You think of something that, you know, you come down on a position really hard,
and yet you still think, okay, have I thought of this from all angles?
And, you know, what could change my mind?
Those are moves that most people don't know.
And, you know, I think I mentioned this before, but one of those examples when we had Navinon,
we're talking about marriage, and he had asked you, hey, is there anything that, you know,
is there any circumstance where you'd still get married?
And you're like, yeah, if I had a close friend who needed my medical insurance,
you had an answer ready, you'd already thought of it.
Like you, that showed that you had thought through this from several angles and that you
didn't, you didn't like bottom line think, I hate this, I'm going to write 30 arguments above it,
right?
Right.
So I, I don't know, I don't know if I, I don't know who among us has the,
has the power to grant you a blue belt, but
This is one of those.
This is actually where I think what I would like to explore in the future.
I think magic has a lot of techniques for hacking your brain into getting you to do behaviors
and changing the way you look at the world.
And I think that when I was last on with you, Stephen, I was talking about how I wish there
was a set of techniques that people could learn first, like that think through every,
every position one and then learn the theory behind it in the sequences later.
So I wish there was a way to extract those useful ways of hacking the brain to getting
more rationalist thinking, but I'm not sure how to do it yet.
I have heard that about magic before too, that it is good for hacking those sorts of things.
If you find out that sort of thing, or like just even as you start making progress along
these lines, you should let us know we can keep in contact and, you know, touch back on this.
Yeah, it's like one of the ones I try to do regularly as a magic
action is I try to collect the oldest like material I can from my alter and I just keep
like a little pile of rocks. Like I have a rock from the pyramids of the Egypt. I have a meteorite.
Wait a minute. Did you steal a rock from the pyramids?
I just picked it up and put it in my pocket.
It was on the ground and then you're not supposed to take those because then if
everyone does that there aren't any rocks left, right?
No, that thing is huge. Everyone could easily take a rock the size I took and there'd be a
lot of pyramids left. It was very intimidating.
Well, all righty then.
I have a meteorite and it sounds like a silly rock collection it is, but it's a way of
representing to myself like history is huge. You are in a very small slice of it and that
is a humbleness reminder. So when I look at it, I'm like, okay,
what am I worried about right now that is probably not a big deal and what should I be
worried about in the long term? It's a refocusing of what's important and it's a way I just like
built that memetic habit into my magical worship.
I like that a lot. I also like that you like rocks too. I don't have a big collection,
but I have a handful of ones that I really like. I have a friend who brought me back
a piece of igneous rock from Hawaii and it's, you know, I don't know how old it is, but it's,
you know, it could be just a few decades or even a few years old. My brother brought me back,
I love this. It's a small piece of cobblestone from a road in Prague that he went to in high
school. That absolutely had to be not legit, dude.
I don't know if it was a crux of the road that now everything's hitting this pothole or if it
was found nearby, but part of it was worn smooth and then he brought me back a rock from the beach
of Ireland and, you know, old coins are kind of similar to me too, right, where
there's this sense of history to it. I think that's really cool.
Yeah, so people, okay, so I'm going to give you now what I believe is the definition of ritual
and ritual is that which is done with symbolic intention because you can brush your teeth,
but if you make the very act of cleaning your body, a ritualistic thing is like you
purify your mind to prepare the day, that's what changes brushing your teeth from a habit
to a ritual. It's the way you approach it that changes the context of it.
See, you could have saved us 45 minutes on that one episode.
Yeah. People are ritualistic creatures. Like the way we start denoting humans have become
intelligent is we have like art and jewelry at our gravesites. We have rituals. We are
homo ritualists and for whatever reason, they really stick in our brains. So if you're going to,
if you know that you can hack your brain using ritual, then you should build rituals and patterns
in your life that will hack the correct things into you. I like this. I really actually want to
start implementing this now. So one of the chaos magic procedures is you're supposed to find your
patron god and goddess and in a way, it's almost forcing you to decide like what kind of, if I
have a masculine and a feminine part to my personality, what describes those parts of me
and it's also kind of aspirational. Like who do you want to be? I have friends who's like my
female part is Kalima and she's like death goddess and dark and I'm like, okay, that's
that's a decision you're saying to yourself. Yeah, someone watched the temple of doom as a
teenager. Yeah, I chose Athena and the monkey king because I wanted a trickster and a goddess of
wisdom and so that's what I want to think about every day when I go about my life and I think
that's what religion does for people in the same way. You intentionally focus your mind on being
like a person like Christ, a person who's willing to sacrifice and hold others above themselves
and that helps you become like that in a small way. But per the warning earlier, like some people
take that up to up to 11 and believe that they can't draw that wisdom without also believing
a bunch of really weird and wrong shit, right? I don't know. Yeah, you're absolutely right and
I wish there was a way to better filter but I think of it more like an engine can work even
with a little bit of gunk in it, but if there's too much gunk, the engine is definitely not going
to function like you and I don't know how to figure out where that is because I think the
common parlance would be to say like there he would be below the sanity waterline and honestly
let's be if we're being very frank here, if someone said the things that you told me he said
Emyah is like let's go 60 years ago. He would have been below the sanity waterline as far as most
of society was concerned. Yeah. And I'm not saying that this person is insane. I'm saying that
this person probably functions very well, but is not society no longer says that that is
below the line and I have mixed opinions about this. Oh, yeah. And I'm not like I feel bad because
I don't really have room to judge and I'm aware of this, but I can't help myself from noticing that
and just thinking like this is like we just got gay marriage a few years ago. Society is moving
really fast. I'm sorry. I really like your podcast with that guy from was it West Virginia?
Oh, yes, yes. Joshua. Joshua is a person who also lives in the East Coast and who has gone to
West Virginia many times for kayaking. I understand the viewpoint of the part of the country who
feels reticent about all these social changes. No, I think I think overall it's a change for
the better. I mean, he's not harming anyone. And the only person he might be harming is himself.
And even then I'm not sure how much that's harming him. I guess what he's his his efforts are no
longer being funneled into something more socially useful by a church. But on the other hand,
lots of times churches would funnel people's efforts into very destructive and bad things.
So on the whole, I prefer things this way where sure, people have their own crazy bullshit,
but at least the churches aren't around, you know, telling gay people that they're awful
and they can't marry and all the bullshit things that churches have done since time immemorial.
Yeah. I mean, I think you're right more anti organized religion than you are.
I think you're generally right. I mean, my I feel bad for organized religions like Catholicism
and Buddhism, because they are desperately trying to update themselves in a way that is useful.
And I think that if society was moving a little bit slower, or if they had started this like a
decade ago, there might be a much better place for them in the world. But it just doesn't seem
likely at this point. And it makes me a little sad.
Like, because you're right, I don't disagree with you. I do think that there's going to be
backlash in terms of like how fast we're moving. But the general trend is definitely
a positive one. But there are very few effective super organisms in society. I listened to your
last one. And I checked out that there are very few effective super organisms. And the Catholic
Church at its height was one of the most powerful in history. Oh, hell yeah. And they really had
their shit down. It's really, really impressive when you can like, think about a single person
saying a word and then imagine like more wealth than currently resides in Africa, changing hands
and an entire city being built, which is a thing that happened like two or three times
during the reign of like the popes, which is crazy to me, like just pointing and saying,
I want a city here. And then people moved there and live there and started doing it.
Oh, yeah, no, there's, I don't know, you kind of think we had some more. It's hard because you
think, oh, how much good could these super organisms do if they were pointed the right
way? You know, we could be solving so many problems. But then the trap is, you know,
sure, everything would be great in a dictatorship if I was the dictator, right? But I'm never the
dictator. It's always the guy with the crappy ideas as the old cliche goes. First of all,
I've thought about dictatorship and realized at a young enough age that I'd be a really good
face man, but I should never be a dictator. I think the only way you can incentivize super
organisms to be effective is if they are competing against other super organisms in a larger ecosystem.
I generally go with the ecosystem answer whenever I'm confused by a behavior,
which I guess is like something that rationality definitely taught me to do.
Do you think the rationalists are something I think about every now and then
seeding too much ground by being so disorganized and not?
Absolutely. Yes. Yes, 100%. I wish that there was a way that we could organize and point
ourselves at a goal because I generally find that whenever I meet a group of rationalists,
I'm very good with my words and I'm kind of clever, but I'm generally the least intelligent person
there. And if I'm being very honest, I don't think I'm dumb. And if we could get that money people
with that kind of intelligence pointed at a goal, I don't know what the upper limits actually could
be. How many people do you think if you posted something on less wrong or if we
decided to do something would get involved? I genuinely have no idea.
Probably not all that many. I mean, I think the largest thing that has ever been done in
a single organization is when Eleazar founded Miri and that's something. It's an organization
that gets a decently large budget, can support several researchers now, but it's not all that
big in the grand sphere. I mean, more than anything, it's the fact that they have incentivized other
organizations to also get on board and start paying attention to this that it has had the
greater effect than anything they've done directly. And I think that is the one largest
rationalist center of focus right now. We're not a very focused people. And I think that's okay
because we are distrusting of authority as we should be, as we kind of have to be in order to
get to rationalism in the first place, but it makes it tough to form the sort of superorganism
that gets a lot done and competes in the ecological sphere of other leviathans.
I mean, I think that the existential threat of what the AI problem that you'd Kowski points
out in the sequences is one of those things that when you get what he's implying, your stomach
drops. And even if you are somehow persuaded to believe it's not going to be as bad as he describes,
the idea is always there, like the existential dread is now permanently implanted into you.
And that kind of thing I think can motivate people very well. The only other thing I can
think of that would motivate the community would have to be something that has that kind of emotional
impact. I don't think that fear and things like that are actually very good motivators. I think
it's much more important to have a community going. I think that's the big thing that helped the
Catholic Church, right? For the vast majority of people, it's just the lady, it's people working
their nine to five jobs or in the pre-modern era, their sunrise to sunset farms and for the most part
living life, finding a place to slot into in society and being more or less content and putting
just a little bit of their effort towards the church and they managed to give people enough
meaning in life and fulfill enough of an niche socially that they could aggregate some of that
extra effort until eventually they became what they are. And so I don't think that, you know,
telling the lady, as Jesus did in the gospel, sell everything you own and follow me because
the end is nigh, I don't think that works for most people. There'll be some fanatics that are
convinced by that, but for the most part, I think people want to have a society that they can live
their lives in and so I don't think an existential threat like that is a good thing to do. I think
we need community first. I think you need both, but like the way I view it is you kind of need
something to kick people's ass to get them in gear, but if you don't have a community that's real and
genuine once that fades away because that will eventually fade, like it's going to take years
of hard work, you're not going to feel existential dread every minute of every day working there,
talking to people or hanging out and drinking a coffee. Like if there's not a community there,
then you become a death cult. So I do think you're right. You need both. I think you need
something that is external, that is a motivation for everyone, but you also need an in community
worth fighting for. And it's just about every author will tell you nowadays because everyone
writes fan fiction. It's where you learn fan fiction is so much easier to write not because
of the world or the characters or anything that's already there, but because you post it up online
and you get instant feedback and people saying, I enjoyed reading this. Thank you. And that is
what gets you going from day to day, you know, whereas writing a novel where you're just at it
for months alone and no one's going to see it. And then there's months of editing and then there's
years before it hits the presses and it is, it does not sustain you at all motivationally. Whereas,
you know, writing a chapter for your fanfic and putting that up online, you get that dopamine
hit of people saying thanks immediately. It's so rewarding. Oh man, that sounds
interesting. You know, Naseem Talib actually did that for his last book. He would post up like
chapters with no chapter number or page numbers, but randomly he would post them on Facebook
for months before his book was published. Oh, nice. Yeah, I really liked it. Skin in the game
was good. I think it's the first for it's the first mathematical formalization of ethics I've
ever seen. Oh, fancy. Yeah, like, essentially, the more risk that you shove away from yourself
onto other people, the worse human you are. Oh, I like that. Yeah. And the more risk you
take onto yourself and save from other people, the better you are. Oh, but then you can collapse
under the weight of that. That's why everyone loves a martyr. You just described what a martyr
complex does. Well, we are over an hour and a half. So we kind of got to wrap things up at this
point. Sounds good. It's late where I am. Yeah. Yeah, right. You're over on these coasts.
Thanks for rocking to midnight with us. I realized that I haven't said anything in like half an hour
and I think I have a total of like 10 minutes of dialogue in this whole episode. I find this
happening off it. No, no, no, no. I was just gonna say I find this happening a lot when we have
interesting guests on and especially if you know, I was just here to like, you know, keep the
conversation going. But I just like came back and listen, but I had a really good time even though
I wasn't very active here. I apologize too. I tend to get like carried away and all excited about
shit. No, no, no. I think I think I have enough like autonomy in the conversation to grab it if I
really wanted to seize it, at least for a minute here and there. But really for the most part,
I was having a good time hanging out. I wanted to ask really quick though, David. So you've
mentioned 12, 12 rules for living or 12 rules for life and the same Taleb to me a bunch.
And so I don't have a huge reading budget because it takes me so long. So
who should I read first, Taleb or Peterson? I like Peterson. I like Peterson. But the truth is
he's probably not going to reveal anything to you that is new. If you have the opportunity to
borrow 12 rules, do that, but don't buy it. Buy Taleb. Taleb will like fill in
gaps in your map or a better way to say it is in the map and territory analogy,
Taleb is the best person I've ever seen describing the blank spaces on your map.
I've never seen anything like that's what his books are, a meditation on the blank spaces in
the map and the ethics and how to deal with it. Excellent. Yeah, I'm captivated. Sweet.
Yeah. That sounds like a strong recommend there. And he's just pretty hilarious. He taught me my
first French phrase that I remember. Pet-a-beth. Which is? A face that invites a slap.
Everyone knows you know someone. As soon as I said that word, everyone who's listening to this
thought of a face, because everyone knows immediately. Everyone thought of a jeep pie.
Yeah. Because he just has that face, right? I'm not a violent person.
You just want to slap him. I know one guy who went to my friend's college at Bucknell. And as
far as I know, he was a very friendly person. I have no beef with him. But every time I saw him,
I'm like, oh my God, you make me want to become like a college bully. Why? Why is this happening?
I don't know if this says something about me, but I did not have a face that came to mind.
Oh, you're a better person than me. I think that says that. Or maybe more boring. I don't know.
You need more enemies. No, no, I do not. Okay. I promise I won't give you any of mine.
I think we can talk up to you being a better person. Yeah, sure.
Don't throw in those enemy sigils at me. Okay. Fair point. Okay. Thank you guys for having me on
again. I appreciated it. And I'll let you guys go. Peace. Oh, before you go, is there anything you
want to promote or plug? Well, I heard what your brother was saying earlier, Stephen. And if anyone
out there would like to help me coordinate, I would like to get a less wrong meetup going in
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania. I've tried to look at them. I believe there's one in Philly that
meets like once a quarter, but I can't meet there. So if anyone is in Southeast Pennsylvania,
hit up, hit me up. And if you want to buy a house, I'll put my information.
How can I hit you up? Give us a quick email address. Okay.
Okay. You can reach me at dydavidusif at gmail.com. Okay. And we'll put a link up on our
podcast on the webpage as well. Sweet. And I'll just say this really quick in response to your
thing about community starting that I'm hardly a person with any real experience or knowledge here,
but really, then this is the rule for life that I've been articulating for myself too. And it's
kind of like Peterson, super cliched, but also super true that the one thing that's
possible from doing anything is just not actually trying, not actually doing it. They just think,
oh, it won't work, or oh, it'll be too hard. Throw something up on Meetup, go hang out a
coffee shop by yourself for two first weekends, and then people will start showing up, right?
Or maybe if nothing happens after a month, then start marketing more heavily. But
I bet there are people who look on SlateStar Codex or wherever they have those maps,
and like, man, I wish something was in the area. And if you put something on the map,
people will come, right? You're right. I will do that tomorrow. That is a very sensible thing I can
do. And I said that on the air, just so if anyone else is thinking the same thing, go out there and
do it. There's not, there's not much to it. I, you know, ask anybody in Denver, I don't do anything
to coordinate this community other than throw the events online. So anyway, that was my two cents.
And now I've gotten my mandatory five minutes of talking in this episode, so.
