Lecture 4
Charlemagne Founds the Palace School at Aachen
Welcome back.
In our last lecture we discussed Muslim Spain
or Al-Andalus and explored how it came into existence
almost in spite of itself. In 711
a reconnaissance mission from North Africa
made up of Muslim leaders with Berber tribesmen as troops
turned into a full-blown conquest
and no one was seemingly more surprised
than the mission's leader, Tariq ibn Zayed.
In place after place he met little or no resistance
from the Spanish Christian nobles
or the long-established Jewish communities
both of which were disgusted with their visigothic
heretical Christian conquerors
and did little or nothing to hold back the invaders.
In some cases it seems that the Jewish communities
and the Spanish nobles welcomed the invaders as liberators
or at least as a better option than what they currently had.
And the Muslim conquerors proved to be benevolent,
tolerant and restrained
while simultaneously improving life on the peninsula
in terms of agriculture, the arts, hygiene, architecture,
education and many, many other areas.
The end result was a society the likes of which
was utterly unique in the medieval world
and which deeply influenced those communities
on its borders and beyond through trade
and other kinds of contact.
Once the Muslims began their conquest of Spain
they simply kept going until they met some resistance
at one point pushing north into what is today France.
But here they were stopped
and they were stopped by the most formidable man of his age.
Charlemagne, ruler of an empire
the largest the European world had seen
since the fall of Rome was a singular individual
whose actions would put an indelible stamp
on the Europe of the Middle Ages.
We have seen in other lectures
how the power of the past can be used to shape the future
and Charlemagne quite consciously looked back
to the model of Rome as he created a new world.
He was a brilliant warrior and military commander,
a clever and insightful statesman
who unified disparate territories
and a devout supporter and reformer of the church.
As phenomenal as all these achievements were however,
many of them would not last significantly
beyond his lifetime.
And in some sense they were turning points
the impact of which were limited in time
although not in memory to be sure.
In the year 800 the Pope crowned Charlemagne
Holy Roman Emperor during the Christmas service in Rome
and many people in the medieval world
saw this as a turning point.
Rome was coming back, there was an emperor again.
But in fact, this action most definitely belongs
to our fourth category of turning point.
It was simply a turning point that was not one.
The Pope's move was the Maraschino cherry
on top of the amazing confection
Charlemagne had already created all by himself.
In other words, the crowning itself
didn't really change anything.
It simply acknowledged and affirmed everything
that Charlemagne had already accomplished
all by himself, all on his own.
And of all those accomplishments, the most important,
the most long lasting and the most remarkable
is his founding of the Palace School at Aachen
which is the subject of our lecture today.
The Andalusian Kingdom in Spain came into being
because of a series of historical events
and social and political currents
that happened to coincide with one another
at exactly the right moment.
The Carolingian Empire, the name we give
to the territories ruled over by Charlemagne
came into being because of the vision and will
of a single individual, Charles or Char in French,
one of the few men in history to have the descriptor
the Great appended to his name.
In French, the Great is Lumagne,
hence Char Lumagne or Charlemagne.
Charlemagne's family had occupied a hereditary position
within the Merovingian dynasty,
but Charlemagne's grandfather, Charles Martel,
also known as the Hammer,
which probably tells you all you need to know about him,
had made his family's position one of such strength
that eventually the Merovingians were deposed,
the Carolingians took their place,
and this cleared the way for Charlemagne
to become undisputed King of the Franks.
Charlemagne was reportedly a singular man
in more ways than one, but the most obvious
for those who were laying eyes upon him
for the first time was his height.
Although his biographer, Einhard,
claimed that Charlemagne was seven feet tall,
analysis of his bones shows that this was an exaggeration
and he was actually just six foot four.
Still, at a time when the average man was five seven,
Charlemagne definitely stood out from the crowd.
His size certainly gave him an advantage
when it came to fighting.
He was, by all accounts, a fierce warrior,
but it was the mind and that big skull of his
that would change the world forever.
Charlemagne was ambitious, brilliant, innovative,
and educated, and what he wanted to do more
than anything else was recreate the glories
of the Roman past.
He was acutely aware of what the Roman world had been
and how its collapse had splintered Europe
into fragmented communities,
none of which possessed the sophistication or the knowledge
and certainly not the power of the former empire.
The first thing he had to do, as Charlemagne saw it,
was expand and solidify the boundaries of his territory,
which eventually would result in the creation of a kingdom
that covered most of modern day France and Germany,
parts of Italy, and beyond,
covering more than 800 miles east to west.
Practically every spring in the 770s and 780s,
Charlemagne was on the march,
pushing back his enemies or absorbing them into his realm,
and as he was doing this, he realized
that he needed to figure out a way
to govern all these peoples,
many of whom spoke different languages
and had different cultural traditions from one another.
If first, he was a military leader and conqueror,
second, Charlemagne was a state builder.
He both established a solid central bureaucracy,
but also realized this would work much better
if he allowed local leaders a significant degree of autonomy.
Hand in hand with this work went his support of the church.
We need to remember that in the Middle Ages,
there is really no such thing as separation
of church and state.
So it made sense that the one would support
or influence the other,
or at times they could in fact be one and the same.
Charlemagne instituted tithing,
sent missionaries out to realms not yet fully Christian,
and he regularized the Latin liturgy of the church
so that the saying of mass would be consistent,
no matter which church one attended
anywhere throughout his kingdom.
The thing that really tied these three endeavors,
conquest, state building, and support of the church,
the thing that really tied them all together
was his fourth identity and his most important role,
and this is as educator and patron of the arts.
Deeply steeped in ideals of the Roman Empire,
Charlemagne deliberately sought to recreate its glories
when he founded his palace school at Aachen.
While centers of learning and libraries
had been found throughout the Roman Empire,
most of these had developed in what we might call
an organic fashion.
They grew over many decades or centuries,
and over time, the greatest minds of the world
were attracted or induced there
to pursue study or discussion or to teach.
What is different about Charlemagne's program
is that it was conceived by one man
and it was established almost overnight.
He picked the site for his headquarters, Aachen,
the site of a former Roman military encampment,
and then he sent men south into Ravenna, Italy
to essentially loot the Basilica of San Vitale
and bring its stones north to Aachen
for the construction of Charlemagne's own palace
and religious slash political slash educational complex.
While the rest of Charlemagne's complex
no longer exists, one portion,
called the Palatine Chapel, still survives.
When he laid out this complex of buildings
with the help of his main architect, Otto of Metz,
Charlemagne continued his attempt to recreate Rome.
There was a council chamber in which official business
was conducted and Charlemagne delivered a speech
to his assembled government officials there each May.
There was a swimming pool
that we called the Baths of Rome.
A mint, a treasury, an archive room, a gold works,
an ivory works, various school rooms
where the youth of the land, noble and lower class,
were educated, a gymnasium, a menagerie or medieval zoo,
a scriptorium, barracks, medical facilities,
sculleries, kitchens, and plenty in the way
of open air spaces that we called some of the gardens
from the glory days of Rome.
The complex grounds were generally open to all
and every day crowds of people moved in and out
and around the spaces.
Here were scholars from the British Isles and Middle East
mingling with traders from all over the medieval world.
There were nobles who had come to speak with Charlemagne
on official business and had, perhaps,
brought their sons to be educated at the school.
Merchants and craftspeople rubbed elbows with princes,
priests, monks, and beggars who came to ask for charity.
For the average person living in the area,
it must have seemed a magical and marvelous place,
not least of all because it was open to everyone.
The space was filled with noise and activity,
not just the multiple vernacular native languages
of the people present, but also the Latin
that was the official language of education and bureaucracy
in the Carolingian Empire.
Add to this that Charlemagne apparently liked
to hear poetry performed or important text read aloud
while he was having lunch or swimming in the pool.
Occasionally, above all the bustle,
one could hear the trumpeting of the menagerie elephant,
which had been a gift to Charlemagne
from the Caliph of Baghdad.
It might have been hard to make out, however,
considering the chattering of the monkeys,
the growling of the bears, and the squawking
of the exotic birds that added to the cacophony.
Occan was a place that was bursting with life
and life, the likes of which the world had not seen
since the glory days of Rome.
Charlemagne even stole a statue of the Emperor Theodoric,
which he then installed in a central location
of his Achin complex, a move intended to emphasize
his link with the classical world.
In its layout, the main buildings at Achin
also quite specifically emphasized royal position
in conjunction with piety.
The church was designed to have three levels.
The top represented the heavens,
and the ground floor was the place
where the clergy and the people met to worship.
Between these two levels, there was a gallery
that connected the church to the royal palace.
Charlemagne located his throne on this level
in direct alignment with the altar,
so that as the people raised their eyes
to contemplate Jesus or God in the heavens,
their gaze was first met with a very large
and very striking throne, on which Charlemagne
regularly sat.
They were thus always reminded that Charlemagne
mediated between them and God.
He was the Emperor of Rome, reborn.
Well, while all of this sounds fantastic
and like a lot of fun, we come back to the so what question.
How does this serve as a turning point
that sowed the seeds of the modern world?
The answer is, what Charlemagne did at Achin
was much more than an attempt
to recreate the Roman past.
He also sought to preserve learning for the future,
and above everything else,
this is probably the greatest accomplishment of his life
and perhaps the greatest accomplishment
of the age in which he lived.
Charlemagne was concerned at the decline of learning
and the loss of knowledge when monastic libraries
were destroyed, broken up, or looted
in the wake of the fall of Rome.
So he went on a mission to preserve
the knowledge of the past.
The first thing he did was send agents out to collect,
purchase, and in some cases simply steal,
important texts that he considered vital
to the advancement of humankind.
In particular, classical authors like Horace,
Virgil, and Tacitus were high on his list
of important thinkers and writers of the Roman age.
These manuscripts, once procured,
were brought back to Achin,
where Charlemagne set a veritable fleet
of monks and professional scribes
to work making fresh copies of these texts.
In fact, many of the originals of these manuscripts
are now utterly lost to the vagaries of time,
and when we study the writings of many early thinkers,
it is the eighth or ninth century carolingian copy
that we are reading.
Without the efforts of Charlemagne,
there are names and texts and entire philosophical positions
that would be completely unknown to us today.
But Charlemagne wasn't done yet.
As reformer of the church,
he was particularly concerned that copies of the Bible
be available in every parish,
and that they also be rigorously checked for errors.
Errors in medieval manuscripts
were a huge source of concern.
For once an error had been made,
it was likely to be repeated
in subsequent copies of a text.
And while this might not have been a big deal
in some instances, one can only imagine
that a scribal error in an important theological text,
or even worse, the Bible,
was particularly frightening
because of the potential for people
being accidentally led into sinful behavior.
Now, one might think that all of this would be enough.
The regularizing of important texts
and the preservation of knowledge is no small feat,
whether it happens in the year 789 or 1989.
And it is certainly what makes the Palais School of Aachen
one of the most important turning points
in the history of the medieval world.
But Charlemagne did even more.
Medieval and classical manuscripts were and are
notoriously difficult to read.
More often than not, there's no punctuation,
the handwriting is hard to decipher,
and there are multiple styles or hands
that a scholar has to learn how to negotiate
in order to make sense of what's on the page.
Scholars and researchers who study antique,
medieval, and Renaissance texts
need to take courses in paleography,
literally the study of old writing,
in order to engage with the texts in their original forms.
This was true in Charlemagne's day as well.
So he decided to regularize
and simplify medieval writing styles.
With the help of his advisors,
he created what we call Caroline Minuscule,
a style of writing much easier to read
than many that preceded it,
and he also established a hierarchy of fonts.
So he decreed that titles should be
all in capital letters.
Subtitles should be a mix of capital and lower case,
and the main text should be all in lower case.
This helped considerably as scholars
tried to figure out what portions of a manuscript
were the main text, the headings, and so on,
because in some cases,
there was no clear differentiation
until Charlemagne came along.
As someone who had experience trying to rule over
and unify disparate groups of people
who spoke multiple languages and had varying customs,
Charlemagne thought to apply the same solution
to texts that he had to his political life.
The past definitely had a strong hold on him,
and he made it common practice
to attempt to preserve poems and songs from the past
in their vernacular and sometimes pagan contexts
as much as was possible.
But when an important text within a vernacular language,
and vernacular here means not Latin,
Charlemagne more often than not
had that text translated into Latin,
a move which immediately made it accessible
to every educated person in the medieval world.
An aspect of medieval life that was definitely a holdover
from the days of the empire,
Latin was no longer a living language in Charlemagne's day.
It had evolved into the Romance language
as a French, Spanish, Italian, and others.
But by looking to the Roman past,
Charlemagne helped Latin hang on
as an important form of communication.
A monk from Saxony and a priest from England
and a scholar from Spain would be at a loss
when it came to trying to communicate with one another
unless they all knew Latin.
Latin was a kind of lingua franca or a bridge language
that made communication among various groups possible.
Having texts translated into Latin,
then copied and circulated,
meant that more knowledge was available
for more people in the medieval world
than had been the case previously.
As we'll see in our next lecture, however,
just a century later in England,
Alfred the Great would find such an idea,
a stumbling block to education rather than an aid,
as very few people in the England of his day
could read Latin.
Alfred would begin an educational program
like Charlemagne's but in reverse.
He decreed that the most important texts
should be translated out of Latin
and into the vernacular West Saxon or Old English
to make them more accessible
to a greater portion of the population.
Alfred lamented this necessity,
seeming to echo the sentiments of Charlemagne himself
from a century prior.
In his preface to the pastoral care,
Alfred bemoans the lack of scholars
in Britain in the ninth century,
noting that in the past, quote,
people from abroad came here to this country
in search of knowledge and instruction.
And we should now have to get them from abroad
if we were to acquire them.
Thanks be to Almighty God
that we now have any supply of teachers at all, end quote.
Well, the reason Alfred found himself
and his people in such dire straits
when it came to learning and education
is because Charlemagne had collected
all the great scholars of his age
and brought them to Aachen.
Although the physical buildings
and the contents of its library
were hugely important components
of the palace school at Aachen,
it is the minds of the great scholars of the age
that were its bedrock and its essence.
Charlemagne poached great thinkers
from all over the medieval world,
from Italy, he recruited Peter of Pisa
and Paulinus of Aquileia,
from Spain, Theodos of Orléans,
and there were many, many more.
But by far, the greatest number of scholars
at Charlemagne's court were from the British Isles,
Alcuin of York, Clemens Scotus,
Cthulph, Bjornred, Dungal, Dicuil,
the list goes on and on.
It was the greatest collection of thinkers,
teachers, and philosophers
that the medieval world had ever seen
or ever would see again
until the rise of the university system
several centuries later.
What Charlemagne accomplished here
was to shift the center of learning and education
away from Britain,
where it had been firmly ensconced
for a good two centuries.
And when he did this, he made continental Europe
and specifically the kingdom of Francia,
the place to be.
From this point, the so-called Carolingian Renaissance
continued to pick up steam.
The arts flourished, the church prospered,
exchange of ideas and knowledge burgeoned.
Einhard, Charlemagne's biographer,
detailed Charlemagne's many accomplishments
in his Vita Caroli Magni,
a work that glorifies the ruler
as the most generous, wise,
and forward-thinking of all the men of his age.
It is no accident that Einhard's work
owes much to the Roman writer, Suetonius.
Like his master, Einhard saw the Roman past
as a useful model for present actions.
But he combined the antique
with contemporary concerns and issues
to construct a reality that both recalled Rome
but also transcended it.
So you can see why the moment when the Pope
placed a crown on Charlemagne's head
during Christmas services in Rome in the year 800
may, from the vantage point of the future,
seem like a non-event.
Some in the medieval period
considered it a hugely significant moment.
In reality, it meant almost nothing
and was more or less a decorative flourish.
What's harder to understand is why so much else
of what happened during Charlemagne's reign
can't really be considered a turning point
as almost all its impact had dissipated
within 60 years of Charlemagne's death.
In fighting broke out among his descendants,
of which there are almost too many to count.
The vast empire that the emperor had built
through a combination of military prowess,
shrewd statecraft, and really,
when you come right down to it,
the courage of his convictions and beliefs,
this kingdom was divided and subdivided
and nibbled and gnawed into smaller and smaller pieces.
Until finally, there existed a cluster of small,
in some cases tiny kingdoms,
in what had once been the sprawling
Carolingian empire.
None of these little realms were large enough
to exercise any real power over anything.
My colleague, John Contrini,
a renowned scholar of the Carolingian world,
has noted of Charlemagne's renaissance
that, quote, it had a spectacular effect
on education and culture in Francia,
a debatable effect on artistic endeavors,
and an unmeasurable effect
on what mattered most to the Carolingians,
the moral regeneration of society, end quote.
And it is true that in an immediate sense,
Charlemagne's empire seems to have been a blip
on the radar screen of importance.
But the fact remains that for the sake of posterity
and preservation of learning,
Charlemagne's program at the palace school
was a turning point upon which much of the later development
of medieval societies and scholarship would depend.
Now, speaking on behalf of modern scholars,
I would like to say that we are all eternally
grateful and indebted to Charlemagne
because his program preserved information about the past
that would otherwise be completely lost.
And the ideas that Charlemagne espoused,
support of the church, a restoration of knowledge
and educational programs,
unity begun through military conquest
that cemented with prudent governance.
Quite obviously, these ideals inspired people
throughout the rest of the Middle Ages
and into the Renaissance,
even if Charlemagne's empire itself lay in ruins.
When we speak of the Renaissance or early modern period,
most scholars are referring to a period
that began in Europe in the 15th and 16th centuries
and was marked by a revived interest in the texts
and ideas of the ancient Greek and Roman worlds.
It is worth pointing out that with his palace school
at Aachen, Charlemagne got there first.
Indeed, the later Renaissance could not have happened
without the Scholastic Foundation
that had been laid at Aachen.
The power of Charlemagne
and the ideal of unity he represented
remains a potent force down into the modern day.
It is worth remembering that the bulk of Charlemagne's empire
included most of modern-day France and Germany.
And in the wake of World War II,
Francis Charles de Gaulle,
himself sometimes compared to the medieval ruler,
stated the following, quote,
I see no reason why the German and French peoples,
if they overcome their reciprocal contentions
and territorial intrigues, should not end up united.
In short, it would amount to picking up Charlemagne's project,
this time on modern economic, social,
strategic, and cultural grounds, end quote.
Thus, while Charlemagne's physical empire collapsed,
the empire of the mind remained intact.
A ruler certainly worthy of the epithet, the great,
due to the accomplishments of his lifetime,
Char, king of the Franks,
is perhaps more deserving of this title due to his legacy.
As we'll see in a later lecture,
less than a century after Charlemagne founded
the palace school at Aachen, another king,
on the opposite side of the English Channel,
a man who would also be acclaimed
as the greatest his royal line ever had, or would produce,
would confront similar problems.
Alfred of Wessex, like Charlemagne,
looked to the past for models,
but used this to craft a brand new future.
It was a future conceived in the crucible
of a series of tragedies that beset Alfred
and brought him to an almost unimaginably low point.
Reduced to hiding in swamps from marauding Vikings,
King Alfred seemed likely to fade into oblivion,
a footnote to history.
Yet he managed to overcome a series
of seemingly insurmountable obstacles
to become the greatest ruler
the British Isles had ever seen.
Deliberately modeling himself after Charlemagne,
Alfred initiated a series of programs,
alliances and reforms,
that gave birth to the nation of England.
The turning point that was the reign of Alfred
was the result of crisis,
a crisis that we explore in our next lecture.
In the eighth century,
for reasons that still remain somewhat unclear,
Scandinavian raiders from Denmark, Norway and Sweden
suddenly turned their gazes to the south
and ushered in a violent couple of centuries
that we call the Viking diaspora.
The Vikings traveled south to the Mediterranean,
east to Constantinople and the Islamic territories beyond.
They went west to Ireland, Greenland
and even North America.
In their sudden movements throughout the known world,
they altered and were themselves altered
by it in ways too varied to count.
Join us next time as we explore who these people were,
what they wanted, how they went after it
and why it matters.
Thank you.
Thank you, Alfred.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
