Lecture 6, King Alfred burns some cakes.
Welcome back.
In our last lecture, we discussed how the movement of Scandinavians throughout the medieval
world in the 8th and 9th centuries changed society in myriad ways across space, time,
and cultures.
Today, we are going to focus on the results of some of those raiding activities.
When the New Year dawned in England in the year 878, it was anything but a celebratory
occasion for Alfred, King of Wessex.
For years, his kingdom, the land claimed by the Wessexans, had been under repeated attack
from Viking forces that had come down from the north and established fortified bases
in London.
Alfred's father and four of his older brothers were dead, killed in battle with the Scandinavian
invaders, and Alfred himself seemed to be holding on to his throne only tenuously at
best.
He had paid off the Vikings in 871 to get them to leave his kingdom, and just five
years later had brokered a very short-lived peace by exchanging hostages and persuading
the non-Christian Vikings to swear an oath of peace on what the historical accounts
describe as the Holy Ring of Thor.
By any measure, this was a radical tactic, as the Anglo-Saxons were fully Christianized
by this time, and most would refuse to acknowledge any power or authority attached to what were
viewed as pagan objects.
Alfred, however, had learned the hard way that oaths on Christian relics or books had
no meaning at all for the Vikings, so he thought to beat them at their own game.
It was a good strategy, but it didn't work, and at the beginning of 878, the Vikings were
back, and Alfred was forced to flee into the marshes of the Somerset region to hide from
the invaders.
It must have been particularly galling for a king raised in the warrior culture of the
Anglo-Saxons to have to resort to such a move.
As we saw in our discussion of King Arthur in the Battle of Mount Badden, the Anglo-Saxons
were formidable warriors hired by the Romano-British in the 5th century as mercenaries to help
them fight off invading Picts, Scots, and others.
This was a task the Anglo-Saxons accomplished easily, and then, when the job was done, they
decided to stay and invite their cousins to come on over.
They sliced through the helpless Romanized Britons like a hot knife through butter until
an even more formidable warrior, the legendary King Arthur, stopped them.
But that turning point, as important as it was, was relatively temporary in the grand
scheme of things.
Eventually, the Saxons and their descendants dominated the island, turning Britain into
England.
Alfred was a scion of the Kingdom of the West Saxons, the most powerful and long-lived
of the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms, which at one point had numbered seven distinct realms ruled
over by seven different houses.
As we saw in our last lecture, at the end of the 8th century, the Viking diaspora had
suddenly and dramatically changed all that.
And in 878, after bearing the indignity of multiple military defeats and the deaths of
all the adult males in his house, Alfred was reduced to running, and even worse, he was
not running to a fortification or to an ally for help.
He was running to hide, to save his life, and to do this, he had to obscure his very
identity and plunge into the swampy, damp, probably very buggy, Athelney marshes.
Alfred's time in the marshes marked one of the most important turning points in not only
English history, but also the history of the entire medieval world.
This was the moment when he could have simply given up.
He could have faded into oblivion and lived at his life on the run, or eking out a peasant's
existence somewhere far from the front lines of battle.
One can't help but think that there must have been a moment when this prospect seemed appealing.
He had, after all, according to some accounts, left his dinners sitting on the table, still
warm, when word came that the Vikings were attacking, and there was no logistical way
any sort of defense could be mounted.
Had Alfred given up, though, and stayed in that swamp, the England that we know today
would be almost unrecognizable, and the language that I'm speaking right now, well, probably
it would still be a tongue from the Germanic language family, would sound probably noticeably
different.
It is a situation that is hard for most of us to imagine, I'm sure, to be raised in
a culture that was devoutly Christian, but prized military prowess and lineage over almost
everything else, to have endured the deaths of the members of his family, and had the
kingship thrust upon him, to have fought and fought and fought against Viking invaders
who respected neither faith nor treaties nor oaths, and then to be forced to run or die.
For the common people, Alfred's subjects, it was similarly a miserable time.
They most likely kept their heads down and hoped that the trouble would go around them,
not plow into and through them.
In times of raids, those who got enough notice would have fled to hiding places in the forests
and hills, hoping that perhaps the raiders wouldn't burn all the crops this time.
But Alfred was not like most of us.
In fact, he was not like most anybody who ever lived.
His was a mind and a spirit and a force of will that truly changed the course of history.
It was those winter months in 878 that were the deciding moment.
According to tradition, while in hiding, Alfred took refuge in the household of a peasant
family.
He did not reveal his identity, but attempted to assist with daily life in the household
as a means of earning his keep and protecting his anonymity.
According to the story, the family had no idea that the man sleeping in front of their
hearth and helping with chores, tending to the pigs, was the king of the West Saxons.
One day, the housewife left to go and get some water from the well.
She asked Alfred to keep an eye on some cakes that were baking over the fire.
He agreed, but he was so preoccupied with concerns about the Viking invasions and his
ever more tenuous kingship that, lost in thought, he allowed the cakes to burn.
When the housewife returned and discovered supper was ruined, she berated Alfred with
an angry tongue lashing.
The king of the West Saxons took the dressing down meekly, and according to the story, it
was in that moment that he had a flash of inspiration that would eventually lead him
to victory and lay the foundation for England as we know it today.
Now, this story is apocryphal and probably never actually happened.
In many respects, it's like the story that American school children were regularly taught
about George Washington chopping down his father's cherry tree.
So virtuous was the first president of the United States of America that, even when caught
in childhood mischief, he fessed up famously or infamously, admitting, quote, I cannot
tell a lie, I did it with my little axe, end quote.
The point of this story is not that it did or did not happen, but rather that it conveys
a larger truth about George Washington's character and it teaches a lesson about moral
behavior, about right and wrong.
One could say something similar about Alfred and those cakes.
Whether or not this did or did not happen is not that important, but the idea of the
story has a kernel of truth in it.
The truth is that the most powerful man in Britain had been brought to an inconceivably
humble position to be on the run from one's enemies would have been particularly humiliating
for the leader of a people who valued Marshall prowess so highly.
Anglo-Saxon society was also a highly structured hierarchical society, so for Alfred to be
berated by a simple peasant woman only added insult to injury.
But the point here is that even when Alfred was as low as he could get, he found a way
to pick himself up, dust himself off, and keep going.
And in fact, not just keep going, but defeat his enemies and radically change Anglo-Saxon
society.
While he was in the Somerset Marshes, Alfred plotted his counterattack.
And later in 878 emerged from the fends around Ethelne and rode to a landmark known as Egbert
Stone.
There he was met by several small local military forces with which he had been communicating
while in hiding.
This has entailed careful negotiation and strategy that he had developed while on the
run in the marshes.
The raising of the malicious, or feards, of three shires was a key moment toward which
Alfred had been working doggedly for almost two years.
What it signaled was that the power of Alfred, his charisma, his ability to command, his
ability to inspire loyalty, had remained intact even while he was on the run.
And as we saw in the case of King Arthur, this meant that Alfred must have been a truly
unique man.
What makes this all the more fascinating is that Alfred was never meant to be king.
Indeed, as the fifth son of a royal house, it seemed much more likely that he would be
destined for life in the church.
The Viking invasions changed all that.
With the deaths of his father and brothers, necessity born of crisis, one of the major
themes we've been discussing in this course, created a situation in which a hero was needed.
There was no reason to expect Alfred would rise to this challenge.
By this point, six of the seven kingdoms of Anglo-Saxon England had fallen to the Vikings,
or the Danes, as they were commonly called by the early English, and the kingdom of Wessex
alone maintained some degree of autonomy.
It would have been largely unremarkable if Alfred had fled into the swamps, faded into
oblivion, and England had become a Scandinavian territory by the end of the ninth century.
Instead, Alfred emerged from the marshes in 878 to win the battle of Ethundun, driving
the Danes out of Wessex and pushing them back to their stronghold at Chippenham, where he
eventually starved them into submission.
When peace with the Viking leader was eventually brokered, a few important things happened.
One was that the leader, Guthrung, and his followers were required to become Christians.
Now what we might call the efficacy of the baptism of the Vikings can certainly be called
into question.
This was an important first step in incorporating the Viking invaders into what would eventually
become England.
They were now Christians, at least in name, and thus in some ways, they were now more
similar to their Anglo-Saxon neighbors.
The other significant thing about this treaty was the way in which former Anglo-Saxon territories
were divided up.
The treaty with Guthrung created in the south and west for the first time a unified kingdom
of the Anglo-Saxons.
While the size of Alfred's realm at the end of his reign fell far short of encompassing
the England that we think of today, it was the largest unified territory ever ruled by
an Anglo-Saxon leader, and it laid the foundation for what would eventually become the kingdom
of the English ruled by Alfred's grandson.
Lands north and east of the kingdom of the Anglo-Saxons became known as the Dane Law.
This was a straightforward appellation that let you know that in this region the laws
of the Danes, or the Vikings, were in effect.
The existence of these two kingdoms side by side, the Dane Law and the Kingdom of the
Anglo-Saxons, had a most profound effect on the English language.
The Scandinavian languages spoken by the Viking raiders and the West Saxon dialect spoken
in Alfred's realm were both Germanic languages.
They were similar enough that a Dane and a Saxon could probably communicate with one
another reasonably well, but they were different enough to cause speakers on both sides some
difficulties.
As anyone knows who has studied Old English or Anglo-Saxon, it is much different from
modern English.
Old English was an inflected language, meaning that the form of the word told you whether
it was the subject or the object of a phrase, and word order was not really that important
when it came to trying to understand what a sentence was trying to say.
For example, in modern English the sentence is, the king loves the queen, and the queen
loves the king, mean two different things.
Different individuals are being loved and doing the loving, and it is the word order
that tells us this.
But in Old English, this wouldn't have been the case.
The sentence is, Sukinning Lufath Thakwain, and Thakwain Lufath Sukinning both mean,
the king loves the queen.
Although in the second version the positions of the subject and object are reversed, the
meaning of the sentence doesn't change, and it's the form of the words that tells us
that this is the case.
Old English nouns also had genders, masculine, feminine, and neuter, and in addition to the
singular and the plural forms, there was also a dual, a way to say you two and we two.
What happened when different forms of Germanic came in contact with one another is that much
of the variation and complexity got sanded down.
The languages simplified toward one another to make communication more effective.
So this interaction between the Danes and the English was the first step in transforming
the English language into what I'm speaking today.
Other steps would come later on.
In some ways, this interaction, in addition to the language issue, was again the first
step in the development of the England, the nation of England, as we know it today.
During the period of peace after his victorious return from the Marshes in 878, Alfred took
advantage of the lull in fighting to implement an educational program, part of which involved
the translation of important texts from throughout the medieval world into Old English.
If this sounds familiar, it is no accident.
As you'll recall from our lecture on Charlemagne and the founding of his palace school at Aachen,
the Carolingian ruler whose name you'll also remember means Charles the Great, he wanted
to collect and preserve knowledge for future generations as well.
Alfred seems to have been very aware of Charlemagne as a model of kingship and sought to emulate
him, or at the very least, Alfred's biographer, Arthur, wanted to make the comparison as obvious
as possible.
What is different in Alfred's case is that he wanted to make texts available to those
who did not know Latin, while Charlemagne had emphasized the important status of the
Latin language and texts written in Latin in his educational program.
In his preface to the pastoral care, Alfred explains his reasoning for undertaking this
venture.
Quote, therefore it seems better to me, if it seems so to you, that we also translate
certain books which are most needful for all men to know into that language that we all
can understand and accomplish this as with God's help we may very easily do if we have
peace so that all the youth of free men now in England who have the means to apply themselves
to it be set to learning while they are not useful for any other occupation until they
know how to read English writing well.
One may then instruct in Latin those whom one wishes to teach further and promote to
a higher rank.
End quote.
Alfred took his education program seriously and he himself translated some texts out of
Latin and into Old English.
These included 50 Psalms, St. Gregory the Great's Pastoral Care, which I've already
mentioned, Boethius's Consolation of Philosophy, and St. Augustine's Soliloquies.
There may have been others, but we do know for certain that he was also commissioning
numerous other translations to be executed by the many scholars he actively recruited
from the continent.
More than one scholar has noted that while Alfred can certainly be called the father
of the English nation, he also, quite legitimately, could be called the father of English literature.
One of the reasons for this, and one of the epiphanies that seems to have struck him while
he sat unseen in front of those burning cakes, is that in his mind it was not the Viking
attacks that had caused the decline of learning in England, but rather the withering of the
English scholarly tradition is what had led to the kind of social decay that made the
Viking attacks possible.
He saw the revitalization of knowledge and learning in England as a key element in his
plan of defense.
If Englishmen were educated and had access to the important works of philosophy, religion,
and history he reasoned, then never again would an English king have to take refuge
in a swamp with a peasant family.
And so what, you may be asking, how does one 9th century king's victory change the world?
Well, first of all, without Alfred's educational and translation program, we would have next
to nothing in terms of texts from the medieval period in Britain, and the English moving
forward from the 9th century would not have had nearly the understanding of their history
and heritage as they did because of Alfred.
In part, this was due to the creation of what we've come to call the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle,
which is an offshoot of Alfred's educational program.
And the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle is quite simply a manuscript in which the history of the Anglo-Saxons
was written down.
Up to a certain point, it was copied into several separate manuscripts, and these were
then sent to various monasteries throughout the land where, over the centuries, they
were added to.
In their differing accounts, the various versions of the Chronicle show us a fascinating picture
of Anglo-Saxon life in terms of both local interest and a grand view of the place of
the Saxons in British history.
In addition to his educational program and his desire to promote the church, Alfred instituted
several defensive measures in order to protect the precarious piece he had achieved.
First, he created a system of roughly equidistant fortifications throughout his kingdom.
Known as the Berglheidige, this system of strongholds, thirty-some in total, each about
one day's journey from the next, helped strengthen the Saxon power base and effectively undermined
any potential future attempts by the Vikings to invade and conquer.
These fortresses could house substantial military forces as well as much of the local population
during times of trouble.
They were virtually impregnable and they worked well as bases from which Anglo-Saxon warriors
could launch military strikes against an invading Viking army.
In the instance of the Berglheidige, we see the demonstration of one of our recurring
themes throughout this lecture series, the power of the past.
As you'll recall from Lecture 1, practically anywhere you went in the medieval world at
any time, the legacy of Rome loomed large.
In Alfred's case, the memory of the Roman presence in Britain may have given him the
key to the idea of the Berglheidige, as Alfred used the Roman road system as his guide to
laying out the thirty or thirty-two or thirty-three, depending on how you count, fortresses of
the Heidege.
In some instances, Alfred refortified old Roman fortresses to create the fortresses
in his system.
In a few cases, he looked even further into the past and refortified Iron Age hill forts
and incorporated them into his network of defenses, a move that the man who was the historical
basis for King Arthur also made, as you'll recall from Lecture 2.
So the Berglheidige was step one in Alfred's defensive military plan for his kingdom.
Step two was the creation of a standing army that he divided into two sections, one of
which was always in the field and the other which was always ready to be called.
Because speed was of the essence in medieval military campaigns, it was also a priority
of Alfred's to make sure as much of this military as possible was mounted on horseback.
Now, contrary to what you may have seen in the movies, medieval warfare, especially in
the ninth century, mostly took place on foot.
You rode your horse to the battle, got off, fought, and if you lived, you got to get back
on your horse and ride back home.
But the fact that Alfred's army was all on horseback meant that it was a much more mobile
and flexible entity than had previously been the case.
So even though the fighting's not happening on horseback, the fact that he had all his
men mounted and ready to go was an important innovation.
Had such a system been in place when Alfred was forced to flee into the Athelene Marshes,
his time in the peasant household might have been of much shorter duration.
Since communication among his war leaders and movement from one place to another could
have been achieved much more quickly.
If nothing else, the need to flee his own household because of an advancing Viking army had taught
Alfred that advance notice was of paramount importance.
As you'll remember from our lecture about the turning point that was the sack of Lindisfar
and Abbey, the reason the Vikings were such an effective fighting force was in part due
to the element of surprise.
Their ships were fast, light, maneuverable, with a very shallow draft, and this meant
that they could sneak up on you with virtually no warning.
Aware of this, Alfred took step three of his defensive reform, which was to create essentially
a strong presence on the waters around Britain.
So to the many of Alfred's notable titles, The Great, Father of English Literature, we
can add, Father of the English Navy.
These three defensive elements, working in concert, affected a significant disruption
in the abilities of the Danes to do much of anything against the newly established kingdom
of the Anglo-Saxons.
Raiding and looting was curtailed, incursions were met with swift responses, and in the days
and weeks and years of peace that followed, Alfred continued to put his mark on the world.
He reformed the legal system, issuing many new dooms or laws, but was clear in his own
writing that he did so not because he believed he had all the answers, but so that future
generations might know what the laws had once been and thus have some guidance.
Under his orders, London was rebuilt, the coinage system was improved, and myriad other
improvements were affected.
Among many of Alfred's accomplishments, one of my personal favorites is the invention
of the horn lantern.
This may seem surprising, but the story of how this came about gets to much that is significant
about Alfred's character.
According to the story, Alfred, a deeply pious man, wanted to spend equal parts of the day
contemplating the secular and religious worlds, so he had candles made that accurately showed
the hours of the day as they burned down.
Whether he was in a fortress, at prayer, living in the marshes, or out on campaign, Alfred's
world, however, seems to have been a very drafty one, and his candles kept snuffing
themselves out, or they burned out a little too quickly because of the wind.
Legend has it that Alfred figured out that if you took a cattle horn and scraped down
the inside until it was almost paper thin, the material would become translucent.
When placed over a candle, the horn would block the wind but allow the light to shine.
Problem solved.
While we cannot say that Alfred the Great created England as we know it today, he created
the idea of it, and he was the first to do so.
In his own writings, he spoke often of the English and the Angokun, or people of the
English, the people of the Angles, that's where English comes from, from Angles.
And in doing this, Alfred transformed what had been separate but culturally similar communities
into one entity.
He championed literacy and learning, was pious but capable of dealing death on the battlefield
when need arose.
He could be brutal but also merciful.
He had a grand idea for what the world of the West Saxons could eventually become, but
also at times he could become obsessed with details.
Alfred rebuilt his homeland but also actively reached out to other communities on the continent,
bringing a level of cosmopolitanism to Britain that it had not enjoyed since the days of
the Roman Empire.
He suffered great physical pain, enduring what appear to be excruciating cases of hemorrhoids
and possibly Crohn's disease throughout his life, and he had to endure personal humiliation.
And yet he never gave up.
There have not been many kings like him in the sweep of history.
Indeed, there have not been many men as remarkable as he.
The reign of Alfred the Great is a major turning point in the history of the medieval
world in that this is when the idea of England is born.
Like Charlemagne before him, the man on whom he seems to have modeled much of his behavior,
Alfred changed history through the force of his incredible will.
Yes, crisis produced the moment of the turning point.
A crisis drove him into the marshes of Somerset.
But in the moment when he supposedly burned those cakes, Alfred of the Anglo-Saxons demonstrated
a strength of personality that is breathtaking.
At what was symbolically and literally possibly his lowest moment, he refused to give in and
his defiance against all odds made England.
In our next lecture, we'll move away from our discussion of the individual person as
a driving force for change and examine how a technological shift, affected in part by
a small loop of metal, the horseshoe, in combination with a highback saddle, came together with
the larger social and historical fact of the medieval world as a culture founded on violence
and would produce profound changes after a single event that occurred far to the east
and the north of the events we've discussed today.
This event was the Battle of Lechfeld in the year 955 when Hungarian and German armies
settled a century of mutually destructive violence in a single day.
