Welcome back. In our last two lectures, we discussed turning points that were rather
stretched in nature, that endured over long periods of years or even centuries. In lecture
2017, we explored the increasing persecution of the Jews, a persecution that grew in intensity
from about the 11th century through the 13th. By the time that turning point had completed
its cycle, the Jews had gone from being fairly integrated into medieval society to being
utterly ostracized in multiple ways. In our last lecture on the little optimum or medieval
warm period, we explored one of the natural reasons that was potentially behind this rise
of a persecuting society, a change in climate that made crop production easier and more plentiful,
which in turn caused a boom in population, which in turn caused people to try and hang on even
more tightly to those resources over which they did have control. Taking lands and trade
opportunities away from Jews and from other groups like heretics, lepers, pagans, and homosexuals,
meant that there was more to go around for those who were in mainstream Christian society. Today,
we're going to conclude this cluster of three lectures that focus on what's happening in between
roughly 1,000 and 1,300 and talk about another quote-unquote stretched turning point. This turning
point is really the series of agricultural advances that were created out of necessity during the
little optimum. People wanted to be able to take full advantage of what the land had to offer,
and we get into a situation that is rather like a feedback loop. More crops met more people who
then needed more land and who then needed to make the land they did work more productive. And to
understand how and why these changes came about, we have to understand a little bit about the nature
of agriculture in the medieval world. Now as you all know by now, around the year 1,000, roughly 90%
of the medieval world was rural and agrarian in nature. People tended to live in hamlets or villages
in the countryside. Surrounding the cluster of homes in the center of the village would be a series
of fields that were plowed in long strips. At any one time, one field would be in production and
another would be left to life fallow, resting for the next year's planting and harvest. Beyond the
community's fields would be the forests, which at this time dominated the countryside throughout
Europe. As we saw last time, these were often referred to as the quote, mantle of the poor,
end quote, as it was in the forest that many poor people were able to scavenge for food or firewood
or medicinal herbs. Here was where the village pigs were allowed to roam wild until they were
ready for slaughter and where the charcoal for the smithy could be found. In some places, common
people were free to hunt in the forest, to feed their families with whatever they could catch
or kill. It is a striking irony that when population pressures came to bear and more farmland was
required to feed the people, they cleared forest land by the process of a sartine and this meant
that in some ways even more people would go hungry as the forests were now diminished. But before
people in the medieval world turned to clearing the forest, they first brought under the plow any land
that had previously been unavailable and thus was unused. This meant lands that had soil which was
dense or clay-y and which had been hard to till and now it had to be worked out of necessity. And
again, necessity is one of those major course themes to which we keep returning. In the year
1000, when the land under cultivation was the land that was easiest to work, here's what plowing
looked like. First, you had to judge when you wanted to start planting and you had better guess
correctly. You didn't want too much time to pass between the time when you plowed your land and
planted and you didn't want to plant too early in case there was an unexpected early frost. But
still, you started plowing quite early in the season when it was still very cold, especially at
first light. First, you would need to get a team of oxen, slow-moving ponderous beasts who could be
yoked to the plow. For those people who didn't have oxen, you often had a family member or two
stand in their place. They would drag the plow while someone else followed behind, manipulating
the main part called the shoe. For close to a thousand years, the shape of this basic plow,
called an ard, had been unchanged. It had a point that scratched the earth but didn't actually turn
it over. In the choice lands that fell under cultivation first in the medieval world, this was
often sufficient to get the planting done, but it was still pretty significant labor. From sun
up to sundown during plowing time, the oxen or people would trudge along in a more or less
straight line, the plowmen behind forcing the point of the plow down into the earth. Farmers in the
medieval world preferred to work long, narrow strips of farmland, which might seem counterintuitive
to us today, but actually made a great deal of sense back then. A plow with a team of oxen yoked
to it was hard to turn, so you tended to go as long as you could in one direction before you
turned and started heading back the other way. There were no barriers between one family's
plowland and another's, which is why this was sometimes referred to as the open field system
of agriculture. Even when it was time for one set of fields to lie fallow and recover its strength
and nutrients, medieval farmers had learned that it was still best to plow this land each spring,
to turn over the earth and wake it up, so there was never a break from plowing. Every field had
to be plowed every year. So you can imagine how important it might be to come up with a more
efficient means to work the fields once demand for grain became greater and greater. The first step
in response to this necessity was the creation of a plow that had what's called a colter at the
front of it. The colter is essentially a knife that cuts vertically into the earth. When it was
paired with another element known as the plow share, which was placed at a right angle to the
colter and which cut horizontally through the soil, the efficiency of the plow improved dramatically.
Add to this a third element, a mold board, and this efficiency increased yet again. The mold
board would actually turn the soil over, something that a scratch plow or an aard didn't do. The
turning over of the earth helped release more of the nutrients into the soil. The mold board became
especially necessary once farmers began to cultivate farmland that had soil that was difficult and
heavy to work. But still, while much more effective than a scratch plow, the plow with mold board
still needed to be dragged along the fields and someone needed to either stand on the back or at
least push down with great force to get the plow share to cut through the soil. In what is present
day Germany in the 10th century, there was a new innovation. This was the heavy wheeled plow. The
wheels meant that it moved more easily over the plow land and that it could move more easily
out to the fields and back again at the end of the day. The plow share was made of iron,
which meant it could bite more firmly into the earth. It is significant that it was developed in
this part of the medieval world where heavy soils made such an invention a necessity. It's also
significant that from the period of about 1000 to 1200, it quickly spread throughout the rest of
Europe as more and more marginally arable lands came into cultivation. In addition to the speed
and ease which the heavy wheeled plow added to the process of plowing, it also reduced a great
deal of the labor. Before the advent of the heavy wheeled plow, the field would usually have to be
cross plowed to get the best results out of the soil. The heavy wheeled plow turned the soil over
so deeply and definitively and thoroughly that suddenly there was no need for cross plowing.
The work of farming the land had just been cut in half.
But while it was a significant advance, the heavy wheeled plow was still in many respects
limited by the kind of power that was available to drive it. Oxen were slow, lumbering animals,
strong, but difficult to work with. Horses would have been much preferred as plow animals,
but for a long time no one could figure out how to make this happen. Oxen had such broad shoulders
and these shoulders were positioned in such a way that it was easy to fit a wooden yoke to them
and then hitch the animals to the plow. The skeletal muscular structure of horses was
significantly different from that of oxen and attaching them to the same style of wooden yoke
would have meant that they would have essentially been choking themselves with every step they took
forward. In the 10th century an innovation all the way from China, the padded horse collar,
made its way west. The design of the horse collar allowed for horses to be yoke to a plow
which was a much better way of doing things. Horses were quicker than oxen, easier to control
and when you combine the innovation of the horse collar with the innovation of the heavy-wield
plow, well suddenly you are able to get a substantial portion of your farm work done
much more quickly than you ever did before. It is a sign of the necessity of producing
enough cereal grains to sustain the population that people seem to give up the way they had been
doing things for the last thousand years pretty quickly and they enthusiastically embraced the
new technology. The amount of land that previously had been plowed in a day now could be plowed in
just a few hours. Some scholars estimate that compared to oxen horses were able to do 50%
more in the same amount of time and they did it much more easily than had been the case with oxen.
Again this created a feedback loop in which because the plowing could be done more quickly
people were eager and willing to look for more land to plow. Once more we see an increase in a
sardine or reclaiming land from the forests and boggy wetlands were ingeniously drained with a
system of tiles and channels in the earth. Water was directed away into catch pools and more land
was available for planting. While the heavy plow had started to come into use in the early medieval
period it's as we head into the high middle ages and the time period we're discussing here that we
see widespread almost universal adoption of it. Some scholars have gone so far as to suggest
that the whole structure of peasant society was altered by the adoption of the heavy wheeled plow
because if it was going to be truly efficient especially in the days before the horse collar
then the community needed to come together and share in the labor and the management of this
most valuable resource. Before horse power came into broad usage as I noted a moment ago oxen
were the preferred beast of burden when it came to plowing and the heavy wheeled plow was most
effective when it was pulled by teams of four or even eight oxen. Now if you've been paying
attention at all to our discussion so far you can guess that almost no one had the resources to own
and care for eight oxen but an entire village might and that's what happened bodies of governance
formed and instead of every man or every family for himself or itself when it came to subsistence
farming communities had to work cooperatively in order for everyone to achieve good results.
By the time horse power came along and the surplus from the harvest could be used by more and more
people to focus on their own individual needs these communal social bodies were firmly entrenched.
When horses and the horse collar arrived on the plowing scene you might think that this might have
been a logical time for there to be a shift toward individualism but the communal bodies that had
been formed prior to this were now solidified and involved with much more of village life than
simply allocating plowing resources. These communal structures were not going anywhere.
This is one of the clear beginnings of what came in some places to be called the commune movement
in which the citizens of a particular community was where oaths of fealty and allegiance to one
another and the town elders began the practice of getting together to decide on various matters
of importance to the community at large. In the early modern period even when communities had
shifted away from cooperative agriculture vestiges of this system remained. The shift had been so
dramatic it had helped form a new social structure. Of this change in technology scholar Lynn White
Jr. says quote no more fundamental change in the idea of man's relation to the soil can be imagined.
Once man had been a part of nature now he became her exploiter end quote and the changes kept on
coming. This upward momentum was continued by yet another development in agriculture the three field
rotation system. As I said earlier in a medieval village using the open field system there would
be a cluster of houses near the center of the settlement and fields would surround the village
proper. We call this a nucleated village. From the eighth century on we see more and more villages
not only organize this way but they also start to shift away from a two field rotation system
to a three field system. Whereas previously one field had always lain fallow while another was
planted we start to see peasants dividing their fields into three. One was used for autumn planting
usually some form of winter wheat another field was used for spring planting which mostly consisted
of oats barley peas and similar crops and then the third field lay fallow. If we add to this that the
population seems to have figured out that turning animals such as cows and sheep out on the fallow
field to graze not only kept the weeds down but also added valuable fertilizer to the soil in the
form of manure you can see how medieval farmland just continued to become more and more productive
as we head towards the year 1300. Further medieval people had also discovered almost by accident
that by rotating crops of beans and legumes through those fields they increased their productivity
later on. The nitrogen such crops put back into the ground kept the soil quote unquote
in good heart as was often said in the Middle Ages and in another one of those feedback loops
I've already mentioned several times the three field system contributed to its own more widespread
use by making it possible to dedicate one field to the sowing of oats. This became much more common
as more and more people came to rely on horsepower for plowing instead of oxen. Oxen need grass and
substantial huge amounts of it to survive. Comparatively speaking oats were easier to produce
and a more reliable form of nutrition for horses so as more fields were devoted to oats more horses
could be sustained which in turn led to more plowing of fields which in turn led to a greater
desire for and reliance on horsepower and well you get the picture and of course it didn't hurt
that in a pinch oats could be made suitable for human consumption. In the run-up to the year
1100 there was for the first time in living memory a surplus of grain for many people living in the
medieval world whereas previously farmers had had a subsistence existence with pretty much whatever
they produced over and above what they needed to survive going to the lord of the manner
in the form of rents and taxes. The advances in agricultural technology in combination with the
milder climate of the little optimum resulted in extra grain above and beyond what the peasant family
could consume or needed to use as payment and food surplus in the medieval world was like a
sudden influx of real wealth. As we discussed in our lecture on the little optimum this situation
sparked a boom in trade. Merchant networks began to expand as people ranged far afield to find
eager buyers for goods unavailable in particular regions but in bountiful surplus in others
or if the growers themselves were not traveling to do this there were plenty of middlemen who
saw an opportunity for advancement and jumped on it. Also as I noted before this increase in food
and expansion in trade and mercantilism led to the revival of urban life. Cities that had been in
decline since the fall of the Roman Empire now came back to life and became bustling centers of
commerce and industry. Suddenly many people had excess wealth. Among these was the church which
was the biggest landholder in the medieval world. Not only was the church making a handsome profit
out of selling and trading its own crops and other goods but it also was receiving more and more
contributions and donations from common people who previously could not afford to give so razor thin
was the margin between sustenance and survival. So in yet another of those feedback loops the church
during this period seemed to keep getting richer in spite of itself and its professed devotion to
the ideal of poverty. For example consider the monastic system. In this system monks lived a
life of prayer and manual labor. They had taken vows of poverty chastity and obedience but at the
end of the 11th century there were some who felt that the dominant monastic order in the medieval
world the Benedictines named after Saint Benedict who composed their rule of life had become too
worldly. The monks who felt this way broke away and formed a new order the order of the
Cistercians. This order sought to embrace poverty and manual labor more rigorously so they tended
to locate their abbeys in locations far removed from town centers but then their industry and
frugal living backfired on them. They had taken advantage of many of the agricultural advances
that had come into existence and had essentially opened up the undeveloped countryside into a new
world order using what is called the Grange system. This was a system that was in some ways comparable
to the way a castle worked in the rest of society. A castle would be the centerpiece and stronghold
of a great lord and the peasants who worked his land and served him would live nearby and they
could retreat into the castle during time of war. Rather than a military or defensive center however
the Grange was an agricultural or industrial center. It would be established in the middle of the
complex of fields the Cistercians were working and usually it would be manned by lay brothers,
members of the community who had not taken formal vows but who served the order and oversaw
the working of the fields and the tending of the animals. If the Cistercian monastery itself was
much more removed from society at large than many Benedictine houses the Cistercian Grange
was yet another step removed deeper in the wilderness. All this hard labor and frugal living
meant that within a short time the Cistercians became enormously wealthy in spite of themselves
for any property or movable goods stayed within the monastery. Once it came in it never came out.
Monks did not own property nor did they have heirs to whom they could leave their possessions or
lands. Because of this the religious houses all of them had surplus wealth and goods on a scale
they had never had before. Much has been made of certain church individuals from the medieval period
who displayed hypocrisy and corruption. More than a few popes fall under this heading and some bishops
as well but we should never forget that the church also could be the greatest source of good the
medieval world would consistently experience and during the time of the rise in population and the
increase of the number of people who were truly poor and without resources the church stepped in
and provided alms, charity, food and other kinds of support. In many places the destitute could
count on a meal, some coins and if there was room a bed due to the charity of the brothers
and because the brothers had more wealth at this time they were able to be even more generous than
they had previously but not all their money went into feeding and supporting the poor.
This period is also the great period of cathedral building. These soaring stone structures some of
them taking decades or even centuries to complete began to be found throughout England and on the
continent during the period we're talking about between the year 1000 and 1300. The building of
these structures had support from within the church system but also from without. Plenty of
well-to-do people from kings on down to merchants and traders donated money and supplies to this
endeavor which has come to be called a quote unquote pilgrimage in stone. It was a way that
people could show their devotion to God and seek some measure of atonement for sins past by supporting
the construction of a glorious edifice that would be the center of a community for time out of mind
and indeed today when you enter Canterbury Cathedral in England or Chartres or Notre-Dame in France
you really do catch your breath at the stunning splendor of it all.
Cathedrals became important in the life of a town not just for worship but as another hub of trade and
business. In one place for example money exchangers might regularly be found clustered outside the
north door. In another town a brisk market business might be happening in the courtyard in front of
the cathedral and some business transactions might actually take place inside the cathedral
inside the cathedral itself when it wasn't in use for prayers or mass.
Another development that springs from the agricultural innovations of the heavy plow
horse collar and three field rotation system is the rise of the university system. In a time of
surplus it was possible for children of wealthy families to imagine that they could be something
else other than a subsistence farmer and there were people who found that they could make a living
offering instruction in particular subjects to a newly wealthy population eager to explore the
life of the mind. You'll remember Peter Abelard from lecture 10. It is exactly this situation
of surplus that made it possible for him to travel to Paris where the university was just
coming into existence and was having its plans of study and rules of progression through the system
finalized and it was not only the children of noble families as Abelards was many well-to-do
merchants who found their business booming because of the combination of agricultural surplus,
enhanced production systems and more temperate climate suddenly had disposable income that
they could use to send one of their children at least to get an education. In Italy there were
many options Bologna, Salerno, Modena. In France Paris was the place to go. In England it was Oxford.
Learning was revitalized in a way that it had not been since the days of the Roman Empire
and it was no coincidence then that what was often studied was the works of philosophy,
rhetoric, logic and more from the antique or Roman period. Many have argued that the early
modern period marked a shift in society because there was a rediscovery or renewal of interest
in the classics that had been lacking during the Middle Ages. Here we can see that this in fact
occurred much earlier in the 11th to 13th centuries when the food surplus due to better climate
and agricultural innovation made it possible for people to begin to reconsider the life of the mind
rather than focus almost exclusively on the life of the body. But while these wonderful
institutions were reestablished during the period of the little optimum and society was progressing
on many fronts as we've already suggested this feedback loop was going to exceed its limits
and soon there was a land crunch and a large portion of the population began to suffer from
malnutrition and crowded and unhygienic living conditions. This meant that the medieval world
was particularly susceptible to a horrible event that was heading its way the Black Death which
struck in 1348 and which we will talk about at greater length in lecture 21. But in our next
lecture we're going to keep our focus on some of the more pleasant results of the little optimum
and agricultural innovation and investigate the flourishing of the arts that began to gather
steam especially at the beginning of the 14th century. More people had the time inclination
and disposable income to support the arts or even be artists and in places like Italy
you really do have to wonder what was in the water so dramatic was this artistic explosion.
While innovative in many respects the artistic traditions of the Middle Ages also looked to the
past and nowhere is this more clear than in the life and career of one of the main subjects of
our next lecture Francesco Petrarcha known to most today simply as Petrarch. In the year 1341
Petrarch was crowned poet laureate a position that had not been filled since the days of the Roman
Empire. His coronation with laurel leaves marked a nod to the past paired with an eager gaze toward
the future. It was a turning point that when we focus on it helps us really see how much the
medieval world was changing.
