Lecture 20 The Medieval World's First Poet Laureate
Welcome back.
As you'll remember from our last three lectures, the period from about 1000 to 1300 saw a dramatic
change in the shape of the medieval world, and perhaps nowhere is this more obvious than
in the area of the arts.
It was possible in the 14th century to have a career as a poet, something that had been
essentially impossible just a century or so earlier.
On April 8th, 1341, an Italian poet known as Francesco Petrarcha, now commonly referred
to as simply Petrarch, stood in the building of the Senate on the Capitoline Hill in Rome
and had a crown of laurels placed on his head.
He was declared Poet Laureate, the first that the Western world had seen in almost a thousand
years since the glory days of Rome.
The great empires of Ancient Greece and Rome had regularly had Poet Laureates, a government
appointed position that helped demonstrate that these civilizations were, well, civilized.
They had moved beyond subsistence, and they were cultured societies that officially valued
the arts.
And that is what the leaders of Rome were trying to say when they crowned Petrarch.
The glories of the ancient world had come again.
They looked to the past as they moved forward to make a future.
If you are looking to try and identify a starting point for the Renaissance or early modern period,
you could do a whole lot worse than April 8th, 1341.
This moment marked a public shift in the way that the medieval world understood and valued
literature and the other arts, and it seemed to announce to the world that humanism had
been reborn.
Petrarch, after all, has been called the father of humanism.
As I'm sure most of you know, when we use the word humanism in this way, we're referring
to a philosophy or worldview that is concerned with the values, issues, and activities of
people first.
Thus, it stands in opposition to what many have seen as the collective or group mindset
of the medieval world, with its interest in subsuming human activity in terms of larger
spiritual concerns and the power of God.
Humanism would be more concerned with the individual person, and most of the time you
hear the word humanism paired with the word renaissance.
It's renaissance humanism, the suggestion being that it was in the renaissance or the
early modern period, and this is usually defined as beginning sometime in the 16th century.
The idea is that it's at this time that European culture began to value the individual in ways
that the medieval world had not, and hand in hand with this new perspective came an
emphasis on knowledge, study, the arts, history, politics, ideals of social order, and more.
Now most medievalists consider this idea to be nonsense.
We feel that the medieval world had long had a sense of the individual, and it is people
like Petrarch and his poet Laureate Crown that help make this fact plain.
Thank you very much.
But at the same time, it is true that there aren't as many traces of this individualism
in the Middle Ages as there are in the early modern.
Petrarch's crowning is thus in some sense a turning point simply because it helps us
to see what is happening, appreciate what came before, understand what's coming after,
and it does so very visibly.
But let's go back a little bit.
Yes, today we're going to take as our starting point the crowning of Petrarch as poet Laureate.
But let's consider this moment in terms of the turning point categories we've been mapping
out as we progress through this course.
And once we think about it, we see that Petrarch's acceptance of the crown of poet Laureate in
Rome is rather like Charlemagne's being crowned Holy Roman Emperor in the year 800.
It was in effect a turning point that was not one.
Rather, it was more an acknowledgement, a way to mark a change that had already been occurring
for some time.
But even though this moment is arguably not really a turning point in the way we've been
discussing it for most of this series, it is handy for us to use it as one in this lecture
because it gives us a point in time with which we can orient ourselves, a position from which
we can look back and look forward.
And also, you have to give the guy credit.
Petrarch must have been a larger-than-life personality, truly, and an amazing talent
as in 1340, he was offered the position of poet Laureate both by the scholars of Paris
and those of Rome.
This fact is significant for a couple of reasons.
First of all, it showed that there had been a significant shift in thinking that had pervaded
a large portion of the medieval world.
If two such distant places had both come up with the idea of looking back to the Roman
past and naming a poet Laureate, then it demonstrates that the idea of the importance
of the arts, of culture, of literary production as a significant component of the social order
was being revitalized in a crucial way.
And while Petrarch was certainly deserving of this accolade, as we'll see in just a moment,
if it hadn't been Petrarch, it would have been someone else.
The point is that larger social trends had arrived at a moment when the naming of a poet
Laureate seemed the logical and indeed necessary next step to keep society advancing forward
on its current path.
In later generations, especially in the early modern period, plenty of people would look
back to the past and take Petrarch and his position as poet Laureate as inspiration for
their own humanist philosophies and ideals.
In fact, we can blame Petrarch, at least in part, for the concept of the Dark Ages as
he was one of the first to characterize the centuries before his lifetime as being a period
of darkness and ignorance.
So just who was this guy, the right man at the right place at the right time, to arguably
usher in the Renaissance, centuries before most people believe it came into being?
Well, the number one thing to realize in terms of understanding the importance of this turning
point is that Petrarch was an Italian.
As we'll see in greater detail in lecture 22, Italy, in many respects, was far ahead
of the rest of the medieval world when it came to things like economic growth, trade,
cultural innovation, education, the university system, and more.
Given its position on the Mediterranean, Italian traders had always had contact with the wider
world.
For much of the medieval period, portions of Italy were remarkably heterogeneous, with
people from all different nationalities, faiths, and cultural traditions living side-by-side
in relative harmony.
It was perhaps the most tolerant society outside of Al Andalus, Muslim Spain.
Or I should say, it contained the most tolerant societies, because Italy was by no means a
unified nation, not by politics, or by culture, or even language.
It was full of different communities and dialects and fiercely proud societies that considered
their city-state to be a completely different entity than the one just over the next hill.
Thus, Siena was its own society, as distinct from Milan, as distinct from Venice, as distinct
from Rome, as distinct from Florence.
You get the picture.
Plenty of historians have argued that the unique nature of Italy's geography and landscape
was at play here, and this is part of what made it so very different from the rest of
medieval Europe.
The mountainous terrain and many rivers kept groups of people contained and distinct from
one another, and the fertile land meant that cooperative farming styles, found in so much
of northern and western Europe at this time, weren't really necessary for survival on the
Italian peninsula in the same way that they were elsewhere.
The Italian peninsula is where modern banking had its birth, where Roman numerals were decisively
rejected in favor of Arabic ones, and where knowledge imparted from the wider world, especially
that concerning science and medicine, as we'll see in lecture 22, were offered as subjects
for study in the first true universities of the medieval world.
So it makes sense, given all these considerations, that the medieval world's first true humanists
would come from the Italian peninsula.
But Petrarch was arguably not the first of these.
The man who paved the way for him is a man from Florence named Dante Alighieri, who was
in fact a friend of Petrarch's father.
Dante is perhaps best known today for his divine comedy, which was remarkable not only
for its epic subject matter, but also for the fact that it was written not in Latin,
but in the vernacular, and not just any vernacular language, but that of Florence.
So influential was his work that Dante is often called the father of the Italian language,
as the Florentine dialect eventually became the dominant and standard form of the language.
Dante was also exemplary in terms of the new breed of prominent citizen.
This was because he combined the interests of a philosopher with the skill of a poet
and the shrewd acumen of a political figure.
He was a different kind of medieval citizen, and Petrarch was very like him in many respects.
In fact, these two, along with Giovanni Boccaccio, are often called the three fountains of Italian
culture.
Petrarch was born in Tuscany in 1304 into a family of lawyers.
His father was deeply involved in the household of Pope Clement V, who was one of the Avignon
Popes.
So Petrarch spent a good portion of his younger days in the papal household in France, also
studying law there at the University of Montpellier, and then again back in Italy at the University
of Bologna.
The social changes of the previous three centuries, which we discussed at great length in lectures
17, 18, and 19, meant that Petrarch was perfectly poised to take advantage of a comfortable
economic situation, the possibility of a career that involved the life of the mind rather
than the backbreaking work of subsistence farming, and he could devote considerable amounts
of attention to what we might call leisure activity.
While certainly there was always some small segment of the medieval population that was
able to spend considerably more time on pleasure than on work, by the beginning of the 14th
century, we see greater and greater numbers of medieval people able to devote significant
energy to activities such as letter writing, for example.
Petrarch was one of these, keeping up a vibrant correspondence with numerous other prominent
thinkers and writers.
In addition to letter writing, Petrarch had a deep interest in the classical world, and
while he was working as a clerk in Avignon, he spent what free time he had composing an
epic in Latin about the Roman general Scipio Africanus.
This was a deliberate attempt to connect himself and his fellow Italians to the world of the
Roman Empire, and it is a sign of the growing interest in the antique world and the writings
of classical authors that the composition of this text made Petrarch a celebrity on the
European stage.
It was the writing of this work that eventually led to his invitation to be poet laureate by
scholars in both Paris and Rome.
Petrarch traveled extensively throughout the European world, sometimes just for pleasure,
a thing that would have been inconceivable a hundred years earlier.
Occasionally, in fact, he is called the first tourist.
Wherever he went, he sought out archives of early texts, particularly those in Latin,
and he made copies of them or otherwise attempted to preserve them.
He is responsible for discovering a collection of Cicero's letters that had been unknown
to the medieval world, and his interests and activities are representative of a new interest
in the past that was sweeping through Europe at the time.
But he also represented a new way of interpreting and valuing that past.
For example, as a devout Catholic a hundred years earlier, Petrarch might have been the
kind of man who sought to subsume his will to the larger will of God, to more or less
disappear into anonymous service to the greater good.
This would have been much more typical of a person of faith in the 12th or 13th centuries.
But in the Italy of the 14th century, Petrarch saw the possibility of devotion to God fitting
together nicely with the expression and cultivation of individual interests and talents.
He saw no reason for the two to be mutually exclusive.
He was certainly not the only person to believe this, but he was arguably the most visible
and influential person who thought this.
He composed a text called the secretum meum, in which he argued that achievements in the
secular world didn't necessarily preclude a sacred relationship with God.
He saw literary creativity and political ability as gifts from the divine, and he both influenced
and was influenced by the idea that the spheres of religious life and secular life could overlap.
Moving along these lines was occurring throughout the medieval world, which had long seen a
distinct mutual exclusivity between what were called the active life and the contemplative
life.
The idea here was that one form of life was preferable to the other, but that both were
necessary in order to achieve the salvation of humanity.
In other words, some people were called to a life of contemplation as a nun or monk or
anchoress enclosed in a cell attached to a church or near a religious institution.
The job of these particularly holy people, removed from society at large, was to pray
for the souls of those still in the world.
Those who were out in the world living the active life as a farmer or blacksmith or banker
were, simply by virtue of the nature of their existence, much more prone to sin.
But they were also necessary in that they provided the supports that made it possible
for other people to live lives of prayer and contemplation, removed from the sinfulness
of the rest of existence.
While these two forms of living had long been regarded as mutually exclusive, in the 14th
century, there was new thinking about the possibility of living a mixed life, of devoting
oneself to prayer and contemplation on a regular basis without having to completely forego the
pleasures and perils of the life of a merchant or statesman or clothmaker.
Petrarch was one of the most vocal proponents of this idea, although he himself struggled
with how to reconcile the two approaches.
In this, he would serve as inspiration for later generations, especially in the early
modern period.
These generations were inspired by the idea that one could be both devout and worldly.
Petrarch demonstrated this in another aspect of his life, in the composition of poems written
in honor of a woman that he identified only as Laura.
The moment when Petrarch first laid eyes on this woman in the year 1327, he claims that
he fell hopelessly, madly in love.
She however was already married to another man, although the suggestion seems to be that
had she been free, she might have returned Petrarch's affection.
The sonnets that Petrarch wrote in honor of her and his love for her became deeply influential
ideas and aspects of the Renaissance, and the poems displayed both deep emotion and
intense mastery of poetic form.
In one of his more beautiful poems written to Laura, Petrarch begins by saying, quote,
Benedetto si al giorno, il mese e il lano, e la stagione e il tempo, e l'ora e il punto,
e il bel paese e il loco ovvio fui giunto da due belli occhi che legato mano, end quote.
Or, quote, blessed be the day, the month, the year, the season and the time, the hour,
the instant, the gracious countryside, the place where I was struck by those two lovely
eyes that bound me, end quote.
We see how aware he was that he was writing for posterity when he concludes that poem
with, quote, Benedetto si an tutte le carte, ovvio famo l'acquisto, e il pensier mio, che
si caltre non va parte, end quote, or, quote, blessed be all the pages upon which I earn
her fame, and every thought of mine, only of her, and shared with no one else, end quote.
Although of course time has proven that these thoughts were shared with the entire world
for centuries to come.
If you think back to your high school English class for a moment, you might remember that
in literature there are two kinds of sonnets, which is a highly stylized poetic form.
There is the Petrarchan sonnet, which is a poem of 14 lines divided into two sections,
the octave and the cestet, with respective rhyme schemes of A-B-B-A, A-B-B-A, C-D-E,
C-D-E.
In contrast is the Shakespearean sonnet, which has a pattern of A-B-A-B-C-D-C-D-E-F-E-F-G-G.
In some respects this is really all you need to know to recognize the impact that Petrarch
had on the development of the early modern or Renaissance period.
Shakespeare, the definitive figure of that period, was working within and tweaking a tradition
that had come to prominence centuries earlier when Petrarch fell in love with a woman he
couldn't have.
His poems in honor of Laura, called the Quenzoñere, or songs, are very different when compared
to so-called love poetry of just a century or even a few decades earlier.
In the Troubadour poetry so popular in the south of France, the object of the poet's
affection was heavily idealized and stylized.
In other words, the woman described in the poem lacked any real individuality or depth
of character.
Troubadour poems could be about just about anyone.
Really all one would need to do is change the name of the woman being described in the
poem.
In the majority of cases, the attributes accorded the subject of Troubadour poetry were so
exaggerated that no mortal woman could actually live up to the standard.
Petrarch's poems about Laura are in some ways similar in that they speak of her beauty
and perfection.
But at the same time, I think we can see that a shift has happened.
And although we don't actually see any physical description of Laura beyond her foot, when
it comes to Petrarch's emotions for her, they are much more deeply engaged, wrenching and
in fact tortured than what we see in the rather detached poetry of the Troubadours.
Some have gone so far as to say that what we have here is the beginning of a psychological
realism in love poetry.
A clear indication that these are the real sincere emotions of a real man writing about
a real woman.
The fullest development of this idea would come centuries later in Shakespeare's Sonnet
130.
My mistress eyes are nothing like the sun.
In this poem, Shakespeare completes the poetic transformation that Petrarch started.
Now it was the poetic convention in the renaissance of Shakespeare's England to follow Petrarchan
conventions and describe one's love by referring to what is called a blazon or a cataloging
of a woman's physical attributes by comparing them to the natural world.
So in this tradition, eyes are always like oceans or pools.
Lips are like rubies or cherries, etc., etc.
It was common also to try and inject sincere feeling into these poems, just as Petrarch
had when he wrote about Laura.
But Shakespeare built on the traditions of the past and added his own comment by writing,
In other words, she looks like a real woman, not some bizarre amalgamation of suns and
skies and plants and lakes and jewels.
But Shakespeare concludes the poem by stating, quote, and yet by heaven I think my love
is rare as any she belied with false compare, end quote.
In other words, his love for her is real because she is real.
Sonnet 130 is a poem that arguably could not have existed if Petrarch had not taken the
first steps in the direction of psychological realism.
The career of Petrarch came to symbolize a change in social attitudes toward the arts.
In the early days of the 14th century, side by side with Petrarch, the Florentine artist
Giotto was helping to usher in a new period of realism and painting.
As the 14th century progressed, names that are certainly familiar to anyone with a passing
acquaintance with medieval art come to dominate the scene, especially in places such as Florence
and Rome.
Brunelleschi, the architect who designed the dome for Florence's Duomo.
Donatello, Brunelleschi's friend and traveling companion whose works of sculpture and statuary
are some of the finest the world has ever seen.
Ghiberti, friend to Donatello and the craftsman behind the Florentine baptistry doors called
the Gates of Paradise.
In Ghiberti's career as a metalworker, we can actually see the evolution from medieval
to Renaissance style.
In 1401, the cloth guild of Florence announced a competition.
They wished to select the best artist of the day to decorate the doors of the baptistry
in the city.
Just the fact of the existence of this competition tells us something about how the medieval world
had changed, a competition sponsored by civic authorities that had as its focus the most
impressive artistic production and which attracted a number of eager applicants.
Ghiberti and Brunelleschi were the finalists, but Ghiberti ended up with a commission.
He worked on the scenes for these doors for 21 years.
Cast in bronze, they showed 28 biblical scenes, each image set within a frame of aquatrafoil,
a highly stylized and very medieval approach to artistic representation.
In 1425, Ghiberti received the commission for another set of doors, and here we see
a dramatic shift.
Perhaps the most famous pieces of metalwork in the world, the east doors showed 10 scenes
from the Old Testament, but gone is the conventional gothic framing technique he used on the north
doors, and here is a breathtaking display of mastery of the use of depth and perspective,
such as the medieval world had never seen.
The layering of the elements of the scenes was utterly novel, and upon gazing upon these
doors, Michelangelo, without a doubt the greatest artist of the European world, Fullstop, pronounced
them fit to be the gates of paradise, which is the descriptor by which they are still
known to this day.
This explosion of art in the realms of painting, sculpture, architecture, metalwork, and more,
accompanied by the importance attached to such endeavors by Italian political factions,
leads one to question, what was in the drinking water in the cities of Rome and Florence in
the 14th century?
At this time, a humanist or renaissance impulse that had been on the rise since the little
optimum found it had room to expand and grow, but nowhere did it flourish as it did in the
Italian city-states in the 14th century.
Francesco Petraca stands as an emblem of that movement, not as the cause, not as the
result, but rather as an indicator that helps give us the point of orientation to better
understand how this transformation was working its way through the medieval world, because
it certainly was.
The work of Shakespeare, the blending of religious and secular life, the importance of the individual,
all of these are considered fundamental elements of the early modern or renaissance in the
16th century, but Petraca helps us see that they were set in motion, their foundations
laid much, much earlier.
Petraca and every other person in the medieval world would be dramatically affected by the
subject of our next lecture.
This was the spread of the Black Death throughout medieval Europe.
Although not as clearly defined a moment as, say, the Norman invasion of England in 1066
or the proclamation of the cannons of the Fourth Ladering Council, the appearance of
the Black Death in 1348 and the havoc it wreaked in its first major outbreak is just as significant
a point in history as William the Conqueror's victory at Hastings or the Fourth Ladering
Council's declaration concerning transubstantiation.
In fact, because the plague immediately affected so many people at so many different levels
of society, one could argue that it is the most significant turning point we will discuss
in this course.
The plague did not discriminate.
Nobles and peasants, heretics and popes all were susceptible.
Even more terrifying for the people who lived through it, no one knew exactly how it was
transmitted, how to avoid it or how to treat it.
In the 14th century, the medieval world was much more crowded than it had been in the
year 1000 and what had been a boon at first now became a liability.
Although technological advances in gains and agricultural efficiency had for a time kept
pace with the burgeoning population, by 1300 the medieval world's people far outstripped
its resources.
The result was overcrowding and malnutrition for a great portion of the population.
The medieval world could not have been in a worse position when the plague first descended
upon it and the people proved hugely vulnerable to its depredations.
Join us next time when we discuss this plague that killed one-third to one-half of the population
of the medieval world, wiping out artisans, farmers, religious leaders, princes and in
some cases whole communities.
It would kill Petrarch's beloved Laura and eventually would kill Petrarch himself.
As we'll see next time, the world would never be the same.
