Lecture 22. Science, Medicine, and the University.
Welcome back. In our last lecture, we discussed a hugely significant turning point in the shape of the medieval world.
That was the first appearance of the Black Death, or plague, which raged through Europe from 1348 to 1350 and killed up to half the population.
In the lecture before that, we saw how a vibrant culture of learning and the arts was just starting to take hold in the 14th century.
This culture was both disrupted and enhanced in different ways by the appearance of the plague.
Poet Laureate Petrarch and his fellow Italian Giovanni Boccaccio were inspired to compose great works of literature because of the plague.
Over in England, Geoffrey Chaucer would find his options greatly enhanced after he won the patronage of John of Gaunt, son of King Edward III,
by writing a text known as The Book of the Duchess, which memorialized Gaunt's wife Blanche, who had died of the plague.
For those who survived it, life after the plague was much better than what had come before, and one of those survivors was the university system.
In today's lecture, we'll examine the rise of the university system in the 11th century in Italy and see how it spread throughout the medieval world.
The advent of the plague was a serious challenge to a model of education that was in place in the medieval world,
but those who were part of the academic world strove mightily to understand the plague and try to combat it.
In the end, most of their efforts and explanations were ineffective and just plain wrong.
Scholars variously attributed the plague to the alignment of the planets, to earthquakes, to a miasma that had risen out of the earth, to sorcery,
and their suggestions for combating it were equally useless.
Carry a bunch of fresh flowers in front of your face so as not to inhale bad humors that caused plague.
Have yourself bled on a regular basis. Consume food that was cold or hot or spicy or bland.
But even though the academic community got so much about the plague wrong, their attempts, their valiant efforts,
and the sense of urgency they brought to those attempts and efforts caused more and more people to turn to the university,
seeking answers in older texts and desiring to learn about different schools of thought
that would help them try and understand not only what was causing the plague, but how to cope with its various effects –
physical, psychological, religious, economic, political, and on and on.
So in today's lecture, we are going to discuss a moment that was both a turning point and a window of opportunity.
And to do this, we are going to go back in time, well before the plague.
As we saw in our discussion of Peter Abelard, by the 12th century in Europe, there was a thriving educational system in place
in most of the great cities, like Paris, and there was a new value placed on learning and education that hadn't been seen
since the days of the Roman Empire. Like so much else in the medieval world, this innovation had worked its way north and west
from the Italian peninsula, and it had arguably begun in the city of Salerno much earlier than the 12th century.
To be precise, this turning point of the medieval world began sometime in the late 10th or early 11th century.
Imagine you are a peasant living somewhere, anywhere, in the medieval world, in about the 10th century.
One day, you develop a nasty cough. You've had this before, but this one lingers. Over time, it gets worse.
You have to stop the forward motion of the plow when you are wracked by coughing spasms.
Your sleep and that of your families interrupted several times a night.
With the lack of sleep and the need to keep working, you are unable to allow your body to rest and recover.
The cough moves deeper into your lungs, and soon you are coughing up yellow and then green phlegm.
You start to run a fever. You would stay in bed if you could, but the plowing needs to get done,
and the seed sown, and the crops watered, and the weeds pulled on your own land,
and your family owes a certain number of workdays on the land of your lord.
And if you take a day off, you'll just fall further and further behind. What do you do?
In many cases, you might eventually be forced to stay in bed for a long recovery at the expense of harvesting your grain
and having to pay a heavy tax to your lord for missing owed days of labor. You might die.
You might turn to a local healer, someone who is versed in plant lore and medicines,
but has no formal education or training except for experience and learning on the job.
These people could often provide real healing and relief, but their resources were limited.
There are no antibiotics. There is no theory of germ transmission or of hygiene,
but the local healer was your best and only option. That started to change a bit at the end of the 11th century.
As you all know by now, the Italian and Iberian peninsulas had long been sites of first contact
for various forms of knowledge filtering into the medieval world. Roman numerals,
advances in architecture, agriculture, the arts, politics, religious tolerance.
Most of these key events or ideas had first touched down in either Muslim Spain or one of the Italian city-states.
This was for obvious reasons due to the geographic location of these territories.
Situated on the Mediterranean, the peoples living here had been engaged
in the exchange of goods and ideas with other groups to the south, north, east and west since time out of mind.
Celerno, in the south of Italy on the Turinian Sea, had been a center of medical learning and expertise since ancient times.
It had been colonized by the Greeks, and their extensive medical tradition,
especially the works of Galen and Hippocrates, had persisted into the days of the Roman Empire.
With the fall of the empire, the medical traditions at Celerno had managed to persist, albeit in restricted form.
But given Celerno's close proximity to Sicily, which was itself always a part of the North African world,
this location was very early on exposed to traditions of Arabic and Muslim medicine.
As we saw in Lecture 3 on Muslim Spain, in the early medieval period,
the Muslim world was one of the greatest repositories of knowledge and culture to exist.
Baghdad was home to a flourishing civilization, while Paris and London were rustic backwaters in comparison.
Because Celerno had extensive contacts with the Muslim world,
it is no surprise that Arabic thinking about medicine and science would find a receptive community here.
For centuries, Celerno and the town of Velia, nearby, had been a sort of early spa resort.
People had come from all over the known world to partake of the waters there,
and received treatment and information from the scholars and practitioners,
the Physici and Medici, who had gathered there,
attracted to the place by its long-standing reputation as a place of healing,
and then, in a sort of forward momentum kind of phenomenon,
attracted by the fact that the greatest medical minds of the age tended to gather in this spot.
At the end of the 11th century and the beginning of the 12th, however,
those other positive changes that were occurring all over the medieval world,
increased crop production, more extensive trade and economic development,
would give Celerno and Celerneton medicine a boost.
In the second half of the 11th century, a Celerneton scholar by the name of Alfinus
became both a doctor of medicine and then the Archbishop of the town.
A student of both Arabic and Latin, he translated many medical texts and treatises from the Arabic tradition into Latin,
thereby making them available in the future to a broader section of the educated populace in the medieval world.
It was he who also invited another giant in the field of medicine,
Constantine africanus, or Constantine african, to come to Celerno from Tunisia,
where he had a great reputation as a scholar and healer.
Constantine and Alfinus were hugely important in the development of medieval science and medicine
for a number of reasons, and here is where we see once again the element of serendipity,
another of our course themes emerging.
First, both these men were able to read and write in multiple languages,
and their positions on the Mediterranean made them more open to cross-cultural interchange,
much more than we might have found in say, the Paris or the Berlin or the London of the same period.
Secondly, they were both committed scholars who were interested in improving the story of knowledge in the world
and in making life better for their fellow man,
and they were living in exactly the period when some members of society had the time, opportunity,
and economic means to turn themselves towards such endeavors.
Third, their activities and interests were boosted and supported by the legendary monastery of Montecassino, which was nearby.
This was one of the greatest storehouses of knowledge in the medieval world and beyond,
and when Constantine came to Salerno to practice medicine, he was inspired to make his own contribution to this work,
and he undertook translations of all the important known works of Arabic medicine into Latin.
This massive compilation would become the foundation for all medical textbooks,
and thus for all medical education in the Middle Ages and well into the 17th century.
In other words, in the early modern period, those who wished to study medicine looked back to the past
and the learning that was brought into Europe through Italy in the 11th century.
Fourth, and perhaps most important, was the way in which Christianity at this time
seemed to have no trouble coexisting with medical practices,
something that would change dramatically by the time of the Fourth Lateran Council
when one of the canons would expressly counsel against monks serving as surgeons or performing medical procedures.
Decades before the Council in France, Bernard of Clairvaux sternly rebuked monks
for seeking out physicians for help in treating or easing medical problems.
By the 13th century, it seemed that the thinking had become that a monk should accept
whatever aches and pains came his way as a gift or punishment from God.
In the year 1050, however, the two spheres of religion and medicine
were certainly not seen as incompatible or mutually exclusive.
Indeed, Constantine seems to have been a practicing Muslim
when he was invited to Salerno by the Christian Archbishop
for the primary purpose of sharing and expanding knowledge about medical theory and treatments.
Later on, Constantine the African converted to Christianity and became a Benedictine monk,
but one has to wonder if that conversion was not perhaps due to his desire
to immerse himself even more fully in a life of study and scholarship.
So we have a situation in southern Italy generally, and Salerno in particular,
where in the late 11th century, medical knowledge from all over the known world
was being preserved and disseminated, and most importantly,
practiced by people from a wide variety of cultural, religious, and ethnic traditions.
Even more interestingly, this was a time and place when gender was similarly not a block
to participating in this exciting revolution of knowledge.
So alongside Jews and Arabs, women were admitted to the study in practice of medicine,
and it seems quite clear that there were several women who were respected members of the medical community.
The most famous of these women practitioners was a woman who has come down to us as trotta, or trotula,
which may or may not be the actual name of an actual woman,
or may be a placeholder name for a collective of women or a title for women
who were masters or magisters of medicine at Salerno.
But in any event, this figure is important and that she makes clear for us
that there were women participating in the advancing of medical knowledge at this time.
Dame Trotta, whoever she was, composed one of the major medical texts
in the Salerno tradition in the 12th century, and encyclopedia often called
On the Treatment of Illnesses.
Additionally, she is named as the author of texts that in English are called
The Diseases of Women, Treatments of Women, and Women's Cosmetics.
Her texts were widely copied and included in the curricula of medical schools in the medieval world
and well into the 16th century.
There is a story told by Orderic Vitalis, a Norman historian of the 12th century.
He relates how a monk went to Salerno, thinking himself a highly educated man
wishing to increase his already ample store of knowledge and learning.
When he arrived, however, he found that he knew less about medical matters
than a woman who was also studying at Salerno,
and he was ashamed to find that he could be bested in a matter of intellect and education
by any number of women who were pursuing studies at Salerno.
The admittance of women into the ranks of accepted and licensed medical practitioners
happened nowhere else in the medieval world, and this tolerant situation did not last too long.
It was, as I said, both a turning point and a window of opportunity,
but one that did not stay open for any extended period of time.
As that rise of a persecuting society mentality worked its way through the medieval world,
it eventually trickled south into Italy, but it took a while to get there.
Once it did, the active presence of women as scholars and practitioners of medicine
was curtailed some, but never completely obliterated,
at least not until the 15th and 16th centuries,
when education in the world of the Renaissance and early modern period was specifically limited to men.
Elsewhere in Europe, while women might not be formally recognized as masters of medicine,
they certainly served an important social function as local healers and midwives.
But in the rural settings where they applied their craft and the world of women and childbirth,
where they had the greatest impact, there was little formal record of their activity.
As we head into the 13th century, Salerno began to lose its status as the greatest of all medical schools.
In part, this was because the school began to be much more interested in the theoretical
rather than practical aspects of medicine.
It was more an intellectual hub than a training center.
This shift was also because in some ways Salerno had become a victim of its own success.
The idea of a university, a place where students and masters would gather to learn and teach,
had caught on in the rest of the medieval world,
and schools such as that at Bologna or the one in Montpellier in France
were eager to obtain copies of the medical manuscripts that had been transcribed at Salerno,
especially those that contained information from the world of Arabic medicine.
Soon the medical treatises produced and copied at Salerno were bound together into one volume
that came to be called the Articella,
which served as the foundation for all courses of medical study throughout the medieval period
and again well into the 16th century.
So what was medieval medicine like?
Well, it mostly derived from the Greek medical theories of Hippocrates and Galen.
At the center of Galenic theory is the idea of the four humours.
Galen and those who followed him held that the body would be healthy
as long as it maintained a balance between heat, cold, dryness and moisture.
Diet was important here,
as it was believed that all foods were made up of at least one of the four elements of fire, air, earth and water,
and after they were consumed they were transformed into one of the four humours,
blood, phlegm, black bile and yellow bile.
Medieval diagnosis might take into consideration the complexion of the patient,
meaning an attempt to determine how his or her humours were balanced.
Thus, someone with an excess of blood might be described as sanguine
and bloodletting would be prescribed in order to try and bring the humours back into balance.
Care had to be taken as to where the bloodletting incision would be made
and many medical texts offered complex diagrams as to where an incision for bloodletting should be made
dependent upon the particulars of the patient's illness.
Most of the bloodletting was very often harmless, especially if applied to healthy bodies,
but in many cases it almost certainly did more harm than good as you can imagine.
One can imagine that no one suffering from the plague benefited from galenic bloodletting,
but ultimately it would be difficult to tell if it was the disease or the treatment that led to the patient's death.
In a few cases it might actually have helped,
as we do have accounts of physicians who treated the bubonic form of plague
by lancing the buboes and approached straight out of galenic medicine.
The lanced buboes emitted foul-smelling pus,
but since this was the one form of plague that was actually possible to survive,
the recovery of even a very small percentage of plague sufferers who had undergone this treatment
was probably enough to maintain some small measure of faith in galenic medical practice.
But to return to the theory of the humors, a person who had an excess of yellow bile,
which was believed to be produced by the liver and then held in the gallbladder,
might be referred to as choleric, as having an excess of choler, which is another term for yellow bile.
Black bile was also believed to be produced by the liver,
but it was held in a spleen according to medieval medical theory,
and a person with an excess of black bile was believed to tend toward melancholy behavior and feelings.
Flem seems to be a kind of catch-all term for any whitish or colorless bodily secretion,
with the exception of breast milk and semen, both of which were believed to be blood transformed.
If galenic medical theory was founded on the idea of the four humors,
then galenic diagnosis and practice had as its most important elements two things,
the checking of the pulse and the examination of urine.
For medieval medical practitioners, by far the most important tool was the urine glass,
the most ubiquitous symbol of the medieval doctor.
In the version of Chaucer's Canterbury Tales found in that most beautiful manuscript known as the Ellesmere Chaucer,
the pilgrim character of the physician is depicted as riding off to Canterbury with his urine glass plainly visible.
Some medieval medical texts suggest that there were twenty different gradations of urine color,
and they offered an explanation as to what kinds of afflictions might cause certain changes in color
and what treatment might then be called for.
While the theory of the humors might seem to have caused more harm than good,
it was the foundation on which medicine was based well into the Renaissance.
Shakespeare, for example, talks of the humors often in his poetry and plays.
So we see once again how it is the medieval world and innovations that occurred during the Middle Ages
that provide the foundation for many of the developments of the early modern.
But there was very much useful and practical knowledge taught in the medical schools of the medieval period
from the concoction of medicines and healing potions to how to perform surgery.
One area in which the European world was ahead of the Muslim world
was when it came to medical knowledge in the area of anatomy.
The schools at Salerno and Bologna recognized the benefits that its students could gain
from studying human anatomy through dissection of cadavers.
By the 13th century, it seems an established tradition in both places
that there be one public dissection per year of a male and a female cadaver for the benefit of the students.
It seems clear also that many more dissections than the formal approved one
took place in the form of autopsies.
That's right, CSI or Crime Scene Investigation has its origins in medieval Italy.
The process used by any number of film and television medical examiners
where a biobody is methodically opened and the contents surveyed, weighed, analyzed
and described out loud in detail has its origins almost a thousand years before the modern period
in the schools of Salerno and Bologna.
For obvious reasons, dissections were only allowed between the months of October and February
and they had to proceed a little more hastily and with a little less careful deliberation
because of the lack of preservation interventions and the relatively quick process of decay.
From its origins as a group of scholars and students interested in sharing information about medicine
the idea of the university spread throughout the medieval world.
We've already seen how Peter Abelard and his fellows in Paris
gathered to study and dispute matters of theology, logic and rhetoric.
All over the medieval world from the 12th century on similar patterns began to play out
with a nascent scholarly community attracting more like-minded men
which in turn attracted students eager to learn
which in turn attracted more scholars who wished to participate and so on and so on.
It's important to understand that when universities first came into being
they were essentially groups of people rather than physical places.
Students might gather around the home of a famed scholar and philosopher
in order to learn from him and classes might take place in the home of the teacher
usually known as Magister or master.
The contours of a formal curriculum began to be shaped over the course of the 12th and 13th centuries
and certain cities became known for the study of a particular field.
Salerno for medicine obviously although it was soon eclipsed by Bologna
which also became renowned for the study of law.
Montpellier in the south of France also became home to a famous medical school early on.
Paris was the place to go if you wanted to study theology
as you'll remember from our lecture on Peter Abelard.
Oxford in England had long been a centre of learning
but didn't really start to grow as a university until the middle of the 12th century
when Henry II's conflict with France resulted in English students living in Paris
being sent back across the channel.
There they gathered together by a kind of law of mutual attraction in Oxford
and the first university in the English speaking world came into existence.
The associations of certain cities with particular fields of study had a kind of snowball effect.
More scholars who worked in that particular field might move to a city
that was known for education in that specialty
and this in turn attracted more students who attracted more scholars etc etc.
It took a long time to complete a course of study in a medieval university
and to be awarded the equivalent of a bachelor's degree could take as long as seven years
while advancing to higher ranks and more focused specialties took even longer.
Whatever specialty students were interested in pursuing
their study usually made its way through the seven liberal arts
which were divided into the quadrivium and trivium.
The quadrivium or road of four consisted of arithmetic, geometry, astronomy and music.
The trivium which as you might guess means something like road of three
consisted of logic, grammar and rhetoric.
It was considered essential that students master these fields of study before advancing any further.
All exams were oral exams and they were very often conducted in public
in front of a panel of masters who would mercilessly challenge the candidate
with question after question in his field of study
and these exams could go on for hours.
In terms of organization there were three types of formal structure among medieval universities.
The first and most common type was one that was student directed.
Bologna would be a good example of this.
Here the students got together and decided which teachers to hire and what to pay them.
In Paris a different system was in effect.
Again as we saw in the lecture on Abelard the church was deeply involved with the running of the university
and it was the church that decided who was fit to teach and what that person should be paid.
Across the channel in England we see a third type of system.
Although the educational system at places like Oxford and Cambridge
was still very much engaged with the church it was the crown, the secular state
that was predominantly responsible for supporting the educational system here.
This is why those institutions were able to stay strong during the English Reformation
when Henry VIII broke with the church in Rome.
The rise of the university system was both partially due to an increase in literacy in the medieval world
and it fueled that growth.
While most students would attend classes listeners the important texts under discussion
particularly the works of Aristotle which formed the central basis for much academic life in the 12th century and beyond
were better studied if one could have access to them directly
rather than only hearing a master read aloud from and expound on them.
Now books in the Middle Ages were precious and rare
and the creation of them was so labor intensive they were quite often prohibitively expensive.
Remember there was no paper so anything that was written down was either noted on a wax tablet with a stylus
a medium that could be smoothed over and reused again and again
or it was written on a sheet of animal hide with quill and ink.
Just think what went into this process.
First an animal would need to be slaughtered, skinned and the hide stretched and the hair scraped off
it would need to be treated with pumice and then cut into page size sheets
which would then be pricked and ruled and bound together with a heavy cover
usually of wood but occasionally of metal
and the main point of this cover was to try and prevent the pages from springing back into the shape of the animal from which they had come.
Ink had to be made by hand usually by combining walnut galls with iron filings
and adding some other elements and then distilling it all down into something like ink.
All writing was by hand and most styles of medieval writing required several strokes to form a single letter
often the quill would need to be re-inked several times before the completion of a single word.
But in the urban centers around universities the need for cheap copies of core texts
led to a boom in text copying services and several people who were not monks
or otherwise attached to a religious institution made good livings making very basic copies of text for students.
At the end of the 14th century the couple Richard and Jean de Mont-Baston
supplied this service for any number of Parisian students who would check out a section of a key text,
bring it into the copy house and for a fee have a personal copy made.
Poor students could check out a copy, procure writing materials and then make their own copy with notes
a process that took a lot of time but was more affordable.
What this meant for the rest of the medieval world was that more and more copies of key texts were now in circulation
which meant that those ideas had the potential to reach a wider and wider portion of the population.
By the end of the Middle Ages study at a university was considered an important element of a young man's growth and development
an idea that would continue as we move into the early modern period.
One thing that made it easier for more people to obtain and benefit from an education
was the invention that we will discuss in our next lecture.
In what is arguably the turning point that made the modern world possible
a German goldsmith by the name of Johannes Gutenberg introduced the medieval world to a new fangled invention
that made the dissemination of information unbelievably quick and easy compared to what had come before.
This invention was the printing press.
Join us next time as we explore how this innovation would usher in a new age of learning and exchange of ideas.
