Craft is Political
Edited by D Wood

BLOOMSBURY VISUAL ARTS
Bloomsbury Publishing Plc
50 Bedford Square, London, WC1B 3DP, UK
1385 Broadway, New York, NY 10018, USA
29 Earlsfort Terrace, Dublin 2, Ireland
BLOOMSBURY, BLOOMSBURY VISUAL ARTS and the Diana logo are trademarks of  
Bloomsbury Publishing Plc
First published in Great Britain 2021
Paperback edition published 2023
© Editorial content and introduction, D Wood, 2023
© Individual chapters, their authors, 2023
D Wood has asserted her right under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 1988, to be  
identified as Editor of this work.
For legal purposes the Acknowledgements on p. x constitute an extension of this copyright page.
Cover designed and embroidered by D Wood
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or  
by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information  
storage or retrieval system, without prior permission in writing from the publishers.
The author and publisher gratefully acknowledge the permission granted to reproduce the  
copyright material in this book.
Every effort has been made to trace copyright holders of images and to obtain their permission 
for the use of copyright material. The publisher apologizes for any errors or omissions in copyright 
acknowledgement and would be grateful if notified of any corrections that should be incorporated in 
future reprints or editions of this book.
Bloomsbury Publishing Plc does not have any control over, or responsibility for, any third-party  
websites referred to or in this book. All internet addresses given in this book were correct at the time  
of going to press. The author and publisher regret any inconvenience caused if addresses have  
changed or sites have ceased to exist, but can accept no responsibility for any such changes.
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Wood, D (D. E. L.), editor.
Title: Craft is political / edited by D Wood.
Description: London; New York: Bloomsbury Visual Arts, 2021. | Includes bibliographical  
references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2020054513 (print) | LCCN 2020054514 (ebook) | ISBN 9781350122260 (HB) |  
ISBN 9781350122277 (ePub) | ISBN 9781350122284 (ePDF)
Subjects: LCSH: Handicraft–Political aspects. | Decorative arts–Political aspects. Handicraft  
industries–Social aspects. | Material culture. | Artisans.
Classification: LCC TT149 .C73165 2021 (print) | LCC TT149 (ebook) | DDC 745.5–dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020054513
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020054514
ISBN: HB: 978-1-3501-2226-0
PB: 978-1-3503-5994-9
ePDF: 978-1-3501-2228-4
ePub: 978-1-3501-2227-7
Typeset by Deanta Global Publishing Services, Chennai, India
To find out more about our authors and books visit www.bloomsbury.com and sign  
up for our newsletters

Contents
List of figures  viii
Acknowledgements  x
Introduction: Re-crafting an unsettled world  D Wood  1
PART 1  Craft Legacy  19
1	 Politics of tea furniture: Invention of ryuˉrei style in 
late-nineteenth-century Japan  Yasuko Suga  21
2	 (Dis)playing politics: Craft and the Caughnawaga 
Exhibition, 1883  Lisa Binkley  34
3	 Indigenous craft is political: Making and remaking 
colonizer–colonized relations in Taiwan  Geoffrey Gowlland  51
4	 Coexistence of craft and design in Turkey as two separate 
epistemes  Çiğdem Kaya  65
5	 Leisure and livelihood: A Socioeconomic reading of 
craft in Australia and Egypt  Anne-Marie Willis  79

vi
CONTENTS﻿
PART 2  Craft Practice  95
6	 The politics of craft and working without skill: Reconsidering 
craftsmanship and the community of practice  Alanna Cant  97
7	 From ‘making flowers’ to imagining futures: Rohingya 
refugee women innovate a heritage craft  Lurdes Macedo, 
David Palazón, Shahirah Majumdar and Verity Marques  109
8	 Liminality: The work of Monica Mercedes Martinez, 
PJ Anderson and Habiba El-Sayed  Heidi McKenzie  123
9	 Jewellery is political: Ethical jewellery practice  
Elizabeth Shaw  136
10	 Networks of economic kinship in Aotearoa New Zealand 
craft markets  Fiona P. McDonald  148
11	 It goes without saying: Craft talks politics  D Wood  165
PART 3  Craft World View  179
12	 Crafts as the political: Perspectives on crafts from design 
of the Global South  Fernando A. Álvarez R.  181
13	 Chilean arpilleras: Hand-stitched geographies and the 
politics of everyday life in Santiago’s poblaciones  
Nathalia Santos Ocasio  198
14	 From essential skill to productive capital: Perspectives 
on policies and practices of craft education in Finland  
Anna Kouhia  212

vii
CONTENTS﻿
15	 Sincerity not authenticity: Craft’s political path out of a 
modernist trap  Leopold Kowolik  225
16	 Bellwether: Fingerprinting your woollies  Seema Goel  237
	Epilogue  D Wood  250
Author biographies  253
Index  258

Figures
1.1	
Tea items made by Gengensai: bamboo flower container 
and raku tea bowl  24
1.2	
Gengensai’s sketch of the ryūrei style  26
1.3	
Ryūrei style furniture  27
1.4	
Tea ceremony at Miyako Odori by Geishas  28
2.1	
W. S. Tanner, St. Regis (Akwesasne) Indian Show Company, 
1894  37
2.2	
George Barker, Tuscarora Squaws, Luna Island, Niagara Falls, 
c. 1870  38 
2.3	
Indian European Team, 1883 at Scarborough, 28 July, Scarborough, 
England  43
3.1	
Ceramic pot made by Paiwan artist Masegseg Ruladen, 
on the model of those revived by Sakuliu Pavavalung  59
3.2	
Members of the Kavalan Indigenous group (Hsin-she village) 
demonstrating the preparation of fibres from the banana plant 
at a cultural centre in Hualien City, Taiwan  60
5.1	
Tasmanian Craft Fair: Glass Manifesto and Tasmanian Glassblowers, 
and Crick Hollow Pottery  82
5.2	
Fayoum Pottery School: Platter or wall plaque; Bowl by 
Mahmoud Elsherif  90
7.1	
Camp Life, 2020  116
7.2	
Under My Skin: Self-Portrait by SA, 2020  118
7.3	
Friendship: R by SA, 2020  119
8.1	
Return Atacama, 2016, Monica Mercedes Martinez  128
8.2	
Glorification #3, 2019, PJ Anderson  130
8.3	
Would I Have Called You Teta?, 2017, Habiba El-Sayed  132
10.1	
Hayley Lowe Designs, 2011  152
10.2	
Devonport Craft Market and Coatesville Craft Market, 2011  155
10.3	
‘I TOOK THE HANDMADE PLEDGE’, Devonport, 2011  157
13.1	
Arpillera #17  205
13.2	
Arpillera #17 reverse  207

ix
FIGURES﻿
16.1	
Wool spinning on a spindle  241
16.2	
Irish GDP in US$ billions  242
16.3	
Irish CO2 production in parts per million  243
16.4	
Correlation between Irish CO2 and GDP  243
  E.1	
Kurshida. Cox’s Bazar, Bangladesh  251

Acknowledgements
My sincere thanks to:
The authors who responded to my request for essays and 
trusted my ability to oversee their work and this project;
the reviewers, pre- and post-manuscript, who gave the project 
a thumbs up;
Libby Davies, for seeing the project through on behalf 
of Bloomsbury;
Frances Whitehead, who said, ‘do what you know’;
and, above all, Tony Fry, who said, ‘do it.’

Introduction 
Re-crafting an unsettled world
D Wood
I
n 2009, during the first months of my doctoral candidacy in Design Studies 
in New Zealand, I attended a lecture by Bill McKibben, the American 
environmentalist and climate change campaigner. McKibben was at the 
University of Otago to promote 350​.or​g, his worldwide association that 
advocates private and public action to reduce global warming. The organization 
was founded in 2008 when the atmosphere contained about 350 parts per 
million of carbon dioxide. Having paid little attention to atmospherics to that 
point, I found McKibben ardent and inspiring and the lecture stayed with me. 
I am not a marcher or soap-boxer or group-joiner, so over the next few years I 
wondered what I could do to counter the ruinous society of which I am part.
World travels brought me back to the southern hemisphere in 2016 to 
attend a workshop1 that aimed to make its participants aware of unsettlement. 
Conducted by design philosopher and educator, Tony Fry, plus international 
academics, we were given a metaphor: unsettlement is best envisaged as a 
boat crowded with refugees or asylum seekers. The boat is on an ocean that 
is rising or waning, subject to currents, winds and rain, and landfall is unknown 
and uncertain. It was easy to imagine the boat, its occupants and dark waters, 
because video coverage of this actuality was prevalent, yet a closer-to-home 
codicil was added by Fry: the inhabitants of planet Earth are figuratively in 
that boat. We have perpetrated irrevocable damage to the biosphere that 
continues: in 2019 the atmosphere contained more than 415 parts per million 
of carbon dioxide,2 with consequences that are reported regularly. 
Reflection on my contribution to global unsettlement needed more urgency, 
but the issues were overwhelming and seemed beyond my expertise and 
capability. Then, one of the workshop facilitators said, ‘do what you know’. 
Craft is what I know – as a practitioner, teacher, researcher and writer – and an 
idea began to evolve. Instead of being privately passionate about craft I could 

2
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
publicly promote it as an alternative to mass-produced temporarily adequate 
goods; advocate for the maintenance of craft skills; proselytize about repair and 
retrofitting; draw attention to the importance of the hand for much more than 
pressing a touch screen; and continue to write, bringing recognition to little-
known craft practitioners and practices. The stark reality of 350​.o​rg and the 
unsettlement workshop required me to address the existing circumstances, 
to act politically. Hence, Craft is Political. 
Why place craft in a political context? Because my research in the microcosm 
of New Zealand showed what became of the national craft organization when 
its funding was cut by government, and crafts were re-categorized as visual 
arts. Craft programmes were replaced by computer studies in primary and 
secondary schools; craft curriculum was eliminated from almost all tertiary 
institutions; and design, supplanting craft, was valorized as a panacea 
for improvement in export earnings. New Zealand is representative of the 
consequences of craft’s loss of political advocacy. In the macrocosm, the 
necessity for craft’s politicalness is because Western countries like Canada, 
the United States, England, New Zealand and Australia are not signatories 
to UNESCO’s Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural 
Heritage.3 It is because major museums and universities have deleted the 
C-word4 from their names, thereby eliminating respect for craft and its 
worth. It is because colonialism denied and, in some jurisdictions, continues 
to denigrate Indigenous practices and beliefs. And it is because handmade 
quality goods are marketed as luxury,5 instead of their being promoted as 
obtainable via a change in mindset, from make-do to make-last. 
Why craft in a political context now? Because anthropocentrism, that 
champions capitalism, perpetuates inequity, condones ecological degradation, 
embraces neoliberal economics and advances globalization, is in the boat with 
refugees and asylum seekers. The boat is floundering and may sink, let alone 
reach shore. As I write this, the world is dealing with coronavirus, a crisis 
that political economist, William Davies, says is due to aspects of capitalism 
– business and leisure, travel and trade – and dependence on the vulnerable 
labour market. Davies proposes: ‘Rather than view this as a crisis of capitalism, 
it might better be understood as the sort of world-making event that allows 
for new economic and intellectual beginnings.’6 Craft represents an alternative 
economic and ontological paradigm; its practice – institutional as well as 
individual – and end products warrant re-consideration and adoption. And I 
don’t mean a proliferation of online platforms! Highlighting the ways in which 
craft has been and is political is my contribution to addressing unsettlement.
As the essays in this book will show, ‘craft is political’ embraces more 
than protest. It exists as an aspect of class, race and identity; it applies to the 
Indigenous as well as settlers; it is about historical and contemporary issues; 
it can be seen in making as well as the made; and it applies to an extensive 

3
INTRODUCTION
range of craft media beyond the usual clay, fibre, glass, metal, wood.7 Carol 
Hanisch’s assertion in 1969 that ‘personal problems are political problems’8 
holds true for every craft practitioner today. The very fact of making a thing by 
hand is political because handcraft runs counter to the hegemonic industrially 
made, mass-produced environment that pertains today. Hanisch’s ‘political’ 
fifty years ago was ‘to tell it like it is, to say what I really believe about my life 
instead of what I’ve always been told to say’.9 The authors of the essays herein 
are telling craft ‘like it is’ to create new discourses in the prevailing canon.
Before providing a synopsis of the international craft topics that are 
gathered in Craft is Political, it is necessary to place the contributions in several 
theoretical contexts. The first is sustain-ability, with a deliberate hyphen; the 
second is craft as an agent of change; and the third is the ethics of care. 
Craft and the Sustainment
Tony Fry makes the distinction between politics and political: ‘politics is an 
institutionalized practice exercised by individuals, organizations and states, 
while the political exists as a wider sphere of activity embedded in the 
directive structure of a society and in the conduct of humans as “political 
animals”’.10 The political, therefore, consists of the activities of humans, who 
live in relation to each other, animals and the Earth, and require the enacting 
of laws and establishment of customs to ensure convivial cohabitation. The 
political is the everyday and, for many craftspeople discussed in this book, craft 
is the everyday and a lifestyle: the handcrafting process has been done for 
generations, without question, with skills and knowledge being passed down. 
Alternatively, Edward Cooke, writing about the American context, points out 
that craft was first used as a noun in the 1870s, thereby naming a cultural 
construct. Since material culture ‘plays a prominent role in the structuring 
and negotiation of everyday life’,11 craft, as a subcategory of material culture, 
does too.
In the field of design, Fry points out that design’s forms – buildings, 
transportation, goods and services, technology, leisure spaces and activities, 
information and its dissemination – have an ideological basis, and as a 
consequence, are political. For example, the design of a bus system is not 
only about travel from A to B, but about bringing workers to employment and 
enabling commerce to support a capitalist economy. As well as being part of 
material culture, craft is a component of design, although it has largely been 
set aside by designers, educators and the industrial complex, due to its pace, 
heterogeneity and human-centred production. Fry recognizes craft as critical 
in a transformative agenda for the Anthropocene: 

4
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
Craft knowledge should not be viewed in a developmental lineage in which 
it is placed behind new or high technologies, for it is essential in keeping 
and making the world human and in artificially sustaining the ecosystem. 
Craft knowledge is, therefore, behind, in front of, and in competition with 
noncraft technologies. It is not, in terms of importance, marginal. Craft 
knowledge is in fact of central importance to the future.12 
Fry coined the phrase ‘the Sustainment’, which he defines as a time when 
all decisions are made with cognizance of their impact on the planet and its 
inhabitants. This utopia, in the sense of an imagined place with a political and 
social system that serves all its denizens, is not achievable via democracy as 
it currently exists. Fry asserts that ‘a future worth having requires a political 
transformation of existing social and economic life, underpinned by a praxis 
more capable of enabling, directing and maintaining affirmative change 
than existing institutions of democracy’.13 Fry is not alone in his disdain for 
democracy’s ability to transform our trajectory. Naomi Klein14 states that change 
will not come out of the pervasive capitalist ideology and its governments, nor 
will business and political leaders provide solutions to the vast array of social 
and environmental problems of now and the future. Much of the proactivity 
is coming from the grass roots, as 350​.o​rg shows. The political content of 
craft – eschewing quantity for quality; care about making and being; emphasis 
on community; valuing labour; ethical use of resources; slow production; 
perpetuation of traditions; emotionally durable design; knowledge of materials 
and tools; repair and retrofit skills – contributes to its appropriateness as a 
praxis of positive change.
Craft as change agent
Matthew Kiem, expanding on Fry’s belief in the importance of craft, discusses 
sustainability, a concept that, in the neoliberal paradigm, is seen in terms of 
social and economic development that views progress as beneficial and natural 
resources as limitless and exploitable. Sustainability does little to stabilize or 
reverse consumption, climate change and loss of resources.15 Sustainability 
embraces globalization, neocolonialism and anthropocentricity; it institutes 
recycling, carbon tax, hybrid vehicles, solar panels, energy-efficient lightbulbs 
and eco-anything under the false assumption that these measures will make 
a difference to the present condition of planet Earth.
A more realistic alternative occurs with the separation of sustain – ‘to 
keep in existence; to maintain in life and health’ – and ability – ‘suitableness 
or adaptation for a purpose; suitable power or proficiency; cleverness or 

5
INTRODUCTION
astuteness’.16 Sustain-ability is defined as suitable for, or astute enough to, 
maintain life and health and keep in existence. The unhyphenated word deploys 
the clever, in the sense of shrewd, to maintain the ideology and economy of 
capitalism. In contrast, sustain-ability constantly poses the questions, does 
this [solution] maintain life and health? or, will this intelligently maintain? If the 
answer is ‘no’, the activity, object, practice or system is insupportable. 
Craft’s place in sustain-ability is asserted by Kiem:
in order to realise both the sustaining and transformative potential of craft, 
practitioners must develop a capacity for ongoing critical reflection that 
informs vocational commitment to change through craft practice. In this 
capacity, it is a call for practitioners to both recognise and engage with the 
political agency of craft as a way of fabricating new, and more sustainable 
modes of (human)being.17
Kiem asks not only that practitioners reflect on whether their making and 
the made answer the sustain-ability question but also that they consciously, 
through their being and vocation, adopt actions that contribute to a better 
future. These political actions could include ethical sourcing of materials, 
teaching craft skills, making work that highlights social or environmental 
issues, advocating for the maintenance of heritage techniques, promoting 
the importance of making and the hand in present and future generations, 
contributing to the craft discourse and advancing its scholarship. Alexander 
Langlands, by personally experiencing and writing about traditional crafts, 
knows what craftsmanship is capable of. He invokes the Old English word 
cræft, which he says doesn’t have an English equivalent and is closer to 
the German Kraft. Cræft is not mere making, but ‘the power, the force, 
the knowledge and the wisdom behind making’.18 Practitioners and their 
community must champion those attributes.
Kiem summarizes what is needed: 
To the question of where such a movement [towards Sustainment] might 
begin, the answer lies in the dialectical relation, that is, change must be 
initiated by individuals and groups at each moment of social reproduction. 
The activities of our daily life, our understanding of the world, our relation to 
other people, our ordinary work practices, our exchange practices, how we 
own and use equipment, each of these and more represent sites in which 
politicised craft practitioners may intervene with the intention of redirecting 
the force of our unsustainability.19 
And while this may seem utopian, Bratich and Brush remind us of context: ‘In 
the ubiquitous crisis called capitalism, new utopias not only are needed but 

6
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
are being enacted (as prefigurative politics). The persistence of crafting despite 
the catastrophic decomposition called capitalism reminds us of ontological 
accumulation whose strength establishes the base for utopian projects.’20 
Craft as care
Philosopher and feminist theorist Rosi Braidotti proposes the ethics of 
affirmation by which political and social actions are seen as positive, holding 
the possibility of change for the future.21 Whereas Hegel believed that 
negativity was necessary to criticize existing negative circumstances, Braidotti 
advocates for feminist theory that places equal importance on criticism and 
creativity and is based on the everyday. She states: ‘A politics of affirmation 
aims at creating the conditions for sustainable futures.’22
An ethics of affirmation complements another feminist theory, the ethics 
of care. This argument was initially set forth in Carol Gilligan’s In a Different 
Voice.23 Gilligan argued that women made choices based on an ‘ethics of 
care’ whereas men’s decisions aligned with an ‘ethics of justice’. The ethic 
of care ‘gives moral priority to contextual and particular decision-making, 
to relationships, and to the responsibilities entailed by those relationships’ 
whereas the ethic of justice ‘emphasizes universalizable moral choices made 
by impartial, autonomous individuals, and the rights of such individuals’.24 
Debate about this gendered dichotomy, its lack of attention to race and class, 
as well as the exclusivity of care and justice25 has been considerable, yet the 
moral concepts of attentiveness, responsibility, competence, responsiveness, 
and integrity,26 and caring as an activity that will generate moral responses are 
not gender specific. 
Selma Sevenhuijsen sees care as a social and political activity that applies 
to citizenship: ‘Care is, and this cannot be stressed enough, not only directed 
at “others” (those in need of care) but also at the self and the physical 
environment, as well as interrelations between these.’27 Sevenhuijsen’s 
concern about humanity, the planet and their connection upholds sustain-
ability. She adds that by being open to the ‘other’, the ethics of care ‘attributes 
an important place to communication, interpretation and dialogue . . . it 
appeals for the restitution of sensory knowledge, symbolized by the unity 
of hand, head and heart’.28 The connection of the senses and hand, head and 
heart reverberates with craft. Tony Fry asserts that ‘it is by the hand, with care 
as craft, that the sacred can be made’.29 By sacred he means an intangible 
collective sensibility at the core of being human.
Feminist philosopher Virginia Held invokes the craft milieu: ‘Chopping at a 
tree, however clumsily, to fell it, could be work. But when it does incorporate 

7
INTRODUCTION
such values as doing so effectively, it becomes the practice of woodcutting. 
So we do better to focus on practices of care rather than merely on the work 
involved.’30 Care in wood work is quality in wood work. Caring citizenship aligns 
with Fry’s ontological view of care: ‘Care for self and future, as a working 
practice toward a quality of the being of objects, and being with objects, 
clearly is inseparable from the quality of survival of all being.’31
The late design historian Victor Margolin believed that design could 
contribute to utopia, defined as a better world.32 In an essay on graphic design, 
he cites the views of Sheila Levrant de Bretteville that credit women’s role in 
designing a better world: ‘Feminist design is an open set of intentions acted 
upon with concern, caring, and courage. It acknowledges the private sphere 
of women’s experience and makes it public and visible. It encourages the 
strength, grace, and warmth derived from women’s culture and provides 
visual material based on women’s experience to which we can turn for relief 
and instruction.’33 In line with de Bretteville’s perspective, the design of 
this book’s cover is invested with my concern about the planet, care about 
introducing an alternative discourse in craft scholarship and courage to persist 
with this publication. It uses a motif that was employed by union and black 
power movements to bring attention to causes of labour and equality. It 
depicts a hand which is synonymous with craft practice. And it is executed in 
embroidery, a mode of expression tantamount to women’s culture. The cover 
embodies my skill as a craftswoman and holistic commitment to craft as a 
critical element in caring for the future. 
Overview of sections
Jill Tweedie, the British feminist and journalist, made the following observation 
in 1971: ‘I cannot personally think of any widespread injustice that has 
been remedied by plodding worthily down the middle of the road, smiling 
and smiling.’34 Two years later Augusto Pinochet came to power in Chile, 
inaugurating a regime of terror that lasted for seventeen years. Rather than 
adopting smiling neutrality – the middle of the road – Chilean women picked 
up their needles, thread and scraps of fabric to make arpilleras, the colourful 
visual narratives that were stealthily sent into the world to relate what was 
happening in Chile. 
The arpilleras were created well in advance of the craftivist initiatives that 
rose out of the World Trade Center destruction in 2001. Betsy Greer, while 
conceding the invention of the word craftivism to the Church of Craft,35 takes 
credit for creating craftivism​.c​om in the wake of 9/11, enabling the word’s 
adoption by multifarious groups. Defined as ‘the practice of engaged creativity, 

8
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
especially regarding political or social causes’,36 the concept was initially North 
American. When it was taken up by Sarah Corbett in Britain in 2008 under the 
name Craftivist Collective, its manifesto was: ‘To expose the scandal of global 
poverty and human rights injustices through the power of craft and public art. 
This will be done through provocative, non-violent creative actions.’37 
Corbett’s ethos is a gentle form a political activism: Craftivist Collective 
made embroidered handkerchiefs that were gifted to board members at the 
retailer, Marks & Spencer (UK), to influence them to raise the minimum wage 
for its employees. The campaign – persuasive rather than confrontational – 
got a positive result that was hoped would inspire other British companies to 
become Living Wage Employers.38 This restrained craftivist approach contrasts 
with actions across the Atlantic where craftivism has been peaceful yet public: 
for example, Jayna Zweiman’s Pussyhat39 Project in which knitted pink hats 
were worn during the 2017 Women’s March in Washington, DC, to support 
women’s rights; Zweiman’s public call for Welcome Blankets that offer a more 
friendly reception for migrants crossing United States borders; yarnbombing 
(yarn graffiti) whereby knitting draws attention to the urban environment and 
societal issues;40 Revolutionary Knitting Circle that stages knit-ins at political 
events; Walking with Our Sisters, an installation of 1,763 pairs of moccasin 
vamps (uppers) to commemorate the lives of Indigenous women murdered 
and missing in Canada; and the Handmaid Coalition, which protests political 
targeting of women, the working class and minorities by wearing iconic 
costumes based on Margaret Atwood’s A Handmaid’s Tale.
Alyce McGovern discusses innumerable additional instances of craftivism,41 
including those in her native Australia like the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights (UDHR) quilts, instigated by Tal Fitzpatrick, whose statistics claim ‘4 
quilts, 131 craftivists, 45 nationalities, 26 languages’.42 Regardless of where 
it takes place,
Craftivists aim to critique the ‘man-made’, and I use that term deliberately. 
This can include the perfect body form demanded by the fashion and beauty 
industry, the effects of globalisation on the high street, the pressure for land 
which forces out local people in favour of expensive housing for incomers, and 
all other effects of capitalism, globalisation, the industrial-military complex 
and any other effects of the masculine hegemony we have omitted.43 
And while craftivism has its critics,44 the projects mentioned are commendable 
efforts to bring attention to social concerns within the political arena. The 
arpilleras of Chile and craftivism in the West are transparent instances of 
craft’s involvement in politics that eschewed the middle of the road. But in 
compiling an in-depth book on craft and politics, a broader range of political 
application is required. 

9
INTRODUCTION
The essays: legacy, practice and world view
Edward Cooke gave impetus to my resolution to give craft and politics a 
broader purview: ‘Because of its genesis as a social critique, craft has always 
had a subversive potential, particularly in regard to industrial capitalism, but 
this facet has rarely received any sustained critical attention.’45 I contacted 
scholars heard at academic conferences whose topics fit the theme and 
solicited suggestions from colleagues. Authors who were approached offered 
additional possibilities. Reviewers of the proposal requested input from the 
Global South. The result is sixteen essays covering a range of craft practices, 
countries and academic disciplines. The content offers unique interpretations 
of the political in the context of craft. This book is a first, and while not 
exhaustive, is a provocation for subsequent research and publication.
Authors were given free rein in how they tackled the theme, with the result 
that they interpreted ‘political’ in ways that were unexpected, informative 
and, sometimes, challenging to the craft canon. Some authors focus on long-
standing craft communities that need revised or updated discourses; others 
consider what is made, from various perspectives such as materials, context 
and the makers; and still others look at the big picture, the philosophical and 
institutional ways that craft has been politically fashioned. As a result, the 
sections are titled Legacy, Practice and World View.
Part 1. Craft Legacy
Legacy sheds light on craft and the political in Japan, Canada, Taiwan, Turkey, 
Egypt and Australia. In some of these countries, craft practices of various sorts 
have existed for millennia.46 Historically, these practices were manipulated 
by those in control; currently they are under threat by governments, 
globalization, technology and social change. In communities where artisanry 
means subsistence living, practices are maintained out of necessity and by 
the intervention of conscientious outsiders; in one instance documented 
here, practitioners are capitalizing on their heritage to make political gains. 
This section also contains two essays that delve into archives to examine 
assumptions about culture. These researchers demonstrate that craft history 
is rife with stories that warrant being brought into the light.
Yasuko Suga illuminates the Japanese tea ceremony and its transformation 
through craft. Her research in Japanese sources focuses on the advent of 
Western-style exhibitions in the nineteenth century and the efforts by 
Gengensai, a Grand Tea Master, to adjust the Japanese tea ceremony for 
the appreciation of foreign exhibition visitors. Gengensai, also a craftsman 
and collector of crafts, was well-placed to introduce furniture and high-quality 

10
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
objects into the ceremony. This intervention was instrumental in demonstrating 
Japan’s modernity and restored prestige to a cultural practice that, at the time, 
was regarded as old-fashioned. 
Changes to the Japanese tea ceremony came about for a Kyoto exhibition. 
Lisa Binkley also discusses an exhibition, this time an Indigenous one in 
Canada. While Binkley’s essay focuses on a silk patchwork quilt made by Louise 
Laronde that was displayed at the 1883 Caughnawaga Exhibition, she expands 
its context to government policies of assimilation of the Kanien’kehá:ka and an 
attempt to expropriate their lands. The quilt was seen politically as evidence of 
adoption of a Western craft practice, and therefore adaptation by ‘the other’, 
whereas the making of quilts by women was a standard Indigenous handicraft. 
Binkley’s historical research is a reminder that craft exists in societal, cultural 
and political circumstances and cannot be viewed as isolated material objects.
Geoffrey Gowlland’s essay evolved from his residency in Taiwan to examine 
ceramics. He became intrigued by Indigenous Taiwanese crafts and proposes 
that instead of their being seen as traditional, as government tourist marketing 
alleges, they are instead innovative and agentive in negotiating indigeneity 
with the state, the market and settler communities. He explores the impact 
of various colonizers on the Austronesian population and describes how the 
classification of ‘backward’ affected subsequent generations. Now it is the 
task of Indigenous practitioners in their forties and fifties, who know craft 
practices and language, to engage with young people about the importance 
of reinstating what was derided. Gowlland asserts that the case study of 
Indigenous Taiwanese craft practices and objects, that serve political purposes, 
could be applied to other Indigenous cultures. 
Çiğdem Kaya, trained as an industrial designer, documents her research 
on the differentiation between craft and design in Turkey. Of the multitude 
of craft practices in that country, dating back to the Ottoman Empire, some 
have disappeared because of mass-produced goods and changing lifestyles, 
whereas others are seen to have value only if design is an intervention in their 
process. The design/craft dichotomy is habitually a hierarchical one, with only a 
few designers engaging with and giving credit to the expertise of craftspeople. 
Kaya proposes that this hierarchy maintains class disparity, pitting designers 
with formal education against master craftspeople whose knowledge has 
been passed from mother to daughter, father to son. Her research shows that 
emotional connections among a project’s participants yield more successful 
results than hierarchical ones. 
Closing out this section, Anne-Marie Willis also deals with artisans whose 
practice began in antiquity. While teaching at the German University in Cairo, 
she observed the thousands of small craft shops dedicated to artisanal 
practices that crowd the central city. Her first-hand account, telling craft ‘like 
it is’, engages the senses and paints a colourful exotic picture, yet the reality 

11
INTRODUCTION
is subsistence, disparity and loss of trade due to mass-produced imports. As 
a stark contrast she takes us to the annual Tasmanian Craft Fair that couldn’t 
be more different than Egypt, in its setting, goods and peripheral events like 
sheep-dog trials. Nevertheless, the noun ‘craft’ applies to both venues. Willis’s 
discussion reminds us that Western perspectives on craft are light-years away 
from what is happening in developing countries. She believes, as well, that 
NGOs need to be more realistic about goals and refrain from imposition of 
neo-colonialist tropes.
Part 2. Craft Practice
In this section, authors discuss Western craft artists and how they negotiate 
the everyday with respect to sustainable practice, identity, commerce and 
the troubling social and economic issues of today. The majority of the essays 
are based in the developed West while two consider craftspeople in marginal 
societies. The most timely of these, about Rohingyan refugees in Bangladesh, 
covers a craft intervention that is changing women’s lives. 
The first essay adds to Alanna Cant’s extensive research and publications 
dedicated to Oaxacan woodcarvers. Wood carving is not a long-standing 
practice, but developed in Oaxaca to serve the tourist industry and provide 
income in an employment desert. Cant questions the anthropological notion 
of community of practice being a universal framework for studying craft and 
challenges Richard Sennett’s assertion that quality is inseparable from craft. 
According to her observations, craft practice is not always driven by romantic 
ideals; it may be determined by personality and financial necessity. These 
considerations should be concomitant in future studies, according to Cant, to 
reflect the reality of craft in a wider range of jurisdictions. 
David Palazón, a photographer and documentary film-maker, originally 
intended to write about craft in Timor-Leste, but during the evolution of Craft 
is Political, he relocated to Bangladesh. As a result, he and his colleagues, 
Shahirah Majumdar, Lurdes Macedo and Verity Marques, tackle an up-to-
the-minute political travesty: the expulsion of the Rohingya from Myanmar. 
Under the auspices of the International Organization for Migration, Palazón 
et al. document embroidery programmes for women in the Cox’s Bazar 
refugee camp. Embroidery, a long-standing activity for the Muslim women, 
was manifest initially in a restricted range of motifs, but through professional 
instruction and ongoing workshops, the women have expanded their 
repertoire, concurrently raising their self-esteem and depicting aspects of 
their culture that might otherwise be lost. 
Moving from East to West, Heidi McKenzie reveals that Theaster Gates 
was responsible for her epiphany about race as an aspect of craft. As a 

12
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
ceramics practitioner who has dealt with race, her essay considers Canadian 
practitioners whose identities influence their ceramics. McKenzie contends 
that BIPOC (Black, Indigenous and People of Colour) artists are rarely included 
in the craft canon, and analysis of their work, based on identity, is absent. 
She redresses this situation by profiling three portfolios of hybridity – Chilean/
European, Jamaican/Métis and Egyptian/Guyanese – and observing how the 
women navigate their craft practice in a medium that, in Canada at least, 
needs improvement with respect to racial inclusion.
Considering another material, Elizabeth Shaw begins her essay with the 
politics of jewellery, providing instances of prominent women wearing a 
particular brooch to send an intentional message. Shaw’s concrete examples 
conform to Jean Baudrillard’s theories on the semiotics of everyday life. 
As a jeweller and educator, Shaw upholds an ethical and environmentally 
sustainable practice and conveys her beliefs in her studio instruction. She 
writes here about jewellery as a component of fast fashion and cites initiatives 
whose actions bring sustain-ability to the sector. Shaw then describes Radical 
Jewelry Makeover, originating in the United States, and JUNK, at Birmingham 
City University (UK), that propose alternative sourcing of materials and serve 
to educate jewellery students and consumers about the consequences of 
material choices.
Next, Fiona McDonald examines the phenomenon of craft markets in 
Aotearoa New Zealand, both actual and virtual. Her field work centred around 
woollen blankets that have been reconfigured into a range of items that 
invoke memory and nostalgia for their purchasers. Yet, when she reflected 
on her research, she realized that the blankets were part of a significant 
community of practice. She argues that the kinship bonds forged by the 
women who participate in the craft markets are economic as well as social. 
The physical and online markets and their female creators are indicative of the 
politics of the handmade as well as an alternative economic paradigm that 
embraces women’s roles and interactions. McDonald observed the activity 
in the Auckland region pre-internet and now trawls social media as a digital 
ethnographer. 
Finally, in the Practice section, D Wood gathers a selection of current 
Western craft practices wherein the objects created, across the traditional 
media of clay, glass, metal, wood and textiles, are overtly political in their 
themes. These themes, including war, revisionist history, the environment, 
labour, identity, immigration, sexual assault, politics, colonialism and apartheid, 
are indicative of the issues of everyday life in the twenty-first century. This 
representative sample of conscientious craft artists contains several who 
are reluctant to attach the word political to what they make. Wood’s primary 
research discovered fear of backlash on social media that would affect the 
makers’ reputation and income, or worse.

13
INTRODUCTION
Part 3. Craft World View
The last section, World View, is devoted to essays that consider craft in the big 
picture. Two are philosophical, arguing that the craft community, itself, must 
review its language and spiritual underpinnings to align with today’s ontological 
circumstances. Another focuses on craft education and the importance of 
longevity in education policy to ensure its maintenance. And while an essay 
on Chilean arpilleras could have been slotted into the Practice section, I 
have placed it here because the analysis is as much about the political and 
economic environment in which the arpilleras were made as the embroideries 
themselves. And last, but certainly not least, a case study in which a craft 
practitioner and educator illuminates climate change by means of craft and a 
material that exists in the learners’ back yards.
First up, Fernando Alberto Álvarez Romero addresses philosophy from his 
perspective in the Global South. Andean Indigenous peoples are beholden 
to Pachamama (Mother Earth) who provides raw materials to the craftsman. 
The subsequent making constitutes social relationships and results in 
objects of use that symbolize a reciprocity between humanity and nature. 
This symbiotic connection aligns with the ethics of care and is the antithesis 
of the ravagement and degradation of the environment that Western profit 
motives have perpetrated in Andean countries. Álvarez places craft practice 
firmly in the metaphysical realm as a viable ethos that stands in opposition to 
an industrially manufactured, capitalistically idealized world view.
Staying on the South American continent, the next essay by Nathalia 
Santos Ocasio connects the arpilleras of Chile with the neoliberal 
economic measures instituted by Pinochet and perpetuated by subsequent 
governments. Basing their imagery on daily life in Santiago’s poblaciones, 
Chilean women expressed their grief, despair and, eventually, anger about 
the deaths and torture carried out by their elected officials as well as the 
economic conditions under which they and their families were living. The 
arpilleras – ‘handstitched newspapers’, a memorable metaphor coined by 
Santos Ocasio – are an example of grassroots political action by means of 
craft. Santos Ocasio’s impassioned writing about her homeland serves to ‘tell 
it like it is’ in Chile today as well as offering an insider’s look at the renowned 
embroideries of its women. 
Anna Kouhia also writes about government in her native country. Finland, 
probably the only country in the world where craft is compulsory in primary 
school, has had legislated craft curriculum throughout its history. However, 
the aims of that curriculum have been political and varied according to the 
ethos of Finnish identity that successive governments wished to project. 
Kouhia, whose craft expertise is in textiles, recounts developments over time 
and points out that while non-gendered choices of craft media are encouraged 

14
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
today, gender socialization is difficult to overcome. Top-down political policy 
takes time to translate into human interactions.
Next, a philosophical essay by Leopold Kowolik, who debates authenticity 
and sincerity in craft. Kowolik’s argument starts with John Ruskin, proceeds 
to William Morris and Lionel Trilling, and concludes with an assessment of 
contemporary craft objects, preferring to assign them the accolade ‘sincere’ 
rather than authentic. With the adoption by ad agencies of craft-related words 
such as heritage, artisan and traditional to market everything from coffee 
and beer to bread, bacon and lettuce, consumers are confused about what 
constitutes authenticity. Kowolik develops a cogent argument for the adoption 
of sincere as the best adjective for craft.
The last essay in Craft is Political, by Seema Goel, is placed here because it 
is evidence of craft as sustain-ability, craft as an agent of change and craft as 
care. Goel was one of five artists/scientists selected to participate in Lovely 
Weather in County Donegal, Ireland. Her wide-open mandate was to connect 
with locals about climate change, and she began by pulling an Aran-style 
sweater out of her Canadian closet. As a craft practitioner she epitomizes 
how skilled and committed makers can influence others, long term. Goel’s 
reflections on sheep-farming, the capitalist economy and the success 
of learning by doing are an upbeat conclusion to this book. Goel’s modest 
intervention can plausibly be replicated in other settings with other materials 
and tools. Undertaking and recording such projects expand scholarship and 
discourse on craft and politics.
This Introduction was written during the early weeks of the worldwide 
coronavirus. The full extent of the repercussions of the pandemic are as yet 
unknown. For many craft practitioners in the West, it means a loss of livelihood 
with the cancellation of markets and fairs. E-commerce is an alternative, but 
an online purchase denies the meaningful connection between maker and 
buyer. For practitioners in developing countries, the loss of tourist traffic and 
orders from retailers is devastating. However, this global crisis, when it has 
abated, was a waste of humanity if business-as-usual is restored. I entrust 
readers with the provocation to embrace craft as an agent of change, be 
political in singing its virtues and walk the talk of caring craft practice.
Notes
1	 Studio at the Edge of the World: Seeing Unsettlement/Intercultural 
Responses, 4 January to 7 February 2016, University of Tasmania, 
Launceston. ‘The project is based on the proposition that the deepening 
problems and proliferating complexity of climate change, global geopolitical 
instability, actual and potential inter-cultural conflict, global inequity and rapid 

15
INTRODUCTION
technological change all combine to unsettle vast numbers of people in 
numerous ways. In so many ways many people feel like the world is broken.’ 
Tony Fry. www​.the​stud​ioat​thee​dgeo​ftheworld​.com
2	 350​.or​g.
3	 As of May 2018, 175 countries are signatories. http:​/​/www​.unes​co​.or​g​/eri​/la​/
c​onven​tion.​asp​?l​angua​ge​=E&​KO​=17​116
4	 John Perrault, ‘The C-Word: Craft’, Artopia: An Arts Journal Blog, 7 October 
2014. http:​/​/www​.arts​journ​al​.co​m​/art​opia/​2014/​10​/th​e​-c​-w​ord​-c​raft.​html
5	 Victoria & Albert Museum and British Crafts Council, ‘What Is Luxury?’ 
Exhibition April–September 2015. The V & A’s website states: ‘Making luxury 
is not concerned with practical solutions but with the extraordinary, non-
essential and exclusive. Mastery of a craft and exceptional expertise…’ 
Juxtaposition of craft with exclusive perpetuates public belief in its being the 
preserve of the wealthy.
6	 William Davies, ‘The Last Global Crisis Didn’t Change the World. But This 
One Could’, The Guardian, 24 March 2020. https​:/​/ww​w​.the​guard​ian​.c​om​/co​
mment​isfre​e​/202​0​/mar​/24​/c​orona​virus​-cris​is​-ch​ange-​world​-fina​nci​al​-glob​al​-ca​
pital​ism.
7	 For example, culinary craft has been explored in academic research 
and documentaries. See Susan Terrio, ‘Visions of Excess: Crafting and 
Consuming Good Chocolate in France and the United States’, in Critical Craft: 
Technology, Globalization and Capitalism, ed. Clare M. Wilkinson-Weber and 
Alicia Ory DeNicola (Bloomsbury: London, 2016), 135–52.
8	 http:​/​/www​.caro​lhani​sch​.o​rg​/CH​writi​ngs​/P​IP​.ht​ml. Hanisch states that 
‘The Personal is Political’ was an editorial choice for a title to her paper 
and it became a rallying cry for the Women’s Liberation Movement of the 
1970s.
9	 Ibid.
10	 Tony Fry, Design and Politics (London: Berg, 2011), 5–6.
11	 Edward Cooke, Jr., ‘Modern Craft and the American Experience’, American 
Art 21, no. 1 (2007): 2–9, 7.
12	 Tony Fry, ‘Sacred Design I: A Re-creational Theory’, in Discovering Design: 
Explorations in Design Studies, ed. Richard Buchanan and Victor Margolin 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995), 190–218, 212.
13	 Fry, Design and Politics, 4.
14	 Naomi Klein, This Changes Everything (London: Allen Lane, 2014).
15	 For example: ‘400 million tons of plastics are produced globally every year. 
Globally only 9% of plastic ever produced has been recycled, while 79% 
can now be found in landfills, dumps or the environment and 12% has been 
incinerated.’ Published by Sustainability Management School Switzerland 
(SUMAS), ‘Sustainability Statistics Worth Knowing in 2019’. https​:/​/su​mas​.c​h​/
sus​taina​bilit​y​-sta​tisti​cs/
16	 Oxford English Dictionary.
17	 Matthew Kiem, ‘Theorising a Transformative Agenda for Craft’, craft + design 
enquiry (2011): 33–48, 33.

16
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
18	 Alexander Langlands, Cræft: How Traditional Crafts Are About More Than 
Just Making (London: Faber & Faber, 2017), 339.
19	 Kiem, ‘Theorising a Transformative Agenda for Craft’, 42.
20	 Jack Bratich and Heidi Brush, ‘Fabricating Activism: Craft-Work, Popular 
Culture and Gender’, Utopian Studies 22, no. 2 (2011): 233–60, 255.
21	 Rosi Braidotti, ‘The New Activism: A Plea for Affirmative Ethics’, in Art and 
Activism in the Age of Globalization, ed. Lieven De Cauter, Ruben De Roo 
and Karel Vanhaesebrouck (Rotterdam: NAi Publishers, 2011), 264–71.
22	 Ibid., 270.
23	 Carol Gilligan, In a Different Voice: Psychological Theory and Women’s 
Development (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1982).
24	 Catherine Gardner, The A to Z of Feminist Philosophy (Lanham, MD: 
Scarecrow Press, 2006), 42.
25	 Lawrence Blum, ‘Gilligan and Kohlberg: Implications for Moral Theory’, in An 
Ethic of Care: Feminist and Interdisciplinary Perspectives, ed. Mary Jeanne 
Larrabee (London: Routledge, 1993), 49–68; Bill Puka, ‘The Liberation of 
Caring: A Different Voice for Gilligan’s “Different Voice“’, in Larrabee, An Ethic 
of Care, 215–39.
26	 Joan Tronto, Moral Boundaries: A Political Argument for an Ethic of Care 
(New York: Routledge, 1994), 126–37.
27	 Selma Sevenhuijsen, Citizenship and the Ethics of Care: Feminist 
Considerations on Justice, Morality and Politics (London: Routledge, 1998), 
23.
28	 Ibid., 61.
29	 Fry, ‘Sacred I’, 211.
30	 Virginia Held, The Ethics of Care: Personal, Political, and Global (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2006), 37.
31	 Fry, ‘Sacred I’, 207.
32	 Clive Dilnot, ‘Obituary: Victor Margolin: The Generosity of Mind’, Design and 
Culture 12, no. 1 (2020): 1–4.
33	 Victor Margolin, ‘Reform, and Revolution: American Graphic Design for Social 
Change’, Design Issues 5, no. 1 (1988): 59–70, 67.
34	 Jill Tweedie, ‘Why Nice Girls Finish Last’, in Women of the Revolution: Forty 
Years of Feminism, ed. Kira Cochrane (London: Guardian Books, 2010): 9–11.
35	 Betsy Greer, ‘Craftivist History’, in Extra/Ordinary: Craft and Contemporary 
Art, ed. Maria Elena Buszek (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2011): 
175–83.
36	 http://craftivism​.com​/definition/ Greer states that after fifteen years of being 
identified with the craftivism website she is now using hellobetsygreer​.co​m.
37	 Sarah Corbett and Sarah Housley, ‘The Craftivist Collective Guide to 
Craftivism’, Utopian Studies 22, no. 1 (2011): 344–51, 344.
38	 Sarah Corbett, ‘How to Be a Craftivist: Gentle Doesn’t Mean Passive: The 
Strength of Temperate Activism in Breaking Down Corporate Barriers’, in 
Crafting Dissent: Handicraft as Protest from the American Revolution to 

17
INTRODUCTION
the Pussyhats, ed. Hinda Mantell (London: Rowman & Littlefield, 2019), 
227–32. Corbett quotes the Chairman of M & S saying: ‘It’s a campaign that 
is thoughtfully done and heartfelt. We feel every bit as heartfelt about our 
employees.’ Sarah Corbett, How to Be a Craftivist: The Art of Gentle Protest 
(London: Unbound, 2017), Chapter 12, no pagination.
39	 President Donald Trump, as evidenced by a Hollywood Access tape recording 
in 2005, said he grabs women ‘by the pussy’. The pink pussyhats were 
designed and knit as a protest to Trump’s election in 2016. Hinda Mantell, 
‘Yarn, Thread, Scissors, Fabric: A Crafter’s Tool Kit for Mending Democracy as 
Engaged Citizens’, in Mantell, Crafting Dissent, 1–11.
40	 Marianne Jørgensen’s pink Tank Cozy (2006), envisioned by the Danish artist 
and made by volunteers around the world, was Jørgensen’s and the knitters’ 
protest against Danish, American and British participation in the war in Iraq. 
It remains the most iconic example of yarnbombing.
41	 Alyce McGovern, Craftivism and Yarn Bombing: Critical Criminological 
Perspectives (London: Palgrave Pivot, 2019).
42	 https://quilts​.moadoph​.gov​.au
43	 Ann Rippin and Sheena J. Vachhani, ‘Craft as Resistance: A Conversation 
about Craftivism, Embodied Inquiry, and Craft-based Methodologies’, in The 
Organization of Craft Work: Identities, Meanings, and Materiality, ed. Emma 
Bell, Gianluigi Mangia, Scott Taylor and Maria Laura Toraldo (New York and 
London: Routledge, 2019), 217–34, 225.
44	 Laura Portwood Stacer, ‘Do-It-Yourself Feminism: Feminine Individualism 
and the Girlie Backlash in the “Craftivism” Movement’ (Paper presented at 
the International Communication Association Convention, San Francisco, 
CA, 2007). https​:/​/ww​w​.aca​demia​.edu/​18634​81​/Do​-It​-Y​ourse​lf​_Fe​minis​m​
_Fem​inine​_Indi​vidua​lism_​and​_t​he​_Gi​rlie_​Backl​ashin​_the_​Craft​ivism​Movem​
ent; Samantha Close, ‘Knitting Activism, Knitting Gender, Knitting Race’, 
International Journal of Communication 12 (2018): 867–889; Tamela J. 
Gordon, ‘Pussy Hats: The Confederate Flag for White Feminists’, Medium, 
7 January 2018. https://medium​.com/​@shewritestolive​/puss​y​-hat​s​-the​-conf​
edera​te​-fl​ag​-fo​r​-whi​te​-fe​minis​ts​-7a​21352​b2f5e​.
45	 Cooke, ‘Modern Craft and the American Experience’, 6.
46	 The online craft journal, Garland, launched in 2015 and edited by Kevin 
Murray, has extensive archives devoted to cultural heritage practices in the 
Indo Pacific. Garland is produced by the World Crafts Council – Australia. 
https://garlandmag​.com​/about/

18	

PART 1 
Craft Legacy

20	

1
Politics of tea furniture 
Invention of ryuˉrei style in 
late-nineteenth-century Japan
Yasuko Suga
Introduction
W
hen the British designer and botanist Christopher Dresser visited Japan, 
he received an invitation from the Governor of Kyoto to go to a temple 
garden for a tea ceremony. Sent by the South Kensington Museum (now the 
Victoria and Albert Museum) as a connoisseur of Japanese art, he wanted to 
enjoy the best of Japanese aesthetics. The tea ceremony represented literally 
a total art that pleased the five senses, as it consisted of appreciating the 
burning charcoal and incense, listening to the water boiling, eating sweets and 
drinking from a tea bowl, viewing and delicately handling the items made of 
ivory, metal, wood, lacquer, bamboo and fabrics, and considering them. It was 
a compilation of different crafts most carefully selected by the host to match 
and produce a special occasion for the guests. In a small, square, four-and-a-
half tatami mat room – each tatami being 6 feet by 3 feet – Dresser observed 
that ‘everything is done with the same strange precision’ and following the 
‘code of etiquette’.1
In fact, the tea ceremony was and is not only about crafts and aesthetics: 
it is also deeply ‘political’. Dresser recorded how he learned that ‘at these 
meetings private matters are often discussed and secret plots concocted, 
and that most of the revolutions of Japan have been planned at these secret 

22
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
gatherings’, because political, military and financial leaders would meet and 
dine at tea houses.2 In Japanese history, the tea ceremony has provided a 
strategic setting since the time of Sen Rikyū (1522–1591) who systematized 
the rules in the sixteenth century – the Age of Civil Wars. Also, the tea 
ceremony itself has metamorphosed over time. For example, during wars, 
various procedures using a style of portable tea-box were devised to enjoy the 
tea ceremony even at a battlefield or on a battleship. Highly crafted tea bowls 
and powdered-tea containers were often given by a lord to his servants as a 
reward at battles. 
A number of procedures and styles have been devised by successive grand 
masters, often to harmonize tea culture with contemporary socio-political 
movements. Perhaps the most revolutionary adaptation was the invention of 
ryūrei (standing courtesy) style, which used Western-style tables and stools 
instead of traditionally sitting directly on the tatami floor with one’s legs folded. 
The style was devised in the middle of Japan’s rapid modernization after it 
opened to the West in the mid-nineteenth century. Its creator was the eleventh 
Grand Tea Master, Gengensai (1810–1877) of the Ura-Senke school, one of 
three major tea schools established by Sen Rikyū’s descendants to pass on 
his ‘Way of Tea’. Gengensai’s dual ‘invention of tradition’ is observable in that 
he wanted the tea ceremony to be more accessible to foreign visitors in the 
time of Japan’s opening after centuries of national seclusion, thus contributing 
to its international representation. Also, domestically, he projected the ryūrei 
style as the nation’s indispensable cultural tradition of value in the modern 
age.
This article explores the cultural and political significance of the ryūrei style, 
by focusing on the Kyoto Exhibition of 1872 where it was first demonstrated, 
and on Gengensai’s philosophization of tea culture. In addition, the essay 
reveals how the new tea furniture was invented out of political considerations 
for the attraction of and catering to Western visitors and, subsequently, to 
function as a bilateral interface of both ‘tradition’ and ‘modernity’ in tea culture.
Kyoto and tea culture in hard times
After Japan opened to the West in the 1850s, the government focused on 
two initiatives in order to catch up with Western civilization: ’leave Asia, enter 
Europe’ (datsua-nyūou) and ‘Japanese spirit combined with Western learning’ 
(wakon-yosai). Japanese officials were sent to the United States and Europe, 
and one of the myriad novel things they reported on was a medium of national 
publicity: exhibitions. They visited the London International Exhibition in 
1862 with awe and marvel. Interestingly, this was the exhibition where the 

23
POLITICS OF TEA FURNITURE
Japanese artefacts exhibited by the first British minister to Japan, Sir Harry 
Parkes, attracted many European artists, designers and dealers such as Walter 
Crane and Arthur Liberty, lured by the Japonisme craze in the West.3
At once, the culture of exhibitions was fashionable in Japan. According to 
the writer and editor Ishii Kendo (1865–1943), exhibitions became a symbol 
of the West and modernity during the Meiji period, especially between 
1872 and 1877, together with other novelties such as schools, horse 
carriages and Jinriki-sha (rickshaw).4 The first step, taken by the municipality 
of Kyoto in 1871, was an exhibition at a temple. From 1872, for another 
thirty-one years, annual exhibitions were held in Kyoto. Other major cities 
also organized exhibitions, but Kyoto differed in that while other cities tended 
to follow the style of conventional shops, Kyoto’s exhibition introduced the 
Western system of jury selection and the display of imported machines, 
based on the understanding that European exhibitions worked as a medium 
of knowledge and learning.5 Why such a difference and strong determination 
to hold exhibitions to the Western standard in Kyoto? One obvious reason 
was the political competition between Kyoto, the ancient Japanese capital 
from 794 AD to the end of Edo period (1603–1868), and Tokyo, a new capital 
after the Meiji Restoration. When the Meiji period (1868–1912) began, all 
governmental functions moved to Tokyo. In addition, Kyoto and nearby 
Osaka, which had been the centres of commerce for centuries, had a drastic 
downfall. In May 1871, yen currency was newly introduced as the only 
currency exchangeable with dollars, in place of ryo used in feudal times; two 
months later the abolishment of feudal domains and established prefectures 
occurred. The former feudal lords lost their dominions and ruling powers, and 
those who had borrowed large amounts of ryo from major money exchange 
merchants, mostly based in Osaka, escaped from their debts, which caused 
Osaka merchants’ demise and the city’s fall from the summit of national 
economic power. 
It was no wonder that Kyoto jumped at the opportunity to demonstrate 
local identity in order to revitalize the economy. The organizational group 
for the Kyoto Exhibition stated that Kyoto had ‘experienced the turbulent 
changes of the Restoration’ and ‘faded’; therefore ‘in order to vitalize the 
critical decline’, Kyoto officials and important business figures gathered to 
realize the Kyoto Exhibition.6 The first exhibition was held with 166 Japanese 
exhibits, 131 Chinese exhibits and 39 Western offerings; 11,211 visitors saw 
the displays during the thirty-three days of viewing.7 
During the Restoration, similarly to the city of Kyoto, tea culture underwent 
a disruptive transition because the tea families had largely been hired and 
protected by the feudal lords. The days when a good warrior and ruler was 
expected to know the deep aesthetics of tea culture were over: the new Meiji 
Government in Tokyo considered tea culture as simply ‘old-fashioned’ and of 

24
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
little importance in the time of Westernization and modernization, and it was 
deemed one of the quaint leisure activities like Sumo wrestling, Kabuki acting 
and street performances. The income of the tea families dropped and so did 
that of the merchants dealing in tea ceremony utensils. A strategic discourse 
on tea culture as something which would lead the nation towards modernity 
on a par with the West had to be configured, for the sake of the weakening 
Sen families and craft dealers. 
During this time, Gengensai, the eleventh Grand Master of the Ura-Senke, 
actively worked for the promotion of tea culture. He was adopted from a 
feudal lord family into the Ura-Senke family, and became the Grand Master 
at the age of seventeen. Coming from outside the three major tea families, 
Gengensai had freer thoughts, and his wide, influential connections with 
priests, wealthy merchants, feudal lords and their families, and court nobles 
were his unparalleled strength.8 He communicated with priests at powerful 
temples such as Tokudaiji, Chionin and Higashi-Honganji, who all joined and 
supported the Ura-Senke school. He also established a good relationship with 
the Imperial family, performing the tea ceremony at the palace in Tokyo, thus 
geographically bridging the new and old capitals by himself. Besides this, 
among all successive tea masters, he was known for his extensive collection 
of tea item masterpieces, and was himself an adept craftsperson making 
items for the tea ceremony, such as incense containers, bamboo tea scoops 
and tea bowls, and practising calligraphy. Making and using his collectable 
craftwork and travelling near and far, he energetically dedicated himself to 
enlivening tea culture by successfully holding Rikyū’s 250th Commemoration 
Ceremony (1839) and enlightening a wide range of people on his expeditions 
(Figure 1.1).
FIGURE 1.1  Tea items made by Gengensai: bamboo flower container and raku tea 
bowl. With permission of Chado Shiryo-kan, Kyoto.

25
POLITICS OF TEA FURNITURE
When the Restoration took place, Gengensai’s career as the Great Master 
was nearing its end, but what he brought to tea culture at large was substantial. 
He was asked to support the staging of the Kyoto Exhibition in 1872 with other 
tea family members and offered a most unconventional idea in that difficult 
time – one that projected both the past and the future of tea culture. 
Ryūrei style at the Kyoto Exhibition
After the local exhibition in Kyoto in 1871, the Kyoto Exhibition Company 
was set up jointly with Kyoto Prefecture and the private sector. The politician 
Makimura Masanao (1834–1896) was the central figure for the occasion.9 In 
1872, when the Kyoto Exhibition was organized by the Company, the exhibition 
committee included the Governor of Kyoto and important citizens and local 
celebrities. The Governor of Kyoto explained how ‘overseas countries hold 
exhibitions’ for the purpose of gaining the knowledge of civilization.10 Among 
the ‘Supportive Attendance’ members were the names of Sen Sosa, Sen 
Soshitsu (Gengensai) and Sen Soshu, and Yabuuchi Shouchi, all members of 
the major tea families.11 The Exhibition was planned to last for eighty-nine days 
using part of Kyoto Palace, showing both domestic and Western exhibits. A 
novel consideration was that the organizers wanted to attract foreign visitors 
as well as Japanese. For the purpose, they secured three temples as the sites 
especially for the entertainment of foreign visitors: Nishi-Honganji, Kenninji 
and Chionin. 
As a result, the Kyoto Exhibition was aimed at being the first ‘international’ 
exhibition held in Japan, preempting such an event in the capital Tokyo. 
Accordingly, the facilitators officially and practically prepared for foreign 
visitors. At that time foreigners were confined to a 40-kilometre radius from 
the designated ports of Yokohama and Kobe. As a means of accommodation, 
from 10 March 1872 for fifty days, foreigners with special permission from 
their national embassies were allowed to visit Kyoto, but prohibited from 
going to certain areas or hunting or firing a gun.12 The residents of Kyoto made 
every effort to welcome foreign visitors: there were no Western-style inns or 
hotels in Kyoto then, but eateries prepared menus that included roast beef, 
bread, champagne and coffee for the comfort of overseas guests. 
A total of 2,485 exhibits were displayed, and the Japanese exhibits 
included a variety of teas, raw silk, dyed silk, cotton, Kyoto’s traditional silk 
woven textiles, gold- and silver-works, bamboo and ivory crafts, a variety of 
papers, musical instruments and so on.13 There were also many splendid 
tea-related exhibits that belonged to the tea families, and works by special 
craftspeople, such as Tsuchida Yūko, a pouch-making artisan. The craftspeople 

26
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
were designated as Sen-ke Jusshoku (Ten Artisans of the House of Sen) who 
supplied their works to the three major tea families. Gengensai, too, exhibited 
many of his family treasures, such as an iron helmet given to Sen Rikyū from 
Toyotomi Hideyoshi, Imperial Regent in the late sixteenth century, and many 
tea items with special aesthetic features or histories.14 
The biggest contribution made by Gengensai was the tea ceremony 
performed in the novel ryūrei style, as he named it. Gengensai and three other 
tea practitioners from major tea families took turns to give ceremonies both in 
the open-air and indoors at Kenninji, one of the ‘extra entertaining sites’. This 
was largely Masanao’s doing, as he approached Maeda Zuisetsu, a dealer in 
bags and pouches in Kyoto and one of Gengensai’s best pupils, to ask how 
to give a tea ceremony to entertain foreign visitors. Zuisetsu discussed the 
matter with Gengensai and he proposed the usage of tables and stools for the 
ease of foreigners not used to sitting on tatami mats, an idea which seems to 
have been already in his mind as early as 186815 (Figure 1.2).
Conventionally, when entering the tea room, guests need to shuffle in 
on their knees and kneel on tatami mats. But the ryūrei style allows one to 
walk in and remain standing to look at and appreciate the items placed in the 
tokonoma (alcove), and then sit on stools, just as Western manners require 
when sitting at a table. In the ryūrei style, a table called tenchaban (tea-serving 
FIGURE 1.2  Gengensai’s sketch of the ryūrei style. With permission of Chado 
Shiryo-kan, Kyoto.

27
POLITICS OF TEA FURNITURE
table) is used, which is made of bamboo and cedar, about 55 centimetres high 
and painted with black Japanese lacquer. Also, the guests use a kikka, a table 
for guests drinking tea. The master and guests sit on an eni, a round stool 
about 45 centimetres high, also lacquered black, on top of which is placed a 
round flat cushion. 
Gengensai’s political calculations in designing the furniture and the procedure 
for the most radical ryūrei style were clear. In respect to the traditional tea 
world, he wanted to show the maximum formality that was visibly possible, 
by choosing and presenting the set of furniture and items in a particular way 
in order to persuade the Japanese to accept its unconventionality. Tenchaban 
and kikka are both flatpack furniture, suggesting the portability of the new 
furniture to be placed, at least temporarily, in a traditional Japanese-style 
tatami-matted room. But the style had to be acknowledged as very important, 
with plain black lacquer finish signifying the highest formality in the world of 
the tea ceremony (Figure 1.3). Also, he intentionally introduced the same items 
used on the tenchaban as those with the daisu-temae, a formal procedure 
using a large utensil stool, which is considered prestigious and elegant. On 
a tenchaban table, a brazier and a kettle, as well as a set of matched utensils 
(fresh-water container, ladle stand, waste-water container and lid rest) are 
decoratively placed.
FIGURE 1.3  Ryūrei style furniture. With permission of Chado Shiryo-kan, 
Kyoto.

28
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
Additionally, the ryūrei style signalled to the authorities that this was an 
agency of modernity. Tenchaban tables and eni stools were placed on tatami 
mats, thus tailoring the invented tea furniture for the centuries-old traditional 
Japanese rooms. The literal mixture of Japanese tatami-matted floor with 
the Western use of tables and chairs demonstrated that the tea ceremony 
embodied Western modernity in the middle of Kyoto. In a time when there 
were no public spaces in Japan where Western forms could be seen, the 
ryūrei tea ceremony provided an example of new possibilities in lifestyle.
Another political significance of the ryūrei style which could be attributed to 
Gengensai, although unrecognized by him, was the popularization of the Way 
of Tea among females. There had been a strong gender-bias in tea practices 
during feudal times, which were available only to feudal lords, male merchants 
and male citizens. The situation changed in the Meiji period. Social change 
necessitated physical and mental accessibility to the tea ceremony, which was 
again provided at the 1872 Kyoto Exhibition. As another attraction for foreign 
visitors, the Miyako Odori Festival was organized, whereby geishas (traditional 
female entertainers trained in singing and dancing) sang and danced to the 
lyrics Masanao wrote to introduce sightseeing spots in Kyoto. Soon after, 
definitely by 1876, before the geishas’ dancing, a tea ceremony in the ryūrei 
style was organized as a curtain raiser (Figure 1.4). Tea and dancing combined 
proved so popular that, during the cherry blossom season in April, the festival 
became Kyoto’s famous annual event that has survived until now. People 
FIGURE 1.4  Tea Ceremony at Miyako Odori by Geishas. Photograph by Joi Ito, 
Creative Commons.

29
POLITICS OF TEA FURNITURE
annually witnessed the ryūrei style conducted by females in public, thereby 
contributing to promotion of participation by the female population in tea 
culture. From the mid-1870s, girls’ schools introduced tea ceremony classes 
in their curriculum as part of bride training. Both the ryūrei style, as well as the 
conventional Japanese style, were taught in schools.
Aftermath: The way of tea as 
Japanese philosophy
The Kyoto Exhibition in 1872 was considered a great success. A total of 
31,103 Japanese adults, 7,531 Japanese students (boys and girls) and 
770 foreign visitors were recorded. Among the foreign visitors, one hundred 
and twenty-five were from Britain, seventeen from France, sixty-six from the 
United States and thirteen from Germany.16 It was reported that the Kyoto 
Exhibition as a whole was reviewed as ‘fairly popular with good reputation’.17 
When Gengensai himself wrote to his friend, Tsunematsu Yokichiro, a 
wealthy merchant, and lamented the drastic change in people’s human nature 
after the Restoration, he did not forget to mention how popular the Kyoto 
Exhibition was.18 
How was Gengensai’s breakthrough received by other Japanese? It is hard 
to find contemporary sources of direct reference to the novelty in the domestic 
tea culture. There is one reference which was addressed to the international 
audience in later years. A Harvard University graduate who worked for the 
Oji Seishi Paper Manufacturing Company and contributed much to American–
Japanese cultural exchange, Yasunosuke Fukukita (1874–1944), introduced 
the ryūrei style in a chapter titled ‘New Methods for New Times’ in his book 
Tea Cult of Japan: An Aesthetic Pastime (1935). He introduced the style and 
criticized it as ‘a poor makeshift, and not without some incongruity’.19 He 
considered that it had ‘scarcely been improved since it was originally devised 
as a makeshift only’. He went on:
It is natural that some tea-masters and devotees of the orthodox type 
should attach little importance to the practice of using tables and chairs, 
for they don’t quite harmonise with a Japanese room. Among other things, 
the presence of tables and stools spoils the artistic effect of the alcove 
decoration, which is the most important part of a Japanese room.20
I have not so far found a direct written criticism of the style in Japanese, and it 
may be that Fukukita was able to critically write about the tea master’s radical 
attempt because he presupposed the book’s readers as foreigners. But it is 

30
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
likely that Gengensai anticipated such a viewpoint, and arguably he designed 
the style with formality in the furniture and items to protect his alteration. 
When he and the other two tea families were asked again to assist with the 
Fifth Kyoto Exhibition, the ryūrei style was not adopted for the occasion. But 
Gengensai continued to capture other occasions to demonstrate the style. It 
is said that Gengensai adopted a boy from a long-standing Kyoto merchant 
family, the Suminokura family, who lost their fortune due to the Restoration. 
When he visited the Suminokuras, he entertained the guests with a tea 
ceremony in the ryūrei style because a French ambassador was staying at 
their house.21 
Gengensai did not stop there. Around the time of the Kyoto Exhibition, 
the government intended to regulate tea ceremony activities with the issuing 
of a ‘Performing Arts License’. The Meiji Government introduced taxing for 
theatres and spectacles and regulated performing activities, thus screening 
out obscenity and vulgarity in an attempt to place popular culture under 
control. However, Gengensai strongly opposed the authority. He led the tea 
families and as a representative wrote to the Kyoto local government,22 in a 
letter titled ‘Sadou no Geni’ (root meaning of the Way of Tea), to say that the 
tea ceremony was not simply an amusing performing art but a spiritual ritual, 
an outcome of Confucianism and, therefore, far from a leisurely practice. The 
letter was written in July 1872, a few months after the opening of the Kyoto 
Exhibition.
Gengensai, from his childhood, learned neo-Confucianism, which was 
considered the most authentic religion in the Edo period. Neo-Confucianism 
adopted a principle that was introduced by Confucianism, namely the orderly 
maintenance of human relations, and valuing the virtues of humanity, justice, 
courtesy, wisdom and sincerity, both fairly and rationally. This principle 
was used as the basis for his explanation of the Way of Tea. In addition, he 
emphasized the spirit of communication based on classless equality and 
frugality, valued as the pervading spirit of tea practice, and thus elevated tea 
culture to a philosophy of modern living. 
Gengensai’s letter was sent to the Governor of Kyoto, with the signatures 
of the three major tea families. Perhaps the authority took the success of 
the Kyoto Exhibition into consideration. The strong determination of the tea 
proponents moved the officials, and tea practice was not included in the 
system of licensing performing arts. Tea was now an element of Japanese 
culture that expressed Japanese high morality and intellect.
With the above understanding as the basis, Japan made more and more use 
of tea culture. On the one hand, at international exhibitions the combination of 
a Japanese garden with a tea house became a central feature of the Japanese 
display. At the 1873 Vienna, 1876 Philadelphia, 1878 Paris and 1893 Chicago 
Exhibitions, the combination was popular. For the 1904 Louisiana Purchase 

31
POLITICS OF TEA FURNITURE
Exposition, informally known as the St. Louis World’s Fair, the tea ceremony 
was demonstrated at a tea house.23 On the other hand, at home, tea culture 
was actively applied to girls’ education towards the end of the nineteenth 
century, so much so that in the twentieth century, the gender ratio was 
reversed from feudal days: the majority of tea practitioners had become 
female.
Conclusion
According to Kakuzo Okakura’s The Book of Tea:
the simplicity of the tea-room and its freedom from vulgarity make it truly 
a sanctuary from the vexations of the outer world. There and there alone 
can one consecrate himself to undisturbed adoration of the beautiful. 
In the sixteenth century the tearoom afforded a welcome respite from 
labour to the fierce warriors and statesmen engaged in the unification 
and reconstruction of Japan. In the seventeenth century, after the strict 
formalism of the Tokugawa rule had been developed, it offered the only 
opportunity possible for the free communion of artistic spirits. Before a 
great work of art there was no distinction between daimyo, samurai, and 
commoner. Nowadays industrialism is making true refinement more and 
more difficult all the world over. Do we not need the tea-room more than 
ever?24 
Okakura’s book on tea is internationally famous, for it has placed the 
tea ceremony in the context of philosophy. He based his writing on the 
philosophization of tea culture promoted by Gengensai in the late nineteenth 
century. 
The mixture of Western style with Japanese proceeded, and by the 1920s 
the décor in which rattan tables and chairs were displayed in tatami-matted 
Japanese rooms became more common.25 The Japanese began wearing 
Western clothes, and people acclimatized to the use of Western furniture 
designs. These changes originated in Gengensai’s ryūrei invented more than 
a century ago. He initiated the possibility of a modern Japanese lifestyle, and 
simultaneously reinforced the significance of tea culture as an insightful act in 
the time of change. And this was communicated through his new tea furniture 
and tea items organized in a special design.
Gengensai’s innovative style demonstrates how the tea ceremony conveyed 
multilayered political messages through the forms, colours and settings of 
craft items. His juxtaposition of furniture with high-quality handmade utensils 

32
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
and tea sets not only restored the significance of the tea ceremony in Japan, 
but also acted as a bridge to the West, symbolizing Japan’s willingness to 
embrace modernity. He used his knowledge as a craftsperson to design 
tenchaban tables and eni stools to hospitably and graciously accommodate 
Western visitors, and by maintaining features like tatami mats he ensured a 
traditional experience for foreigners. One could say that Gengensai’s crafty, 
in the sense of shrewd, abilities satisfied both domestic and international 
interests. His craft and political legacy were honoured by succeeding Grand 
Masters of the Ura-Senke family. 
Notes
1	 Christopher Dresser, Japan: Its Architecture, Art and Art Manufactures 
(Edinburgh: R&R Clark, 1882), 158–9. Dresser’s translator, Haruo Sakata, 
who travelled with him throughout Japan provided the information.
2	 Dresser, Japan, 158–9.
3	 For the impact of Japonisme and how Japan used the opportunity, see 
Yasuko Suga, ‘“Artistic and Commercial” Japan: Modernity, Authenticity 
and Japanese Leather Paper’, in Buying for the Home: Shopping for the 
Domestic from the Seventeenth Century to the Present, ed. David E. Hussey 
and Margaret Ponsonby (Farnham, UK: Ashgate 2008), 91–114.
4	 Kendo Ishii, Meiji Jibutsu Kigen [Origins of Things in Meiji] (Tokyo: 
Nihonhyoronsha, 1929), 1018.
5	 Shunya Yoshimi, Hakurankai no Seijigaku [Politics of International Exhibitions] 
(Tokyo: Chuko-Shinsho, 1992), 123.
6	 Kyoto Hakurankyokai, ed., Kyoto Hakurankai Enkakushi [Historical Records of 
Kyoto Exhibition], Jo-kan [first volume], 1906), 1–2.
7	 Ibid.
8	 Former Daimyo families such as the Tokugawa, Ikeda and Maeda. His friends 
who were wealthy merchants included Tsunematsu Yokichiro of Iwami and 
Takekawa Chikusai of Seshuu, who also joined the Ura-Senke school. See 
Sen Soshitsu, Ura-Senke Konnnichian Rekidai: Gengensai Seichu, 11-kan 
[Ura-Senke Konnichian Successive Great Masters: Gengensai Seichu, Vol. 11] 
(Kyoto: Tankosha, 2008).
9	 Makimura later became the Governor of Kyoto from 1875 and put all his 
effort into revitalizing Kyoto.
10	 Kyoto Hakurankai Enkakushi, 1–2.
11	 Kyoto Hakurankai Enkakushi, 6.
12	 Kyoto Hakurankai Enkakushi, 9–12.
13	 Kyoto Hakurankai Enkakushi, 38.
14	 Hakurankaisha, Kyoto Hakurankai Buppin Mokuroku: Zen [All Lists of the Exhibits 
at Kyoto Exhibition]. Privately bound, microfilm, Tokyo National Museum.

33
POLITICS OF TEA FURNITURE
15	 Gengensai sketched the idea of ryūrei in one of the seven books called 
Houmeikibun, which were considered to have been compiled in the late 
1860s. See Sen Soshitsu, Ura-Senke Konnnichian Rekidai.
16	 Kyoto Hakurankai Enkakushi, 38.
17	 Kyoto Hakurankai Enkakushi, 32.
18	 Sen Soshitsu, Ura-Senke Konnnichian Rekidai.
19	 Yasunosuke Fukukita, Tea Cult of Japan: An Aesthetic Pastime (New York: 
Japan Society, 1935), 60.
20	 Ibid., 60–1.
21	 Home Page of Taikoan, https​:/​/ww​w​.tai​koan.​jp​/20​13​/11​/07​/2​013年1​1月/
22	 Sen Soshitsu, Ura-Senke Konnnichian Rekidai.
23	 By this time, Japanese green tea was a merchantable export good, 
competing with Indian black tea and Chinese tea. See Robert Hellyer, 
‘Dueling Tea Rooms: British-Japanese Competition for the US Tea Market 
at World Expositions, 1893-1917’, Expos and Human History (International 
Symposium, International Research Center for Japanese Studies 
[Nichibunken], Kyoto, December 2015), 99–108.
24	 Kakuzo Okakura, The Book of Tea (New York: G.P. Putnam’s Sons, 1906), 
98–9.
25	 For more, see Sarah Teasley, ‘Nation, Modernity and Interior Decoration. 
Uncanny Designs in the 1922 Peace Commemoration Tôkyô Exposition 
Culture Village Houses’, Japanstudien 13, no. 1 (2002): 49–87.

2
(Dis)playing politics
Craft and the Caughnawaga 
Exhibition, 1883
Lisa Binkley
Introduction
F
ollowing the inception of the Indian Act 1876, Indigenous peoples in Canada 
were no longer permitted to participate alongside non-Indigenous people 
in public exhibitions. This chapter discusses one specific fair as an example 
of the separation of Indigenous and non-Indigenous participation in Canada 
and one specific craft, highlighting the significance of Indigenous women’s 
needlework practices as vehicles through which to express the role of women 
in matriarchal society. 
The 1883 Caughnawaga Grand Agricultural and Industrial Exhibition was 
the first of its kind in Canada to limit participation to Indigenous peoples 
only.1 Although it followed the establishment of regional and local agricultural 
and industrial exhibitions taking place across Canada as well as the Great 
Exhibition of Industry of All Nations (London, England, 1851), the Caughnawaga 
fair was evidence of the Canadian government’s intentional situation of 
Indigenous participants within the national and the global political contexts 
of citizenship.2 Through the display of objects, the Exhibition was rooted in 
‘potent mechanisms and visualizations of power relationships, [classifying 
differences] between the colonizer and the colonized’.3 

35
(DIS)PLAYING POLITICS
The separation of Indigenous and non-Indigenous objects at public fairs 
was a recent concept and differed from that previously displayed at the Great 
Exhibition. The popular lithograph of that Exhibition’s Canada booth, wherein 
the highly romanticized coexistence of outdoor modes of travel glorified 
the aesthetics of settlement and the ideas of nature, suggested peaceful 
coexistence, a concept that would have appealed to spectators, especially 
those contemplating a trans-Atlantic relocation. Hanging centre stage as the 
focal point, a Kanien’kehá:ka4 birchbark canoe drew viewers’ attention to other 
interesting objects, such as a fashionable cariole, draped with sumptuous 
furs, and taxidermied wildlife. To viewers, the booth would have served as 
a tableau of sorts, allowing patrons to step inside a curated and civilized 
Canadian scene. 
In his Annual Report to the Superintendent of Indian Affairs, the Indian 
Agent5 John Davidson articulated his interpretation of the current state of 
the Kanien’kehá:ka through the Caughnawaga Exhibition. The deliberate 
categorization of exhibits was explicitly divided between objects associated 
with traditional Indigenous life and those that were more closely tied to Euro-
settler customs. For example, handcrafted items were separated according 
to the form of construction and use in which they were associated, implicitly 
categorizing certain elements as racially and culturally inferior. For example, 
the tent labelled Indigenous craft, which included moccasins, beadwork, 
lacrosse sticks and pipes, was installed separate from the tent which housed 
Special items and featured Euro-settler-influenced objects such as dresses, 
robes, petticoats and quilts. Although the fair included items produced only 
by Indigenous peoples, the layout of the exhibit tents clearly differentiated 
between those that were made in a more traditional manner and those that 
represented Euro-settler culture. Through a circus-like appeal that drew local 
Euro-settler and tourist spectators, fair organizers facilitated a spectacle which 
essentially emphasized any underlying political agenda. Through this, the 
government sought to declare itself in a position of power for the purpose of 
the viewing public and as a reminder to the reserve residents. 
The chapter will explore the Exhibition as a vehicle through which the 
Canadian government sought to emphasize its position on the so-called 
‘Indian question’.6 Furthermore, I look at two items displayed in the Special 
tent that included non-Indigenous forms of sewing, a silk dress made by 
Celia Flints and a silk patchwork quilt made by Louise Kon8aseti Laronde. 
To tourists, spectators and government agents, the adoption of making silk 
dresses and quilts by Indigenous women supported ideas of assimilation and 
a willingness to participate in Victorian consumerism. However, interrogation 
of these objects reveals how Indigenous women maintained their integral 
roles as central to matriarchal society.

36
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
The politics of the Caughnawaga Exhibition
Organizers of the 1883 Caughnawaga Grand Agricultural and Industrial Exhibition 
sought to highlight industrial development and economic potential, as well as 
feature cultural activities of an Indigenous community in transition. Agricultural 
implements and husbandry, and produce and livestock, including horses and 
cattle, were presented alongside various ‘amusements, such as war and snake 
dances, pony races, canoe races, and a championship lacrosse match between 
the Royal Caughnawagas and the Cornwall Indians . . . among other attractions’.7 
By publicly displaying a moment in time of the lives of the Kanien’kehá:ka in 
the fall of 1883 through public display, organizers simultaneously elucidated 
and masked the government’s underlying policies of aggressive assimilation.
Juxtaposition of modern exhibits and agriculture, and Indigenous craft and 
performance, moved patrons from one arena of the Exhibition to another, 
from Indigenous to Western, situating Indigeneity as anachronistic or as ‘a 
space inhabited by prehistoric, atavistic, and irrational [people], inherently out 
of place in the historical time of modernity’.8 For patrons to experience this 
Western-non-Western dichotomy, they first travelled to the Exhibition from 
Montréal or nearby Lachine by steamer across the St. Lawrence River or by 
rail service over the Victoria Bridge; through the threshold of the established 
reserve boundary, designated for the fair as: ‘Welcome to Caughnawaga, 
Speed the Plough’9; and then, once on the fairgrounds, they were guided by 
effective signage on respective tents identifying particular exhibits: ‘Native 
Handicraft and Art, Agriculture, A Baby Show, Poultry, and Domestic Art’.10 
Some community members were mobilized to participate in agricultural 
and industrial contests, where winners were awarded prizes such as wringer 
washers, sewing machines and ploughs – modern implements intended 
to encourage cleanliness, domesticity and agriculture; others, committed 
to traditional lifeways, sold beadwork and baskets and engaged in cultural 
performance. In particular, patrons were treated to a display by a dance troupe 
from Akwesasne (Figure 2.1) who regularly toured across Canada and the 
United States, at times travelling as far as Kansas and Colorado.
Beadwork artists earned income through the sale of handmade items, 
such as beaded handbags and memorable keepsakes, catering to Victorian 
consumer demands; such artists were regularly seen at tourist sites such as 
Montréal and Niagara Falls (Figure 2.2). These modes of handicraft enterprise 
were especially popular during the 1860 Royal tour of Canada by Prince 
Edward Albert.11 
Although the Indian Agent dedicated considerable space in his report to 
traditional Indigenous handcrafts, agriculture was indeed where Davidson 
focused his attention. In fact, he even included closing remarks from the 
Exhibition issued by Montréal advocate R. C. Smith, on how he ‘hoped to 

37
(DIS)PLAYING POLITICS
see [Indigenous community members] not only relieved from the restrictions 
that now hampered them, but that they might even surpass their white 
neighbours, of who they were not behind many now and ahead of some’.12 
These remarks differed from those issued earlier by the Superintendent of 
Indian Affairs in his 1881 report, which drew consternation about some of the 
continuing practices demonstrated by community members, such as, 
basket-making, ax-handle manufacturing, bead work, moccasin-making and 
other Indian handicraft, [which] have to be resorted to in order to supply the 
deficit. And to dispose of these articles the Indians have to visit numerous 
places, and thus their old, and to them, congenial habit of wandering about 
the country is fostered, which is attended with evil results to them, morally 
and materially.13
While the juxtaposition of events at the Exhibition revealed some movement 
towards modernization and agriculture, it also highlighted how some community 
members vehemently rejected agriculture as a way of life. This resistance to 
agricultural practices was more complex than merely a rejection of Western 
measures of self-sustenance or how ‘agriculture and farming were viewed 
as offensive to the earth’.14 Rather, this rejection was exacerbated by the 
FIGURE 2.1  W. S. Tanner, St. Regis (Akwesasne) Indian Show Company, 1894, 
Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. USZ62-42816.

38
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
fact that routine and concentrated land cultivation was viewed as a mode 
through which the government could more easily facilitate enfranchisement 
and eventually dismantle and assimilate the reserve community through the 
sale of land to the non-Indigenous.
Kahnawà:ke land survey
The Caughnawaga Exhibition served the government of Canada’s intentions 
regarding Indigenous assimilation: it separated what it viewed as traditional 
craft practices from those customarily associated with those made by Euro-
settlers, European ones, designating the latter as ‘special’. It should be noted 
that this early use of the word ‘craft’ as a tent label – Indigenous craft – is 
significant, yet its juxtaposition with Indigenous when it was dropped from 
Special, could be interpreted as pejorative. Such politically charged language 
was coupled with an additional, more insidious agenda however, namely the 
intent to expropriate the Kahnawà:ke lands.
Through his involvement with the community and as Caughnawaga 
fair organizer, William McLea Walbank (b. 1856) was considered the ideal 
FIGURE 2.2  George Barker, Tuscarora Squaws, Luna Island, Niagara Falls, 
c. 1870. Courtesy of the George Eastman Museum 1981.6374.0001. 

39
(DIS)PLAYING POLITICS
candidate for a government contract. Walbank, a Montréal architect, land 
surveyor and civil engineer, was an ambitious young entrepreneur intent 
on cultivating his professional interests in Kahnawà:ke through land survey. 
Not yet 30 years of age, Walbank was granted the contract by the federal 
government to survey common lands, marking out 30 acre lots to be 
granted in the form of ‘location tickets’, eligible to men who met particular 
requirements: they had to be literate, morally upright and debt free.15 As 
part of this agreement, if band members accepted the terms of the location 
ticket, they would be forced to abandon their existing property and relocate 
to an assigned plot, which might also mean trading in fertile land for scrub 
brush.16 Furthermore, the terms of the agreement would require that band 
members must agree to enfranchisement, which extinguished Indigenous 
status and any accompanying rights, rendering land title as something that 
could be sold and transferred to anyone outside the community. Thus, the 
eventual dissolution of Kahnawà:ke as a contiguous parcel of Indigenous land 
was a possibility. Within close proximity to Montréal, Kahnawà:ke presented 
itself as an attractive parcel of land, ripe for development.17
Walbank’s initial contact with the Indigenous community followed a request 
by more affluent community members to have the boundary surveyed, 
challenging several land claims by numerous non-Indigenous residents. One 
land claim, in particular, identified concerns with a land agreement held by 
Thomas Phillips, a non-Indigenous property holder, who had acquired his 
plot from Edouard Deblois, a French Canadian. For several years, Phillips had 
neglected to pay rents to the band, causing some members to view this as 
an ideal opportunity to reclaim the land for the community. To circumvent any 
laws that would be reason to rescind his agreement, Thomas Phillips placed 
land title in his wife’s name, Tsawennorseriio, as she was a member of the 
Kahnawà:ke community.18 
As a result of negligence by the Department of Indian Affairs to maintain 
the collection of land rents and its intentional minimized efforts to get involved 
with reserve politics, this, the haphazard management of reserve land under 
the mandate of the Indian Act, might have been somewhat intentional.19 Either 
the government did not care to intervene in the micropolitics of the community 
or it hoped to see the reserve eventually disintegrate in order to make way for 
public ownership. However, by 1879, when revisions to the Indian Act removed 
local powers to administer reserve lands from Indigenous community leaders 
to the Department of Indian Affairs, the federal government revised its approach 
towards land management as though it had realized it might have missed an 
opportunity to better determine the assimilation of the community members. 
This would have been within the scope and objectives of the Superintendent 
of Indian Affairs, who also happened to be the Minister of the Interior and 
manager responsible for land settlement and expansion in Canada. 

40
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
To further modernize the land use and planning initiatives on the reserve, 
Walbank, a newly established business owner, set up a satellite office in 
the community in 1882, with the directive to divide the common land into 
measured lots. The division and allotment of lands to individual owners 
was thought to overcome the increasing number of land disputes that had 
erupted over the past two decades. While primary concerns revolved around 
the right to harvest wood for building and heating, other issues included the 
operation of maple sugaries on common land, and the absence of property 
improvements by residents when parcels of land were continually denuded 
by community members.20
According to Kahnawà:ke customary law, upheld by the chiefs, those who 
claimed parcels of land could not legally stop other Mohawks from cutting 
wood on their parcel. From this point of view, Kahnawà:ke territory was 
a wood commons. The customary law on wood had been spelled out in 
some detail by chiefs in 1801 and continued to be practiced since then.21 
In an effort to control the abundant harvesting of wood, some residents built 
fences with the idea they might protect property that they had occupied for 
some time, while others rushed to cut wood, keeping it for their own use.22 
Although Walbank spent over two years on the reserve, eventually completing 
the official survey, it was disputed by community members and never used 
as intended. 
In 1883, Walbank was appointed Honorary President and Head of the 
Executive Committee for the Caughnawaga Exhibition,23 a task that would 
have well-suited his professional agenda: promoting the ideas of modernity, 
agriculture and domesticity. Figuring prominently on the reserve during 
1882 and 1883, Walbank’s position as fair organizer would have been vested 
in his business interests, which included the potential to situate himself as 
a stakeholder for any future possibilities of Montréal expansion to the south 
side of the river. The personal elements illuminate underlying factors guiding 
the planning and management of the Exhibition. It was no secret that the city 
of Montréal was interested in seeking new directions to accommodate its 
increasing population; equally so, Walbank, the entrepreneur, was invested in 
expansion and development, and likely furthering his political position among 
city elites. His architectural and engineering accomplishments reveal a list 
of commercial buildings across Montréal and, later, a hydro-electric power 
company that harnessed energy from the Lachine Rapids.24 The Victoria Bridge, 
constructed in 1859, connected the island of Montréal to the south shore, 
facilitating the movement of people and goods to the Eastern Townships and 
beyond to the United States, further establishing improved trade routes that 
were once reliant on water travel. For the Montréal elite, and the local and 

41
(DIS)PLAYING POLITICS
federal governments, the common lands at Kahnawà:ke would have been 
viewed as valuable, ripe for development within close proximity to the city. 
The Indian Agent’s generous commentary on the Exhibition, including 
mention of Walbank’s devotion to the outcome, is worthy of a full quote and 
offers insight into the President’s commitment to the festivities: 
The faces of men, women and children – who are, as a rule, well dressed 
– are lit up with joy and enthusiasm over the novel event in their history; 
and the exhibition promises to have excellent and lasting results upon the 
future of the Indians in Canada. . . . Now that the existence of the Exhibition 
and its attractive features are generally known, as well as its easy access, 
nothing but fine weather should be required to induce a great throng on 
the grounds today.25 
By all recorded accounts, the Exhibition proved successful to the participants, 
having attracted over 4,000 spectators during the two-day event. 
At five o’clock, on the second afternoon of the Exhibition and as part of the 
closing ceremonies, the Executive Committee was joined by an invited group 
of local dignitaries, including local politicians and businessmen, who took the 
stage. In addition to this group of elites, three of the remaining hereditary Chiefs 
in regalia were present, signifying the last public representation of traditional 
laws before the introduction of elected councils on Indigenous reserves through 
the Indian Advancement Act (1884), leading to the eventual diminishment of 
hereditary leadership.26 Together, the procession of people involved in the 
closing ceremonies portrayed the emerging social and political undercurrents 
of Kahnawà:ke life. James Kewley Ward, wealthy lumberman and, eventually, 
member of the Legislative Council for Quebec, thanked Mr Walbank for ‘his 
energetic and successful management of the exhibition’.27 Walbank followed 
these remarks with his closing statement, inviting spectators to visit and view 
the farms and their farmers so that they could witness for themselves that 
indeed, ‘Indians could become farmers.’28 The details of the closing ceremony 
as recorded by the Indian Agent, in his report to the Superintendent of Indian 
Affairs, reveal the underlying focus on the government’s interest in promoting 
agriculture as a primary source of employment and the direction in which the 
government sought to shift Indigenous culture. 
Louise Kon8aseti Laronde’s silk patchwork quilt 
Although the Indian Agent’s report offers the most robust written account 
of the Exhibition, it is necessary to consider how participants might have 

42
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
experienced and understood the event. An interrogation of Louise Kon8aseti 
Laronde’s silk patchwork quilt as material culture offers an alternative 
view through which to explore her experiences and the roles of women in 
matriarchal society. It is unknown whether Laronde’s quilt still exists. From 
its brief description in the Indian Agent’s report, however, it is possible to 
consider the quilt as an expression of the maker’s social, cultural and 
political identity and as a vehicle through which to recoup the community’s 
understanding of the fair. Described as patchwork, Laronde’s coverlet would 
have comprised a collection of patches of silk cloth, likely assembled in an 
aesthetically pleasing overall geometric patterning, featuring any of some 
4,000 design possibilities.29 
Patchwork was a popular form of quiltmaking in the region between 
1870 and 1890, an activity often commemorating significant events through 
the use of significant fabrics. The making of Laronde’s quilt coincided 
with an increased availability of manufactured cloth and the circulation of 
quilt patterns in women’s periodicals such as Godey’s Ladies Book and 
Peterson’s Ladies Magazine. Laronde’s use of silk for patchwork would have 
heightened the interest in this coverlet and thus added to its visual appeal. 
The use of silk for patchwork was rare and suggests the quilt would have 
been made as a commemorative piece, perhaps in celebration of this first-
ever Caughanawaga fair, or a community member’s upcoming marriage, or 
as a keepsake representing the Royal Caughnawaga lacrosse team’s most 
recent overseas travel, where it had been documented that team members 
brought home silk yardage for family members (Figure 2.3).30
For example, it is likely the silk dress made by Celia Flints was a product of 
cloth brought home by her husband Sam or her brother Big John Canadian, 
both members of the community’s lacrosse team. In recent years, the team 
had travelled to Europe on several occasions, 1867, 1876 and 1883, playing 
exhibition matches across the British Isles and France, with the intention 
of generating international interest for the game.31  Captain W. B. Johnson 
of Montréal had organized the first trip abroad in 1867, as ‘a profit-making 
enterprise, hoping that British spectators would come to view the Canadian 
Indian playing a traditional game’.32 The subsequent tours to Europe in 
1876 and 1883, as well as Canadian matches played in Canada (in 1860, for the 
visiting Prince Edward Albert and in 1869 for Prince Arthur), were organized 
by W. George Beers, a nationalist, who was instrumental in westernizing 
the game and sought to use these opportunities as ‘patriotic celebrations of 
Canadian manhood’.33 The most recent tour to Europe in May 1883, included 
a match before Queen Victoria at Windsor Castle where she commented, 
‘how pretty is the game’.34 For community members, the lacrosse team’s 
public recognition would have been significant in Kahnawà:kero:non history, 
and its relationship to the silks brought back by family members would have 
been memorable.35

43
(DIS)PLAYING POLITICS
For Flints and Laronde, the silk used in their creative outputs was closely 
tied to these Royal events and Beers’s ideas of nationalism and identity, 
which promoted Canada as an independent nation. However, to community 
members, Laronde’s quilt would have represented the integral role of 
needlework to Indigenous lifeways. Although quiltmaking customarily has 
been viewed as a form of Euro-settler craft, ‘quilts are as quintessentially 
Native as any other object that supports a Native belief system, worldview, 
or sense of identity’.36 Quiltmaking offers one example of the exchange 
between settler and Indigenous women through the exchange of supplies, 
designs and skills.37 For Indigenous women, textile production is viewed 
as a position of honour and fulfils women’s roles within matrilineal society. 
Scholars of colonization have attested, ‘local and Indigenous peoples, who 
are often supposed to be passive recipients of European material culture, 
selectively appropriated external objects and practices, and actively negotiated 
sociocultural transformations’.38 Nevertheless, through needlework, traditional 
knowledges are passed on from grandmother to mother to daughter and 
between community members; these practices embrace women’s biological 
and reproductive roles, and women’s roles within the community,39 disrupting 
hetero-patriarchal processes of colonization reinforced by the Indian Act and 
the residential school system.40 Therefore, ‘State-sanctioned discrimination 
FIGURE 2.3  Photographer unknown, Indian European Team, 1883 at 
Scarborough, 28 July, Scarborough, England. Centre player Big John 
Canadian, Team Captain. McCord Museum, Montréal, Que. M2000.21.7.25.

44
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
and diminishment laid the groundwork for a culture of racism and misogyny’,41 
set forth by government initiatives that sought to foster a culture of gender-
based inequity.
Curating politics
The curation of objects and events at the Exhibition reveals a distinct division 
between Indigenous and non-Indigenous modes of craft and served an 
underlying purpose to guide spectators through a maze of racialized hierarchies 
of display. For example, when the Indian Agent addressed his interest in the 
items displayed in the tent ‘devoted to female industry’, he distanced himself 
from the collection, positioning it as gendered and domestic. Furthermore, 
as the government’s representative to Kahnawà:ke and the surrounding 
Kanien’kehá:ka communities,42 he instantiated his own interpretation of 
quiltmaking and needlework from a hetero-patriarchal position, supporting 
government ideologies that informed policies dedicated to enfranchisement as 
an aggressive assimilative measure. This position followed the government’s 
deliberate policies towards the erasure of Indigenous peoples,43 first 
introduced with An Act for the Gradual Enfranchisement of Indians, 1869, 
followed by the Indian Act, 1876:
Any Indian woman marrying any other than an Indian, shall cease to be an 
Indian within the meaning of the Act, nor shall the children issue of such 
marriage be considered as Indians within the meaning of this Act; Provided 
Also, that any Indian woman marrying an Indian of any other tribe, band or 
body shall cease to be a member of the tribe, band, or body to which she 
formerly belonged, and become a member of the tribe, band, or body of 
which her husband is a member, and the children, issue of this marriage, 
shall belong to their father’s tribe only.44
These measures have ‘generated damaging legacies of hierarchy, domination, 
intolerance, hatred, and the annihilation of others [my italics]’.45 Through subtle 
messaging within a government document such as Indian Agent Davidson’s 
Exhibition report, hetero-patriarchy and the marginalization of Indigenous 
women became further entrenched in what the government aimed to 
accomplish through an exhibition restricted to Indigenous participation. 
Laronde’s silk patchwork quilt was installed along with other domestic 
objects, such as dresses, petticoats, robes and drapery (noted above) as 
Special objects, separated from items identified as Indigenous handcraft, such 
as moccasins, beadwork and baskets.46 It was suggested to fair patrons how 

45
(DIS)PLAYING POLITICS
attendees to the fair might consider purchasing any of the ‘ornate and dazzling 
Indian goods, as presents for friends across seas or anywhere, or material 
to add to treasuries of curios in our own land’.47 For Exhibition patrons, the 
division between Indigenous and settler styles of craft supported government 
objectives and satisfied some of the concerns set forth by settlers, who viewed 
Canada’s Indigenous population as a group of peoples in need of civilizing, and 
those of the region’s elite, such as R.C. Smith, who, in his closing remarks 
declared,
The exhibition was one of which any community might very well be 
proud. It was not merely creditable for its display of Indian curiosities and 
handiwork, but in the great excellence of the agricultural products shown. 
All who saw were proud of their progress, and the event was an important 
step, elevating the Indians to the full status of citizens of the Dominion.48
Dividing handmade items into specific categories as Indian craft and Special 
items in an all-Indigenous exhibition supported the Canadian government’s 
objectives, which identified Indigenous peoples through the objects they 
made. Through separate spheres of display that were organized according to 
Indian craft and Indian dancing, and women’s industry, produce and livestock, 
organizers evoked a sense of past and present. It was as though Indigenous 
displays captured a moment in time – in the past – juxtaposed to new ideas of 
agriculture and industry intended to present aspirations of a future economy 
and lifestyle on the reserve. 
Handcrafted items made by Indigenous women have been viewed as both 
functional and aesthetic, and often valued for their representation of a culture 
on a path to extinction. In the years following the Indian Act, Indigenous craft 
made for the purpose of sale served a twofold purpose: firstly, to appeal to 
consumers, thereby providing income for its makers and their community, 
especially for those rejecting government pressures to succumb to Western 
modes of employment and agricultural development; and, secondly, as one 
of several ways of maintaining cultural knowledges through the practices of 
needlework. Until recently, the making of patchwork quilts has often been 
overlooked as a mode of traditional needlework because of its association to 
Euro-settler practice and its purpose as a useful domestic object. However, 
Indigenous women across Turtle Island (what is now known as North America) 
since the mid-nineteenth century have been stitching quilts in different patterns 
with myriad intentions, claiming this form of craft practice as their own. 
Thus, I maintain that Laronde’s quilt, from her acquisition of cloth through 
to its making and then its display, is a political object. Recently, scholars, 
such as Marsha MacDowell, Sherry Farrell Racette, Janet Catherine Berlo, 
Ruth Phillips and Kirsty Robertson, have explored the political aspects of 

46
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
quilts made by Indigenous women from across Turtle Island. For example, in 
To Honor and Comfort: Native Quilting Traditions (1997), Alex Jacobs reveals 
how Kanien’kehá:ka quiltmakers from Akwesasne have for several decades 
made and sold quilts for the purpose of raising funds for the Freedom School, 
an in-community institution dedicated to teaching children in their traditional 
language49; Sherry Farrell Racette has explored Métis women, who expressed 
through quiltmaking their views on Prairie life following the Riel Rebellions50; 
and Kirsty Robertson extends this idea of political agency to her study of the 
Living Healing Quilt Project that saw the making of hundreds of quilt blocks 
by residential school survivors and their families, raising awareness of the 
legacies of trauma incurred by Indigenous peoples in Canada. Recently, I have 
written about Star quilts, used as symbols of gratitude and gifted to community 
leaders with an expectation for service to the community.51 The 2015 gifting 
of a Star quilt by the Assembly of First Nations Chief, Perry Belgarde, to 
Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau affirmed the underlying message of 
reciprocation: it was expected that the government would reciprocate the 
gesture by maintaining its promises of reconciliation and reparation following 
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission’s inquiry into the generational trauma 
caused to First Nations peoples. 
Conclusion
As the first Indigenous only fair, the Caughnawaga Grand Agricultural and 
Industrial Exhibition served as a political tool, highlighting the transitions to 
Indigenous life taking place in Canada in the decade after the Indian Act. By 
demonstrating to the Euro-settler public the advancement of Indigenous 
peoples as agricultural producers, the Canadian government considered 
it was well on its way to achieving its agenda. Indigenous participants 
displayed agricultural produce and livestock, as well as their progress in 
domestic practices. For organizers, these advancements parlayed into ideas 
of obedience, rationality and order, all elements that could be viewed through 
the care taken with land management, both evidenced in the tidy farm and 
through restructured land allotments surveyed by William McLea Walbank. 
Although Walbank’s extensive survey of Kahnawà:ke common lands and the 
proposal to redistribute and relocate residents was never accomplished, the 
imposition of a renewed political scheme on the reserve challenged existing 
traditional laws. The Exhibition served as a public display of the turning point 
in which the community became politicized under different systems of power: 
traditional Indigenous lifeways and modern Euro-settler politicization. As an 
ambitious young entrepreneur, Walbank viewed his task of surveying the land 

47
(DIS)PLAYING POLITICS
and organizing the Exhibition as his opportunity to be recognized by the elite 
community that had an underlying agenda for reserve lands that could serve 
the needs of a growing Montréal. 
These political manoeuvrings were further complicated by the display at 
the Exhibition of handmade craft objects made by community members. For 
Celia Flints and Louise Kon8aseti Laronde, the display of a silk dress and a silk 
patchwork quilt served their own political objectives. The making of objects 
considered sewn in the Euro-settler style would have pleased event organizers 
and the Indian Agent in that they represented the progress of community 
members in their advancement towards assimilation. The installation of these 
items in a tent reserved for Special items was an affirmation of Indigenous 
progress. However, I maintain that these items were forms of resistance and 
symbols of how community members were playing their own form of politics. 
These makers would have applied their own traditional knowledges and 
methods of making to the silks that were brought home for them by members 
of the lacrosse team; these silks would have represented the meeting 
between lacrosse players and Queen Victoria during their public presentation 
at Windsor Castle. While for some, this presentation would have constituted 
the modernization of lacrosse as a civilized sport, for the players, it would have 
represented an important step in the recognition of Indigenous cultures by the 
Queen of the British Empire. Furthermore, for Flints and Laronde, the dress 
and the quilt presented the material culture of the perseverance of matriarchal 
society. To Indigenous women, the passing on of traditional knowledges 
through these objects indicated, to the community and patrons, the political 
significance of women’s roles to the community. 
Notes
1	 Caughnawaga, one of various Euro-settler iterations of the community of 
Kahnawa:ke. For the purpose of this paper, when referring to the exhibition 
or the lacrosse team, or if quoting from contemporaneous reports, I will use 
Caughnawaga as it would have been used in its original form.
2	 Stuart Murray, ‘Canadian Participation and National Representation at the 
1851 London Great Exhibition and the1855 Paris Exposition Universelle’, The 
Journal of Social History 32, no. 63 (1999): 1–22.
3	 Jeffrey A. Auerbach, ‘Introduction’, in Britain, the Empire, and the World 
at the Great Exhibition of 1851, ed. Jeffrey A. Auerbach and Peter H. 
Hoffenberg (London: Ashgate, 2008), xii.
4	 Kanien’kehá:ka refers to the Indigenous group commonly referred to 
as Mohawk or Iroquois and, in particular, those that live in Kahnawà:ke, 
Akwesasne, and Kanesatake, all communities in the region where Quebec, 
Ontario, and New York State meet.

48
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
5	 ‘Indian agents were almost exclusively non-Indigenous men.’ https​:/​/ww​w​
.the​canad​ianen​cyclo​pedia​.ca​/e​n​/art​icle/​india​n​-age​nts​-i​n​-can​ada
6	 John S. Milloy, A National Crime: The Canadian Government and the 
Residential School System, 1879 to 1986 (Winnipeg: University of Manitoba 
Press, 1999), 18.
7	 Government of Canada, Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs 
for the Year Ended 31st December, 1883 (Ottawa: McLean, Roger & Co., 
1884), 278. http:​/​/cen​tral.​bac​-l​ac​.gc​.ca/.​item/​?id​=1​883​-I​AAR​-R​AAI​&o​p​=pdf​&​
app=​india​naffa​irs
8	 Auerbach, ‘Introduction’, ix–xviii, xii.
9	 Government of Canada, Annual Report 1883, 278.
10	 Ibid., 276–8.
11	 Ian Radforth, ‘Performance, Politics and Representation: Aboriginal People 
and the 1860 Royal Tour of Canada’, Canadian Historical Review 84, no. 1 
(2003): 1–32. See also, Ruth Phillips, Trading Identities: The Souvenir in Native 
North American Art from the Northeast, 1700-1900 (Montréal-Kingston: 
McGill-Queen’s University Press, 1999) and Colin M. Coates, Majesty in 
Canada: Essays on the Role of Royalty (Toronto: Dundurn Press, 2005).
12	 Government of Canada, Annual Report 1883, 279.
13	 Government of Canada, Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs 
for the Year Ended 31st December, 1881 (Ottawa: McLean, Roger & Co., 
1882), 55. http:​/​/cen​tral.​bac​-l​ac​.gc​.ca/.​item/​?id​=1​881​-I​AAR​-R​AAI​&o​p​=pdf​&​
app=​india​naffa​irs
14	 Wilcomb E. Washburn, Red Man’s Land/White Man’s Law: A Study of the 
Past and Present Status of the American Indian (New York: Charles Scribner’s 
Sons, 1971), 144.
15	 Daniel Rueck, ‘Commons, Enclosure, and Resistance in Kahnawà:ke 
Mohawk Territory, 1850-1900’, Canadian Historical Review 95, no. 3 
(September 2014): 361.
16	 Ibid., 362.
17	 The Indigenous reserve community of Kahnawà:ke is located on the south 
shore of the St. Lawrence River, directly across from Lachine, Québec, at 
the part also referred to as Lac St. Louis.
18	 Daniel Rueck, ‘Enclosing the Mohawk Commons: A History of Use-Rights, 
Land-Ownership, and Boundary-Making in Kahnawà:ke’ (Unpublished thesis, 
McGill University, 2013), 233.
19	 Ibid., 190.
20	 M. MacIver to David Laird, 23 December 1873, RG10, vol. 1917, file 2746, 
Library and Archives Canada, Ottawa.
21	 Ibid.
22	 Rueck, ‘Enclosing the Mohawk Commons’, 197.
23	 Government of Canada, Annual Report 1883, 278.

49
(DIS)PLAYING POLITICS
24	 Unknown, ‘William McLea Walbank’, Biographical Dictionary of Architects in 
Canada, 1800-1950, ed. Robert G. Hill. http:​/​/dic​tiona​ryofa​rchit​ectsi​ncana​da​
.or​g​/nod​e​/290​
25	 Government of Canada, Annual Report 1883, 278.
26	 Gerald F. Reid, ‘It Is Our Custom – The Persistence of Kahnawà:ke’s 
Council of Chiefs in the Late Nineteenth and Early Twentieth Centuries’, 
Haudenosaunee: Kahnawà:ke Branch of the Mohawk Nation, Six Nation 
Iroquois Confederacy, http://www.Kahnawà​:kelonghouse​.com​/index​.php​?mid​
=2​&p=3
27	 Government of Canada, Annual Report 1883, 278.
28	 Ibid.
29	 Roderick Kiracofe and Mary Elizabeth Johnson, The American Quilt: A 
History of Cloth and Comfort, 1750-1950 (New York: Clarkson Potter, 1993), 
48.
30	 Government of Canada, Annual Report 1883, 277.
31	 Stan Shillington, ‘1830-1883 Caughnawaga [Down Memory Lane]’, Canadian 
Lacrosse Hall of Fame website, https​:/​/ww​w​.clh​of​.or​g​/ind​ex​.ph​p​/abo​ut​/in​
-the-​news/​news/​22​-me​mory-​lane/​675​-d​own​-m​emory​-lane​-caug​hnawa​ga
32	 C. Richard King, Native Americans in Sports (New York: Routledge, 2004), 
178.
33	 Gillian Poulter, Becoming Native in a Foreign Land: Sport, Visual Culture, and 
Identity in Montréal, 1840-85 (Vancouver: UBC Press, 2009), 155.
34	 Shillington, ‘1830-1883 Caughnawaga [Down Memory Lane]’.
35	 Kahnawà:kero:non is a Mohawk member of the community of Kahnawà:ke.
36	 Marsha MacDowell and C. Kurt Dewhurts, ‘Introduction’, in To Honor and 
Comfort: Native Quiltmaking Traditions, ed. Marsha L. MacDowell and C. 
Kurt Dewhurst (Santa Fe: Museum of New Mexico Press, 1997), ix.
37	 Janet Catherine Berlo and Ruth B. Phillips, Native North American Art, 2nd 
edn (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015 [1998]), 24.
38	 Tatsuya Murakami, ‘Materiality, Regimes of Value, and the Politics of Craft 
Production, Exchange, and Consumption: A Case of Lime Plaster in Teotihuacan, 
Mexico’, Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 42 (June 2016): 56–78, 61.
39	 Charlotte Loppie Reading and Fred Wien, Health Inequalities and the Social 
Determinants of Aboriginal Peoples’ Health (Prince George, BC: National 
Collaborating Centre for Aboriginal Health, 2009), np.
40	 ‘The term residential schools refers to an extensive school system set 
up by the Canadian government and administered by churches that had 
the nominal objective of educating Aboriginal children but also the more 
damaging and equally explicit objectives of indoctrinating them into Euro-
Canadian and Christian ways of living and assimilating them into mainstream 
Canadian society. The residential school system operated from the 1880s 
into the closing decades of the twentieth century. The system forcibly 
separated children from their families for extended periods of time and 
forbade them to acknowledge their Aboriginal heritage and culture or to 

50
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
speak their own languages.’ https​:/​/in​digen​ousfo​undat​ions.​arts.​ubc​.c​a​/the​
_resi​denti​al​_sc​hool_​syste​m/ 
41	 Kari Dawn Wuttunee, Jennifer Altenbert, and Sarah Flicker, ‘Red Ribbon 
Skirts and Cultural Resurgence’, Girlhood Studies 12, no. 3 (Winter 2019): 
63–79, 67.
42	 Kanien’kehá:ka is Mohawk for People of the Place of the Flint and refers to 
members of the three Mohawk communities, Kahnawà:ke, Akwesasne, and 
Kanesatake.
43	 John L. Tobias, ‘Protection, Civilization, Assimilation: An Outline History 
of Canada’s Indian Policy’, in Sweet Promises: A Reader on Indian White 
Relations in Canada, ed. J. R. Miller (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 
1991), 127–44.
44	 Government of Canada, An Act for the Gradual Enfranchisement of Indians, 
1869. https:///www​.a​adnc-​aandc​.gc​.c​a​/DAM​/DAM-​INTER​-HQ​/S​TAGIN​G​/tex​te​
-te​xt​/A6​9c6​_1​10010​00102​05​_en​g​.pdf​
45	 Marie Battiste, Visioning a Mi’kmaw Humanities (Sydney: Cape Breton 
University Press, 2016), 6.
46	 Government of Canada, Annual Report 1883, 277.
47	 Ibid.
48	 Ibid., 279.
49	 Alex Jacobs, ‘The Quiltmakers of Akwesasne’, in To Honor and Comfort: 
Native Quiltmaking Traditions, ed. Marsha L. MacDowell and C. Kurt 
Dewhurst (Santa Fe: Museum of New Mexico Press, 1997), 145–52, 151.
50	 Sherry Farrell Racette, ‘Sewing Ourselves Together: Clothing, Decorative Arts 
and the Expression of Métis and Half-Breed Identity’ (Unpublished thesis, 
University of Manitoba, 2004), 232, 241.
51	 Lisa Binkley, ‘Piecing Heritage in Transition: The Lakota Star Quilt as a Symbol 
of Pan-Indigeneity’, in Craft and Heritage: Intersections in Critical Studies 
and Practice, ed. Elaine Cheasley Paterson and Susan Surette (London: 
Bloomsbury Visual Arts, forthcoming, 2021).

3
Indigenous craft is political
Making and remaking 
colonizer–colonized relations 
in Taiwan
Geoffrey Gowlland
I
n this chapter I discuss the making of contemporary craft objects by the 
Indigenous (Austronesian speakers) People of Taiwan. More than the case 
study, my aim is to make a general claim about the political significance of 
indigenous crafts that is applicable to other contexts. Specifically, I will suggest 
how we can re-think the meaning of ‘indigenous craft’ to make the concept 
useful analytically in research on indigenous cultural rights and definitions of 
indigenous identity. 
When I first visited Taiwan1 to conduct research on (non-indigenous) 
ceramics, I soon became aware of the crafts and arts of the country’s 
Indigenous People. In Taiwan, sixteen ethnic groups making up about 2 per 
cent of the population have been officially recognized as ‘Indigenous’ by the 
government; these people are Austronesian speakers, and their ancestors 
inhabited the island of Formosa (making up most of what is now Taiwan) and 
the island of Lanyu before the arrival of Chinese settlers starting in the 1500s. 
Indigenous material culture is today visible in a number of venues. Certain 
Indigenous villages have become tourist attractions, proffering performances, 
traditional food, and, invariably, various crafts for sale. In the main cities, a 
number of museums display past and contemporary Indigenous crafts, shops 

52
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
sell Indigenous craft and design products, and popular cultural events promote 
artisans’ work. Indigenous crafts, such as the iconic Tao canoes or Paiwan 
pottery, are also visible in the imagery promoted by the government for tourism 
or as national symbols. It is clear that crafts play a number of specific roles 
for Taiwan’s Indigenous People. Crafts provide sources of income, as tourist 
art, but also as designer clothing items, furniture or artworks. Occasionally, 
craft objects serve a more decisively political role, for instance when they 
make their appearance in protests. Similarly, the canoes of the Tao people 
have become symbols of Indigenous resistance, and are displayed during 
protests against the dumping of nuclear waste on Tao land, Lanyu island. In at 
least one instance, crafts have supported claims in the politics of recognition 
of Indigenous groups. And as I will discuss, the Taiwanese government has 
political interests in displaying and promoting Indigenous material culture 
in order to sustain claims of national identity. In other words, beyond the 
commercial interests of producing crafts for sale, crafts are often – and I 
contend, always – political.
These different roles of craft are not unique to Taiwan’s Indigenous 
People. With a quick review of the literature, it appears that there are 
roughly two categories of scholarly articles addressing the crafts of 
indigenous people worldwide: the first tends to link craft activities and 
products to expressions of indigenous ‘identity’, while the second group of 
publications concerns income opportunities for marginalized communities, 
or an appraisal of the benefits or consequences of marketing craft, for 
instance, to tourists. Critical-minded versions of these two strands of 
arguments point to the politics of heritage: in the first category, we see 
how crafts are instrumental in shaping images of indigeneity that are useful 
for the political claims of indigenous people. In the second, scholars point to 
ways in which the past can be commoditized, and to the unequal relations 
of power between producers and consumers such as tourists. Yet even in 
critically minded discussions, too often indigenous crafts are characterized 
as ‘traditional’.
Why are craft practices so significant for indigenous people? What is 
it about the power of things, and the power of making things, that fit so 
well with the agendas, strategies and needs of contemporary indigenous 
people? Although it will only scratch the surface of the issue, this chapter 
will address the complexity of the purposes of crafts, while at the same 
time point to how the diversity of forms and purposes of crafts serve some 
common purpose. I will discuss this purpose in terms of recent debates in 
indigenous studies, and suggest that indigenous crafts are particular kinds 
of crafts not because they are ‘traditional’ as such, but simply because they 
are made by indigenous people. Once we accept a relational definition of 
indigeneity understood as people standing in relation to particular forms of 

53
INDIGENOUS CRAFT IS POLITICAL
power (as I discuss in the next section), then this implies that indigenous 
crafts are particular kinds of crafts because they have a mediative role in 
relations between indigenous people and non-indigenous powers such as 
the state or the market. In this perspective, indigenous crafts are anything 
but traditional: they are innovative because craft objects and craft practices 
are means to continuously adapt to the tensions between the need of 
indigenous people to adapt to life in a settler society, and the desire for 
cultural resilience.
The chapter proposes to do two things: it starts with a suggestion for a 
redefinition of the meaning of ‘indigenous craft’, and goes on to consider how 
this redefinition can reveal the power of crafts for indigenous people. The first 
section will explain my reasons for redefinition, highlighting Clifford’s2 concept 
of ‘articulation’ as he applies it to indigenous heritage. I then look at crafts 
in the history of Taiwanese colonialism up to the present day, and go on to 
consider the significance of craft revitalization practices among Indigenous 
Taiwanese, in political and commercial terms. 
Constructive ambiguities: 
‘indigenous’ and ‘crafts’
The terms ‘craft’ and ‘indigenous’ are both ambiguous, nebulous and 
contested. In this first theoretical section, I argue that this makes the terms 
particularly interesting as tools of enquiry. One might start by noticing 
that what ‘craft’ and ‘indigenous’ have in common, at least in the popular 
imagination, is that they tend to be equated with ‘tradition’. Crafts tend to 
be perceived as outmoded, ‘traditional’ practices that are now replaced by 
more efficient and ‘modern’ processes and products. Similarly, when the 
term ‘indigenous’ is invoked, at least outside of academia, it tends to identify 
people who are pursuing ‘traditional’ ways of life and are resilient against the 
changes imposed by ‘modernity’ (however ‘modern’ is defined). Both ‘crafts’ 
and ‘indigenous’ then tend to be defined in terms of what is ‘non-modern’. 
We then get another striking similarity between the two concepts, namely 
that they are both defined by what they are not. Despite attempts at defining 
what craft is in essence,3 ‘craft’ remains ambiguous, and it is easier and 
more constructive to define it through contrasts: one might speak of craft to 
distinguish it from art, or mass-produced items, etc. (though in all cases, the 
lines of demarcation are blurred4). We might want to give up entirely on the 
term ‘craft’, but I would argue there is something useful analytically in this 
‘not-something-else’ concept, and this is why the term has not gone out of 
fashion. When we talk of craft in the twenty-first century, it is, for instance, 

54
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
often to signal the rejection of mass-produced items, or an expressed desire 
by people to be makers rather than consumers – in short, a rejection of the 
principles and negative consequences of capitalism. Craft is that which is not-
not-craft, and this makes it a politically powerful concept.
‘Indigeneity’ similarly identifies difference and distinction. To be indigenous 
is in the simplest terms to be non-non-indigenous. International declarations 
and conventions have established internationally recognized principles (ILO 
Convention 169, UN Declaration of the Rights of Indigenous People), and 
tried to identify the common characteristics that define indigeneity. Yet in 
scholarship, indigeneity is most usefully defined relationally.5 Specifically, 
we define indigenous people as groups standing in unequal power relations 
in settler societies, or in relation to market forces, and who affirm cultural 
resilience and collective rights to land. Despite the lack of fixed definitions, the 
concepts of indigenous and indigeneity are significant analytically, to identify 
movements of people who rally behind the same idea of indigeneity at a 
global level, and to address relations of power that involve claims to cultural 
distinctiveness, rights to land, and the need to counter cultural assimilation. 
The promotion of indigenous identities is a political act; it encapsulates claims 
of resilience against the powers of the state, of assimilation and of capitalism. 
It is curious that even in cases where scholars are sympathetic to this 
relational definition of indigeneity, the term ‘indigenous crafts’ is invoked in 
terms of what is ‘traditional’. Indigenous crafts are seen as the crafts that 
indigenous people (whether defined in essential or relational terms) have 
‘traditionally’ produced, or that manifest some continuity with these past 
practices. Yet my argument here is that indigenous crafts are fundamentally 
innovative precisely because they are made by indigenous people. If we 
define indigeneity in relational and constantly evolving terms, then indigenous 
crafts can only be defined in terms of novel and constantly evolving practices 
that make sense of, and respond to, evolving situations. I would then define 
indigenous crafts as the material objects and practices that serve the purposes 
of indigeneity, namely to negotiate relations with the powers of the state and 
market. 
James Clifford proposes a particularly useful concept with which to think 
about indigenous heritage: the notion of ‘articulation’.6 With this concept, 
Clifford finds a middle ground between two views of indigenous revivals, as 
either continuity of past practices, or ‘invented tradition’. The term describes 
how indigenous people around the world negotiate the continuity of practices 
at the same time as they learn to adapt to the agendas of state and other 
institutions: ‘this is hegemony at work: interactive and negotiated, but 
ultimately on terms dictated by the more powerful’.7 Indigenous people are 
constantly having to ‘articulate’ the demands imposed on them by the powers 
of the settler society with their own desire for cultural continuity. Claims to 

55
INDIGENOUS CRAFT IS POLITICAL
indigeneity – and indigenous practices – are always (by definition, for Clifford) 
the result of an articulation of this tension.
Arguably, crafts do not exist before colonization for indigenous people, 
and the notion of ‘craft’ itself, as understood today, has a relatively 
short history in the West, dating back to the seventeenth century when 
contrasts were established between creativity and repetition, freedom 
and determination, and ultimately art and craft.8 The very idea of ‘craft’ 
is a hegemonic one, a foreign concept that might become accepted by 
the colonized. Colonizers evaluate and judge local crafts based on their 
own definitions of art or technology, their own aesthetics and ideas about 
social evolution. Later I will discuss the historical connection that indirectly 
imported the ideas and aesthetics of the Arts and Crafts movement of 
nineteenth-century Europe to Taiwan, via the Japanese Mingei movement, 
and was used to make judgements of value regarding Austronesian 
material culture.9 
When ‘craft’ is invoked by the colonizer, it is making a claim to difference 
when characterizing the material culture of the colonized as non-modern or 
perceived to be inferior to colonizer or modern technologies. Conversely, 
the idea of craft can, as I will discuss, be appropriated by the colonized, as 
a marker of what is different to imported artefacts and technologies, thus 
serving to articulate the need to adapt to the requirements of living in a settler 
society, and the desire for resilience. ‘Indigenous crafts’ is then by definition 
political, and relational. 
One might then object that the definition of indigenous craft that I am 
proposing is just as artificial and ethnocentric as definitions imported and 
at times imposed on indigenous people. The point I want to argue, with 
reference to my material on Taiwan, is that by starting with a different 
definition of ‘indigenous craft’, one can approach a topic of study in a 
different way, and understand how material culture and processes of making 
things can be powerful for indigenous movements, and why they are such a 
significant part of the politics of indigeneity. So instead of seeking another 
term to identify certain material practices of indigenous people, I prefer to 
use the notion of ‘indigenous craft’, a phrase that is powerful in identifying 
in the negative what it can be: non-non-indigenous, and not-not-craft. 
‘Indigenous craft’ is a concept for understanding the uses of the making, 
promotion and circulation of forms of material culture by people who make 
claims as indigenous people. With this new definition of indigenous crafts 
as articulation, I turn in the next section to my case study, where I explore 
how the material culture (some of which is eventually identified as ‘craft’) 
of Austronesian-speaking people (later officially recognized as ‘Indigenous’) 
has played particular roles in the history of relations between Indigenous 
People and the colonial state. 

56
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
Colonizing crafts in Taiwan: Japanese, 
nationalist and multiculturalist agendas
Indigenous People represent 2 per cent of the overall population of 
Taiwan; with ongoing claims on the part of ‘assimilated’ populations 
who until recently identified as Han Chinese, this figure might soon be 
revised upwards. There is great linguistic and cultural diversity among the 
Austronesian groups. Linguistic and archaeological research indicates that 
Taiwan has been inhabited by Austronesians for thousands of years, and 
the island might have been the original land from which the Austronesians 
spread through the Pacific and Indian Oceans.10 These scientific arguments 
were instrumental in the successful claims of Taiwan’s Austronesian 
populations to be recognized as Indigenous People, as opposed to minority 
ethnic groups, in the 1990s.11
Material culture has played various roles in the relations between 
Austronesians and different colonizers. There is a history of relations of trade 
in goods, such as the glass beads that today are a heritage item among the 
Paiwan and Rukai people. But I want to start this historical discussion with 
the Japanese colonizers (1895–1945), who were the first to subjugate the 
entire Austronesian population of Taiwan, not only in the plains (Austronesian 
populations there were, by the time of the Japanese era, mostly assimilated) 
but in the as yet unconquered mountain interior. Previously, China’s Qing 
dynasty had created a boundary between the mountains and the plains 
populations; the government had little interest in the mountains, given the 
limited opportunities for agriculture. In contrast, the Japanese were interested 
in the resources of the mountainous interior, in particular hardwoods. As 
part of their subjugation of the Austronesian people, the Japanese banned 
such material practices as the weavings of the Atayal people,12 or the carvings 
of the Paiwan people (as my Paiwan interlocutors explained to me). These 
bans were motivated by the perception that they posed risks to the authority 
of the colonizers. Atayal weavings were not simply clothing, but the practice 
of weaving was essential to definitions of Atayal womanhood, and related to 
the practice of tattooing which was also banned for fear of subversion. For the 
Paiwan, carvings – on wood and slate – were the prerogative of chieftains, 
and a ban on carvings was imposed as a form of control of the Paiwan political 
elites. 
In parallel to the often-brutal subjugation of the Austronesians, the 
Japanese also had a fascination for Austronesian material culture. This played 
out in two fields. In the first, Japanese scholars in the 1930s were influenced 
by Western anthropological ideas,13 and anthropologists and other scholars 
became concerned with studying and salvaging cultures that the colonial 

57
INDIGENOUS CRAFT IS POLITICAL
government was busy destroying.14 As evidence of this interest, museums 
in Taiwan and Japan present rich collections of Austronesian artefacts; 
these collections also attest to the pillage of artefacts from Austronesian 
communities. The second field of interest in material culture came from the 
Japanese Mingei, or ‘folk craft’, movement15 that was taking shape around 
the same time. Mingei, meaning folk art, was inspired by the Arts and Crafts 
movement in Britain. Japanese artists and scholars were enthralled by the 
Austronesian artefacts displayed at colonial exhibitions in the early 1900s. 
Mingei theory became closely tied to the Japanese nationalist project, 
within which expressions of local identity were promoted as examples of 
the richness of the Japanese empire,16 also becoming a means to transform 
Austronesians into Japanese citizens.17 Crafts, as other Austronesian 
expressions, became signs of exoticism and diversity; they were tamed 
at the same time as expressions of culture deemed dangerous or contrary 
to the Japanese rule were banned. Arguably, Austronesian material culture 
became ‘craft’ when it lost its power, when the Atayal weavings were seen in 
museums or as tourist curios, rather than objects that made girls into women 
and ensured a good afterlife. 
After the 1945 defeat of Japan, the Republic of China took control of 
Taiwan. Taiwan was later under military dictatorship from 1949 to 1987. 
There is a saying that the Japanese broke the stem of the flower that is 
Indigenous culture, but the Kuomintang (Chinese Nationalist Party) uprooted 
the flower. During that time, the Kuomintang government imposed policies 
of sinicization over the entire native population, Austronesians and Han 
Chinese alike.18 This included the imposition of Mandarin Chinese as the only 
language of the nation (a foreign language even to Taiwanese Chinese), and 
heavy-handed assimilationist policies aimed at eradicating ‘superstitions’ and 
‘improving’ the living conditions of Austronesians. Among other practices, 
local officials encouraged or imposed the destruction of forms of material 
culture, for instance intensifying the Japanese practice of destroying the 
carved images of the Paiwan. One of my Paiwan interlocutors told me how 
schoolteachers, in collaboration with local police officers, would promise 
candy to children in return for stealing their parents’ artefacts which would 
then be destroyed. 
In the context of colonialism, the notion of craft was created to tame 
the material culture of Austronesians; banning or destroying the material 
culture that was not tamed in this way was an instrument of control. 
Action on material culture is political action.19 In the next section, I turn to 
Austronesian craft revitalization practices, and discuss how such practices 
are just as political in countering or articulating the effects of assimilation, 
while contemporary governments find their own purposes for expressions 
of Indigenous identity.

58
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
Craft articulations
Taiwan’s Indigenous movement began in the 1980s, and gained momentum 
after the end of martial law in 1987 and the democratization of Taiwan with 
the first democratic elections in 1996. Gradual advances in the recognition 
of Indigenous rights led to the establishment of the Council of Aboriginal 
Affairs (later re-named Council of Indigenous Peoples) in 1996; the Indigenous 
Peoples Basic Law came into effect in 2005. More recently, in 2016, President 
Tsai Ing-wen addressed a formal apology to the Indigenous Peoples of Taiwan. 
In the new turn to recognition of Indigenous rights, the momentum of 
Indigenous movements, and promotion of multiculturalism, Indigenous crafts 
took on new significance, both for Indigenous People themselves, and for 
politicians. Two parties, the Kuomintang, which was the single ruling party 
during martial law, and the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), the opposition 
party, both wanted to distance themselves from the martial law era.20 For the 
Kuomintang, a discourse on localism – local expressions of culture – was a 
means to avoid the fraught debate about Taiwan being part of China that was 
previously promoted by the same Kuomintang party throughout martial law. In 
the same way, the DPP party promoted local expressions of culture, but for a 
rather different purpose: multiculturalism was a way for the party to make claims 
about Taiwan being distinct culturally, and therefore politically, from China. Within 
the political discourses and debates of both parties, Indigenous revitalization 
projects could thrive, among them projects to revitalize craft practices that had 
been discouraged and abandoned during the assimilationist era. 
Crafts can be deeply political for Indigenous People in Taiwan.21 Artefacts being 
revived today are some of the same that were actively repressed by past colonial 
powers, such as Atayal weavings and Paiwan carvings as mentioned above. In 
the perspective of this difficult past, the very existence of revitalization practices 
is political: remaking artefacts that in the past were considered uncivilized or 
evil is an act of countering repression and the effects of cultural assimilation. 
Revitalization is not simply an expression of ‘identity’; acts of making are not 
passive ‘expressions’ but ways of engaging with structures of power and 
lingering effects of assimilation. They are lingering because hegemonic ideas 
about civilization and the backwardness of Indigenous culture were internalized 
by a generation during the martial law era. Apart from some early pioneers, the 
key actors in revitalization projects are individuals in their 40s or 50s, who are 
able to bridge two generations: they are still fluent in their native language and 
able to talk with elders (who seldom speak Chinese) to learn about stories and 
practices of the past. In turn, these same people are fluent in Chinese, and can 
talk to youth, few of whom speak their Indigenous language. 
One of the better-known craft revitalization initiatives is that of Paiwan artist 
Sakuliu Pavavalung. He is probably the person who has contributed the most 

59
INDIGENOUS CRAFT IS POLITICAL
to cultural revival, not only through his own work, but by teaching youth in his 
community and travelling around Taiwan to foment revitalization work among 
other groups. One of Sakuliu’s first projects was to restore the production of 
Paiwan pottery. This is a case of ‘revival’ rather than revitalization: the Paiwan 
had not been producing pottery for perhaps centuries, and rather acquired pots 
through trade. Besides recovering and figuring out the techniques of pottery, 
talking to makers from other ethnic groups and finding inspiration in books about 
African and Central American pottery, a key aspect of Sakuliu’s research was 
to interview elders about the meanings of the range of motifs that appear on 
heirloom pots. Thus the production of new objects was combined with research 
(the Chinese word is yanjiu). The initiative for Sakuliu was at first primarily a 
cultural and educational one, and he gathered youth from the community to 
learn about pottery and other practices. Proof of the success of his initiatives in 
the 1990s is that many of the children he taught have become successful artists 
and artisans. Pots were produced for purchase both within the community as 
wedding gifts, and outside of the community as tourist art (Figure 3.1). 
Sakuliu appears to have set the standard for the revitalization of craft objects, 
by conducting extensive research, and talking to elders about practices and 
symbology. ‘Research’ has become a way of evaluating the work of artists 
and artisans and is deemed to be at the heart of revitalization projects. A 
consequence of this is that Indigenous artists and artisans, at least among 
the Paiwan (the people I am most familiar with), have acquired a new status 
FIGURE 3.1  Ceramic pot made by Paiwan artist Masegseg Ruladen, on the model 
of those revived by Sakuliu Pavavalung. Photo by the author.

60
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
FIGURE 3.2  Members of the Kavalan Indigenous group (Hsin-she village) 
demonstrating the preparation of fibres from the banana plant at a cultural centre in 
Hualien City, Taiwan. Photo by the author. 
in their communities, not only as makers but as political figures: they have in 
many instances become authorities on their culture and tradition, and at times, 
certain tensions have developed between them and the traditional holders 
of cultural knowledge, the chieftains. Artists and artisans are often also the 
representatives of their communities, for instance being invited, as Sakuliu 
often is, by museums to represent their culture through art and knowledge.22 
Craft revitalization practices frequently go hand in hand with other claims 
to Indigenous rights. One case in point is the revitalization of the banana fibre 
weaving of the Kavalan. One of the prime motivators for the Kavalan was to 
claim status as a distinct ethnic group – previously, they had been grouped 
with the more numerous Amis people. In their petition to the government for 
recognition as a separate indigenous group, one factor was the revival of a 
form of weaving that, judging by museum collections, was only produced by 
the Kavalan. The revitalization of banana fibre weaving involved asking elders 
to recall the process of production. After its successful use in their petition to 
the government, the weaving practice has taken on a life of its own. Within 
the community, weavings are worn during the harvest festivals; outside of 
the community, the Kavalan demonstrate the preparation of fibres at cultural 
events, and sell artefacts as design and tourist art (Figure  3.2).

61
INDIGENOUS CRAFT IS POLITICAL
In a way, these processes of revitalization are re-infusing objects with the 
powers they once had before they became tamed as crafts under colonial 
rule. And yet, these forms of craft are still ‘safe’ insofar as they are consistent 
with contemporary state policies that promote multiculturalism. In this 
respect Barclay23 has argued that a recent major exhibition of crafts, Rainbow 
and Dragonfly, held in 2014 at the National Taiwan Museum, played into the 
tropes of colonialism. Recalling Clifford, this is a reminder that indigenous 
revitalization projects are always processes of articulation: they express the 
resilience of indigenous people, yet have to operate within structures and 
hegemony imposed by the state or other powerful actors.
In other instances, creating craft products is more directly aimed at providing 
a source of income. But because Indigenous crafts derive at least some of 
their value through their association with Indigenous cultures – they reproduce 
patterns, themes or functional objects that are promoted as ‘traditional’ – the 
lines between cultural identity and marketization tend to be blurred. A comment 
that one Indigenous artist made to me during an interview captures this point. 
He stated quite bluntly that he and his fellow Indigenous artists and craftspeople 
were in the business of ‘selling taboo’. I translate, somewhat inaccurately, the 
Paiwan word palisi as taboo, (palisi is usually translated as jinji in Chinese which 
in turn is translated as ‘taboo’ in English). The artist implied that his work used 
designs and motifs regulated by ‘palisi’ – a set of customary laws – to make 
items for sale. The issue for him and others – at least among the Paiwan I am 
most familiar with – was not so much the ethical issues related to selling cultural 
items that should not be commercialized, but rather that selling such objects had 
unintended repercussions for ownership and rights of use of designs. What was 
palisi was not so much the design itself, but rather who can or cannot reproduce 
the design, and once reproduced, who can acquire the object. The phrase ‘selling 
taboo’ captures the bind artisans are in, as they have both responsibilities for 
promoting their culture to those outside their communities and to local youth, at 
the same time as they have to earn a living to continue their work. This leads to, at 
times, difficult choices and accusations by others of privileging cash over culture. 
Cash itself is ‘articulation’ in Clifford’s sense. There are many possibilities 
afforded by income: perhaps most importantly, as expressed by artisans, 
income opportunities for youth that preclude their need to migrate to the 
cities to find jobs. This also counters the widespread problem of dissolution of 
Indigenous communities, particularly in the mountains. 
Conclusion
This chapter started by asking why craft practices, whether as part of cultural 
revitalization movements or commercial enterprises, are so often significant 

62
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
within indigenous movements. I suggested several answers to this question 
relating to the Taiwanese case: these all have to do with efforts to find 
articulation within relations of power in a settler society. To understand the 
multifaceted role of crafts, it is prudent to consider crafts, not as ‘traditional’, 
or at times ‘inauthentic’ objects and practices, or as simply the material 
output of indigenous people, but as processes and resulting artefacts that 
serve political purposes. They are things and processes that are agentive, 
in Gell’s sense,24 of articulating relations between indigenous people and 
either the state or the market. As a result, rather than ‘traditional’, indigenous 
crafts should be approached as fundamentally innovative material practices, 
in that they serve to constantly engage and work with changing relations of 
power between indigenous communities and the state, the market or non-
indigenous populations.
To identify things as ‘crafts’ is to draw contrasts with things that are not 
craft. The Arts and Crafts movement drew this contrast with mass-produced 
items, or even with crafts that did not fit with the movement’s principles, such 
as eighteenth-century veneering.25 Indigenous crafts similarly draw a contrast 
between indigenous and non-indigenous things, and ultimately, people. As 
such, they are important in the politics of resilience of indigenous people. Even 
so, makers of indigenous crafts also act within the hegemonic framework of 
the colonizer, accepting hegemonic ideas of modernity or accepting to work 
within the terms dictated by the market. 
Notes
1	 Research in Taiwan was conducted with my wife, cultural historian Marzia 
Varutti; we consider the data gathered together as co-owned.
2	 James Clifford, ‘Indigenous Articulations’, The Contemporary Pacific 13, no. 2 
(2001): 467–90, https://doi​.org​/10​.1353​/cp​.2001​.0046.
3	 E.g. David Pye, The Nature and Art of Workmanship (London: Cambridge 
University Press, 1968).
4	 Glenn Adamson, Thinking Through Craft (London: Berg Publishers, 2007).
5	 Marisol de la Cadena and Orin Starn, ed., Indigenous Experience Today 
(Oxford and New York: Berg, 2007); James Clifford, Returns (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 2013).
6	 Clifford, ‘Indigenous Articulations’; Clifford, Returns, 45–6.
7	 Clifford, Returns, 46.
8	 Tim Ingold, The Perception of the Environment: Essays on Livelihood, 
Dwelling and Skill (London: Routledge, 2000), 350; R. Coleman, The Art of 
Work: An Epitaph to Skill (London: Pluto Press, 1988), 7.

63
INDIGENOUS CRAFT IS POLITICAL
9	 Y. Kikuchi, Refracted Modernity: Visual Culture and Identity in Colonial Taiwan 
(Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 2007).
10	 David Blundell, Austronesian Taiwan: Linguistics, History, Ethnology, 
and Prehistory (Berkeley, CA: Phoebe A. Hearst Museum with Shung Ye 
Museum, 2000).
11	 M. Rudolph, ‘The Emergence of the Concept of “Ethnic Group” in Taiwan 
and the Role of Taiwan’s Austronesians in the Construction of Taiwanese 
Identity’, Historiography East and West 2, no. 1 (2004): 86–115.
12	 Mami Yoshimura, ‘Weaving and Identity of the Atayal in Wulai, Taiwan’ (MA 
thesis, University of Waterloo, 2007).
13	 Paul D. Barclay, ‘An Historian Among the Anthropologists: The In l Kanori 
Revival and the Legacy of Japanese Colonial Ethnography in Taiwan’, 
Japanese Studies 21, no. 2 (2001): 117–36, https://doi​.org​/10​.1080​/713683805.
14	 Chia-Yu Hu, ‘Taiwanese Aboriginal Art and Artifacts. Entangled Images of 
Colonization and Modernization’, in Refracted Modernity: Visual Culture and 
Identity in Colonial Taiwan, ed. Yūko Kikuchi (Honolulu: University of Hawaii 
Press, 2007).
15	 Y. Kikuchi, Japanese Modernisation and Mingei Theory: Cultural Nationalism 
and Oriental Orientalism (London and New York: Routledge, 2004); Hu, 
‘Taiwanese Aboriginal Art and Artifacts’.
16	 Kikuchi, Japanese Modernisation and Mingei Theory.
17	 Leo T. S. Ching, Becoming ‘Japanese’ (Berkeley, CA: University of California 
Press, 2001).
18	 Allen Chun, ‘From Nationalism to Nationalizing: Cultural Imagination and 
State Formation in Postwar Taiwan’, The Australian Journal of Chinese Affairs, 
no. 31 (January 1994): 49. https://doi​.org​/10​.2307​/2949900; Ketty W. Chen, 
‘Disciplining Taiwan: The Kuomintang’s Methods of Control during the White 
Terror Era (1947-1987)’, Taiwan International Studies Quarterly 4, no. 4 
(2008): 185–210.
19	 Jean-Pierre Warnier, ‘A Praxeological Approach to Subjectivation in a Material 
World’, Journal of Material Culture 6, no. 1 (1 March 2001): 5–24.
20	 P. Kerim Friedman, ‘The Hegemony of the Local Taiwanese Multiculturalism 
and Indigenous Identity Politics’, Boundary 2 45, no. 3 (1 August 2018): 
79–105, https://doi​.org​/10​.1215​/01903659​-6915593.
21	 Marzia Varutti, ‘Crafting Heritage: Artisans and the Making of Indigenous 
Heritage in Contemporary Taiwan’, International Journal of Heritage Studies 
21, no. 3 (2015): 1036–49.
22	 Geoffrey Gowlland and Marzia Varutti, ‘Museums as Sites of Indigenous 
Revitalisation: Dialogues between National Museums, Indigenous Artisans, 
and Indigenous Communities in Taiwan’, in Unpacking the Museum in/of 
Asia, ed. Yunci Cai (London: Routledge, forthcoming).
23	 Paul D. Barclay, ‘Tangled Up in Red: Textiles, Trading Posts and the 
Emergence of Indigenous Modernity in Japanese Taiwan’, in Japanese 
Taiwan: Colonial Rule and its Contested Legacy, ed. Andrew Morris (London 
and New York: Bloomsbury Press, 2015), 49–74.

64
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
24	 Alfred Gell, Art and Agency: An Anthropological Theory (Oxford: Clarendon, 
1998).
25	 Peter Betjemann, ‘Craft and the Limits of Skill: Handicrafts Revivalism and 
the Problem of Technique’, Journal of Design History 21, no. 2 (20 June 
2008): 183–93. https://doi​.org​/10​.1093​/jdh​/epn011.

4
Coexistence of craft and 
design in Turkey as two 
separate epistemes
Çig˘dem Kaya
I
n their essay, ‘Designs on Craft’,1 Ory DeNicola and Wilkinson-Weber 
consider the discourse in India surrounding designers as modern and design 
as a cognitive process, while craft is seen as handwork. They state: ‘the 
association of designers with modernity is so taken for granted it is understood 
as a right and responsibility for designers, as modern (and model) citizens, to 
be both benefactor and protector of the “unmodern” maker (printer, tailor, 
embroiderer)’.2 Their research posits that this prevailing perception bolsters 
differences of class and power between designers and craftspeople, with 
designers as ‘developed’ assisting the underdeveloped.
This article examines craft in relation to design in Turkey where a similar 
hierarchical discourse has predominated. In Turkey, the relationship between 
craft and design has evolved based on factors such as craft heritage, being 
a non-Western modernity, coming late to industrialization, the influence of 
globalization and exposure to digitalization. In what follows, these factors are 
elements in a personal narrative of practice-led research contextualized mainly 
with French theory on production and consumption in everyday life.
Initially I am conceptualizing the mobilization of craft in the Turkish political 
economy, where it is argued that products are valorized by design. In this 
agenda, a hierarchy is created between craft and design. Modern design is 
seen as superior to craft, and craft is valorized by design’s, and designers’, 
intervention. Later in the essay I challenge this argument and propose that 

66
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
craft and design collaboration should be a practice of relationship making.3 
This entails letting go of professionalism and corporatism to investigate craft 
as a way of doing, per se. 
Craft and design: vernacular versus industrial
The hierarchy between design and craft has been challenged in the international 
literature. Craft has more to offer than traditional patterns, colours and 
materials as widely argued by distinguished scholars such as Richard Sennett 
in The Craftsman,4 Glenn Adamson in Thinking Through Craft,5 Susan Luckman 
in Craft and the Creative Economy6 and Malcolm McCullough in Abstracting 
Craft: The Practiced Digital Hand.7 Going deeper than semantic links between 
visual signs and their latent meaning, I am interested in eliciting modes of 
making in craft and reframing them with an industrial design vocabulary, my 
field of expertise. 
Choosing to examine industrial design outside industry is part of a larger 
investigation of everyday life in the discipline of sociology. Karl Marx indicated 
that commodities are part of a socioeconomic system.8 Historically, their 
production resulted in the alienation of labour, thereby influencing the Arts 
and Crafts movement. In Critique of Everyday Life, LeFebvre stated that the 
everyday contained ‘human wealth’9 outside mass-produced modern life.10 
According to Michel de Certeau, to understand the various dynamics of 
material culture at play, everyday life should be examined.11 And semiologist 
and writer Roland Barthes showed the cultural meanings of everyday objects 
in modern life.12 Thus, the everyday – what people do as part of their normal 
routine which, in some societies, includes craft – is a canvas that is ignored in 
the modern era of mass production. 
Trained as an industrial designer with this theoretical background, I searched 
the knowledge and skill set of industrial design outside of industry13: in craft, 
in handcrafts, in designer-makers’ practices and in the activity of making in 
everyday life. This chain of research indicated that in the Turkish context, the 
encounter of craft and design is an encounter of class, as is the coupling of 
design and industrialization over the handmade. Both are indicators of political 
elitism.
Turkey’s craft history
The context of the stream of research presented in this article on Turkish craft 
is both nurtured and inhibited by tremendously old and different traditions. The 

67
COEXISTENCE OF CRAFT AND DESIGN IN TURKEY
craft tradition and heritage in Anatolia has been extensively studied in Turkish 
folklore studies, with ample evidence that the craft tradition practised by both 
men and women dates back to Neolithic Anatolia.14 American folklore scholar 
Henry Glassie authored Turkish Traditional Art Today, documenting his fieldwork 
conducted in Turkish villages using methods of ethnography and oral history.15 
Glassie stated that crafts in Turkey include ancient arts of saddlery, carpentry, 
pottery, masonry, metalsmithing, felt making, woodworking, basketry, copper 
working, knife making, stone working, bookbinding, calligraphy and marbling, 
among numerously varied arts of shaping materials.16
For the urban context, Gökhan Karakuş states that the guild system has 
influenced the production culture in contemporary Turkey, ‘a largely urban and 
industrial society’.17 According to Karakuş, the Ottoman guild system heritage 
is an important part of Turkish contemporary trade and craft.18 For example, 
crafts workshops are typically present in clusters in today’s Istanbul as a 
heritage of the Byzantine and later Ottoman guild systems where workshops 
were in proximity.19 Another example is Istanbul’s jewellery production that 
was based on the guild tradition and system, situated in close proximity in one 
building (bedestans), as documented by Halil Inalcik in his historical studies of 
Istanbul.20 Orlandi and Kösebay Erkan note that the workshops in the jewellery 
sector in the Grand Bazaar in Istanbul are today still connected not only by 
means of vicinity but also by co-production of products.21 
Both Turan and Karakuş state that craft disappeared from the design scene 
in Turkey until the twentieth century.22 After more than a decade of research 
on craft and its knowledge in Turkey, the authors assert that, in the modern 
design milieu, the inclusion of craft is rare, and the design work integrating 
craft with traditional motifs, materials and techniques is avant-garde, if at 
all present. Turan identified discussions in the 1930s in Turkey that were 
both for and against craft production versus industrial production as part of 
the development discourse.23 Industrialization was rapidly adopted by the 
new state; prior to this, production was mainly based on craft and small 
enterprises.24 Seen contrary to industrial production, crafts, as minor arts, 
carried a certain stigma compared to modern design.25 The research by Turan 
and Karakuş shows that the borders between craft and design were political 
as well as artistic. 
Craft and design in Turkey: 
product differentiation
Craft in Turkey has not been immune to industrialization, the digital revolution 
and globalization, professionally mobilizing craftspeople and handcrafts 

68
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
practitioners.26 The term ‘crafts’ expanded within the creative industries in 
the twenty-first century in Turkey, whereas previously they were deemed a 
concept excluding women’s daily handcraft practices. In the past, women’s 
handcraft practices were mainly to make items for domestic use and for their 
trousseaus for marriage. Craft, as a gendered practice, transformed because 
mass-produced items became preferred for the trousseau. Likewise, in 
kilim production in villages, the number of women making kilims declined 
because of job opportunities in factories. Labour in craft and handcrafts was 
gendered and was part of the informal economy. However, in the past decade, 
these practices started to become visible through research and design. For 
example, the atlas design collection27 was created by selected designers and 
is produced by local and refugee women in Harran in south-eastern Turkey. 
The items of this collection are for sale on the atlas website.28 
The latter example illustrates the expansion of the concept of craft as a 
phenomenon of the post-industrial world where hands-on processes have 
been reintroduced as added value. In addition, since the late 1990s, the 
folklore literature in Turkey indicates that crafts should be re-interpreted 
and commercialized for their sustainment and also for economic value.29 
Furthermore, transformation has been observed in craft practices and its 
objects due to immigration and changing lifestyles.30 For example in Maraş, 
saddlery disappeared due to the proliferation of cars, and felt making declined 
due to mass-produced textiles.31
Some crafts have survived and revived as they found a new market in global 
tourism consumption and export opportunities as cultural artefacts.32 Uslu and 
Kiper state that the number of silversmith shops increased from eight shops to 
seventy-three ateliers as a consequence of tourism in the town of Beypazarı.33 
Etikan and Çukur report that in Çomakdağ-Kızılağaç, beadwork, practised by 
women and traditionally used on the collars of the long shirts worn as an inner 
layer of clothing, on the portion of the çemperi (silk head-dress) that holds it to 
the chin, and on nazarlık, a traditional protector from evil energy, is now used 
on bracelets, chokers, belts, bags, cell phone cases and as wall decorations for 
touristic consumption. Similarly, decoration used on şalvar (traditional pants), 
called yaneş embroidery, is used on wall decoration pieces and wallets.34
In 2009, Orlandi as well as Köroğlu et al. described the competitive power 
of the jewellery sector stemming from traditional making in the Grand Bazaar 
in Istanbul, and situated craft products as a strategic resource, stressing the 
potency of innovation in the jewellery sector in global market competition.35 In 
later research, Orlandi and Kösebay Erkan pointed out the innovative capacity 
of the craftsmen in the Grand Bazaar for developing metrics of innovation 
evaluation.36 As a result of the research, in terms of innovation capacity, among 
forty-seven master craftsmen, twenty-four were found to be potentially eligible 
for the designation of UNESCO’s Living Human Treasures.37 

69
COEXISTENCE OF CRAFT AND DESIGN IN TURKEY
In 2006, Ingin stated that crafts are strategic elements in the case 
of craftspeople clustered in the Şişhane neighbourhood in Istanbul who 
manufacture designers’ designs, thereby initiating Made in Şişhane.38 Later, in 
2015, Ingin declared that craft neighbourhoods are open design systems that 
offer the resources of crafts to designers to facilitate making their products.39 
Crafts in the examples presented above were mobilized with a ‘handmade’, 
‘locality’ and ‘added value’ ethos. Being handmade and manufactured by 
means of local production has been seen as added value. This could be 
observed as branding for the collaboration projects and the resulting products. 
Here, the influence of marketing is apparent.
Some of the inherited craft practices in Turkey have been used in the 
design and production of new products developed and co-developed by 
some designers in professional and commercial projects. It could be said 
that the outcomes of these collaborations carry agency in connecting 
tradition and modernity as an alternative to industrial production, enabling 
the perpetuation of crafts and leading to new sustainable consumption items 
that are produced both with slower and ethical production, as well as being 
emotionally durable. 
The inclusion of craft in design projects in Turkey is significantly employed 
to add value to products. Inhibited by the historical hierarchy between craft 
production and industrial production, the project examples in the previous 
section argue for the ‘betterment’ of craft by added value through design, 
forming a developmentalist discourse in Turkey. 
In contrast, there is recent research that situates craft and design outside 
the development and class discourse. Gürdere and Kaygan state that the 
inclusion of craft in design projects for added value and local development 
is an example of social design in Turkey,40 and Karakuş argues that craft can 
be an ‘urban vernacular’, practised in the cities, including digital technologies 
and resulting in distinctive one-of-a-kind products.41 Orlandi and Kösebay 
Erkan state that craftspeople have innovation capacity on their own, without 
designers’ involvement.42 Aktaş and Mäkelä43 used Ihatsu’s44 triangle diagram 
of the craft field that defined craft as an area within ‘design’, ‘art’ and ‘craft’. 
Their method of participant selection was based on this expertise diagram. For 
each corner of the diagram a representative felt maker in Turkey was selected 
as a participant for their research.45 Thus, the relationship of craft and design 
was partially contextualized outside a developmentalist discourse based on a 
hierarchy relationship between craft and design.
We have seen so far that Turkey’s rich and considerable craft heritage is 
overwhelmingly regarded as producing products that are enhanced by design 
intervention, whether that be by maintenance of an aesthetic and technical 
ranking, or an externally imposed branding. Both demean craft labour and 
confer political powerlessness on those who do it.

70
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
A dialogical and expert-expert learning bond
I am a Turkish industrial designer,46 schooled in an environment where design 
was considered female and aesthetic. As a practitioner I designed items 
for mass production, yet also saw that industrial design added competitive 
advantage to craft. This view was endorsed by many of my colleagues 
in interviews about research on craft and design. In time, as a researcher, 
instead of accepting the notion of a binary clash between craft and design or 
a marriage for competitive advantage for both parties, I studied the separate 
epistemes of craft and industrial design and identified first a dialogical bond,47 
then a learning bond,48 and finally an emotional bond between craftspeople 
and designers during the production of products designed by designers and 
fully or partially produced by craftspeople. The stream of research presented 
here is based on hands-on fieldwork conducted by me and my colleagues with 
unstructured interviews, simultaneous participation in the making, photo and 
video documentation, and methods of anthropological fieldwork. 
The documentation not only contains verbal reports and past design work 
but work in progress and the actual making process. Therefore, strategies to 
document the making with the sole aim of eliciting explicit knowledge from 
the tacit knowledge49 contributed to the method and analysis. The analysis, 
indicating changes in the researcher’s various roles as designer, researcher 
and participant, required documenting and developing methods that contained 
both visual and verbal information concurrently.50 In The Craftsman, Sennett 
conceptualizes craft as a method of making, associating the quality of making 
practices with craft. However, he does not investigate individual making in the 
everyday, which is what my research attempted to do. 
In order for me to undertake various roles in the research, self-reflection 
was required. It is important to state that for an industrial designer to let go of 
professionalism requires a substantial amount of unlearning, and this is only 
possible by avoiding Cartesian thinking as much as possible; it also requires 
leaving behind a binary perspective and recognition of uncategorizable, 
awkward and mismatching situations. As argued by Bruno Latour in 
Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-Network Theory, reliable 
data can only be obtained when people are allowed to behave in any possible 
way, like micro-organisms under a microscope.51 If I intended to explore the 
everyday, I had to be part of and accept the everyday.
My research in 2007 started with investigating economic empowerment 
of women handcraft practitioners in Turkey, with the intention of exploring 
form, colour, volume and taste in the works of these practitioners. From my 
viewpoint, the practitioners were designers without formal design education, 
in other words, non-designer makers.52 Here, a different understanding and 
practice of design was present. The handcrafts knowledge and practice were 

71
COEXISTENCE OF CRAFT AND DESIGN IN TURKEY
gendered and transmitted through generations as part of female culture. 
Formal choices were not based on modern taste but on cultural meaning, yet 
experimentation and innovation were present. Hence, it is not easy to argue 
that modern design brings experimentation and innovation to this practice as 
is widely argued in the industrial design discourse. 
Between 2008 and 2011, I collaborated with the Foundation for the Support 
of Women’s Work (KEDV, Kadın Emeğini Değerlendirme Vakfı) as part of a Social 
Support Program (SODES, Sosyal Destek Programı) under the Turkish Ministry 
of Development (Kalkınma Bakanlığı), spending an extensive amount of time 
as a participant in communities of handcraft practitioners in Mardin, in south-
eastern Turkey. This project was inspired by a collaboration between the National 
Institute of Design (NID) design faculty and Jawaja leather producers in India.53 
The transformation of women’s traditional handcraft practices, formerly 
used to make trousseau items, resulted in women-led micro enterprises that 
had agency for moderate financial empowerment with available skills. The 
products vary from home textiles to garments marketed as branded collections 
as well as gifts. They stand out for their quality since the skills inherited from 
trousseau practices are exquisite. By being simplified and adapted to modern 
needs the results exist between mass-produced items and collection pieces. 
Hence, empowerment of practitioners and production of handmade items for 
slower and conscious consumption transform traditional handcrafts. 
Later, challenging obstacles in our past research on empowerment with 
craft and design, we stated that the valorization of craft as a socioeconomic 
asset supports the financial empowerment of practitioners in cases where 
commissioners decrease and where craftspeople have more direct access to 
the market.54 In this perspective, it is argued that the intermediaries should 
not gain benefit based on the labour of craftspeople. However, the lack of an 
intermediary structure can, as well, decrease the reach of items to the market 
unless the craftspeople themselves develop the necessary structures.55 In 
later research, we developed a tool to compare the empowerment of projects 
using the capability approach of Amartya Sen56 and Martha Nussbaum.57 In 
this approach, Sen, a Nobel laureate in economics, states that the welfare 
of people should not be measured by their income but by their capabilities. 
Based on the Jawaja Project in India and the DOBAG58 project in Turkey, we 
argued that empowerment in craft with design can be achieved by increasing 
both the internal and external capabilities of craftspeople instead of mere 
concentration on market success.59
In Mardin and then Salihli, as participant designer-researchers, we avoided 
a top-down approach by building rapport with practitioners and by deliberately 
refraining from teaching. The encounter of designers and craftspeople created 
expert-to-expert situations instead of expert-to-novice situations where 
designers are experts and craftspeople are novices to be taught. Crafts 

72
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
practitioners were experts since they had extensive experience although not 
within the formal design profession. They are experts of the craft epistemology. 
Therefore, the designer-craftsperson relationship is not and should not be a 
hierarchical relationship. Instead of a teaching relationship between designer 
and craftsperson, we constructed a ‘learning platform’, theorized as such 
in our work at Salihli, in western Turkey. A learning platform is built by the 
equal participation of all participants where design knowledge is not taught 
but emerges.60 The idea of a platform was later expanded by constructing 
design rubrics and putting the research online, where craftspeople had access 
to these rubrics. Here, the rubrics were developed based on the inspiration 
resources of the craftspeople we interviewed.61
In the meantime, with Burcu Yagız, on the basis of our observations and 
experiences and reports by our colleagues, be they academics or practitioners, 
I identified collaboration between designers and craftspeople in Istanbul. This 
was the first time I witnessed an equal participation in the design process: a 
collaboration versus a clash of two epistemes.62 The collaboration contained 
knowledge exchange between designers and craftspeople. In this regard, craft 
was a channel of knowledge between formal modern design and informal 
vernacular practice.63
For example, designer Özlem Tuna collaborates with metalsmiths in the 
Grand Bazaar, where craftsmen working in the jewellery sector have been 
clustered since the Ottoman Empire. Tuna provided a remarkably detailed 
and transparent report of her design process with craftspeople, indicating the 
pitfalls and obstacles of her project both when I interviewed her alone and also 
with Vilyan Usta. Tuna’s report of rapport with craftsmen and use of simple 
semi-prototypes and like analogies to communicate her ideas indicated that 
there was a particular communication and relationship. 
In another example, Chicago-based industrial designer Eli Bensusan 
collaborates with goldsmith Aret Colakyan and finishing master Boncuk 
Karagöz in the Grand Bazaar area.64 Bensusan, trained as a designer in Turkey, 
sends 3-D prints to masters and finalizes his jewellery with the feedback of 
the master craftsmen. Unlike in orthodox practice, Bensusan includes the 
name of each craftsperson who contributed to the making of his jewellery 
by attributing their expertise, thereby providing evidence for the separation 
of different epistemes in an expert-expert situation.65 In these examples, the 
hierarchy between design and craft is negated.
An emotional bond
By means of empowerment, digitalization and a goal to reach markets beyond 
the traditional as required by contemporary culture, crafts’ foundational formal 

73
COEXISTENCE OF CRAFT AND DESIGN IN TURKEY
elements have transformed. During this growth and transformation, its clash 
with modern design is evident. The knowledge gap between craftspeople 
and designers is not a gap between the binaries of positive and negative. It 
is a gap between two separate epistemologies that cannot be positioned in 
relation to each other hierarchically. The expert-expert situation is jeopardized 
by a binary hierarchy.
Formal designers are trained as independent creative individuals whereas 
craftspeople are trained through the hierarchical apprenticeship system from 
very young ages. They did not attend formal education until it was required by 
law. When they attend formal education, the cultural inhibition of hierarchy is 
prevalent. For example, in past research, where designers and craftspeople 
collaborated, designers retained their professional jargon and methods as a 
means of negotiation. Reports indicated cases where craftspeople perceived 
the design episteme as superior, prompting rejection of participation. In 
addition, when craftspeople were asked how they came up with a design idea, 
there were intuitive responses such as ‘it came from inside me’.66 In formal 
design education and practice, a rationalization of the design activity based 
on conscious reasoning is expected.67 An intuitive response is discounted in 
formal design.
More importantly, an encounter between two fundamentally separate 
epistemes was possible, perhaps required, in the presence of extra-
professional relationship making between designers and craftspeople. 
Within a professional context, this encounter could only be a clash. Research 
indicates that cooperation between designers and craftspeople does not entail 
a mere professional relationship, because the design and craft epistemes are 
different.
In a preferred scenario, a social bond is required. An encounter of these 
two epistemologies occurs without pre-plan, on its own. It has a unique 
space, time and context. It has an aura specific to its zeitgeist. Therefore, 
beginning from an identification of the potential clash and the necessity for 
cooperation, attempts to unite or separate these two epistemologies require 
in-depth research. Referring to Walter Benjamin’s The Work of Art in the Age 
of Mechanical Reproduction,68 instrumentalizing this encounter initiates a ‘cult 
value’ (magic or mystery) and hence opens up the responsibility of envisaging 
new epistemologies that do not perpetuate a political ‘us’ and ‘them’. In further 
research, the nature of the relationships between craftspeople and designers 
should be investigated to see where crafts’ holistic nature and integrity can 
be recognized.
In Abstracting Craft: The Practiced Digital Hand, McCullough argued that 
with digital technologies, crafts would be valorized to the extent that its 
products could compete with industrial production. Although certain craft 
practices gained some competitive advantage with technology and marketing 

74
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
knowledge, in the Turkish context they are far from competing with industrial 
products.69 However, the meeting of craft and technology in Turkey has 
highlighted the meaning of making in the everyday, other than the binary 
perspective of craft versus mass production. 
The political content of the clash between design and craft under the rubric 
of class in Turkey has some similarities with the perception of craft and its 
practitioners in India. Although the definition and relationship of craft and 
design are similar, a caste system was not present in Turkey. Nevertheless, 
the relationship of craft, design and class in Turkey needs further investigation.
Notes
1	 A. DeNicola and C. M. Wilkinson-Weber, ‘Designs on Craft: Negotiating 
Artisanal Knowledge and Identity in India’, in Critical Craft: Technology, 
Globalization and Capitalism, ed. Clare M. Wilkinson-Weber and Alicia Ory 
DeNicola (London: Bloomsbury, 2016), 79–98.
2	 Ibid., 83.
3	 C. Kaya and B. (Yancatarol) Yagiz, ‘Design in Informal Economies: Craft 
Neighborhoods in Istanbul’, Design Issues 27, no. 2 (2011): 59–71.
4	 Richard Sennett, The Craftsman (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 
2009).
5	 Glenn Adamson, Thinking Through Craft (London: Berg Publishers, 2007).
6	 Susan Luckman, Craft and the Creative Economy (London: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2015).
7	 Malcolm McCullough, Abstracting Craft: The Practiced Digital Hand 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997).
8	 Karl Marx, Capital: An Abridged Edition (Oxford World’s Classics) (Oxford, 
UK: Oxford University Press, 2008).
9	 ‘All we need do is simply to open our eyes, to leave the dark world of 
metaphysics and the false depths of the “inner life” behind, and we will 
discover the immense human wealth that the humblest facts of everyday life 
contain’. Henri LeFebvre, Critique de la vie Quotidien [Critique of Everyday 
Life] (Paris: L'Arche, 1997), 8.
10	 Henri LeFebvre, Dialectical Materialism (Minneapolis, MN: University of 
Minnesota Press, 2009), 9.
11	 Michel de Certeau, L’Invention du Quotidien [The Practice of Everyday Life] 
(Paris: Gallimard, 1990).
12	 Roland Barthes, Mythologies (Paris: Point, 2014).
13	 Early research and practice on the interaction of craft and design, although 
rare and marginalized could be further studied in research by Secil Satir, 
who was initially trained as an applied art teacher of flower making and later 
pursued both interior architecture and industrial design degrees in Devlet 

75
COEXISTENCE OF CRAFT AND DESIGN IN TURKEY
Tatbiki Güzel Sanatlar Yüksek Okulu (State Academy of Applied Arts) and in 
Gesamthochschule Kassel consecutively.
14	 R. O. Arik, Les Fouilles d’Alaca Höyük [The Excavations of Alacahoyuk] 
(Ankara: Türk Tarih Kurumu [Turkish Historical Society], 1937); Ian Hodder, The 
Leopard’s Tale: Revealing the Mysteries of Catalhoyuk (New York: Thames & 
Hudson, Reprint edition, 2011).
15	 Henry Glassie, Turkish Traditional Art Today (Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press, 1993).
16	 Ibid.
17	 G. Karakuş, ‘A Manifesto for Design and Craft in Turkey in the Twenty-First 
Century’, in From Crafts to Design, ed. Merve Yucel (Istanbul: Istanbul 
Modern, 2015), 14–19. http:​/​/zan​aatta​ntasa​rima.​istan​bulmo​der​n.​org,
18	 Ibid.
19	 Ibid.
20	 Halil Inalcik, ‘The Hub of the City: The Bedestan of Istanbul’, in  Studies in 
Ottoman Social and Economic History, ed. Halil Inalcik (London: Variorum 
Reprints, 1985), 1–17.
21	 A. Coskun Orlandi and Y. Kösebay Erkan, ‘Value Creation in Jewelry 
Fabrication Today: Exploring the Interrelations of Crafts and Innovation 
Through the Case of the Grand Bazaar in Istanbul’, 11th European Academy 
of Design Conference Proceedings, 22–24 April 2015 (Paris: Descartes 
University Institute of Psychology). https​:/​/ww​w​.aca​demia​.edu/​33039​122​/V​
ALUE_​CREAT​ION​_I​N​_JEW​ELLER​Y​_FAB​RICAT​ION​_T​ODAY_​EXPLO​RING_​
THE​_I​NTERR​ELATI​ONS​_O​F​_CRA​FTS​_A​ND​_IN​NOVAT​ION​_T​HROUG​H​_THE​_​
CASE​_OF​_T​HE​_GR​AND​_B​AZAAR​_OF​_I​STANB​UL
22	 Karakuş, ‘A Manifesto for Design and Craft in Turkey in the Twenty-First 
Century’; Gulname Turan, ‘Craft and Design in the Early Turkish Republic’ 
(Türkiye'de Erken Cumhuriyet Dönemi Zanaat ve Sanayi Üretiminde Tasarım) 
(Unpublished PhD thesis, Graduate School of Social Sciences, Istanbul 
Technical University, 2005).
23	 Turan, ‘Craft and Design in the Early Turkish Republic’.
24	 S. Gürdere Akdur and H. Kaygan, ‘Social Design in Turkey through a Survey 
of Design Media: Projects, Objectives, Participation Approaches’, The Design 
Journal 22, no. 1 (2019): 51–71.
25	 Karakuş, ‘A Manifesto for Design and Craft in Turkey in the Twenty-First 
Century’.
26	 C. Kaya Pazarbasi, P. Ozemir and E. Ercis, ‘Knowledge Sharing Between 
Designers and Craftspeople in Turkey: Development of A Platform’, Milli 
Folklor 31, no. 121 (2019): 141–51.
27	 ‘atlas is based on a social responsibility model supporting the local and 
Syrian women living in Harran to generate their economic independence 
by being at the core of the production process at the felt, wood, weaving 
and ceramic ateliers developed in ADEM (Family Support Centre) within the 
Governorship of Harran’. https://www​.atlasharran​.com​/en​/story/
28	 Ibid.

76
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
29	 M. Kahveci, ‘21. Yüzyıla Girerken Geleneksel Türk El Sanatları’ [Traditional 
Turkish Handcrafts While Entering the Twenty-First Century] Folkloristik 
(1998): 387–97; I. Ozturk, ‘Türk El Sanatlarının Günümüzdeki Durumu 
(Tarihçe, Sorunlar, Öneriler)’ [The Condition of Turkish Handcrafts Today, 
History, Problems, Suggestions], Sanat Dergis 7 (2010): 67–75.
30	 Ozturk, ‘Türk El Sanatlarının Günümüzdeki Durumu’.
31	 N. Gunay, ‘XIX. Yüzyıldan Günümüze Maraş’taki Ekonomik ve Sosyal 
Değişikliklerin Şehirdeki Bazı Geleneksel Meslekler Üzerindeki Olumsuz 
Etkileri’ [The Negative Impact of Economical and Social Change in Maraş on 
Some Traditional Occupations from Nineteenth Century to Today], Milli Folklor 
22, no. 86 (2010): 163–73.
32	 A. Odekan, ‘A Resource for Design: Traditional Handicrafts from Anatolia’, in 
Turkish Delight, ed. G. Gunaltay and B. Kohl (Berlin: Conrad Citydruck & Copy 
GmbH, 2008), 19–53.
33	 A. Uslu and T. Kiper, ‘Turizmin Kültürel Miras Üzerine Etkileri: Beypazarı/
Ankara Örneğinde Yerel Halkın Farkındalığı’ [’The Impact of Tourism on 
Cultural Heritage: The Consciousness of Local Residents in the Example of 
Beypazari/Ankara’], Tekirdağ Ziraat Fakültesi Dergisi 3, no. 3 (2006): 305–14.
34	 S. Etikan and T. Çukur, ‘Kırsal Turizm Faaliyetlerinin Çomakdağ-Kızılağaç Köyü 
El Sanatları Üzerine Etkisi’, Art-e Sanat Dergisi 4, no. 8 (2011): 1–15.
35	 A. E. Coskun Orlandi, ‘21.Yüzyılda Türkiye Mücevher Endüstrisinde Katma-
Değer Dinamiği Olarak Endüstri Tasarımı ve Küresel Rekabet: “Made in 
Italy” Örneği Üzerinden Bir Model Önerisi’ [‘Industrial Design and Global 
Competition as Added-Value Dynamics in Jewellery Industry in Turkey in the 
Twenty-First Century’] (Unpublished PhD thesis, Mimar Sinan University of 
Fine Arts, Mimar Sinan Güzel Sanatlar Üniversitesi, 2009); B. Armatli Köroğlu, 
Tanyel Ozelci Eceral and Aysu Ugurlar, ‘The Story of a Jewelry Cluster in 
Istanbul Metropolitan Area: Grand Bazaar (Kapalıçarşı)’, Gazi University 
Journal of Science 22, no. 4 (2009): 383–94.
36	 Orlandi and Erkan, ‘Value Creation in Jewelry Fabrication Today’.
37	 Ibid.
38	 A. Kiyak Ingin, ‘Kentsel Ölçekte Tasarım- Üretim İlişkisi: Şişhane Örneği’ 
[Design and Production Relation on Urban Scale: The Case of Şişhane], III. 
Ulusal Tasarım Kongresi Bildiri Kitabı [Proceedings Book of the 3rd National 
Design Conference] (Istanbul: Istanbul Technical University, 2006), 224–39.
39	 A. Kiyak Ingin, ‘The Crafts, Once Again: A Review of the Relationship 
Between Design and Istanbul’s Craft System’, in From Crafts to Design, ed. 
Yucel, 20–5. http:​/​/zan​aatta​ntasa​rima.​istan​bulmo​d​ern.​org
40	 Akdur and Kaygan, ‘Social Design in Turkey through a Survey of Design 
Media’.
41	 Karakuş, ‘A Manifesto for Design and Craft in Turkey in the Twenty-First 
Century’.
42	 Orlandi and Kösebay Erkan, ‘Value Creation in Jewelry Fabrication Today’.
43	 B. Merve Aktaş and M. A. Mäkelä, ‘Craft Dynamics: Empowering Felt 
Making Through Design’, Nordes 7 (2017): DESIGN+POWER, 
www​.nordes​.org.

77
COEXISTENCE OF CRAFT AND DESIGN IN TURKEY
44	 A. M. Ihatsu, Craft, Art-Craft or Craft-Design? In Pursuit of the British 
Equivalent for the Finnish Concept ‘käsityo﻿̈’. (Joensuu, FI: University of 
Joensuu, 1998).
45	 Aktaş and Mäkelä, ‘Craft Dynamics’.
46	 ‘The State of Design: Towards an Assessment of the Development of 
Industrial Design in Turkey’, METU Journal of Faculty of Architecture 13, 
no. 1–2 (1993): 31–51. Alpay Er points out the significantly high number of 
female graduates of industrial design and states that industrial design was 
misunderstood as an ‘arty and classy’ and ‘soft’ profession in Turkey although 
it was a ‘hard’ profession in the West. Later Pınar Kaygan stated that 
industrial design was seen as ‘arty’ or ‘real’ meaning making pleasure for the 
senses versus use of technology and its association with gender based on 
narratives from Turkey. Pinar Kaygan, ‘“Arty” versus “Real” Work: Gendered 
Relations between Industrial Designers and Engineers in Interdisciplinary 
Work Settings’, The Design Journal 17, no. 1 (2014): 73–90. I am a female 
industrial designer who has designed numerous ‘real’ and ‘hard’ products 
manufactured by large factories and exported in masses. I received no 
recognition including for vehicle design projects where I not only designed 
the interior but also the exterior.
47	 Kaya and Yagiz, ‘Design in Informal Economies’.
48	 Çiğdem Kaya, ‘Designer as Enabler: A Methodology of Intervention for 
Designers’ (Unpublished PhD thesis, Graduate School of Science and 
Engineering, Istanbul Technical University, 2011).
49	 Michael Polanyi theorized about tacit knowledge in his book The Tacit 
Dimension (New York: Anchor Books, 1967).
50	 Kaya, ‘Designer as Enabler’; C. Kaya, P. Ozemir and E. Ercis, ‘Knowledge 
Sharing Between Designers and Craftspeople in Turkey: Development of A 
Platform’, Milli Folklor 121 (2019): 141–51.
51	 Bruno Latour, Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-Network 
Theory (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007).
52	 Kaya, ‘Designer as Enabler’.
53	 Ibid.
54	 O. Von Busch and C. Kaya Pazarbasi, ‘Just Craft: Capabilities and 
Empowerment in Participatory Craft Projects’, Design Issues 34, no. 4 (2018): 
66–79.
55	 Ibid.
56	 Amartya Sen, Commodities and Capabilities (Amsterdam, NL: Elsevier, 
1985).
57	 Martha Nussbaum, Creating Capabilities: The Human Development Approach 
(Cambridge, MA: Belknapp, 2011).
58	 DOBAG is an abbreviation for Doğal Boya Araştırma ve Geliştirme Projesi 
[Natural Dye Research and Development Project]. In this research and 
development project initiated by German chemistry teacher Harald Bohmer 
in the 1980s, a group of craftspeople and researchers worked to increase the 
quality of kilim rugs made by women in the Aegean region of Turkey, mainly 
by using natural dyes.

78
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
59	 Busch and Pazarbasi, ‘Just Craft’.
60	 C. Kaya and K. Gelmez, ‘Grassroots Empowerment with Design in a 
Community of Practice in Turkey’, Journal of Arts and Communities 5, no. 1 
(2014): 55–72.
61	 Pazarbasi, Ozemir and Ercis, ‘Knowledge Sharing between Designers and 
Craftspeople in Turkey’.
62	 C. Kaya and B. Yagiz (Yancatarol), ‘Design in Informal Economies: Craft 
Neighborhoods in Istanbul’.
63	 Ibid.
64	 http://www​.neferka​.design​/about
65	 Interview with Eli Bensusan, September 2020.
66	 Author’s translation. In Turkish ‘İçimden geldi’. refers to an emotional 
subjective spontaneous gut feeling.
67	 N. Bayazit, ‘Investigating Design: A Review of Forty Years of Design 
Research’, Design Issues 20, no. 1, (2004): 16–29. There are two major 
schools of rationalization of the design process which have influenced design 
education and practice. These are the Bauhaus School and the cybernetics 
movement.
68	 Walter Benjamin, ‘The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction’, in 
Illuminations: Essays and Reflections, ed. Hannah Arendt (London: Fontana, 
1969), 214–18.
69	 M. Kadir Altintas, ‘Kaybolmaya Yüz Tutmuş Geleneksel Türk El Sanatkârlarının 
Karşı Karşıya Bulunduğu Ticari Sorunların Analizi’ [The Analysis of Commercial 
Problems of Disappearing Turkish Handcrafts Practitioners], Bilig 77 (Spring 
2016): 157–82.

5
Leisure and livelihood
A Socioeconomic reading of 
craft in Australia and Egypt
Anne-Marie Willis
W
hat is craft? It is different things in different places. This does not only 
mean different techniques, materials and artefacts, but that ‘craft’ has 
different meanings in different places. And here, meaning does not just refer 
to motifs, visual languages, styles, or even the deeper cultural meanings of 
artefacts, but also to the practice and context of craft – to the intrinsically 
political questions of who does it, how it is valued or not valued within and 
between cultures and by different social groups within a particular culture. 
The differences can be great, to the extent that across and between cultures, 
when we evoke ‘craft’ we are not all talking about the same ‘thing’. These 
differences and their implications will be explored via a deliberately extreme 
comparison of craft practices in Australia and Egypt. 
What prompted this essay was a temporal collision between two places. 
After four years of living in Cairo, I moved to Tasmania. The environments could 
not be more different. A city of 20 million people versus an island state of half 
a million people.1 A crumbling, ancient and car-choked metropolis versus lush 
forests, farmland and small towns. Low income and inadequate housing for the 
majority versus high income and comfortable houses for the majority. And this 
is to say nothing of cultural and political differences between and within each 
place. Craft has a presence in both Cairo and Tasmania. There are weavers, 
potters, jewellers, metalsmiths, leather workers, embroiderers, bookbinders 

80
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
and furniture makers in both places. But given the huge differences, can such 
practices be seen as equivalent? 
In comparing recent craft practices in Egypt and Australia, the point is 
not to resolve differences, or to seek an irreducible essence of craft. It is, 
rather, to argue against uncritical deployment of generalized Eurocentric 
notions about the nature of craft and its intrinsic value, and the transposition 
of these ideas to other places and people. In this sense, the comparison is 
informed by the politics of decoloniality.2 The argument will be developed via 
a descriptive account of the craft practices of Australia and Egypt focusing 
on conditions of production and consumption, and the identity and status of 
craft practitioners. Both nations have outstanding craft practitioners, but what 
follows is not about individuals, it is about perceptions, and the actuality of 
craft in the different socioeconomic contexts of Australia and Egypt. Explicit 
and implicit assumptions of various social actors about the value of craft will 
be drawn out and argued with, because so many of the claimed benefits of 
craft are actually undermined by actions seeking to support it. This observation 
applies particularly to the work of non-government organizations (NGOs) 
in promoting craft as a means for the empowerment of the women of 
impoverished communities in Egypt and many other parts of the world. Power, 
of course, is at the heart of the political, and it operates at multiple levels 
from the barely perceptible and taken-for-granted through to the overt and 
oppressive actions of social actors or institutions across all domains of social-
economic-cultural existence. In this sense, ‘the political’ is to be distinguished 
from ‘politics’ which refers to the formal structures of the contestation of 
different interests – political parties, governments, policies, etc.3
The topic is large, and the argument will be advanced mainly by 
symptomatic readings of reports on craft practice in Australia and Egypt and 
my own observations.4 Jessica Hemmings’ idea of the ‘smallness of craft’ will 
provide a framing. 
The smallness of craft
Jessica Hemmings has argued that many researchers and writers on craft tend 
to overclaim its power, this being prevalent in academia where craft has had to 
legitimate itself vis à vis established disciplines. This overclaiming is especially 
prevalent within the discourse of craftivism, which asserts craft as politically 
empowering, often based upon a limited repertoire of continually reiterated 
examples.5 Hemmings argues that what needs to be engaged instead is craft’s 
inadequacy in the face of ‘the scale of the social problems that surround it’, 
and that ‘the smallness of craft’ needs to be acknowledged and investigated.6 

81
LEISURE AND LIVELIHOOD
Instead of engaging craft practices directly, Hemmings demonstrates this by 
turning to literature: selected novels and short stories from Chilean, Indian 
and Zimbabwean writers in which craft appears incidentally as part of the lives 
of characters.7 Analysing these narrative moments of making clay figures, 
carving wood animals, knitting, sewing quilts and repairing shoes, she finds 
that ‘empowerment created by the production of craft remains brutally limited 
. . . [it] does little to alleviate the troubled lives of characters’ and is shown as 
‘tiring labor for at best, meagre financial remuneration’.8 We will return to her 
observations when considering the craft-as-empowerment claims of many 
NGOs. 
Sites of craft: the Tasmanian 
Craft Fair and Islamic Cairo
You arrive at the picturesque town of Deloraine on the Meander River, 
surrounded by big sky, green fields and mountain ranges. Signs direct you to an 
open paddock, where smiling volunteers guide you to park your car in perfect 
alignment with all the others. You walk across the grass, buy a ticket and enter 
the first pavilion of the Tasmanian Craft Fair. Described in promotional material 
as the largest working craft fair in Australia, it began forty years ago selling the 
work of local artists and craftspeople. The event grew, and now runs for four 
days every November attracting 20,000 visitors and craftspeople from all over 
Australia. The work ranges from high end musical instruments, contemporary 
jewellery, fine timber furniture and ceramics, through to textiles, clothing, 
accessories, toys, homewares, decorative art and novelty-ware, all hand-
thrown, spun, woven, dyed, collaged, patch-worked, embroidered, block-
printed, carved, engraved, forged and cast, with natural and recycled materials 
heavily featured (Figure  5.1). The Fair takes over the town, spreading across 
fourteen venues, taking in the specialist art and craft shops on the main street, 
and out to the showground where you can sample local gourmet food and 
watch the ‘working sheep dog trials’. Since its inception, the Tasmanian Craft 
Fair has been organized by the Rotary Club of Deloraine, and its proceeds 
have funded many local improvement projects over the years. There are now 
regular craft markets and fairs in towns and cities across Australia. Tasmania, 
despite its small population, has many craftworkers who sell their work in 
specialized shops and galleries, and at a weekly market at Salamanca Place in 
Hobart that attracts many tourists and locals.
If you superimposed the area of Deloraine over a map of Cairo to take in El 
Gamaliya, Bab el Khalq, Muizz Street, Khan el Khalili bazaar, the ‘Tentmakers 
Street’ and Ahmad Maher Street you would have an area of 5 square 

82
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
kilometres, just 10 per cent of Central Cairo. In this dense urban area crafts 
and trades have been practised for more than six hundred years. There are 
hundreds, maybe thousands of small workshops, some open to the street, 
others in rear courtyards and on the upper levels of buildings. You will find 
blacksmiths, sheet-metal workers, carpenters, furniture makers, shoemakers 
and tailors, as well as the decorative arts of glass-blowing, brass work, lantern-
making, gold and silver jewellery, alabaster, and mother-of-pearl inlay. Entering 
Muizz Street from the ancient city gate of Bab Al Futah, you walk past ancient 
buildings revealing the intricate work of stonemasons and carpenters. Here 
are building crafts dating back to Cairo’s origins which are still practised today 
such as decorative marble work in which small pieces are assembled into 
Islamic geometric designs used not only for restoration but also for new 
mosques; and mashrabiya, tiny pieces of hand-turned wood assembled into 
window screens that allow airflow while preventing a view to the interior.9 
Muizz Street ends with the tourist market of Khan el Khalili, overflowing with 
mass-produced Pharaonic figures and lurid coloured belly dancing costumes. 
Crossing the road to a covered market and passing through the ancient city gate 
of Bab Zuweila you enter the famous Tentmakers Bazaar where men sit cross-
legged, sewing khayamia, the colourful appliquéd cloth traditionally used for 
ceremonial tents and marquees, nowadays made as wall-hangings and cushion 
covers mainly for the tourist trade.10 You might then walk along Ahmad Maher 
Street towards the Islamic Museum, passing many blacksmiths, sheet metal 
and carpentry workshops. This is where local restaurants source cookware, 
where street food vendors obtain charcoal burners for roasting sweet corn, 
and where garden contractors can order tall wooden stepladders needed for 
trimming the hedges and lollipop trees of the gated compounds of outer Cairo. 
Further on you will pass street stalls and shops selling mass-produced clothing 
that could have been made anywhere in the world, alongside fruit, vegetables, 
FIGURE 5.1  Tasmanian Craft Fair: Glass Manifesto and Tasmanian Glassblowers 
(left) and Crick Hollow Pottery (Photo by Tony Fry).

83
LEISURE AND LIVELIHOOD
dried beans, nuts, packaged snack food, live chickens, pigeons and rabbits. 
And rounds of flat bread cooling on racks outside bakeries, delivered around 
the neighbourhood by men on bicycles balancing trays on their heads, dodging 
motor scooters, tuk-tuks, vans, cars and pedestrians. 
This dense, vivid, noisy mix of old and new, local and international is not 
unique to Cairo. Small-scale artisanal production for local needs continues in 
villages, cities and megacities throughout the Middle East, Africa, Asia and 
Latin America (in other words, most of the world). From one perspective the 
cramped workshops, the noise, polluting materials and processes, the crude 
tools, and basic products turned out, can be seen as an undesirable remnant 
of the past that needs to be updated or eliminated – this is the mind-set of 
modernization. From another perspective such workshops can be viewed as 
elements of a sustainable local economy. While concern is expressed about 
decorative crafts ‘in danger of extinction’, practical crafts are overlooked, yet 
many of them ‘sustain that which sustains’ such as the making of specialized 
pots for cooking traditional food that is much more nutritious than the 
industrially manufactured snack food sold by street vendors (often financed by 
micro-loans from NGO poverty-reduction programmes).
Craftworker identity
To further indicate the inappropriateness of a universal definition of craft, let 
us look at examples of the identity of the craftworker. The first is from an 
Australian report Crafting Self: Promoting the Making Self in the Creative 
Micro-Economy in which the researchers refer to the uncertain identity of 
contemporary craft practice evidenced in the proliferation of descriptors: 
craftsperson, artisan, artist, maker, designer, designer-maker.11 They note 
that craft practitioners they interviewed preferred to describe themselves 
by their medium/practice: ceramicist, jeweller, metalsmith, furniture maker, 
textile artist, glass artist and the like. The second example is from a report on 
craftspeople in Upper Egypt (that is, the upper reaches of the Nile in southern 
Egypt) in which the researcher tells of an extended family of potters who 
owned a small plot of land in a village. During the time of her research the 
family divided up their courtyard, demolished the kiln and built a house in its 
place because of pressure from two of the brothers who wanted to split off 
from the household. Their sister and her husband wanted to continue pottery 
but that was impossible without a kiln. The researcher reported: 
The woman is still hopeful that they would be able to resume pottery 
making somehow. For the time being, her husband will concentrate on 

84
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
his work as a pottery trader. The other two brothers are working in brick-
making. . . . When I asked if this new development meant they are no 
longer fakharaniyya (potters) they were horrified at my question. The 
woman said: ‘are we going to disown our origins? Of course not. Even if 
we don’t practice the profession we are still potters’.12
Though both the Australian and Egyptian craftspeople identified themselves 
by their craft, the meaning of that identification is worlds apart. ‘Ceramicist’ 
or ‘metalsmith’ for an Australian is a self-chosen identity, actualized via 
formal education and individual effort to establish a professional practice 
and a reputation. Crafting Self noted that Australian craftspeople are mostly 
university educated in visual arts, craft or design. As in other Western nations, 
Australian craftworkers see themselves, and are perceived as, creative 
individuals.
The potters of Upper Egypt were born into their craft. Fakharaniyya is a 
hereditary identity that determines a livelihood based on making utilitarian 
items (such as the Zir, a ceramic pot for holding and cooling water). 
Fakharaniyya is also a tribal affiliation that mediates social relations within the 
larger community, determining status, circumscribing marriage and residence 
options.13 While the association between craft, tribal identity and social status 
is probably weaker now than when Saad conducted her study, especially due 
to the economic decline following the 2011 Revolution which affected the 
whole country and pushed more people into precarious informal wage labour, 
tribal structures have not entirely disappeared from Upper Egypt.14
Craft socioeconomics: Australia
The differences between craft in Australia and Egypt arise from their 
dramatically different economic, social and demographic character. Put simply, 
Australia has a small population (25.3 million), a post-industrial economy, and 
high per capita income. Egypt has the reverse: a large population (100.4 
million), a mixed economy and low per capita income.15 The two places are in 
different historical moments of time, and within each nation people exist in 
different temporalities. 
Craft is of little economic significance in Australia. It is not possible to identify 
it separately in census data: the Australian Bureau of Statistics classifies craft 
as part of the subset of the Creative Arts industry, ‘a variety of occupations 
which rely on creative expression’ which includes painters, sculptors, 
writers and composers, with the 2011 census identifying 648 sculptors and 
459 ceramicists/potters.16 The National Association of Visual Arts similarly 

85
LEISURE AND LIVELIHOOD
defines craft as creative expression.17 Other reports show the low incomes 
of art and craft practitioners, indicated by their titles: Do You Really Expect To 
Get Paid? and What’s Your Other Job?18 But artist incomes are only low in the 
Australian context, certainly not in global terms, and while the latter title is 
intended as facetious, the point is that other jobs are actually available, which 
is not the case for the vast majority of Egyptian craftspeople. 
Crafting Self gives a picture of Australian craftworkers as micro-enterprises 
and, as such, requiring skills beyond their craft: product positioning, pricing, 
marketing, stock control, cash flow, and, of course, a carefully crafted online 
identity. Rather than the optimistic hype of the internet as easy access to 
the global marketplace, the report tells of the increasing time craftspeople 
are having to spend online creating a social media identity and maintaining it 
across multiple sites. As the authors say, having an online professional identity 
is now a baseline for creative professionals; it proves you exist, but will not 
build sales by itself.19 
Craft gains its significance in Australia and other Western nations in 
the context of the decline of manual labour, whereby ‘doing something by 
hand’ moves into the domain of leisure. A recent survey by the Australian 
Bureau of Statistics of participation in cultural activities found that craft was 
the most popular, practised by 56 per cent of women and 24 per cent of 
men.20 The survey defined craft as including ‘knitting, embroidery, cross 
stitch, tapestries, quilting, appliqué, dressmaking or tailoring, jewelry making, 
beading, scrapbooking, card making, collage, wood crafts, pottery, ceramics 
and mosaics’. These are mainly hobby crafts, done for personal fulfilment, 
rather than income. That amateur crafters outnumber professionals is perhaps 
not surprising, and while there would be some overlap (the hobbyist who sells 
to friends), the pattern would be similar in other Western nations. All of these 
busy hands, however, make no difference to the system of mass production 
that craft advocates have sought to oppose since the time of the Arts and 
Crafts movement. Hobby craft is firmly in the domain of consumption; much 
of it could be regarded as consumerism masquerading as creative production, 
each craft requiring the purchase of specialized equipment and materials, 
often in kit form, with limited use beyond the particular craft activity. In 
Western economies, the craft supplies industry probably generates much 
higher turnover than the output of craftworkers, amateurs and professionals 
added together. 
An interesting (and short-sighted) qualification in the ABS survey of 
participation in cultural activities is that respondents were asked to exclude 
home DIY projects, ‘mending, repairing and maintenance for clothing and 
wood craft’, the assumption being that these are routine and ordinary. Yet 
repair, as Richard Sennett and others have argued, ‘is an all-important aspect 
of technical craftsmanship’, a way of learning how something works by pulling 

86
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
it apart.21 The need for repair forces attention onto the material construction 
of something, it can prompt innovation, retrofitting, repurposing. And then 
there are the skilled practices of restoration and renovation, and techniques 
of mending (of china, of textiles). The sad contemporary reality is that repair 
has become increasingly impossible because manufactured things are not 
designed to be disassembled and are produced and sold so cheaply that 
replacement is easier. Mending, repair and maintenance could be regarded 
as endangered practices, in the same way as many traditional handicrafts are. 
The low cost and ready availability of mass-produced items is what constantly 
marginalizes the handcrafted product, even when it is functional (tableware, 
etc.), relegating it to the display shelf or ‘for special occasions only’. Against 
this, Tony Fry has elaborated a politics of ‘craft remade’ within a quality-based 
economy with the ‘general aim . . . (of) reconfiguring the relation between 
production and consumption’ in which long-life products, expanded services, 
and new high-level maintenance and repair would be key elements.22
Craft socioeconomics: Egypt
The practice of repair in Egypt is economically driven. The floating of the 
Egyptian Pound in November 2016 reduced its value by nearly 50 per cent – 
the float was a condition imposed by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
in order for the Egyptian government to access a loan – greatly reducing the 
purchasing power of wage-earners. This has pushed many people to buy 
less, and especially to keep their clothes longer. The cobbler and the raffa 
(a tailor specializing in repair) are attracting more clientele, even t-shirts are 
being brought in for mending. Shoemakers on the verge of closing down 
are now doing good business repairing not only shoes, but also handbags, 
schoolbags, anything that can be patched and stitched on their heavy-duty 
sewing machines, and some are cleaning trainers (sneakers) ‘to look as good 
as new’.23
While craftspeople and what they produce are statistically insignificant in 
the Australian economy, in Egypt craft is a means of gaining a livelihood; it is 
rarely practised for leisure. The economic significance of craft is registered by 
the fact that ‘Handicrafts’ (handmade textiles, pottery, porcelain, ceramics, 
woodwork, metal handicrafts, carpets and jewellery) comprise one of the 
nineteen Chambers of the Federation of Egyptian Industries, with the claim 
of employing four million workers.24 The handicrafts industry is linked closely 
to tourism which, beginning with President Sadat’s ‘open door’ policies of 
the 1980s, became an increasingly important part of the Egyptian economy.25 
Traditional handicrafts from the different regions were adapted for the tourist 

87
LEISURE AND LIVELIHOOD
market: for example, the geometric patterned rugs and basketry of Aswan; 
the woven textiles from the village of Nagada; the intricate embroidery of 
Sinai; other styles of embroidery from Siwa.
Handicraft producers and artisans have low social status, even those who 
produce fine decorative work. In her account of attempts to establish an official 
Centre for Traditional Crafts in Cairo, Reem Saad noted one of the problems 
was that craftsmen were hired as low paid workers and treated accordingly: 
the craftsmen I met see themselves as creative artists rather than craftsmen 
. . . In a place where classical hierarchy between administrative and manual 
work operates, they are seen as inferior to the administrative staff. Y. said: 
‘If the state was really sincere about promoting crafts, this place would not 
have 70 administrators and 30 craftsmen’.26
This goes to the class divisions of Egyptian society. If you are ‘high class’ you 
don’t work with your hands; you avoid physical labour, hiring ‘low class’ people 
to do cleaning, gardening, car washing, pick-ups and deliveries, with many 
families employing full-time maids and drivers. Among the middle and upper 
classes, there is no culture of do-it-yourself, while hobby crafts and home 
sewing are almost unknown.27 
As Egyptian sociologist, Mona Abaza, has indicated, a small sector of the 
elite has cultivated a taste for Egyptian handicrafts, going against the grain 
of upper class taste, which since the early twentieth century has been firmly 
European (and later, American) especially in fashion.28 Shahira Mehrez built 
a collection of the regional styles of Egyptian peasant clothing, organizing 
fashion shows in the embassies and cultural institutes of Cairo;29 some 
Western-educated Egyptian artists and designers have adapted elements of, 
and valorized, ‘traditional crafts, ethnic-looking architectural styles, furniture, 
costumes and jewellery’ creating a taste regime differentiated ‘from the upper 
middle class majority of Westernized taste’.30 For some, whose Western 
education has been extensive, the take-up of Egyptian ethnic culture is part of 
their own search for an identity. Yet, the elite’s view of peasant and nomad 
cultures (ignored, or despised by their parents’ generation) is mostly an 
aestheticized one rooted in Western exoticization of the ethnic, and replicated 
globally.31 
NGOs and craft 
One constituency that constantly over-claims the power of craft is the NGO 
sector. A widespread strategy to combat poverty in Egypt and other parts of 

88
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
the world is to focus on rural women and traditional handicrafts. The claim, 
and the appeal to donors, is that the revitalization of craft is a pathway 
to the ‘empowerment of women’ by improving their chances of earning 
an income. Handicraft is favoured because, for cultural reasons, many 
women do not work outside their homes, and they already have home-
based skills such as spinning and weaving. In heritage discourse, traditional 
crafts practised by only a few people are referred to as ‘endangered’. In the 
villages, such crafts would be viewed differentially: mourned by those who 
had excelled in them, regarded as unwanted tedious labour by others; or as 
old fashioned and undesirable by youth with different ambitions. According 
to the logic of the development industry, traditional crafts can be revitalized 
if directed towards the production of goods for aesthetic consumption by 
Western(ized) customers, especially tourists. This is not just a change of 
function, it is a different economy, requiring new knowledge and networks 
beyond the local. 
The empowerment discourse originated in the 1980s (its roots can be 
traced back further) in the politics of activists of the Global South opposed 
to Western developmentalism, seeking instead a process whereby ‘women 
and the poor gain awareness, individually and collectively, of the dynamics 
of dominance that marginalize them, and to build up capacities to radically 
transform inequitable economic, social, and political structures’.32 In her 
history of the empowerment discourse, Anne-Emmanuèle Calvès explains 
how empowerment became co-opted by international development 
institutions and ‘became a vague and falsely consensual concept’ that has 
‘come to assimilate power with individual and economic decision-making, has 
de-politicized collective power into something seemingly harmonious and has 
been employed to legitimize top-down policies and programs’.33
Many small and medium sized Egyptian NGOs have adopted the same 
depoliticized, economistic rhetoric of empowerment, setting up projects 
claiming to empower impoverished rural women by training them in craft, 
design and entrepreneurial skills. This one is typical: ‘The organization 
(Badaweya)… provides the women training in technical skills, design 
development and entrepreneurship. …. Aiming to empower Bedouin women, 
support and develop the community and preserve centuries-old traditions.’34 
This is extraordinarily ambitious, and to be successful would require lengthy 
training of highly motivated participants. The reality is large groups of women, 
many illiterate, attending training programmes of several days, rather than 
several months’ duration.35 The instruction is often delivered in classroom 
settings by visiting experts, conditions remote from those conducive to the 
cultivation of craftsmanship, that is, the acquisition of skills through lengthy, 
dedicated practice under guidance of an expert in that craft. A reality check: 
having completed several years of education, what percentage of university 

89
LEISURE AND LIVELIHOOD
design graduates actually go on to establish successful enterprises and launch 
innovative products into the market? 
This recalls Hemmings’ remarks noted earlier about craft’s inadequacy 
to deal with social problems and empowerment being limited with little 
economic gain. This can be linked to the story of another researcher in Qena, 
Upper Egypt, who assisted a group of potters in getting connected to the 
electricity and water supply. This increased the value of the land, so they sold 
it and dispersed. She was disappointed because she’d only been trying to 
improve their quality of life, but instead they abandoned their craft. Reem 
Saad commented that such situations ‘push us to an uneasy hypothesis: that 
poverty is positively correlated with enduring traditional modes, including craft 
production’ and she asks whether preservation of traditional crafts can be 
‘harmonized with the more important goal of improving the standard of living 
of the poor and marginal producers’.36
There are thousands of Egyptian NGOs, as well as international development 
agencies and foreign NGOs all dedicated to alleviating poverty. Many have been 
operating for more than fifty years, running programmes of skills training, health 
education and literacy classes. Yet the problems do not go away. There are two 
linked factors that prevent this model from being a force of transformation 
towards the elimination of disadvantage. The first is that the development 
organizations have their own agendas and community members have theirs, 
and they are usually not the same, nor are they the same within a community; 
there are misunderstandings and wilful misunderstandings.37 The second is 
that NGO development programmes are increasingly filling in for governmental 
neglect: they become permanent fixtures and create a structural dependency.38 
The fundamental problem is that NGO craft initiatives, and their other 
income-generating projects for poor communities do not address the problem 
head-on, which is that an impoverished underclass is a structural part of the 
economy and the society, in which political power is tightly held by a small elite. 
NGO programmes for the people of urban informal areas and rural villages are 
thus a diversion. They would not be needed if there was equality of opportunity 
for all – fair wages, affordable healthcare and housing, and, linking all these, 
free access to good quality education. These are the conditions enjoyed, and 
taken for granted by the majority of Australians, and Australian craftworkers.
Conclusion
Every November, when the Tasmanian Craft Fair is running at Deloraine, 
the Egyptian village of Tunis holds its Pottery and Handicrafts Festival. Like 
Deloraine’s, this event began forty years ago when a Swiss artist, Evelyne Porret, 

90
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
her husband and children, came to live in Tunis, among palm trees beside Lake 
Qaroun, near the town of Fayoum. She started making pottery. The children of 
the village watched her and she noticed how they played with mud from the 
stream making it into the shapes of tractors and animals. Evelyne Porret had 
worked with Egyptian architect Ramses Wissa Wassef on a project with children 
in Haraneya, Giza, and was impressed with the way he harnessed their talents.39 
This gave her the idea of starting a pottery school. It took time, and there were 
bureaucratic hurdles, but the Fayoum Pottery School opened, and in time, some 
of the graduates set up studios in their houses (Figure 5.2). Tunis now has a 
reputation for its distinctive pottery. Visitors come from Cairo and overseas. 
Others were attracted. The respected artist Mohamed Abla established an Art 
Centre and Museum of Caricature. There is a modest eco-lodge.40
The organic development of the Fayoum Pottery School has been 
slow: it takes a long time to acquire craft skills. This contrasts with the 
programmes of large NGOs, where bureaucracies push on-the-ground 
staff and volunteers to deliver unrealistic goals in unfeasible timeframes; in 
the meantime, small NGOs are idealistic, often lacking the resources and 
knowledge to reach their aims. Craft as a means of economic development 
happens unintentionally. Its results are small, not spectacular. It happens 
where there are conditions for reciprocity, and it can take a lifetime. Political 
change – towards an equitable and quality-based economy – is on the same 
timeline.
FIGURE 5.2  Work of graduates of the Fayoum Pottery School: Platter or wall 
plaque (unknown Fayoum potter). The design is based on decorative elements on 
front of houses of Tunis village Fayoum; Bowl by Mahmoud Elsherif. Photos by 
Tony Fry.

91
LEISURE AND LIVELIHOOD
Notes
1	 Tasmania’s population as at June 2019 was 534,000. See Australian 
Demographic Statistics, https://www​.abs​.gov​.au​/ausstats​/abs@​.nsf​/mf​/3101.0 
The population of greater Cairo is 18.8 million (Cairo Governate 9.8 million 
plus Giza Governate 9 million). https​:/​/ww​w​.cit​ypopu​latio​n​.de/​en​/eg​ypt​/a​dmin/​
2	 Decoloniality demolishes the ‘post’ of postcolonialism, asserting that 
colonialism does not end with the arrival of political independence but 
continues as the imposed modes of thinking, fracturing of ways of being and 
of communities, and other destructions of colonialism continue through many 
generations. As Madina Tlostanova says, ‘Global coloniality . . . continues 
long after colonialism is over and flourishes in unexpected and not evident 
spheres of modern disciplines and academic divisions, in the production 
and distribution of knowledge, as well as in geo-historical and geo-political 
situations’. Decoloniality, as a discourse of scholars of the Global South, names 
a process, and one that must happen through ‘delinking from modernity/
coloniality and decolonizing our being, knowledge, perception, gender, and 
memory’. Madina V. Tlostanova, ‘What Is Coloniality of Knowledge?’ Design 
Philosophy Reader, ed. A.-M. Willis (Bloomsbury: London, 2019), 110. See 
also B. Santos, Epistemologies of the South: Justice Against Epistemicide 
(London: Routledge, 2016) and W. Mignolo and A. Escobar, ed., Globalization 
and the Decolonial Option (London: Routledge, 2009).
3	 The distinction between politics and the political underpins Tony Fry’s Design 
as Politics (Oxford: Berg, 2011), which also has much to say on how design 
and craft could be remade as political practices.
4	 Living and working in Cairo 2013 to 2017 and visits 2018 and 2019.
5	 Jessica Hemmings, ‘Rereading and Revising: Acknowledging the Smallness 
(Sometimes) of Craft’, Craft Research 9, no. 2 (2018): 273–86, 276.
6	 Ibid., 274.
7	 Hemmings discusses novels and short stories by Isabelle Allende, Rohinton 
Mistry, Yvonne Vera, Tsitsi Dangarembga and Brian Chikwava.
8	 Hemmings, ‘Rereading and Revising’, 284.
9	 For an illustrated account of the crafts of building, their history and 
contemporary applications see Agnieszka Dobrowolska, The Building Crafts 
of Cairo: A Living Tradition (Cairo: American University of Cairo Press, 2005).
10	 Khayamiya has been promoted internationally by Australian quilt-maker, 
Jenny Bowker, and art historian Sam Bowker, who has researched its history 
and contemporary contexts. See Sam Bowker, ‘The Urban Fabric of Cairo: 
Khayamiya and the Suradeq’, International Journal of Islamic Architecture 
3, no. 2 (2014): 475–501; and Sam Bowker, ‘The Symmetry of Khaymiya 
and Quilting: International Relations of the Egyptian Tentmakers in the Early 
2000s’, craft + design enquiry 6 (2014): 29–60.
11	 Susan Luckman, Jane Andrew and Tracy Crisp, Crafting Self: Promoting the 
Making Self in the Creative Micro-Economy (Adelaide: School of Creative 
Industries, University of South Australia, 2018), 18–19.
12	 Reem Saad, ‘Transformations of Marginality: Crafts and Craftspeople in 
Upper Egypt, Final Report’ (Cairo: Ford Foundation, 2007), 38–9.

92
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
13	 Saad, ‘Transformations of Marginality’, 7–8. Saad also notes that potters, 
unlike blacksmiths ‘do not carry the stigma of a “lowly origin”, as they are 
supposed to be . . . descendants of the Prophet’, 12.
14	 ‘The share of informal wage employment outside fixed establishments has 
increased especially fast: from 12% of total employment in 2006 to 18% 
in 2012 to 23% in 2018. This form of employment is most vulnerable to job 
insecurity, as measured by irregularity of employment and involuntary part-
time work. It also has some of the highest rates of exposure to occupational 
hazards and injuries’. Ragui Assaad, ‘Egyptian Economy Still Not Creating 
Good Jobs’, The Economic Research Forum, 21 October 2019. https​:/​/th​eforu​
m​.erf​.org.​eg​/20​19​/10​/21​/e​gypti​an​-ec​onomy​-stil​l​-not​-cr​ea​ting-​good-​jobs/​
15	 Australia’s economy is 71 per cent service sector; Egypt’s mixed economy is 
54 per cent service sector.
16	 https://www​.abs​.gov​.au​/ausstats​/abs@​.nsf​/Lookup​/4172​.0main​
+features232014
17	 ‘Craft: Original, handmade craft that is high in quality, innovative in its use 
of materials and aesthetic vision and has been made by a skilled craft 
practitioner (artist, designer, maker), in the areas of ceramics, fibre/ textiles, 
glass, woodwork, metalwork, jewelry, furniture and new technologies.’ And 
‘Contemporary craft: Original, high quality, craft that was recently made 
and/or produced by a living craft practitioner and the result of an individual 
process of investigation and critical enquiry. This can include work that is 
designed by a practitioner and produced by another practitioner or machine 
process.’ Liana Heath and Joe Pasco, Mapping the Australian Craft Sector 
(Sydney: NAVA, 2014), 9.
18	 David Throsby and Anita Zednik, ‘Do You Really Expect to Get Paid? An 
Economic Study of Professional Artists in Australia’ (Surry Hills, NSW: 
Australia Council for the Arts, 2010); and S. Cunningham and P. Higgs, 
‘What’s Your Other Job? A Census Analysis of Arts Employment in Australia’ 
(Surry Hills, NSW: Australia Council for the Arts, 2010).
19	 Luckman et al., Crafting Self, 41–2.
20	 Australian Bureau of Statistics, Participation in Selected Cultural Activities, 
Australia, 2017-18 (Canberra: ABS, 2019), https://www​.abs​.gov​.au​/ausstats​/
abs@​.nsf​/mf​/4921.0 The survey measured active participation in the previous 
12 months; ‘active’ meant playing a musical instrument rather than attending 
a concert, making art rather than visiting an exhibition, etc. It was conducted 
by phone, had 28,243 respondents and found that 31.4% of Australian adults 
participate actively in culture. Women had a higher participation rate (37%) 
than men (25%).
21	 Richard Sennett, The Craftsman (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2008), 
199–200.
22	 Fry, Design as Politics, 64–5, 94–5, 139–40, 208.
23	 Mai Samih, ‘Many Craftsmen in Egypt Are Developing Their Skills to Meet 
the Increasing Needs of Middle-class Customers’, 30 July 2019. http:​/​/eng​
lish.​ahram​.org.​eg​/Ne​wsCon​tent/​7​/0​/3​38488​/Life​-​-Sty​le​/0/​Egypt​-Deve​lopin​g​
-the​ir​-cr​afts.​aspx

93
LEISURE AND LIVELIHOOD
24	 According Mosaad Omran, president of the Chamber of Handicrafts Industry 
in an interview with Egyptian Streets. https​:/​/eg​yptia​nstre​ets​.c​om​/20​19​/10​/17​
/t​hree-​handi​craft​-skil​lsets​-that​-are​-​dying​-in​-e​gypt/​
25	 Overseas visitor numbers declined dramatically after the Revolution of 
2011 and the instability that followed. Since 2017 they have slowly started to 
increase.
26	 Saad, ‘Transformations of Marginality’, 65.
27	 The rarity of middle-class home craft (and the labyrinthine character of the 
city to an outsider) is captured in this exchange on a Cairo Expat Forum in 
2014:
12 March: Where can one buy wool and knitting/crochet and craft things 
from? . . . Anyone know of anywhere?
13 March: I know someone who knits and they said there is a small shop in 
grand mall. Good luck!
13 March: Yes, Maadi grand mall. Ground floor near the entrance on the side 
of road 250.
21 March: There is another store that sells yarns and sewing supplies, just 
off of where the bridge descends before you get to Midan Horeyya. It’s 
called Tricot MM. The exact location on the Yellow Pages map isn’t quite 
right. If you turn right onto Rd. 100 . . . I’ve heard of another store downtown 
called Abd El Hady (الهادي عبد) located in a small street left off 26th July after 
Sharia Emadeddin, heading towards the Attaba metro station . . . https​:/​/ww​
w​.exp​atfor​um​.co​m​/exp​ats​/e​gypt-​expat​-foru​m​-exp​ats​-l​iving​-egyp​t​/369​697​-w​
here-​buy​-w​ool​.h​tml
28	 This was disrupted from the 1980s onwards with increasing numbers of 
middle-class women starting to wear the hijab, and the subsequent arrival 
of ‘Islamic chic’ fashion. Mona Abaza, ‘Shifting Landscapes of Fashion in 
Contemporary Egypt’, Fashion Theory 11, no. 2/3 (2007): 281–97, 288–9.
29	 Ibid., 291–4.
30	 Saad, ‘Transformations of Marginality’, 53–4.
31	 Abaza, ‘Shifting Landscapes of Fashion in Contemporary Egypt’, 294–5.
32	 Anne-Emmanuèle Calvès, ‘Empowerment: The History of a Key Concept in 
Contemporary Development Discourse’, Revue Tiers Monde 200 (2009/4): 
735–49, 746.
33	 Ibid.
34	 Interview with Sherif El Ghamrawy, founder of Hemaya and co-founder of 
Badaweya. https​:/​/ww​w​.cha​ngema​kers.​com​/M​ENAwo​men​/b​log​/e​mpowe​
ring-​women​-and-​reviv​ing​-b​edoui​n​-tra​ditio​ns
35	 Reports on NGO projects are difficult to obtain. Annual Reports and case 
studies on the websites of such organizations are not very informative as 
their function is promotional, emphasizing the numbers of people who have 
benefitted from their programmes, which can seem impressive but often 
what is measured is just ‘people through the door’. A rare example of a 
publicly accessible detailed report is by Thaap Consultancy and Advisory 

94
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
Services, ‘Empowering Women Through Craft. UNESCO-Norway Funded 
Project: Mapping of Cultural Assets in Districts Multan and Bahawalpur, End 
of Assignment Report’ (Lahore: Thaap CAS, 2010). https​:/​/ww​w​.aca​demia​
.edu/​10203​23​/EM​POWER​ING​_W​OMEN_​TH​ROU​GH​_CR​AFTS
36	 Saad, ‘Transformations of Marginality’, 75.
37	 Gwendolyn Kulick discusses some telling examples in ‘Conducting Design 
Research in Pakistan’s Craft Sector: Opportunities and Limitations’, Nordes: 
Design Ecologies, no. 6 (2015).https​:/​/ar​chive​.nord​es​.or​g​/ind​ex​.ph​p​/n13​/arti​
cle​/​v​iew​/4​40​/41​2
38	 See Anne-Marie Willis and Eman Elbana, ‘Socially Engaged Design: A Critical 
Discussion with Reference to an Egyptian Village’, Design Philosophy Papers 
14, no. 1–2 (2016): 3–57.
39	 Ramses Wissa Wassef worked closely with Hassan Fathy whose ill-fated 
New Gourna village was the basis of his book Architecture of the Poor that 
became very influential internationally, if not in Egypt.
40	 This account is based on a visit in 2015, and ‘From Mud to Art: The 
Proud Potters of Egypt Shaping Futures Through Clay’, Middle East Eye, 
11 December 2019. https​:/​/ww​w​.mid​dleea​steye​.net/​disco​ver​/p​otter​y​-​rur​al​-
eg​ypt

PART 2
Craft Practice

96	

6
The politics of craft and 
working without skill 
Reconsidering craftsmanship 
and the community of practice
Alanna Cant
T
hese days, ‘artisanal’ and ‘craft’ are everywhere. From cheese and beer 
to beauty products and landscaping services, in contemporary North 
American and Western European markets, these words now function as a 
shorthand to indicate goods that are ostensibly made in less mechanized 
forms of production than their industrially produced equivalents.1 Although 
the exact measure of artisanal objects’ ‘handmade-ness’ is highly variable 
and often impossible to determine, the ability to position one’s product as 
artisanally produced is lucrative in the twenty-first century.2 
The renewed interest in craftwork is driven by particular emergent upper-
middle class dispositions that lightly critique – but do not reject – industrial 
capitalism and mass manufacturing. These dispositions are marked by the 
cultivation of taste, expertise and aesthetics that generally relate to lifestyles 
and consumption, rather than individuals’ political or working lives. At the heart 
of these perspectives is the implicit and explicit assumption that handmade 
products necessarily have a high level of quality, which derives from their 
maker’s skilfulness and satisfaction with their work, thus making them worthy 
of higher prices.3

98
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
Craft, as it is colloquially understood, is therefore intimately connected to a 
particular ethics that places high value on producers’ learned skills, abilities, 
thoughtfulness and even pleasure.4 This ethics is neatly illustrated by the 
way that we use the term ‘craftsmanship’ to indicate precision, mastery 
and rigour, rather than simply the condition of working as a craftsperson, 
which is what the word grammatically suggests. 5 I want to draw attention 
to this semantic shift in this chapter. It is analytically important to do so, 
because this particular ethical understanding of craftsmanship has heavily 
influenced the way that craft scholars imagine the subject of our studies. 
We, too, tend to implicitly believe that handmade objects, food and drink 
are made through more satisfactory and less alienating processes than 
industrial goods. 
As I will discuss, this development is perfectly understandable from the 
perspective of researchers. However, one consequence is that certain kinds 
of craftspeople become invisible when we only approach craft in this way – 
particularly those who work at lower ends of artisanal commodity markets. 
This invisibility is decidedly political in nature, in ways that go beyond just 
issues of representation: it reinforces hierarchies of power and value among 
producers by excluding those craftspeople who do not fit the archetype of 
the skilful, satisfied artisan. As these hierarchies also inform markets for 
craftwork, they directly affect artisans’ livelihoods and well-being. As such, the 
semantic shift between craft as ‘something that is made by hand’ and craft as 
‘something that is made by hand that manifests skill, perception, and quality’ 
engenders a political act.
In order to highlight the consequences of this slippage, I will focus here on 
the concepts of ‘craftsmanship’ and the ‘community of practice’ (CoP) because 
they have been so useful to us as analytic frames. I do not intend this as a 
critique of the CoP approach per se; rather, I use CoP as a foil to question what 
and whom gets missed when we imagine artisanship as an ethical condition 
of being, rather than a category of person who makes things by hand. Drawing 
on long-term ethnographic research that I conducted with woodcarvers in 
Oaxaca, Mexico, I will show how the CoP approach does not account for 
artisans whose personalities and conditions of work mean that they regularly 
work ‘without skill’.6 While most of the artisans I worked with enjoyed the 
rhythm and flow of their craft, there were a few who resisted these qualities 
of the work and at times resented the conditions of economy and chance that 
made craftwork their fate. Since they did not perceive their work as a satisfying 
engagement with materials and form, formulations of ‘craftsmanship’ and the 
‘community of practice’ are not sufficient for understanding their experiences. 
I begin by exploring the ways that ethical understandings of craftsmanship 
have influenced scholarly approaches to craft, and how the CoP approach 
reinforces the exclusion of certain kinds of artisans. I then present the cases of 

99
THE POLITICS OF CRAFT AND WORKING WITHOUT SKILL
two artisans to highlight how their perceptions of their work are not reflected 
in the ideals of craftsmanship or the CoP formulation. 
Craftsmanship and the community of practice
the way [the old cabinetmaker] manages his budget, his time or his body, 
his use of language and choice of clothing are fully present in his ethic 
of scrupulous, impeccable craftsmanship and in the aesthetic of work for 
work’s sake which leads him to measure the beauty of his products by the 
care and patience that have gone into them.7
This description by Pierre Bourdieu of the relationship between the 
cabinetmaker’s habitus and his artisanal skill would not appear out of place if 
it had been written a century earlier by William Morris or John Ruskin. These 
Arts and Crafts thinkers sought to convince the public of the ethical value of 
craft by arguing that they were a true expression of ‘man’s happiness in his 
labour’.8 While we may admire these thinkers for their desire for social justice, 
we need a broader and more critical view of the relationship between artisans 
and their works. What of the cabinetmakers who do not live their lives by an 
aesthetic of work for work’s sake, yet still make cabinets? 
It is not a coincidence that researchers of craft would be predisposed 
to find that skilled practices are intrinsically satisfying and engaging: as 
scholars we tend to be interested in those things that people themselves 
find interesting and worthwhile.9 As Soumhya Venkatesan observes, studies 
of skill are most frequently focused on those skills that are valued by artisans 
and the larger societies in which they work, noting that this has given scholarly 
understandings of artisanal work a particular flavour of engaged consciousness 
and deep meaningfulness.10 As researchers, we are also often drawn to 
topics that connect with our own personal interests and experiences. It is not 
surprising to discover that Trevor Marchand, who has produced fascinating 
ethnographies of building and carpentry in Yemen, Mali and the UK, has 
trained in architecture and carpentry.11 Or that Richard Sennett, whose book 
The Craftsman has had wide general appeal beyond the academy, has played 
the piano and the cello since childhood.12 It is not a stretch to see that because 
we find pleasure in skilled activity, we are interested in questions of skill itself 
and gravitate towards research participants who also take pleasure in their 
work. This synergy between researcher and participant has been extremely 
productive: apprenticeship and co-authorship have become important research 
strategies, part of what Tim Ingold describes as ‘knowing from the inside’.13 In 
working alongside our research participants, rather than just observing their 

100
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
tasks, ethnographers of craft have made important insights into the cognitive, 
didactic, embodied and moral processes through which objects and artisans 
come into being.14 
This emphasis on ‘making’, rather than production, has been analytically as well 
as methodologically fruitful. It has allowed us to pry apart questions of materials 
from materiality; authorship from production; and the larger social experiences 
of artisanship from the chaîne opératoire.15 The downside to such an approach is 
that the majority of current research has been about people who want to cultivate 
their skills and who enjoy doing their work.16 For example, Sennett argues near 
the end of The Craftsman that nearly anyone can become a good craftsperson 
with sufficient work and attention, without ever asking in what circumstances 
people may not be able, or even want, to do so.17 For Sennett, the opposite of 
skill is not an absence of skill, but the coup de foudre, the sudden inspiration.18 
This position is, in a sense, tautological, since both of these conditions assume 
an end-result of quality work and satisfaction for the maker (albeit by different 
paths); in choosing cases to study the nature of craftsmanship, Sennett only 
compares examples where craftsmanship is already evident to him. 
A similar ethical position to that of craftsmanship discourses is also at 
the heart of the diverse analytical approaches that are now captured under 
the term ‘community of practice’, or CoP.19 In the past thirty years, CoP has 
become a foundational concept through which scholars of craft understand 
the experience of mutual participation that develops among people as they 
learn, make and create together. As a theory of skill acquisition through 
collective experience, CoP is certainly not limited to the study of craft: it has 
been applied to such diverse groups of people as science teachers, public 
administrators and American ‘nerd girls’.20 Coined by cognitive anthropologist 
Jean Lave and educational theorist Etienne Wenger in 1991, the term describes 
people who are engaged ‘in an activity system about which participants share 
understandings concerning what they are doing and what that means for their 
lives and for their communities’.21 The utility of the concept for social theorists 
lies in the way it links an understanding of human relationships and sociality 
to a broadly conceived view of learning, one that extends well beyond formal 
classroom-like situations where individuals occupy clearly defined teaching 
and learning roles. Instead, it captures how people are brought together by 
a specific need, and how their work to resolve this need through collective 
learning creates bonds between them over time (causing them to become 
a ‘community’). The model then goes on to explore how these learning 
experiences and bonds of belonging dramatically influence the collective and 
individual practices of ‘community’ members.22
Although Lave and Wenger recognize that power and ‘conditions of 
legitimacy’ play a role in how communities of practice develop and change 
over time, as William Warner Wood has discussed, they have not investigated 

101
THE POLITICS OF CRAFT AND WORKING WITHOUT SKILL
the implications of these for their model.23 The CoP approach identifies its 
subjects of investigation by looking at circumstances where the ‘community’ 
has already come into being, and works backwards to understand how 
they came together in the first place. In many ways, this is a necessity of 
the model itself, as it may be impossible to predict where and when such 
organic communities of learning will develop. However, as with Sennett’s 
understanding of craftsmanship, the result is a limited view of a given 
practice. The model cannot fully capture the experiences of those actors who 
are excluded from (or at least not wholly integrated into) the community of 
practice, since it is precisely shared learning and bonding that is the main 
interest of the CoP approach. Actors, practices, opinions and experiences that 
fall outside of these shared domains remain invisible. 
In the case of craftwork, the artisanal community of practice is identified 
by looking for those artisans who endorse or at least acknowledge the norms, 
standards, aesthetics and knowledge relating to production and marketing of 
that craft. Not all members of the community may meet its ideal standards, 
but they will acknowledge them, nonetheless. This delineation of the craft 
community may be sufficient in those artisanal fields where producers are 
primarily motivated by their personal interests, enthusiasm for, or ‘calling to’, 
the craft.24 However, in fields such as Oaxacan woodcarving, where most 
producers have become artisans, at least initially, out of economic necessity and 
lack of viable alternatives, it does not make sense to start from an assumption 
that all individuals working as artisans are accounted for by a CoP approach. 
In the remainder of this chapter, I present two individuals from my larger 
ethnographic research with Oaxacan woodcarvers. As should be clear, my 
intention is not to suggest that their experiences are somehow representative 
of artisans working in Oaxacan woodcarving or larger fields of Mexican craft 
production. Instead, I want to highlight how their structural positions and 
personal dispositions effectively make them invisible to analytic frameworks 
that imagine artisanship to be an ethical condition of being (someone who 
works with skill; a member of a community of practice) rather than just naming 
a person who makes things by hand. In drawing out these examples, I aim to 
show that such models of artisanship are not only analytically limiting but are 
also politically problematic, as those who do not already conform to archetypical 
ideas about artisans and craftwork become unrepresentable within them.
Working without skill in Oaxaca
Oaxacan woodcarvings, also known as alebrijes, provide a particularly good 
opportunity to investigate artisanal practices beyond those driven by an 

102
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
ethics of skill and collective learning. This is because, unlike some other 
forms of craftwork that are consumed through globalized art markets, the 
woodcarvings cannot be directly connected to long-standing traditions of 
cultural production.25 Because of this, there are few fixed norms through 
which woodcarvings are made and there is no formal apprenticeship structure 
through which younger artisans learn their craft. The carvings are generally 
purchased by tourists, ethnic/folk art collectors and gallery owners from 
Mexico, Canada and the United States; the character of these markets means 
that Oaxacan woodcarving is for the most part aesthetically conservative.26 
The village of San Martín Tilcajete, where I have conducted research since 
2008, is one of three main communities in the Central Valleys region of 
Oaxaca where the woodcarvings are produced. San Martín is arguably now 
the most successful of the villages, yet only very few families have been 
able to consolidate their work into a measure of financial stability. Many must 
combine income from woodcarving with other activities, such as running 
small corner shops, driving taxis and working in the tourism service sector. 
While higher end producers are able to dedicate themselves exclusively to 
woodcarving, only one family has become truly economically secure through 
this work, and their success appears to their neighbours to be difficult, if 
not impossible, to replicate.27 While woodcarving may not offer real security 
for most residents, 60 per cent of the village’s households are involved in 
their production.28 This is not at all surprising given the lack of alternatives, a 
consequence of larger conditions of economic and social underdevelopment 
in the region: over 50 per cent of households in San Martín are economically 
dependent on remittances from migrants who work in the United States, 
usually without visas.29
For those who wish to stay in Oaxaca, woodcarving appears to be one of 
the few options available that does not have significant educational or material 
barriers to entry. The costs of tools and materials are generally low; machetes 
and knives are common implements in all rural Oaxacan homes; and the 
wood, paint and insecticides needed are readily available, costing only a few 
pesos per figure. As San Martín Tilcajete is a craft community recognized 
and supported by the Oaxacan state, all villagers in principle can access the 
financial and marketing support that the state offers, without ever having their 
work inspected or evaluated. 
I began to think about people who do unskilful work in the first few weeks 
of my research, when I was still getting to know the artisans and their families. 
I tried to make sense of the fact that some seemed disinterested in cultivating 
their artisanal skills. While this could simply be explained as a disheartening 
consequence of woodcarving being their only real economic option, it does 
not explain why many artisans who find themselves in difficult economic 
conditions remain interested in developing their skills and ‘take pride’ in their 

103
THE POLITICS OF CRAFT AND WORKING WITHOUT SKILL
work. One evening I visited the home of Catalina García, whose family owned 
the most successful workshop in San Martín.30 I showed her some carvings I 
had bought throughout the day, and she picked up a small piece that had been 
made by Blanca Díaz, a woman whose workshop was close to the village’s 
main square. Looking at the piece, Catalina pursed her lips and said that she 
was dismayed that Blanca ‘works without skill’. This, she said, was not only 
bad for Blanca, but bad for everyone because it gave San Martín a bad name 
in the eyes of customers. 
Blanca’s work practices contrasted greatly with those of Catalina García 
and many of the other artisans in San Martín. Most of their workshops were 
quiet, orderly spaces where people concentrated on the tasks at hand. 
Although people often listened to raucous banda music on their radios, the 
football (soccer) was notably eschewed, as it was difficult to concentrate on 
the game and work at the same time. In contrast, Blanca’s workshop had a 
small television in the corner and throughout the day neighbours would pop 
in for a chat and Blanca would wander in and out to buy soda, to make phone 
calls or to just stand in the sun. Each morning, her husband would give her 
a box of carvings that were ready to be painted, and she would line up ten 
to fifteen of approximately the same size on her bench and choose three or 
four plastic bottles of acrylic paint from the shelf. Using one of these colours, 
she would paint all of the carvings with a base coat before returning to the 
beginning of the line to begin the decoration, choosing from the other colours 
at random as she went along, all the while keeping an eye on the telenovelas 
on the TV. 
As I did with other artisans whom I knew well, I would occasionally offer to 
help Blanca paint carvings as we talked, but on the third or fourth time I did 
so, she admonished me for being too slow, telling me that I wasted too much 
time on decorating. ‘Customers will buy these for fifty pesos, whether you 
spend five or fifteen minutes on them . . . it’s better to do them quickly and 
make more of them,’ she explained. I asked Blanca if it bothered her to make 
lower quality pieces. She paused, perhaps a little offended, and told me that of 
course sometimes she prefers to take her time and work on a large piece, but 
that making quick little pieces does not affect her abilities: ‘I know I can paint 
well if I want to, but sometimes I have to paint quickly!’ 
While this might sound like a classic explanation of an ‘economically rational’ 
actor, the truth was that Blanca’s workshop was always overflowing with 
finished pieces, and she never seemed under pressure to fulfil the orders that 
came in from wholesalers. Blanca was not really embarrassed or frustrated by 
working unskilfully and enjoyed the freedom, flexibility and pace that being an 
artisan in San Martín allowed her, especially compared to her previous work in 
a market stall in the nearby town of Ocotlán, which required her to rise early 
and work very hard all day. Blanca’s explanation of her work practices does not 

104
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
indicate that she was necessarily unskilled or desired to improve the quality 
of her work. Rather, Blanca chose to complete her work without using time or 
finesse, and she did not work to develop her skills further. 
Blanca’s perspective on her work can be usefully compared with the case 
of Juan, who was an employee in the Garcías’ workshop. Although he had 
worked for them for over four years, he had not developed his skills and 
had not moved on to the more difficult painting that his colleagues did. He 
preferred to do the preparation tasks of sanding and gluing. While this work 
was important to the production of the very expensive carvings made at the 
Garcías’, it was not considered skilled in the same way as the work done by 
the carvers and painters. The Garcías often expressed disappointment about 
Juan’s apparent complacency, especially since his father happened to be one 
of the first artisans in San Martín and was considered an expert carver. 
One evening, when visiting his family home, I asked him why he preferred 
preparation work when most of the other painters tried to avoid it. He told me 
that he just did not like painting that much, that he didn’t like how long it took, 
and he did not want the responsibility to decide how to paint the carvings. His 
mother Paula, who was cooking nearby scoffed, ‘You see, Alanna. It’s that my 
son is very lazy. He prefers to do nothing at all!’ While Paula characterized her 
son’s working habits as laziness, his own explanation indicates that actually he 
prefers the character of the work involved in sanding and preparation to that 
of painting. Like Blanca, he desired a working life that did not revolve around 
the deep engagement with materials and form that highly skilled painting 
requires. 
In fact, far from being lazy, Juan was keen to be involved in the more social 
side of the Garcías’ business; his decent level of spoken English allowed 
him to offer tours of the workshop when Miguel García was unavailable. He 
enjoyed chatting and interacting with tourists from all over the world and often 
charmed visitors into ordering carvings that were not yet even finished. One 
could say that he was working to cultivate his social or entrepreneurial skills in 
the place of his artisanal skills, but this was generally not recognized by others 
as a worthwhile activity, if it wasn’t accompanied by skilled artisanal work. 
Elsewhere, I have suggested that Blanca’s and Juan’s work practices 
evidence different ‘aesthetics of work’ that are at play within the woodcarving 
workshops of San Martín Tilcajete.31 I argued that this is important to understand 
because it indicates that not all artisans desire or pursue the experience of 
‘material engagement’ that Sennett and others identify as the affective core 
of craftsmanship. The recognition of skilful and unskilful work in San Martín 
Tilcajete can be seen to index different individuals’ ideas about the nature of 
desirable work itself. In other contexts, such differences may lead people to 
choose different career or vocational paths, perhaps eventually finding work 
that is more appropriate and satisfying to them. However, in San Martín, 

105
THE POLITICS OF CRAFT AND WORKING WITHOUT SKILL
where livelihood choices are extremely limited, making woodcarvings with 
skill appears as the most secure form of work that can be straightforwardly 
achieved, and hence is understood by many as superior to other modes of 
working.32
Although Blanca and Juan found ways to work that were agreeable to their 
own dispositions within the market for woodcarvings, these decisions had 
implications for them. Blanca’s work did not attract higher-paying customers 
who looked for the particular qualities of ‘craftsmanship’ discussed above, 
and she was not able to cultivate connections with important patrons like 
gallery owners and government officials who hold significant influence in the 
art worlds of Mexican craftwork.33 Juan’s reluctance to develop his artisanal 
skills meant that he was unlikely to secure higher wages at the Garcías’ or be 
able to strike out on his own by taking over his father’s workshop. There were 
also political implications: in craft communities like San Martín, where access 
to outsiders and opportunities for promotion can affect the fortunes of most 
families, recognition in the markets for ethnic arts and crafts easily translates 
into authority and power at the village, family and interpersonal levels.34
While Oaxacan artisans’ assessments of what constitutes ‘good’ and ‘bad’ 
artisanal work makes sense from their local on-the-ground perspectives, we 
should be aware of reinforcing such judgements in our scholarship. Analytical 
frameworks that emerge from what I have argued are essentially ethical 
positions about the value of craft, are unlikely to take Blanca and Juan on their 
own terms. More critically, when we start from a position that craft is valuable 
because it is by its very nature something that is made with quality through 
shared skills and values, we dismiss Blanca and Juan and others like them 
from the category of ‘craftsperson’. This not only impoverishes our ability to 
understand the nature of craft and artisanship, but also profoundly devalues 
the work and lives of people who make their living through producing objects 
by hand for national and global markets well beyond their control. Although 
we as scholars of craft may be motivated by our own experiences and desires 
for skill and quality, we must pay more attention to whom gets left out – or 
pushed out – of our analytical frames. In paying closer attention to the politics 
of our own scholarly practices, we may be able to intervene in the political 
field of craft itself by making the practices of all artisans recognizable and 
valuable within a more inclusive perspective on ‘craftsmanship’.
Notes
1	 I thank D Wood, Méadhbh McIvor, Daniela Peluso, Andrew Sanchez and 
Miranda Sheild-Johansson for their insightful comments on versions of this 
text.

106
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
2	 Clare Wilkinson Weber and Alicia Ory DeNicola, ‘Introduction: Taking Stock 
of Craft in Anthropology’, in Critical Craft: Technology, Globalization and 
Capitalism, ed. Clare Wilkinson-Weber and Alicia Ory DeNicola (London: 
Bloomsbury, 2016), 1–16.
3	 Heather Paxson, The Life of Cheese: Crafting Food and Value in America 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 2012); Susan Terrio, ‘Visions of 
Excess: Crafting Good Chocolate in France and the United States’, in Critical 
Craft, ed. Wilkinson-Weber and DeNicola, 135–51.
4	 Frances Mascia-Lees, ‘American Beauty: The Middle Class Arts and Crafts 
Revival in the United States’, in Critical Craft, ed. Wilkinson-Weber and 
DeNicola, 57–77.
5	 Eileen Boris, ‘Crafts Shop or Sweatshop? The Uses and Abuses of 
Craftsmanship in Twentieth Century America’, Journal of Design History 2, no. 
2/3 (1989): 175–92. Etymologically, the -ship suffix derives from proto-German 
through Old English, and until the nineteenth century only denoted a condition 
of being (as in ‘apprenticeship’, the condition of being an apprentice), rather 
than any inherent qualities of the person; T. F. Hoad, ed., ‘-ship’, in The Concise 
Dictionary of English Etymology (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996).
6	 I conducted twenty months of research in San Martín Tilcajete, Oaxaca, 
Mexico from 2008–2009. This research was funded by the Emslie Horniman 
Fund from the Royal Anthropological Institute. Interviews quoted herein 
were recorded during that period.
7	 Pierre Bourdieu, Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste, 
trans. Richard Nice (Cambridge: Harvard College, and Routledge and Kegan 
Paul, 1984), 173.
8	 William Morris, ‘The Art of the People’, in On Art and Socialism, ed. Norman 
Kelvin (Mineola: Dover Publications, 1999 [1884]), 31.
9	 This is also in part the result of the languages we use: the contemporary 
meaning of the English word ‘craft’ cannot be easily divorced from the 
broadly Marxist principles set out by the Arts and Crafts movement in 
England and the United States.
10	 Soumhya Venkatesan, ‘Learning to Weave, Weaving to Learn . . . What?’ 
Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 16, no. S1 (2010): S158–S175, 
173. For a detailed critique of the material engagement concept, see Tom 
Yarrow and Sian Jones, ‘“Stone Is Stone”: Engagement and Detachment 
in the Craft of Conservation Masonry’, Journal of the Royal Anthropological 
Institute 20, no. 2 (2014): 256–75.
11	 Trevor Marchand, Minaret Building and Apprenticeship in Yemen (Richmond: 
Curzon, 2001); Trevor Marchand, ‘Embodied Cognition and Communication: 
Studies with British Fine Woodworkers’, Journal of the Royal Anthropological 
Institute 16, no. 1 (2010): S100–S120.
12	 Richard Sennett, The Craftsman (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2008); 
Elizabeth Station, ‘Life in Practice’, The University of Chicago Magazine, 
November–December 2011.
13	 Tim Ingold, Making: Anthropology, Archaeology, Art and Architecture 
(London: Routledge, 2013).

107
THE POLITICS OF CRAFT AND WORKING WITHOUT SKILL
14	 Marchand, ‘Embodied Cognition’; Erin O’Connor, ‘Embodied Knowledge: The 
Expert of Meaning and the Struggle Towards Proficiency in Glassblowing’, 
Ethnography 6, no. 2 (2005): 183–204; Venkatesan, ‘Learning to Weave’.
15	 Alanna Cant, ‘“Making” Labour in Mexican Artisanal Workshops’, Journal of 
the Royal Anthropological Institute 24, no. S1 (2018): 61–74; Roy Dilley, ‘The 
Visibility and Invisibility of Production among Senegalese Craftsmen’, Journal 
of the Royal Anthropological Institute 10, no. 4 (2004): 797–813; Michael 
Herzfeld, The Body Impolitic: Artisans and Artifice in the Global Hierarchy of 
Value (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2004); Tim Ingold, ‘Materials 
Against Materiality’, Archaeological Dialogues 14, no. 1 (2007): 1–16; Mira 
Mohsini, ‘Crafting Muslim Artisans: Agency and Exclusion in India’s Urban 
Crafts Communities’, in Critical Craft, ed. Wilkinson-Weber and DeNicola, 
239–58.
16	 For a further critique of the ‘making’ approach, see Cant, ‘“Making” Labour’.
17	 Sennett, The Craftsman, 268.
18	 Ibid., 37.
19	 Andrew Cox, ‘What Are Communities of Practice? A Comparative Review 
of Four Seminal Works’, Journal of Information Science 31, no. 6 (2005): 
527–40.
20	 Rebecca Schneider, ‘Science Teacher Educators as a Community of Practice’, 
Journal of Science Teacher Education 18, no. 5 (2007): 693–697; Amy Smith, 
‘Knowledge by Association: Communities of Practice in Public Management’, 
Public Administration Quarterly 40, no. 3 (Fall 2016): 655–89; Mary Bucholtz, 
‘“Why Be Normal?": Language and Identity Practices in a Community of 
Nerd Girls’, Language in Society 28, no. 2 (June 1999): 203–23.
21	 Jean Lave and Etienne Wenger, Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral 
Participation (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991).
22	 Ibid.
23	 W. Warner Wood, Made in Mexico: Zapotec Weavers and the Global Ethnic 
Art Market (Austin: University of Texas Press, 2008), 16–17. Wood goes on 
to argue that the model can be bolstered by drawing on Bourdieu’s work on 
‘fields’ of social production, an approach I have found very useful in my own 
work.
24	 For an interesting example of this, see Dawn Nafus and Richard Beckwith, 
‘Number in Craft: Situated Numbering Practices in Do-It-Yourself Sensor 
Systems’, in Critical Craft, ed. Wilkinson-Weber and DeNicola, 115–34.
25	 Michael Chibnik, Crafting Tradition: The Making and Marketing of Oaxacan 
Wood Carvings (Austin: University of Texas Press, 2003).
26	 Alanna Cant, The Value of Aesthetics: Oaxacan Woodcarvers in Global 
Economies of Culture (Austin: University of Texas Press, 2019).
27	 Ibid.
28	 Figure based on a survey conducted March to April 2008.
29	 Jeffrey Cohen, The Culture of Migration in Southern Mexico (Austin: 
University of Texas Press, 2004); Serena Eréndira Serrano Oswald, 
‘Migration, Gender and Woodcarving in San Martín Tilcajete’, in Migration, 

108
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
Gender and Social Justice: Perspectives on Human Insecurity, ed. Thanh-
Dam Truong, Des Gasper, Jeff Handmaker and Sylvia I. Bergh (Heidelberg, 
New York and London: Springer, 2014), 177–92.
30	 All personal names are pseudonyms.
31	 Cant, The Value of Aesthetics, 50–67.
32	 Ibid. This perspective is reinforced by markets that place value on particular 
aesthetics and artistic conventions, such as signatures. See Cant, ‘“Making” 
Labour’.
33	 See Chibnik, Crafting Tradition and Wood, Made in Mexico.
34	 Cant, The Value of Aesthetics, 68–84, 85–129.

7
From ‘making flowers’ 
to imagining futures 
Rohingya refugee women 
innovate a heritage craft
Lurdes Macedo, David Palazón, Shahirah 
Majumdar and Verity Marques
Postcolonial contradictions 
and humanitarian work
T
he contradictions of the postcolonial world have been intensively 
discussed by intellectuals and scholars,1 but rarely by those who face 
the everyday challenges resulting from the postcolonial legacy, especially 
in their work. Humanitarian and development officers are among those on 
the ground facing the daily challenges of overcoming these contradictions in 
order to successfully implement policies and programmes. However, they 
are often not connected to contemporary academic postcolonial thought, 
which represents a lost opportunity in that its main authors believe that the 
theory itself can contribute to practical political change. It is possible that the 
academic discussions are not sufficiently adapted to match these workers’ 
needs. Nevertheless, it would be helpful to take into account some of the key 
ideas delivered by the most influential postcolonial thinkers should we want 

110
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
to clarify the representation systems in which humanitarian and development 
workers operate. 
It was Spivak2 who called our attention to the inevitability of these systems 
of representation being characterized by a double bond – that of a Eurocentric 
arrogance and an unexamined nativism. This is why the author previously 
emphasized the problem of the voiceless in the contemporary world in her 
discussion ‘Can the Subaltern speak?’. In this foundational text, Spivak3 
demonstrated how supposedly well-intentioned people, in disseminating the 
causes of the voiceless independently, ultimately appropriated their voices 
instead of giving ownership of the narrative to the voiceless themselves. 
This demonstration was in line with Said4 who pointed out that the power to 
narrate, or to prevent other narratives from forming and arising, is a weapon 
for imperialism in cultural terms, and is one of the main connections between 
culture and imperialism.
The alternative path necessarily entails the deconstruction of the 
mainstream discourse which has legitimized the incessant reproduction 
of ‘sanctioned ignorance’.5 For this very reason, Spivak6 went on to state 
that care in deconstructing this discourse must be surrounded by a critical 
framework that allows us to understand that ‘it is not a mere tautology to say 
that the colonial or postcolonial subaltern is defined as the being on the other 
side of difference, or an epistemic fracture, even from other groupings among 
the colonised’.7 
On the other hand, Spivak8 noted that in the contemporary world, the 
dominant culture simultaneously promotes the idea of an ancient Third World 
filled with distant cultures, explored but with intact heritages waiting to be 
recovered, constituting the emergence of the ‘South’ as proof of transnational 
cultural exchange. However, that emergence must be put into perspective 
in multiple ways. In fact, we should be aware of Bhabha’s9 formulations of 
stereotypes and discrimination inherited from colonial discourse. These 
continue to constitute the main discursive strategy of the ideological 
construction of alterity, since they impose themselves as a form of knowledge 
and identification of the ‘already known’10 that must be ‘anxiously repeated’.11 
In producing probabilistic truths or predictions, stereotypes are always in 
excess of what can be empirically proved or explained by logic.12 Hence, 
stereotypes, when configuring a set of unwavering and simplified beliefs 
about the attributes of each other’s groups of belonging,13 present the danger 
of compromising structural changes.
Departing from these key thoughts, we propose to discuss empowerment 
and ownership strategies and processes with Rohingya refugee women 
which have been undertaken by a team from the International Organization for 
Migration (IOM) in Cox’s Bazar, Bangladesh. These strategies and processes 
are resulting in practical political change, ameliorating the lives of these 

111
FROM ‘MAKING FLOWERS’ TO IMAGINING FUTURES
women as refugees living in an untenable political situation that is far from 
being resolved.
Rohingya and their current cultural condition 
First, it is necessary to introduce the Rohingya and their current situation in 
order to clarify the context and the object of the research-action we intend to 
describe in the following pages.
In postcolonial Myanmar, the Rohingya are a persecuted minority of the 
conservative Sunni branch of Islam located within the Rakhine state, an area 
shared with a Buddhist majority. In August 2017, more than 700,000 Rohingya 
fled to Bangladesh in what has been described as ‘the largest refugee 
migration the region has ever seen’.14 They were stripped of their material and 
symbolic belongings. Their traditional villages were burnt and their livelihoods 
erased, resulting in a decimated Rohingya material culture. The Rohingya were 
resettled in refugee camps in Bangladesh, often separated from their family 
groups (gusshi) and communities (shomaz), social units which form the basis 
of their sense of belonging and social standing.15 As a result, their traditional 
systems of social organization and community welfare were damaged. 
Despite efforts made by United Nations agencies and international non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) to return dignity to their lives, the artificial 
context of the camps makes it challenging for the Rohingya to maintain their 
traditions and keep their knowledge alive. Cultural practices grounded in the 
rural environment of Rakhine are difficult to translate to the dense, urban 
sprawl of the camps without degrees of adaptation or innovation.
Di Giovanni observes that cycles of creative expression are associated 
with events and, therefore, the analysis of the ‘intersections between political 
experience and aesthetic creation in contemporary forms of collective action’16 
must be encouraged. The author acknowledges that these intersections 
are not new, since artistic manifestations are ‘historically and symbolically 
associated with activism, protest, the breakdown of collective processes of 
self-organisation, denunciation, and the claim of rights’.17
Thus, innovation to Rohingya traditional crafts must be analysed in terms 
of political effectiveness as well as aesthetic language. Accordingly, we 
should consider craftivism as an analytical category, even if stability and 
consensus is lacking in this concept, both in the social sciences and arts.18 
Supported by collaborative practices, craftivism allows the analysis of craft 
expressions articulated with experiences lived in processes of oppression and 
with experiences of empowerment in contemporary societies.19 In this line 
of thought, Farzana20 argued that Rohingya refugees21 express their identity 

112
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
through their narratives and their cultural assets. Aesthetic expressions such 
as songs (taranas) and drawings were ‘produced by ordinary refugees as 
natural expressions of mind and self; therefore, these are highly significant 
in illustrating their sense of identity and belonging, and in expressing a 
different form of resistance, without direct confrontation or protest, against 
the discrimination they have experienced’.22 
The need for creative mediums to express belonging and identity is 
confirmed by a 2018 assessment by the IOM’s Mental Health and Psychosocial 
Support (MHPSS) unit, which found that more than 50 per cent of the Rohingya 
refugee respondents identified an ‘identity crisis’23 as having the largest 
impact on their well-being at the community level. A project called the Cultural 
Memory Centre (CMC) was thus conceived by the IOM to address this need. 
Focused on cultural memory and identity, the CMC is organized around two 
streams: the preservation of Rohingya cultural heritage through inventorying 
artefacts of tangible and intangible heritage, and the training, development 
and resourcing of Rohingya cultural practitioners to support the community 
to sustain their traditions and knowledge across the journey of displacement. 
Innovation is vital to this second stream of work. By enabling Rohingya cultural 
practitioners to marry the existing vocabulary of the Rohingya culture-sphere 
with new materials, techniques and categories of subject matter, innovation 
opens up space for the community to express their identity and experience in 
a politically impactful and aesthetically powerful way. Thus, by facilitating the 
preservation of the Rohingya cultural identity through a craftivist approach, the 
CMC may provide a platform for Rohingya self-advocacy.
Rohingya women: voiceless among the voiceless
According to available accounts, most Rohingya women in Myanmar were 
restricted to the home and domestic side of life. They maintained the household, 
cared for the children and elderly, prepared food, worked subsistence farms, 
raised livestock on their properties and tended gardens. Coyle, et al.24 describe 
how, for the sake of the family’s social standing (izzot), Rohingya women 
were expected to maintain some form of purdah, or seclusion, to ‘veil’ them 
from men outside the family network: ‘Though the Rohingya community 
traditionally did not follow a strict shariah-based social governance system, 
elements of it were observed, particularly relating to women. A woman’s izzot 
was linked to her adherence to purdah a social practice of women’s seclusion 
to “private” spaces.’25 While still in Myanmar, some Rohingya women did 
generate income through piecemeal tailoring or embroidery, or as teachers 
or volunteers employed by development organizations. The vast majority of 

113
FROM ‘MAKING FLOWERS’ TO IMAGINING FUTURES
Rohingya families, however, would have prevented their women from working 
or moving freely outside the private space of the domestic sphere, especially 
in cases where such work would require them to interact with male strangers.
If rural life, combined with the Myanmar Government’s restrictions on 
Rohingya people’s movement, education and socioeconomic opportunities, can 
be said to have rendered Rohingya people ‘voiceless’, it follows that Rohingya 
women’s exclusion from public life and regular employment rendered them 
doubly vulnerable. While Rohingya women’s agency in the domestic sphere in 
Myanmar must be further studied, they lacked equal power and ‘voice’, even 
within the private, bounded space of the family. 
Conditions of displacement have challenged these gendered notions of 
‘work’ in the Rohingya community. In the absence of work opportunities 
for men in the camps (the Government of Bangladesh prohibits refugee 
employment, except in cash-for-work activities), some Rohingya women 
are taking on the traditional male provider role through paid participation 
in Women and Girl Friendly Space (WGFS)26 activities, livelihood projects 
(tailoring, stitching, crafting, etc.), or as ‘cash-for-work’ volunteers working 
with humanitarian agencies. In a focus group discussion (FGD) with the ten 
women engaged in a paid embroidery project by the CMC, evidence was 
found that these new roles may be positively shifting the way the women are 
viewed and treated within their families, as well as their self-concepts.
The aforementioned transformation in gender roles can be discussed 
considering Butler’s thoughts27 on gender being performative. For Butler, no 
identity exists behind the acts that supposedly express gender, and these 
acts constitute, rather than express, the illusion of the stable gender identity. 
In this sense, many of the Rohingya women in the camps are facing the 
challenge of emancipating themselves through changing performances that 
resemble male gender roles. The social and political consequences of this 
inadvertent emancipation resulting from forced migration may become an 
issue – positive or negative – for future researchers.
‘Making flowers’: embroidery 
in Rohingya culture
Called fultola, the craft of embroidery is translated as ‘making flowers’ in the 
Rohingya language. Fultola historically falls within the Rohingya women’s 
domestic sphere, with Rohingya women using traditional motifs, usually 
flowers, to embellish pillowcases, headscarves and blouses. These were 
gifted during culturally significant events such as weddings or births. A skilled 
embroiderer was praised for her skill and might have accepted commissions 

114
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
from other families. S., a twenty-five-year-old Rohingya woman engaged 
by the CMC, said in an interview with CMC project staff that she used to 
sell three sets of pillowcases per month while living in Myanmar, spending 
her earnings on her husband and children. Of the twenty households in her 
immediate neighbourhood in Myanmar, she was one of just three women to 
earn an income through embroidery. 
Fultola is one of the few income streams available to Rohingya women, as 
the work can be done at home or in women-only spaces such as the NGO-run 
WGFS in the refugee camps. In interviews, Rohingya women have reported 
their engagement in skills-training embroidery projects run by humanitarian 
or development actors both before and during their displacement. Thus, as 
a socially sanctioned livelihood activity for Rohingya women with a firmly 
established place in Rohingya cultural heritage, the craft is a culturally 
appropriate means for Rohingya women to review and express their personal 
and collective identities.
The CMC embroidery project was launched in April 2019 with a series of 
storytelling workshops held with Rohingya men and women. Participants 
shared stories and memories, which were collected, categorized and 
highlighted for visual details which could be translated into imagery for 
a ‘storytelling tapestry’. The embroidery itself was undertaken at a WGFS, 
women-only spaces that foster storytelling, experimentation and solidarity. 
The project’s participants had previously only worked within the traditional 
botanical vocabulary of fultola. Here, they were asked to embroider entire 
scenes of domestic and communal life – such as children on swings and 
playing, men praying together at the mosque, women tending farms and 
milling rice, and general scenes depicting their homes, the landscape and 
Myanmar life. This experimentation led to the beginnings of the development 
of a narrative and reinforced the value of their story. It might also be argued 
that the introduction of a broader range of embroidery motifs assisted 
in ‘empowering’ the women to shift from a feminine aesthetic to one that 
implied the political past and present.
As a pilot project, the tapestry was the first attempt to introduce narrative 
storytelling into the previously limited language of fultola. It is important 
to note that, for the Rohingya, storytelling is the domain of the oral, rarely 
captured in visual or written forms, as the Rohingya language lacks a widely 
recognized script, and 66 per cent of the refugee population in Cox’s Bazar 
cannot read, according to the 2019 Information Needs Assessment by the 
media organization, Internews.28 In the Rohingya world, storytelling unfolds 
ephemerally, through folk tales told to children by their grandmothers at 
bedtime, through gossip in the women’s quarters in the quiet afternoons, in 
men’s conversations in roadside coffee stalls and among fishermen yarning 
on the shore after bringing boats in from the water. In the conditions of 

115
FROM ‘MAKING FLOWERS’ TO IMAGINING FUTURES
displacement, these storytelling traditions are at risk of being lost, increasing 
the urgency to find new ways of telling cultural stories. Thus, merging the 
craft of embroidery with narrative storytelling is a critical innovation within the 
Rohingya culture-sphere, preserving a heritage craft and elevating it beyond 
decorative ‘women’s work’ into a powerful medium for memorializing the 
stories of the Rohingya people and communicating them to the watching 
world.
The tapestries
The next phase of the project was a series of workshops encompassing a 
range of subject matter and thematic content related to cultural and personal 
identity. Creation of a tapestry titled Dream Garden followed immediately 
after the storytelling tapestry. Consisting of individual panels embroidered 
with flower and garden wildlife motifs, the Dream Garden memorializes the 
Rohingya women’s gardens in the rural Rakhine state. The women reported 
that creating the Dream Garden tapestry was a happy and nostalgic process. 
The tapestry represented the memory of better times and celebrated their 
traditional connection with nature. The women also embroidered a greater 
variety of flowers than they traditionally would have, demonstrating their 
developed skills through the quality of their work.
Camp Life is a beautified portrayal of life in the camp and has a distinct 
theme and style from the previous tapestry. It aimed to expand the women’s 
embroidery skills to include observational life in the camp. The Camp Life 
tapestry uses a bright leaf-green cloth as a background and depicts winding 
streets with houses set on either side. The streets are punctuated with a 
variety of tree species and solar panel poles. It includes what the community 
holds dear or deems important (Figure 7.1).
The tapestry is stitched with vivid threads and represents an ideal version 
of the camp in that the details of the scenes are not replicas of what would be 
found in the camp. Instead, the tapestry hints at a desire to live in a greener 
space, with trees and traditional houses set at a distance from one another, 
conveying a sense of joy and aspiration. The Camp Life tapestry exhibits 
further developed embroidery skills and a unified narrative, at the same time 
as commenting on the refugees’ present conditions.
For the next project phase, CMC facilitators assembled a group of 
ten Rohingya women and girls, ranging in age from 16 to 28, to train and 
resource as cultural practitioners and ‘speakers’ of the Rohingya experience. 
They were selected based on skill and experience. Several had learned to 
embroider during training programmes in Myanmar, others from older sisters 

116
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
or mothers, and one woman had paid a female embroidery master in her 
home town in Rakhine for lessons. Four of the women reported selling their 
work on commission to neighbours and family. However, none of the women 
had worked outside the standard fultola vernacular of decorative floral motifs 
used to adorn pillowcases, orna (headscarves) and bazu (blouses). The notion 
of storytelling or capturing personal experience through embroidery was new 
to them.
Over a five-week period, the group of ten women produced four embroidery 
collections, each consisting of ten individual pieces, representing specific 
memories and aspirations. The group met three times a week in a WGFS in 
Camp 18, with sessions facilitated by one female CMC staff member assisted 
by one female Rohingya volunteer acting as a translator and cultural mediator. 
Participants drafted ideas in their sketchbooks,29 transferred the final sketches 
to cloth using carbon paper and finally embroidered them using the thread 
and stitching technique of their choice. The four collections are titled: Henna 
Hands, My House in Myanmar, My Favourite Dress and Dream Jewels.
Each collection is a literal depiction of an object or practice of cultural 
significance. Henna Hands memorializes the Rohingya women’s practice of 
applying henna in intricate designs for festivals and weddings. My House 
in Myanmar memorializes the traditional-style homes where they lived. My 
FIGURE 7.1  Camp Life, 2020, courtesy of IOM. Embroidery artworks by Rohingya 
women in Cox’s Bazar refugee camp (Bangladesh) © IOM 2019/2020.

117
FROM ‘MAKING FLOWERS’ TO IMAGINING FUTURES
Favourite Dress and Dream Jewels depict significant articles of Rohingya 
women’s attire, both real and imagined. The women narrated memories 
during the workshops and, during the process of reproducing these memories 
through needle and thread, reported positive feelings, including a sense of 
restoration or peace.
In an interview,30 embroidery project participant, twenty-two-year-old 
Z., connected her My House in Myanmar tapestry with both her individual 
memory and aspiration for the future: ‘Once, when I was ill, my parents took 
me to see a doctor in downtown Buthidaung where there were many beautiful 
buildings. I used to dream of those buildings. One day, after going back to 
Burma and when I have money, I will build my dream building.’
Dreams Without Canvas continued with the arrival of Farzana Ahmed, 
a contemporary Bangladeshi artist and teacher specializing in portraiture. 
Ahmed brought a more experimental and conceptual aspect to the project, 
moving beyond reproductive representation towards exploring emotional 
landscapes. In an interview with the authors, she said, ‘My goal is to bring 
the inner feelings to the surface through art.’31 Ahmed designed a ten-week 
programme introducing visual references from the world of modern art (for 
example, Matisse cut outs, portraits), new surfaces, textures and techniques, 
and the thematic territory of portraiture. The ten weeks were bookended with 
portrait assignments to exhibit the artists’ development over the course of the 
programme.
Ahmed’s first project, titled Under My Skin, radically disrupted the 
conventions of fultola. Instead of flowers, the women were asked to sketch 
and embroider faces, embellishing them with beads, lace, patchwork and 
appliqué. Ahmed modelled the innovations through sketching collaboratively 
with the participants and talking them through choices of colour and materials. 
The results showed that Rohingya women’s technical mastery of the 
embroidery craft, merged with symbolic and emotive imagery, could be fresh 
and startling. The images ‘spoke’ in new and different ways, communicating 
dimensions of Rohingya identity and experience undetected in the previous 
tapestries.
After the radical innovations of the first portrait assignment, Dreams 
Without Canvas proceeded by breaking down portraiture and narrative 
storytelling into basic elements such as scene, setting, mood and character. 
For the assignment titled How I Am Feeling Today, participants sketched 
scenes representing their mood upon entering the WGFS, then embroidered 
them on colourful bazu (blouses). Twenty-five-year-old S.A. chose an image 
reminiscent of her self-portrait from the first assignment, but with an entirely 
different mood, meaning and purpose. S.A.’s Under My Skin portrait depicts 
a veiled Rohingya woman in heavily worked black thread on undyed cotton 
cloth, with only her eyes visible under a dense headscarf of jet-black beads. A 

118
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
five-pointed flower and a trim of gold spangles at the borders of her veil offer 
some relief to the starkness of the image, but the overall effect is of a woman 
trapped and afraid. She is disembodied and without context, her gaze floating 
out towards nothing.
S.A.’s self-portrait for How I Am Feeling Today renders a similarly veiled 
woman in purple thread on vivid magenta cloth. Of her face, only eyes are 
visible. However, her whole body is rendered here. Her hands and feet are 
exposed, her left hand holding a pink umbrella aloft and her right hand holding 
her bag of embroidery supplies. A decorative border encircles the image. 
In her interview with the authors, S.A. said, ‘I drew myself coming to the 
[WGFS] with my umbrella and embroidery box. With my umbrella, I feel that 
the neighbourhood people can’t see me, so I can go about my business more 
freely. In Burma, the rule was that women had to carry umbrella, gloves and 
socks’32 (Figure 7.2).
The portrait represents the freedom with which S.A. moves around the 
refugee camp. Of the ten women engaged by the CMC for Dreams Without 
Canvas, S.A. is the only woman who is the head of her household. After two 
unsuccessful marriages (she left her first husband whom she had married 
in Myanmar; her second husband was a member of the host community 
FIGURE 7.2  Under My 
Skin: Self-Portrait by SA, 
2020, courtesy of Md Rahul 
Karim/IOM. Embroidery 
artworks by Rohingya women 
in Cox’s Bazar refugee 
camp (Bangladesh) © IOM 
2019/2020.

119
FROM ‘MAKING FLOWERS’ TO IMAGINING FUTURES
in Cox’s Bazar who left her for another wife), S.A. provides for herself, her 
mother, two younger brothers and fifteen-month-old daughter through her 
embroidery project earnings. Without a male guardian (her father is deceased 
and her brothers are much younger than her), S.A. has been forced to step 
into a traditionally male role. 
The proceeds from her embroidery work allow S.A. a degree of self-reliance 
and independence from the men in her community – rare among Rohingya 
women – and the bazu scene reveals her pride in this. She chose bright 
colours for the portrait: purple is her favourite colour. Alone of the women 
and girls of the group, she boldly chose to place the embroidery on the back 
of the bazu. While the circle around the portrait indicates the bounded nature 
of her world, it also may represent a sense of wholeness and belonging. The 
border completes and contextualizes the image; it does not bleed into the 
surrounding space. A photo of S.A. in her bazu calls to mind men and women 
in emblazoned sports or membership jackets.
For her final portrait assignment, S.A. and the other embroidery participants 
drew and embroidered portraits of each other. Participants chose their subjects 
and were given free rein to depict them as they liked. Beads, sequins, lace, 
pompoms, cotton yarn and other decorative materials were made available. 
FIGURE 7.3  Friendship: R by SA, 2020, courtesy of Shahirah Majumdar/IOM. 
Embroidery artworks by Rohingya women in Cox’s Bazar refugee camp (Bangladesh) 
© IOM 2019/2020.

120
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
S.A. chose to embroider her friend and fellow embroidery participant, R. Here, 
S.A. again utilizes her favourite colour, purple. R. is depicted in full purple 
robes and a black headscarf with spangled silver trim – but she has eschewed 
the face veil. The beaded eyes are wide and bright, holding the viewer in full 
gaze, and a bright red mouth smiles. S.A. uses many of the same materials as 
in her Under My Skin portrait, but the effect is altogether different, revealing 
controlled use of materials, techniques and storytelling objectives. S.A. says, 
‘I did not know R. before beginning the embroidery workshops, but now she 
is like a sister to me.’33 S.A.’s portrait of R. communicates the joyful notion 
of sisterhood, which has been so vital for creating a sense of solidarity and 
belonging for the refugee women living in the Rohingya camps (Figure 7.3).
Conclusion
The embroidery projects evolved from more reproductive designs, as in the 
first project’s tapestry where participants reproduced scenes from drawings 
through embroidery, to the development of embroidery skills. This learning 
was expanded to observation and imagination for their designs, as in the 
second Dream Garden project. The culmination was more challenging, 
incorporating interpretive designs with a wider range of techniques and 
materials. The evolution is one of growth from replication to imaginative self-
expression. The women interviewed at the end of the first and second projects 
reported improved confidence and esteem of their own talents. Additionally, 
the collaborative nature of the embroidery sessions provided the opportunity 
for the women to forge new bonds, galvanizing the process of creating a 
‘new shomaz’34 in Bangladesh. In this way, they may revive the unity which 
characterizes their traditional ways of social organization and develop a new 
sense of belonging. 
In an FGD held at the end of Dreams Without Canvas, the women spoke 
about their husbands’ new-found support for their work. Two participants 
said their husbands helped them with their embroidery. Another spoke of 
her husband asking her to teach him fultola so that they could double their 
household income. Several other women spoke of husbands and other family 
members helping with household chores or avoiding disturbing them during 
certain hours so that they could complete their embroidery assignments. 
Thus, the act of embroidery becomes not only one of catharsis, but also one 
of empowerment and individual assertion. The women participating in these 
embroidery projects have undergone a process of growth and discovery, both 
in terms of the craft of embroidery as well as their identity. Within the safety of 
the WGFS, embroidery has offered a platform for the women to discover and 

121
FROM ‘MAKING FLOWERS’ TO IMAGINING FUTURES
express their individual and collective identities, memories and aspirations. 
Employing a cliché, the personal is political and for the Rohingya women the 
CMC’s embroidery projects have enabled that, wherever it may lead.
Despite fultola falling within the domain of women, these women have 
used it to ‘speak’ essential stories and experiences at risk of being lost in 
the conditions of displacement. By appropriating the craft to reminisce about 
the past, process the present and reimagine a possible future for themselves 
and their community, the women symbolically challenge voicelessness 
– both their own and that of the larger Rohingya community. Embroidery 
becomes, for them, an effective tool for personal and communal resistance. 
And for academic researchers, it has been shown as an effective tool for 
deconstructing stereotypes, the discourse of ‘the other’ and the postcolonial 
contradictions. 
Notes
1	 H. K. Bhabha, The Location of Culture, 2nd edn (London: Routledge, 2012 
[1994]); E. W. Said, Culture and Imperialism (New York: Knopf, 1993); G. C. 
Spivak, A Critique of Postcolonial Reason: Toward a History of the Vanishing 
Present (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999).
2	 Spivak, A Critique of Postcolonial Reason.
3	 G. C. Spivak, ‘Can the Subaltern Speak?’, in Colonial Discourse and Post-
Colonial Theory: A Reader, ed. P. Williams and L. Chrisman (London: 
Routledge, 2015 [1994]), 66–111.
4	 Said, Culture and Imperialism.
5	 Spivak, A Critique of Postcolonial Reason, 21.
6	 Ibid.
7	 Ibid., 309.
8	 Ibid.
9	 Bhabha, The Location of Culture.
10	 Ibid., 105.
11	 Ibid.
12	 Ibid.
13	 R. J. Fisher and H. C. Kelman, ‘Perceptions in Conflict’, in Intergroup 
Conflicts and Their Resolution: A Social Psychological Perspective, ed. D. Bar-
Tal (New York: Psychology Press, 2011), 61–81.
14	 International Organization for Migration, The Rohingya Crisis: Two Years Out 
(Cox’s Bazar, BD: IOM, 2019), 14.
15	 D. Coyle, A. K. Rahim and M. A. Jainul, Clan, Community, Nation: Belonging 
Among Rohingya Living in Makeshift Camps (Cox’s Bazar, Bangladesh: IOM, 
2020).

122
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
16	 J. R. Di Giovanni, ‘Artes de abrir espaço. Apontamentos para a análise de 
práticas em trânsito entre arte e ativismo’ [Arts to Make Space. Notes for 
the Analysis of Practices in Transit Between Art and Activism], Cadernos de 
Arte e Antropologia 4, no. 2 (2015): 13–27, 15. Authors’ translation.
17	 Ibid., 14.
18	 P. Raposo, ‘Artivismo’: articulando dissidências, criando insurgências’ 
[‘Artivism’: Articulating Dissidents, Creating Insurgencies], Cadernos de Arte 
e Antropologia 4, no. 2 (2015): 3–12.
19	 N. S. Love and M. Mattern, ‘Art, Culture, Democracy’, in Doing Democracy. 
Activist Art and Cultural Politics, ed. N. S. Love and M. Mattern (New York: 
State University of New York Press, 2014), 3–28.
20	 K. F. Farzana, ‘Life along the Naf Border: Identity Politics of the Rohingya 
Refugees in Bangladesh’, in Myanmar Mountain and Maritime Borderscapes: 
Local Practices, Boundary-Making and Figured Worlds, ed. S. Oh (Singapore: 
ISEAS Publishing, 2016); K. F. Farzana, Memories of Burmese Rohingya 
Refugees: Contested Identity and Belonging (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 
2017).
21	 It should be stressed that there were previous Rohingya refugee flows 
from Myanmar to Bangladesh before 2017, although less intense and less 
crowded than the 2017 influx.
22	 Farzana, ‘Life along the Naf Border’, 290.
23	 International Organization for Migrants, Rapid Mental Health and 
Psychosocial Needs (Cox’s Bazaar, BD: IOM, March 2018), 12 (no pagination).
24	 Coyle et al., Clan, Community, Nation.
25	 Ibid., 12.
26	 In the camp context, Women and Girl Friendly Spaces serve as ‘safe spaces’ 
for Rohingya women and girls to share experiences, feelings, and stories, 
and to learn new skills. For most of these women, the WGFS are the only 
such spaces deemed by male family members to be private enough for 
them to visit and participate in livelihood, education and other activities.
27	 J. Butler, Gender Trouble. Feminism and the Subversion of Identity, 3rd edn 
(New York: Routledge Classics, 2006).
28	 Internews. Information Needs Assessment: Rohingya and Host 
Communities, Cox’s Bazaar Bangladesh (Dhaka, BD: Internews, 2019).
29	 The CMC project facilitators helped the project participants develop drawing 
skills over the course of the project, as sketching was new for most.
30	 Author interview with embroidery group participant. November 2019.
31	 Farzana Ahmed, artist. Interview with the authors. December 2019.
32	 Author interview with embroidery participant. February 2020.
33	 Ibid.
34	 Coyle et al., Clan, Community, Nation.

8
Liminality
The work of Monica Mercedes 
Martinez, PJ Anderson and 
Habiba El-Sayed 
Heidi McKenzie
T
he pervasiveness of mainstream White racial superiority in North America 
today exists in the wake of the continent’s history: the colonization 
and genocide of its Indigenous peoples; slavery and its aftermath; and the 
subsequent exclusionary Whites only migration policies imposed by European 
settlers and lawmakers until the mid to late 1960s. The Immigration and 
Nationality Act of 1965 put an end to Whites only immigration in the United 
States,1 and the new immigration policies of 1967 changed the faces of 
Canadians by opening up its borders to immigrants of colour.2 As South African 
artist, William Kentridge, inscribes so decisively in his self-reflexive animated 
flipbook that addresses race and apartheid, Second Hand Reading,3 there is ‘a 
constructed invisibility’ around being seen and not being seen. 
Canadian writer, curator and educator, Julie Hollenbach, contends that 
craft in Canada and the United States is dominated by the White working 
and middle-class.4 Furthermore, BIPOC (Black, Indigenous, Persons of Colour) 
are scarce if not absent from the contemporary community by virtue of 
the fact that historically there has been an emphasis on excellence, genius 
and Eurocentric modernism.5 This bias continues to permeate systemic 
pathways to mainstream success in the arts world, and by extension within 

124
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
the multivalent arenas of craft. A consequence of this systemic imbalance 
of power is that ‘objective qualified success’ elides craft made by non-White 
makers.6 Hollenbach points to the fact that the virtual erasure of BIPOC 
craft artisans and/or practitioners in the contemporary craft canon is due in 
part to the lack of critical analysis that investigates the intersection of the 
craftsperson’s identity with their medium.7 This, in turn, creates a cognitive 
dissonance between the reality of the fine craft movement and what many 
gatekeepers at the apex of the system (curators, gallerists, etc.) perceive to 
be an equal playing field. I would argue that this imbalance of power has 
catalysed many contemporary artists and craft practitioners to politicize their 
art in relation to their racialized identity.
Mixed-race artists inhabit two or more cultural identities. By virtue of 
their hybridity, they position themselves at once inside and outside of their 
collective national narrative. In 1993, University of Toronto geographer Gillian 
Rose coined the phrase ‘paradoxical space’ to define the inherent dualities at 
the crux of mixed-race identity. According to Rose, paradoxical spaces ‘imply 
radically heterogeneous geometries’ that are ‘lived, experienced and felt’.8 
Within a racialized context, that is, the every day, these spaces move beyond 
spaces of resistance and create ‘entirely different geometries through which 
we can think power, knowledge, space and identity in critical, and hopefully, 
liberatory ways’.9 Rose’s metaphor suggests the potential to challenge the 
public imaginaries of the mixed-race individual that are inextricably bound to 
oppressive historically based stigma. Paradoxical space moves beyond spaces 
of resistance and creates the possibility of shifting the paradigm by mapping 
a future where the mixed-race individual is not positioned as out of place, but 
rather, constitutive of their own spatialities.
As a second-generation Canadian and fine craft artist of mixed heritage, 
at mid-life, I am coming to terms with a personal history of racialization 
that was ‘normalized’ to such an extent that it took decades to register in 
my consciousness. My Irish–American mother and Indo-Trinidadian father 
were early pioneers in mixed-race marriage in the 1950s, at a time when 
miscegenation was still illegal in many states in the United States. I grew 
up on the east coast of Canada in the 1970s, a beige kid in the otherwise 
monolithically White capital city of Fredericton, New Brunswick. I researched 
multiculturalism during my undergraduate degree in Toronto – then lauded as 
the most multicultural city in the world – and later dissected systemic racism 
in arts policy in graduate school in the early 1990s; twenty years later I curated 
my MFA thesis around performing mixed-race identity and examined the inter-
subjectivity of being seen and yet not being seen at face value. I launched my 
own fine craft career in 2014. That same year I heard the African American ‘art 
star’, Theaster Gates, at the National Council on Education for the Ceramic 
Arts (NCECA) Conference in Milwaukee. Despite my seemingly heightened 

125
LIMINALITY
awareness of race politics, it was not until I heard Gates ask an audience of 
over five thousand ceramic practitioners to self-identify as Black or persons 
of colour, that I truly embodied what it meant to be ‘othered’. A mere forty 
people stood up. A landslide of emotions tumbled through my body. I was 
awash in the fresh wound of knowing I was on the margins. 
This chapter is devoted to making place and holding space for the works of 
three emergent female Canadian fine craft artists, all of whom draw on their 
varied hybrid backgrounds and perform their racialized identities through the 
lens of craft practice. Monica Mercedes Martinez is of mixed Chilean heritage. 
Her multi-staged, transcontinental process-based performative work engages 
in acts of resistance that simultaneously address the atrocities of Chile’s 
dictatorial military regime under Pinochet,10 and the ritual practices of the 
Inca and other Indigenous peoples who lived on the land. PJ Anderson is an 
emerging mixed-race Jamaican/Métis potter who draws upon both sides of her 
ancestors’ creative practices. As a conceptual artist, she incorporates symbols 
and ideas that society deems taboo or unacceptable as a form of protest into 
her finely crafted burnished vessels. Habiba El-Sayed’s mixed Egyptian and 
Guyanese heritage informs her largely performative, sensory-based work. Her 
practice is focused on dispelling myths around Islamophobia post 9/11 and 
bluntly calls out the uncomfortableness of residual and persistent racial micro-
aggressions.
Monica Mercedes Martinez
Monica Mercedes Martinez locates herself as a Canadian, Prairie-raised, 
transplanted Chilean immigrant whose heritage is part Indigenous South 
American and part European. Her practice is propelled by her quest to unravel 
seminal questions such as ‘How does a person with a multi-faceted ethnic 
identity interpret the colonization of the Americas? … Am I the slave or the 
slave owner, heathen or saint, explorer or exile, conqueror or conquered?’11 Her 
practice reflects her belief that the medium itself is inextricably intertwined 
with human history. She grapples with the effects of cultural colonization on 
personal identity. ‘At its core, my work is a search for identity, for a cultural, 
spiritual, racial, or political identity that speaks for all the parts of me: the 
woman, Chilean immigrant, Canadian citizen, and contemporary artist. My 
artworks have all become vehicles for my attempts to develop a meaningful 
premise for the roots of my own identity.’12 
I first encountered Martinez’s work at the Canadian Clay and Glass Gallery 
(CCGG) in Waterloo, Ontario, in the summer of 2019. I was faced with 
the remnants of a live performance piece she enacted during the opening 

126
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
ceremonies for En Route: Sculptural Ceramics and Glass Emerging from 
Manitoba, co-curated by Grace Nickel, Associate Professor of Ceramics, 
University of Manitoba, and former CCGG curator, Sheila McMath. What I 
witnessed was a human-scaled cage fabricated of chicken coop fencing, with 
dried up pieces of red unfired clay pressed into the enclosure from the inside 
out. The work is entitled containher (2019). Martinez was excited to use native 
red clay in a traditional gallery environment within a non-historical context, 
where it takes up space and cannot be ignored. For Martinez, terracotta is 
a symbol of rebellion against the value placed on the perfect whiteness of 
porcelain. ‘I use red clay because it stains, because it is considered by some 
to be base, dirty, and common. I feel that by performing with raw, red clay in 
places like the Clay and Glass, I can display the raw, messy, hidden labour of 
making in a gallery full of perfectly finished artworks.’13 
The act of simultaneously making the past and the future visible is what 
underlies the violent process of cultural transformation in Martinez’s work. Pre-
eminent American performance studies and Spanish academic, Diana Taylor, 
theorizes that the mixed-race person can act as an ‘intermediary’ to unravel 
the way in which images of cultural mixing carry their own histories and bring 
forward these complex histories.14 Within the context of Latin America, Taylor 
positions the mixed-race Latina/Caucasian artist, the mestizaje, as assuming 
the role of the intermediary – one embodying the process of transculturation. 
The term transculturation was coined by Fernando Ortiz in the 1940s to 
counter the then pervasive anthropological concept of acculturation, in which 
it was assumed that colonized people adapted to and were absorbed by 
the more dominant culture of the colonizer.15 In contrast to this paradigm of 
cultural loss, transculturation emphasizes the mixing of cultures in which the 
simultaneous violent displacement of the colonized’s original culture and the 
imposition of a dominant culture of colonization leads to the creation of a new 
and distinct hybrid culture.16 Taylor underscores the fact that the intermediary 
represents more than a racial mix: ‘she performs the continuity among past, 
present, and future and brings the memory of the past into the present as she 
makes visible the future’.17 
Martinez, acting as Taylor’s intermediary, regards her work as ‘visual 
conversations’ intended to encourage dialogue and reflection on how the past 
continues to manipulate the power structures that rule the world by using 
the bias of memory to subconsciously control our views on racial heritage, 
gender, cultural concepts of beauty and the hierarchies of art.18 Martinez 
herself reflects, ‘The conversations I’ve had with the curious, the confused 
and the outright hostile people who observe my work are essential because, 
to me, art is a living thing that should make you question. When I develop new 
work, these conversations revolve in my mind.’19 Martinez strives to disturb, 
disrupt, enlighten and shift prevailing stigma. 

127
LIMINALITY
For Martinez, the clash between porcelain and terracotta used simultaneously 
raises questions of classism, of maker status and of the value of material. 
Even though the porcelain clay body is formulated to withstand the effects of 
higher heat, it bends or cracks with the melting and bloating of the terracotta. 
The heat of the kiln pushes the lower temperature clay to respond to its 
unusual environment by flowing around, over or through the other elements 
in the piece until the materials fuse into one. The application of heat over time 
ensures that objects can no longer be separated into their components; time 
morphs the objects into new entities altogether. Martinez first started using 
the two clays fired together for her composite wall-mounted series of ceramic 
masks, Castas (2011). The porcelain and the terracotta were combined to fight 
against each other in the kiln in various proportions. This tension between 
the disparate clays viscerally personifies Martinez’s mestizaje identity, thus 
creating a powerful allegory: the clay alters, as did European cultures through 
their interactions with subjugated Indigenous peoples. This resulted in the 
new mestizaje racial categories of contemporary Latin America.20 
In 2012 Martinez created a series of three hundred ceramic bones. These 
pieces were made as an homage to her mother’s journey of exile out of 
Chile’s military dictatorship in 1974. Martinez was six months old when her 
mother carried her on foot over the mountains into Argentina. Martinez always 
meant for this piece to be ephemeral. She imagined that someday, maybe 
decades from the time of their creation, she would return the bones to the 
homeland from whence they were conceived. Four years later, Martinez 
joined the collective, Constelaciones, comprised of five artists.21 It was 
through this collective that her vision of returning the clay to its destined 
resting place became a reality. A crew of thirteen, including the artists, a 
driver, a cinematographer and five witnesses, made the journey from Canada 
to Calama, a small mining town on the edge of the Atacama Desert in Chile. 
Return Atacama (2016) was performed as a journey, ‘an invocation of radical 
generosity, an opening of arms in which form meets form, place meets place, 
time meets time’.22 The ‘bones’ were carried into the Desert and ultimately 
piled on the ground to be consumed by the sand. Over the years, and still to 
this day, the women of Calama have searched that same Desert for traces of 
the bones of their loved ones who were killed and buried in mass graves by 
the Pinochet regime. 
The ceramic component of Return Atacama is much like Castas, a mix 
of terracotta and porcelain, fired at different temperatures so that the clays 
react with and against each other. Terracotta was wrapped around porcelain 
‘bones’ of various sizes, then fired at various temperatures creating hundreds 
of one-of-a-kind forms. Martinez’s ceramic forms may be interpreted as 
sculptures woven from stratified layers of Chilean history, diasporic and 
nomadic trajectories. The act of strewing them across the shifting sand 

128
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
releases the artist from the weight, despair and isolation of their creation 
(Figure  8.1).
Taylor primarily addresses the ‘both/and’ inter-subjectivity of the mestizaje 
in the context of the Latino-American hemisphere. She notes, however, 
that this theory can be extended to other mixed-race cultures, introducing 
the notion of ‘neither/nor inter-subjectivity’.23 Within Canada’s multicultural 
context, and the melting-pot of the United States, there are added layers of 
complexity for the intermediary to negotiate. Both ‘both/and’ and ‘neither/
nor’ implicate a double-coded consciousness that moves beyond a binary 
fragmented sense of identity. 
PJ Anderson
PJ Anderson reads Black at face value, but she lays claim to both of her ethnic 
roots in equal measure in her work. She was born and raised in Winnipeg, 
Manitoba. Her father immigrated to Canada from Jamaica and met and married 
her Métis mother whose ancestry is part Indigenous and part British, from 
nineteenth-century Hudson Bay Company merchants. Even though there has 
FIGURE 8.1  Monica Mercedes Martinez. Return Atacama, 2016 (as part of the 
collective Constelaciones). Performance still. Photo: Cassie Scott.

129
LIMINALITY
been a break in the generational passing down of the handmade from mother 
or mother-in-law to daughter in Anderson’s own family, she literally enmeshes 
her hybrid Métis/Afro-Caribbean identity into her work. 
Taylor points out that contemporary Black cultural theorists, similar 
to their mixed-race counterparts, conceive of a theory of subjectivity as 
‘decentered and uprooted in conjunction with theories stemming from their 
postcolonial and diasporic experience’.24 Anderson’s work reflects the longing 
for connection to cultural resources that were lost to the colonial machine: 
‘Hundreds of years removed from the involuntary migration of my Jamaican 
and Aboriginal peoples, I still feel a strong kinship to their traditional crafts of 
basketry and ceramics.’25 Anderson is a coil builder – a tradition she was drawn 
to, having been steered to the works of Afro-Kenyan British-based ceramic 
artist, Magdalene Odundo, by her University of Manitoba mentor, Grace 
Nickel. When Anderson discovered a plethora of works by non-White, non-
Western ceramic artists, most of whom were coil builders, she committed 
herself fully to the medium and vocation.
Anderson politicizes her work through the extended metaphor of 
weaponization. Here, the reference is not literal; it is meant to speak to the 
ugliness transmuted to seemingly innocuous things, where the media and 
society have altered our relationship with mere things making them into 
objects of fear and terror. For Anderson, her weaponization series explores 
the power dynamics between those who have and those who have less.26 In 
2009 Anderson began her first series of weaponizations by creating traditional 
water vessels with monstrous inaccessible razor-edged blades at their spouts, 
rendering them both unapproachable and unusable. They contain the water, 
but the water is not available to be poured out for human consumption. The 
work emerged in response to the growing visibility of social injustice regarding 
the right to safe drinking water on many First Nations reserves in Canada. She 
was influenced by the media coverage that profiled the Attawapiskat First 
Nations’ crises in Northern Ontario, as well as those of her mother’s family’s 
reserve, Peguis, in Central Manitoba. Anderson queries the power dynamics 
at play: ‘Is the power held by the Indigenous communities without access to 
clean affordable water or, is it held by the international conglomerates that are 
vying to buy Canadian water and sell it back at ludicrously inflated prices?’27 
This body of work is coil-built, burnished to a high polish with a smooth stone, 
bisque-fired, and subsequently smoke-fired with organic matter, often using 
bison dung, a traditional source of fuel. The black vessels stand tall, proud, 
defiant and ‘weaponized’.
Anderson has recently started to literally weave stories into her pots. 
In 2009, she was unable to find Canadian Indigenous potters to work with 
as a student, so she chose to apprentice with Indigenous basket weavers. 
Weaving is also a traditional craft media in many African traditions, and so it 

130
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
felt like a natural fit for Anderson to incorporate weaving with coil-building. 
She stitches symbols onto the pots that are intended to disturb and provoke. 
A black hoodie on the collar of a pot symbolizes the hopelessness of police 
brutality and racial profiling of Black and Indigenous youth alike. Anderson 
notes with incredulity that Blacks are 40 per cent more likely to be harmed by 
police than any other person in Toronto. In the United States, police are more 
likely to shoot, without cause, a brown or black person wearing a hoodie. 
A hoodie is just a sweater with a hood, but worn by a teenager, a Black or 
Indigenous youth, it marks them as a target for police brutality. 
Anderson has travelled to work and learn from Indigenous potters as an 
artist in residence in South Africa, and most recently in Santa Fe, New Mexico 
and El Paso, Texas. She was in El Paso in August 2019 when a gunman open-
fired at a local Walmart, discriminately aiming for brown bodies who might be 
Hispanic and/or of Mexican origin. Twenty-two young people were murdered, 
another twenty-four injured. Anderson was fifteen minutes away at the time, 
taking a workshop on Indigenous ceramic techniques, when her cellphone 
alert went off. The next day, many parents went to the site to try and find 
information about children who had not returned home. They were rounded 
up by police and taken away to be processed and their status as legal or illegal 
FIGURE 8.2  PJ Anderson. 
Glorification #3 (black), 2019. 
Earthenware, terra sigillata, 
graphite, earthenware glaze. 
Photo: PJ Anderson.

131
LIMINALITY
migrants assessed. This lived experience spawned the Glorification series 
within Anderson’s ongoing conceptual exploration of weaponization. Her 
witnessing of nonchalance in people around her further fuelled her sense of 
alienation and frustration. Anderson created beautiful pots with highly realistic 
handguns rising out of the vessels to represent the glorification of guns as a 
means to a racist’s end game (Figure 8.2). 
Anderson points to the fact that we are living and creating in a world where 
even the right to use a public washroom has become contentious, due to 
gender and identity politics. She sees no end in sight with respect to her 
weaponization series. She reflects on how the power dynamic between the 
haves and the have-nots will continue to manipulate the threat narrative. For 
Anderson, fear in its visceral form, will continue to be present in contemporary 
society, thus providing her with a continuous stream of symbols, ideas and 
concepts to turn into ‘weapons’ through art. 
Habiba El-Sayed
Habiba El-Sayed describes her sense of cultural identity as ‘ambiguous’ 
and holds her ‘Canadianness’ as a ‘beacon for [her] many diasporas’.28 From 
this vantage, she aligns herself with Taylor’s double-coded consciousness. 
She is a first-generation Canadian of immigrant parents: her Egyptian-born 
father left her Guyanese-born mother when she was ten years old. She 
performs her Muslim, hybrid identity in order to come to terms with her own 
sense of loss and longing. She notes that ‘perhaps my Egyptian identity is 
precisely my lack of it . . . ever-changing, developing and negotiating with my 
Canadian identity’.29 In Would I Have Called You Teta? (2017), El-Sayed asks 
the question of a grandmother whom she will never meet, whose food she 
will never taste. In this performance-based work, she re-enacts a childhood 
memory of preparing ma’amoul with her father. These are small date-filled 
shortbread cookies typically found in Middle Eastern cuisine. She sourced 
the actual moulds used for making the cookies, and enacts the making 
of them with unfired porcelain, devoid of scent, colour and the essential 
qualities that allow each of us as both viewers and witnesses to connect to 
our pasts (Figure 8.3). 
El-Sayed relies on the sensory aspect of the ma’amoul to re-imagine a 
place where, had her father not left, she might have known her Egyptian 
grandmother, and experienced the ritual of making and consuming the Arabic 
cookies with a significant relative whom she would have called Teta. This 
re-imagining draws on Marcel Proust’s writings on remembrance, in which 
food is not only able to prompt otherwise unreachable memories, but also 

132
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
unlocks ancillary recollections.30 In this way, the scent of food actually allows 
one to traverse time. Nostalgia presents itself as a prominent player in the 
food-memory associative identity relationship. El-Sayed poignantly cautions 
that the romanticization of nostalgia may become problematic with respect to 
the preservation of cultural identity, as nostalgia by-passes the struggle and 
sacrifice often coupled with migration. These elements are essential parts of 
El-Sayed’s diasporic identity.31
El-Sayed actively engages decolonization in her work Pushback (2017). This 
durational performative piece involves pushing 800 pounds of raw terracotta 
through the main gates of the Halifax Public Gardens – a space El-Sayed 
describes as ‘drenched in colonialism’.32 The clay is soft and malleable, akin to 
her own flesh, but the bars of the gates do not allow her to pass through. The 
clay ultimately slumps into a heap, some of it having taken on the imprint of the 
British insignia of the gates. El-Sayed was attracted to working with the duality 
inherent in gates: they at once provide an entry point and block passage; 
their iron bars are permeable yet confining. This duality serves as a metaphor 
for the duality of suppression and openness that El-Sayed lives as a Muslim 
woman of colour in Canada. She plumbs the depths of the sheer exhaustion 
of the weight of apology that Western society has seemingly placed on all 
Muslims in the wake of the terrorist attacks in New York on 11 September 
2001.33 The work reflects the brokenness of the Muslim community in North 
America with which she identifies. On a more universal scale, El-Sayed aligns 
FIGURE 8.3  Habiba El-Sayed. Would I Have Called You Teta?, 2017. Live 
performance, unfired slipcast porcelain, tea, found objects. Photo: Aniqa Tabassum.

133
LIMINALITY
herself with the BIPOC community whose voices are often marginalized. She 
feels that as a visible minority, people often feign a false acceptance, when in 
reality they are judging her, literally at face value. Pushback is an expression of 
frustration in the face of systemic racism and injustice. 
Taylor notes, ‘in the culturally and socially constructed world of performance, 
the past, the present, the future, and “real,” and the “imagined” become 
common referents for performers and audiences’.34 Taylor’s allusion to the 
shifting spectres of presence that loop back and incorporate traces of the past 
within the present is particularly relevant to El-Sayed’s work. Destruction of 
a Chaise Longue (2019) directly references the Orientalist painting, Reclining 
Odalisque,35 by the French painter Jean-Joseph Benjamin-Constant. In the 
nineteenth century, Europeans bastardized the term odalisque and it has 
now become synonymous with a Muslim harem’s concubine. Historic artistic 
representations of the odalisque played a role in spawning the stereotype 
of the submissive Muslim woman. Benjamin-Constant’s painting strips the 
Muslim woman of not only her clothing, but by casting a heavy shadow over 
her eyes, she is stripped of her dignity and agency. She is posed to objectify 
her body for the pleasure of men’s viewing. El-Sayed feels that this voyeurism 
in the odalisque painting is akin to a prison: freezing the woman for an eternity 
in an uncomfortable and awkward position, immortalized for the male gaze.
In Destruction of a Chaise Longue El-Sayed inserts her own body as a 
way to further illustrate the repetitive quotidian physical and emotional labour 
enacted by Muslim women. She poses wearing her hijab, on a chaise longue 
made entirely of clay. She uses her body to lean, push and press into the chair 
until it ultimately collapses. El-Sayed alters Benjamin-Constant’s painting by 
removing the odalisque figure in Photoshop and replacing her with a pixelated 
void. She projects this image onto herself on the chaise longue and onto a 
screen behind her. The projection is animated, and the void creeps larger until 
the body of the odalisque becomes indiscernible. For El-Sayed this annihilation 
of the image through a digital ‘cutting and pasting’ of the female figure carries 
with it a sense of empowerment. ‘If our bodies are objectified, we will take 
up space. We will control where we are, what happens to our bodies and who 
tells our stories.’36 Ultimately, the work aims to challenge the colonial White 
male gaze that seeks to objectify, fetishize and/or suppress Muslim women.37
Conclusion
The conceptualization of mixed race is a complex terrain that ushers in 
issues of intellectual genealogies and the contestation of theoretical terms 
that ascribe dimensions of racial and cultural mixing such as biracialism, 

134
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
crossbreeding, hybridity, passing and mestizaje. Each of the artists discussed 
in this chapter trouble the social construction and cultural perceptions of their 
respective racial binaries through their craft practice. The spaces they inhabit 
are necessarily liminal due to their respective ancestors’ historical colonization 
and their own internalized quotidian marginalization. Their art is politicized by 
virtue of their lived experiences in relation to their racialized identities. Yet, 
they are not the oppressed, they are the truth-tellers. There is a paradox within 
the liminality of the mixed-race artist precisely because their specific vantage 
offers them the possibility to shift external perceptions, stereotypes and 
stigma. 
Notes
1	 Gabriel J. Chin, ‘The Civil Rights Revolution Comes to Immigration Law: A 
New Look at the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965’, North Carolina 
Law Review 75 (1996): 1. https​:/​/pd​fs​.se​manti​cscho​lar​.o​rg​/1b​3b​/7a​6ecb6​
4de7a​efa11​6ba7a​19e1​5​b36be​8f8c.​pdf
2	 Paula Simons, ‘On Point: Fifty Years Ago, Canada Changed Its Immigration 
Rules and in Doing so Changed the Face of This Country’, Edmonton Journal, 
29 June 2017. https​:/​/ed​monto​njour​nal​.c​om​/ne​ws​/in​sight​/on​-p​oint-​fifty​-year​s​
-ago​-cana​da​-ch​anged​-its-​immig​ratio​n​-rul​es​-an​d​-in-​doing​-so​-c​ha​nge​d​-the​-face​
-of​-t​his​-c​ountr​y
3	 William Kentridge, Second-Hand Reading, Film 6:55 (Cape Town, SA: A4 Arts 
Foundation, 2014).
4	 Julie Hollenbach, ‘Moving Beyond a Modern Craft: Thoughts on White 
Entitlement and Cultural Appropriation in Professional Craft in Canada’, Studio 
Magazine 14, no. 1 (Spring/Summer 2019). https​:/​/ww​w​.stu​dioma​gazin​e​.ca/​
artic​les​/2​019​/m​oving​-beyo​nd​-​a-​moder​n​-cra​ft
5	 Ibid.
6	 Ibid.
7	 Ibid.
8	 Gillian Rose, Feminism and Geography (Minneapolis: Minnesota University 
Press, 1993), 144.
9	 Ibid.
10	 The military dictatorship of General Augusto Pinochet was an authoritarian 
military regime that ruled Chile for seventeen years, between 11 September 
1973 and 11 March 1990. The regime left over 3,000 dead or missing, 
tortured tens of thousands of prisoners, and drove an estimated 200,000 
Chileans into exile.
11	 Monica Mercedes Martinez, ‘As We See Ourselves, So Shall We Be Seen: 
Identity and the Artist’s Practice’, Master of Fine Art thesis, University of 
Manitoba School of Art, 22, ii.

135
LIMINALITY
12	 Ibid., 1.
13	 Monica Mercedes Martinez in email correspondence with the author, 
7 October 2019.
14	 Diana Taylor, The Archive and the Repertoire: Performing Cultural Memory in 
the Americas (London: Duke University Press, 2003), 87.
15	 Fernando Ortiz, Cuban Counterpoint: Tobacco and Sugar (Durham and 
London: Duke University Press, 1995), 102–3.
16	 Taylor, The Archive and the Repertoire: Performing Cultural Memory in the 
Americas, 104.
17	 Ibid., 100.
18	 Monica Mercedes Martinez, Artist Statement, 2019.
19	 Monica Martinez in email correspondence with the author, October 2019.
20	 Ibid.
21	 Monica Mercedes Martinez, Roewan Crowe, Doris Difarnecio, Christina 
Hajjar, and Helene Vosters; the witnesses to the journey and the 
performance were Jarvis Brownlie, Cassie Scott, Shannon Bell, Kimberley 
Wilde, Smaro Kambourelli, and Dot Tuer; the cinematographer, Lex Taylor, 
documented the performance; and the driver was Marcelo Valdez Perez.
22	 Monica Mercedes Martinez, Return Atacama, Artist Statement, 2016.
23	 Taylor, The Archive and the Repertoire: Performing Cultural Memory in the 
Americas, 96.
24	 Ibid., 102.
25	 PJ Anderson, ‘Intertwined: Like Kin’, Artist Statement, Canadian Clay and 
Glass Gallery, 2019.
26	 PJ Anderson in conversation with the author, 1 November 2019.
27	 PJ Anderson, ‘Unconventional Weaponizations’, Artist Statement, 2019.
28	 Habiba El-Sayed, ‘Food, Cultural Identity and the Romanticized Memory’, 
Unpublished essay. NSCADU, Halifax 2015, 1.
29	 Ibid., 8.
30	 Marcel Proust, Remembrance of Things Past, trans. C. K. Scott Moncrieff 
(London: Chatto & Windus, 1957), 53.
31	 El-Sayed, ‘Food, Cultural Identity and the Romanticized Memory’, 7.
32	 Habiba El-Sayed, Artist Statement, 2017.
33	 As cited by the artist during a panel discussion, ‘The Art of Otherness’. 
National Council on Education for the Ceramic Arts Conference, Pittsburgh, 
March 2018.
34	 Alberto Guevara, ‘Diana Taylor: The Archive and the Repertoire: Performing 
Cultural Memory in the Americas’, Canadian Journal of Latin American and 
Caribbean Studies 30, no. 60 (2005): 239–40.
35	 Jean-Joseph Benjamin-Constant, Reclining Odalisque, circa 1870. Oil on 
canvas 115 x 149 cm. Ger Eenens Collection The Netherlands.
36	 Habiba El-Sayed, Artist Statement, 2019.
37	 Ibid.

9
Jewellery is political
Ethical jewellery practice
Elizabeth Shaw
T
he close relationship between jewellery and the wearer is understood 
though perhaps not often articulated beyond the discussions of jewellers, 
archaeologists and anthropologists. Jewellery is what we as humans choose 
to attach to ourselves, but it is more than a physical connection: it becomes 
an extension of our personality and identity. It is most often an extension 
that is visible to others; this visibility makes jewellery readable by others. 
Crafts writer and curator Kevin Murray posited, ‘What does politics have to 
do with jewelry? At its most obvious, jewelry operates as a status symbol.’1 
For example the wearing of a wedding ring, or the removal of one, is a status 
symbol that is widely recognized.
With the rise of mass production, the distribution of and access to 
commercially produced jewellery has become more widespread, but along 
with the rise of disposable fashion, disposable jewellery has also proliferated. 
It is clear that how the raw materials are sourced and the jewellery is produced 
can be anything but ethical. While it might seem ethical to buy jewellery from 
developing countries, it is important to note that mass production in jewellery 
isn’t always mechanized: it can include hand production by craftspeople in 
countries with low wages and poor working conditions. In contemporary 
society jewellery is often part of fast fashion, a seasonal changeable aesthetic 
accessory, something that can be, and often is, valued only momentarily. 
Certainly, this jewellery still has a role as a status symbol, for keeping up to 
date with current fashions and being on trend. 

137
JEWELLERY IS POLITICAL
There are many facets to what makes for political jewellery: this essay will 
look at two. Firstly, I will look at how jewellery with a seemingly non-political 
aesthetic can send a political message. I will then go on to discuss the political 
nature of the materials that jewellery is made from. 
Political messages in jewellery 
As a young teenager at a high school with a strict dress code I learnt that 
the most anonymous, understated jewellery can be provocatively political. To 
challenge a rule I didn’t respect, I pierced one ear and wore a small silver stud. 
The school specified that a pair of simple studs or sleeper earrings were the 
only earrings allowed. It took a while for the teachers to notice, but when they 
did, I was given a detention as punishment for my breach of the school uniform 
rules and told to get my other ear pierced or to remove my one earring. Instead 
I pierced the same ear a second time and in keeping with the school dress 
code, I made sure I was wearing a pair of simple studs. This teenage challenge 
to the interpretation of rules proved a powerful irritant for my teachers. I was 
given more detentions but also kept wearing my pair of simple studs. To this 
day the asymmetry of my earring placement continues to unsettle people.
My teenage experience taught me that it is possible to keep within the 
societal norms and wear jewellery that shares a political message. Protest 
badges are an obvious example, but there are nuanced and, at times, 
ambiguous ways jewellery has been and continues to be used to carry 
a political message. In the early 1900s, the Suffragettes campaigning for 
women’s political rights adopted the colours of white, green and purple. 
They wore especially designed brooches to show solidarity, to indicate their 
involvement and to help identify each other. 
Madeleine K. Albright was the first woman to hold the position of 
American Secretary of State. She embraced the societal expectation that 
as a woman she would wear jewellery and did so with clear political intent. 
Significantly Albright wore specific brooches to meetings to ‘express her 
aims of negotiations’.2 Political scientist Alain L. Sanders quoted Albright as 
saying, ‘Everyone will just have to read my pins.’3 An example Sanders cites 
is that Albright wore two brooches, an eagle and a top hat, both symbols 
of American power and glory when she met with Russian President Boris 
Yeltsin in Moscow in February 1997. As another example Sanders states, ‘In 
1994, when reports circulated in the Iraqi press calling Albright a serpent, she 
decided to wear the snake pin—in lieu of a name tag—when meeting with 
Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz.’4 In 2009 Albright published a book aptly 
titled Read My Pins: Stories from a Diplomat’s Jewel Box. 

138
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
In response to a reader’s question, ‘What fashion lessons can we learn 
from Trump’s visit?’5 Hadley Freeman wrote an article for The Guardian 
provocatively titled ‘Was the Queen sending coded messages to Donald Trump 
via her brooches? Absolutely.’6 Freeman reported that Queen Elizabeth II 
was observed to have worn a brooch, received as a gift from the former 
United States President Obama and his wife, to a meeting with President 
Donald Trump and First Lady Melania Trump. At a second meeting she wore a 
snowflake brooch, a gift from Canada, read as a reference to Trump’s prior use 
of ‘snowflake’ as a derogatory term to refer to those who disagree with him. 
For a third meeting the Queen wore a brooch the Queen Mother wore to the 
funeral of King George VI, which Freeman observes is not a brooch associated 
with happiness and joy. 
In late September 2019 Lady Hale, President of the British Supreme Court, 
announced the much-awaited verdict that Prime Minister ‘Boris Johnson’s 
prorogation of parliament was “void and of no effect”’.7 The brooch she was 
wearing also gained wide attention. Scarlett Conlon writing in the fashion 
section of The Guardian reported that the spider brooch had become a ‘fashion 
phenomenon’8. Similarly, fashion historian Amber Butchart writing for Frieze 
Magazine observed that ‘it was her spider brooch that stole the spotlight’ 
and sparked discussion about ‘what the symbolism could mean’.9 Of course, 
journalists focusing on jewellery help build awareness and create demand. 
In a different way of signalling, the Duchess of Sussex, Meghan Markle, has 
been widely reported to wear clothes and jewellery that are ethical or sustainable 
in their origins. Her jewellery choices don’t feature the graphic imagery like Hale 
and Albright’s brooches do, but the impact of her choices nonetheless makes 
a clear political statement. She is known to wear jewellery by Pippa Small, a 
United Kingdom-based jewellery firm that practices ‘fair trade and sustainable 
employment’.10 Pippa Small, quoted by journalist Emily Nash, has said, ‘Ethical 
jewellery has become a conversation and I think the Duchess wearing it over 
the last year, without having to say anything, has brought that subject to a public 
who weren’t aware.’11 Wearing jewellery with political intention remains relevant 
and it seems a public figure would be foolish to think otherwise. 
Jewellery materials
The Museum of London holds a collection of Suffragette brooches, which 
more than a century after their use provide a material record of this influential 
political movement. But what happens to all of the jewellery that isn’t 
collected by museums? The materials that jewellery is made from have the 
very real potential to outlive not just the period of use, but also the life of the 

139
JEWELLERY IS POLITICAL
maker and the owner. Just think of the recovered jewels that have provided 
archaeologists and the public alike with insights into ancient civilizations. 
This longevity of materials applies today to conventionally precious metals 
and gems and also to less commercially precious and comparatively modern 
materials. 
For jewellery made from silver or gold the greatest risk to longevity is that 
it will be melted down for reuse. The ease of melting and reusing precious 
metals is a well-established part of the jewellery trade. However, not all of 
the jewellery of today is made from materials that are as easy to recycle 
or reuse as silver and gold. Materials like plastic and base metals also have 
the potential to outlive the maker and the wearer but are far less likely to be 
recycled or reused. The low economic value of these materials means that 
jewellery made from them is very likely to end up as rubbish. Not only can 
jewellery carry a political message, but the materials it is made from have 
political implications. Every jeweller who designs or makes pieces from 
materials that cannot, in the future, be easily retrieved for reuse is making 
a statement and contributing to material evidence that is likely to last as a 
physical record for centuries to come. 
Jewellery is a carrier of stories and associations and while it can quite 
often have a commodity value, its value for the owner can extend beyond 
the commercial potential of its material make-up. For example, the value 
of a wedding ring or inherited jewellery is likely to be more aligned to what 
it symbolizes than its potential to be exchanged for cash. Yet a lot of the 
jewellery produced today is not intended or even destined to be worn long 
enough for a wearer to form a lasting association. The rate at which fashion 
jewellery is being produced and disposed of resembles the disposability of 
fast fashion. The Fashion Revolution12 is active in raising awareness of the 
hidden impacts of fast fashion, from materials sourcing to manufacture, 
distribution and the masses of waste at the end of life. Fashion jewellery 
also contributes to the overall proliferation of material objects (stuff) and this 
reality has not gone unnoticed. Anthropologist Daniel Miller refers to ‘modern 
stuff’ as being ‘commodities: the deluge that followed from the industrial and 
consumer revolutions’.13 Miller’s choice of the word ‘deluge’ is appropriate: 
another relevant related term is flood. 
The value of an item as a commodity, its ‘commodity candidacy’, is 
specific to its exchangeability within a society.14 The production costs of 
fashion jewellery are low and its commodity candidacy or fashion currency is 
intended to be short lived. The purchaser is expected to respond to changing 
trends necessitating the next purchase. This production cycle rarely includes 
consideration of the human and environmental costs. Design researcher 
Matthew Kiem, acknowledging the influence of theorist Tony Fry, has stated 
‘our current condition . . . seeks to depress the value of labour in order to 

140
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
produce too many things that are impossible to fully consume, and are 
therefore irrevocably destined for wastage’.15 
Jewellery and fashion
The Fashion Revolution was formed by fashion designers Carry Somers 
and Orsola de Castro in response to the 2013 Rana Plaza factory collapse 
in Bangladesh. The structurally faulty factory was reduced to rubble in 
minutes; those working in the building could not escape. The final death toll 
was reported as 1,134.16 The shocking incident exposed the ugly truth of 
the appalling standards in the workplace where fashion clothing was being 
made. This was a damning example of mass production being outsourced 
to the services of people in a country where wages and worker protections 
were low. An extraordinary revelation after the event was that many of the 
clothes were being made for big international brands, and some claimed that 
they had no idea that Rana Plaza was the location of their production. The 
subsequent media scrutiny exposed that fashion supply chains were complex 
and confusing tangled webs; greater transparency was needed. This was 
a challenge to the status quo. Co-founder de Castro refers to the political 
nature of the Fashion Revolution’s initiatives: ’The fashion industry was built 
on secrecy and elitism; it was opaque. Transparency is disruptive . . . and a 
useful weapon of change.’17
The Fashion Revolution is concerned with the whole life cycle of clothing, 
from raw materials and employment conditions of workers involved in clothing 
manufacture to the eventual disposal. It is effective in using social media to 
promote its activities to engage and inform the wider public. It has been active 
in exposing the human and environmental costs of fast fashion. The jewellery 
industry has also been included in its initiatives and efforts for improving 
fashion industry standards. The Fashion Revolution’s annual social media 
campaign, ‘Who Made My Clothes?’18 marks the anniversary of the Rana 
Plaza collapse. The campaign calls on people to post an image of themselves 
showing the brand label of their clothes tagged #whomademyclothes. 
In response, workers at all levels of clothing production are asked to post 
#imadeyourclothes. They have also been directing ‘Who Made My Jewellery?’ 
in recognition of the close relationship between fashion and jewellery.
There are multiple other industry initiatives within and aligned to the 
field of jewellery. These are variously aiming to improve the environmental 
and cultural standards of sourcing raw materials, transparency in the supply 
chain and production processes. As with the Fashion Revolution’s activities, 
the jewellery industry’s initiatives are being disruptive. Their activities are 

141
JEWELLERY IS POLITICAL
necessarily political, drawing attention to practices that are usually hidden or 
far removed from the end product. They advocate and set standards for better 
practice by exposing the human and environmental costs (blood diamonds, 
child miners, cyanide poisoning of water sources, environmental degradation) 
and developing and promoting alternatives. This is by no means a definitive 
list of such organizations: Alliance for Responsible Mining, Jewelry Industry 
Summit, Artisanal Gold Council, Diamond Development Initiative, Earthworks, 
Ethical Metalsmiths, IMPACT, Swiss Better Gold Association, Fairtrade 
International, Fair Luxury, Common Objective. Many of these organizations are 
focused on setting and improving standards for the sourcing and processing 
of new raw materials, precious metals and gemstones. Some are concerned 
also about manufacturing practices.
There are not many initiatives focusing on the deluge of fashion jewellery 
and what happens to it at the end of its commodity life. I will introduce two 
jewellery initiatives that do. These community educational research projects 
have developed as a way of both exposing and testing ways to tackle the 
problem of unsustainable consumerism. Murray has noted that ‘climate 
change has served to raise parallel concerns about consumerism as an 
unsustainable basis on which to maintain societies. In positioning craft as 
an alternative to the rapid turnover of fashion and technology, it maintains 
its role as a counterpoint to dominant trends in modernity.’19 The Radical 
Jewelry Makeover (RJM)20 and JUNK – rubbish to gold (JUNK)21 are craft-
based initiatives that involve students, professional jewellers and the public in 
activities that draw attention to and suggest methods of dealing with jewellery 
at the end of its commodity life. 
Radical Jewelry Makeover
It is not surprising, given the speculative and community base of these 
initiatives, that each was developed and hosted in a university. Both RJM and 
JUNK involve making new jewellery, sourcing the materials from donated 
jewellery. Most of the donated jewellery is mass-produced, while the jewellers 
involved in the research programmes are art students and professional 
studio jewellers. Curator at the Tasmanian Museum and Art Gallery, Peter 
Hughes, has suggested that ‘effective reuse of redundant objects cannot 
be achieved through mass-production and requires an imaginative, craft 
oriented engagement with the things themselves’.22 These two initiatives are 
dependent on the individual creativity of the participants to use their craft 
skills to rethink the use of the materials at hand. 
The RJM was developed by Susie Ganch and Christina Miller for Ethical 
Metalsmiths and was first delivered at the Virginia Commonwealth University, 

142
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
United States, in 2007.23 Ultimately RJM involves making new jewellery from 
old jewellery which in itself is not a new idea. Rather, it is how the RJM 
introduces this idea and how it uses it as an educational tool that makes it 
significant. The programme involves a public call asking the community to 
search their homes, their drawers and their storage for jewellery they no 
longer want and are willing to donate; the RJM calls this ‘community mining’. 
It draws attention to the large quantity of materials suited to reuse hidden in 
households. It also draws the attention of the public to the project. This is one 
of the ways it extends its educational role beyond the jewellery studio. The 
donated material invariably includes items of jewellery made from traditional 
easy-to-reuse materials, precious metals and gemstones, which is not the 
case for the donations to JUNK.
The RJM is focused on closing the loop, following Braungart and 
McDonough’s Cradle to Cradle theory, in which the donated jewellery becomes 
the ‘technical nutrients’ which can be used to make new jewellery, with the 
design allowing for the components in the future to again be retrieved as 
‘technical nutrients’.24 The intention is that, long term, the demand to extract 
raw materials will diminish. In the short term the RJM introduces participants 
to ways of working to ensure the pieces of jewellery made in the programme 
are robust and suited to long term use, while allowing for easy retrieval of 
components as ‘technical nutrients’ at the end of their use. 
In every iteration of the RJM (there have now been fourteen events and 
six satellite smaller ones), the wider community has proven keen to support 
the project and has donated generously. The donors are forewarned that their 
jewellery will be deconstructed and altered beyond recognition. The donated 
jewellery and associated stories are collected and sorted. The stories supplied 
are revealing: the donated pieces can have deep sentimental value as well as 
high material value, but equally some items have never been worn and are in no 
way significant to the donor. The sorting process involves university students 
and professional jewellers who assess each donation identifying the material 
make-up of each item. Is it gold, silver, base metal, plastic, bone, diamond, 
shell, unknown? Does the piece have symbolic value that could be reused for 
narrative content such as a graphic element? The sorting process helps build 
the participants’ understanding of materials, their strengths and weaknesses 
and suitability for reuse. Ultimately the donations are the materials that the 
participating jewellers will use to make new work. Those involved are briefed 
about the considerations of the materials on hand. They are taught how to 
test metal qualities, how to make ingots, how to tell if a stone is real or glass 
or plastic; they are given tips about ways to work with unfamiliar materials 
including safety considerations. 
The jewellers are guided to ensure the works they create in the RJM are 
constructed in a way that adds value to the individual elements used and to 

143
JEWELLERY IS POLITICAL
make future material retrieval more likely. For example, bezel setting a plastic 
bead in a silver earring adds value to the plastic bead, and in the future all 
components should be easy to separate with minimal environmental impact. 
However, fusing brass and gold together to make a ring would mean the 
hypoallergenic qualities of the gold would be compromised by the more 
reactive bronze, making the ring less wearable, and any future retrieval would 
require a full refining process. This is a fundamental idea about the ongoing life 
of materials already in the system and one that participants are encouraged 
to also consider in relation to their usual practice. The project closes with 
a selling exhibition of the works produced. Donors are given credit towards 
a purchase, and the profit from sales is shared between the jeweller and 
Ethical Metalsmiths. This is an event that again draws the public into the 
ideas behind the RJM, encouraging them to think about how materials pass 
through communities. Consistently, the sense of community formed in the 
programme is an important outcome. Through being exposed to the large 
quantity of materials, participants are challenged to consider their own studio 
practices through the lens of the RJM. 
JUNK – rubbish to gold
JUNK is a participatory project co-created by Jivan Astfalk, Laura Bradshaw-
Heap and Rachel Darbourne and was held at the School of Jewellery, 
Birmingham City University in 2015.25 The idea was ‘to collect unsellable JUNK 
jewellery from UK and Irish-based charity shops and bring them together with 
a number of jewellers and makers who would gift their time and skills to 
convert this raw material into new objects while in full view of the public’.26 
According to Bradshaw-Heap, the jewellery that charities deemed unsuited 
for sale was ‘damaged or broken, simply over-worn or no longer in fashion’.27 
These were definitely items destined to follow the more common store to 
landfill cycle. Anthropologist Arjun Appadurai has noted that ‘the commodity 
candidacy of things is less temporal than a conceptual feature, and it refers to 
the standards and criteria (symbolic, classificatory, and moral) that define the 
exchangeability of things in any particular social and historical context’.28 The 
context that led to the JUNK initiative is that in Western culture a measure of 
wealth is ‘how many objects people are able to discard’.29 The rate at which 
things are discarded has led to the deluge of ‘stuff’ that charity shops are 
receiving. 
Like the RJM model, the participating jewellers were working with donated 
jewellery, but in this case the jewellery was not from individual donors so 
was not accompanied by stories and it was also made of extremely low value 
materials. The JUNK project drew attention to the large amount of donations 

144
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
charities receive that they can’t resell. This is an issue that is not unique to 
charity shops in the UK and Ireland. According to a reporter for the Australian 
Broadcasting Corporation, ‘Australian charities are paying $13 million a year 
to send unusable donations to landfill.’30 These are items that charities deem 
to have no commodity candidacy. The team of jewellers involved in the 
JUNK project were challenged to make pieces from a large amount of base 
metal and plastic donations diverted from landfill. Their involvement was 
live streamed extending the audience internationally. JUNK’s co-creators 
stated: ‘During a public performance thirty-one jewellers ‘gifted’ their skills, 
(de)constructing and (re)constructing pieces selected from a mountain of 
JUNK creating reimagined artworks for our exhibitions and online auctions.’31 
The profits from the sale of the works were split among the charities that had 
provided their unwanted donations. The project was well documented and the 
image of the large pile of materials was effective in communicating the scale 
of the problem.
A lot of the materials used in JUNK were ones that are not easy to reuse, 
unlike silver or gold that can be melted and reshaped. The jewellery being 
worked with was made from materials that many of the jewellers were 
unfamiliar with, materials that in our society aren’t valued for their potential 
reuse. While in the RJM sustainable and environmentally friendly studio 
practices and the future life of the materials are the focus, in JUNK this was 
not the priority. While both projects were initiated by contemporary jewellers 
as opposed to commercial producers, most of the materials involved in the 
RJM and JUNK are of mass-produced commercial origin. 
These projects draw attention to how a piece of jewellery that once was 
personal and meaningful can also become unwanted ‘stuff’. As a jeweller 
this is surprisingly confrontational to me. The process of handcrafting creates 
a connection between the maker, the materials and the finished piece of 
jewellery. It is expected and hoped that in turn the wearer will develop a 
similar lasting relationship with the piece of jewellery. This is in keeping with 
Hughes’ description of ‘emotionally durable design’ as ‘an approach that seeks 
to prevent redundancy not through mere physical durability that has proven 
ineffective, but by designing objects whose lives are prolonged because 
people become emotionally attached to them’.32
Conclusion
In the early years of my studio practice I stated, ‘I like working with materials 
that are going to last . . . I like the idea of making jewellery and tableware that 
will be used for generations.’33 Working at the time with only precious metals, 

145
JEWELLERY IS POLITICAL
I was correct in thinking my works had the potential to last generations. 
However, my experiences since then and exposure to the RJMs and JUNK 
suggest that my idea that all of the pieces I make would remain relevant in 
people’s lives and be passed on seems less likely and inappropriate. Kiem, 
discussing Tony Fry’s theory of Sustainment, states, ‘Fry uses the concept 
of Sustainment to refer to a state in which the total inertia of human socio-
technical existence, including cultures and economies, act to secure rather 
than damage the possibility of long term futures.’34 Kiem has observed that, 
by allowing us to talk in terms of the ability of individuals, groups, and their 
relation to the built world, ‘sustain-ability’ assists us in thinking beyond the 
mere technical specifications of objects, and onto questions of how an 
endemic condition of cultural unsustainability is symbolically and materially 
constituted, and what kind of designing and making may begin to counter 
this condition.35 
Contemporary jewellers know that jewellery is not just a commodity, it is 
a vehicle for many ideas. Public figures demonstrate that jewellery remains 
relevant as a means of communication and can be worn with political intent, 
but the politics of jewellery go further. Jewellery can also be interpreted 
on a structural level through, for example, the ethics of its supply chains 
and its contribution to a culture of overconsumption. Through projects like 
the RJM and JUNK, contemporary jewellers are beginning to expose and 
address problems in the current system of fashion jewellery and the use of 
unsustainable materials and processes in the wider field of jewellery. There is 
room for more initiatives.
Notes
1	 K. Murray, ‘The Political Challenge to Contemporary Jewelry’, in 
Contemporary Jewelry in Perspective, ed. D. Skinner (New York, NY: LARK, 
2013), 240–5.
2	 Helen Williams Drutt and W. Steiner, Brooching It Diplomatically: A Tribute to 
Madeleine K. Albright (Philadelphia, PA: arnoldsche Art Publishers, 1998), 9.
3	 Alain L. Sanders and J. Goldstein, ‘Brooching the Subject Diplomatically’, 
TIME Magazine 149, no. 12 (1997): 36.
4	 Ibid.
5	 H. Freeman, ‘Was the Queen Sending Coded Messages to Donald Trump Via 
Her Brooches? Absolutely’, The Guardian, Wednesday, 18 July 2018. 
https​:/​/ww​w​.the​guard​ian​.c​om​/fa​shion​/2018​/jul/​18​/wa​s​-the​-quee​n​-sen​ding-​
coded​-mess​ages-​to​-do​nald-​trump​-via-​her​-b​rooch​es​-ab​solut​ely.

146
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
6	 Ibid.
7	 S. Conlon, ‘How Lady Hale’s Giant Spider Brooch Sent the Web into a Spin’, 
The Guardian, Sunday, 29 September 2019 (modified Monday, 30 September 
2019). https​:/​/ww​w​.the​guard​ian​.c​om​/fa​shion​/2019​/sep/​28​/la​dy​-ha​le​-sp​ider-​
brooc​h​-lau​nches​-glob​al​-tr​end.
8	 Ibid.
9	 A. Butchart, ‘Lady Hale’s Spider and the Political History of the Brooch’, 
Frieze Magazine, 3 October 2019. https​:/​/fr​ieze.​com​/a​rticl​e​/lad​y​-hal​es​-sp​ider-​
and​-p​oliti​cal​-h​istor​y​-bro​och
10	 E. Nash, ‘This Is the Incredibly Moving Impact of Duchess Meghan’s Ethical 
Jewellery Choices’, HELLO! 12 August 2019. https​:/​/ca​.hell​omaga​zine.​com​
/f​ashio​n​/roy​al​-st​yle​/2​01908​12763​87​/me​ghan-​markl​e​-eth​ical-​jewel​lery-​pippa​
-smal​l​-int​ervie​w/
11	 Ibid.
12	 https​:/​/ww​w​.fas​hionr​evolu​tion.​org​/a​bout/​get​-i​nvolv​ed/
13	 D. Miller, Stuff (Cambridge, UK: Polity Press, 2010), 63.
14	 A. Appadurai, ‘Introduction: Commodities and the Politics of Value’, in The 
Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspective, ed. A. Appadurai 
(Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1986), 2–63, 14.
15	 M. Kiem, ‘Theorising a Transformative Agenda for Craft’, craft + design 
inquiry 3 (2011): 33–48, 38.
16	 T. Hoskins, ‘Reliving the Rana Plaza Factory Collapse: A History of Cities in 
50 Buildings, Day 22’, The Guardian, Thursday, 23 April 2015. https​:/​/ww​w​.the​
guard​ian​.c​om​/ci​ties/​2015/​apr​/2​3​/ran​a​-pla​za​-fa​ctory​-coll​apse-​histo​ry​-​ci​ties-​50​
-bu​ildin​gs.
17	 S. Ditty, Fashion Transparency Index 2019: Fashion Revolution, 87. https​:/​/is​
suu​.c​om​/fa​shion​revol​ution​/docs​/fash​ion​_t​ransp​arenc​y​_ind​ex​_20​19.
18	 https​:/​/ww​w​.fas​hionr​evolu​tion.​org​/a​bout/​get​-i​nvolv​ed/
19	 K. Murray, ‘Editorial - Introduction to Sustainability Issue’, craft + design 
enquiry 3 (2011): 1–5, 3.
20	 RJM I: Richmond, VA, February 2007. rad​ical​jewe​lrym​akeover​.org. https​:/​/
ww​w​.rad​icalj​ewelr​ymake​over.​org​/r​ichmo​nd.
21	 Laura Bradshaw-Heap, Rachel Darbourne and J. Astfalk, JUNK: rubbish to 
gold, 2016. https​:/​/is​suu​.c​om​/ru​bbish​togol​d​/doc​s​/hig​h​_res​_junk​_pos​t​er​_ve​r2​
_01​.
22	 P. Hughes, ‘Towards a Post-Consumer Subjectivity: A Future for the Crafts in 
the Twenty First Century?’, craft + design enquiry 3 (2011): 7–17, 16.
23	 RJM I: Richmond, VA, February 2007.
24	 Michael Braungart and W. McDonough, Cradle to Cradle (London: Vintage 
Books, 2009), 9.
25	 Laura Bradshaw-Heap, Rachel Darbourne and J. Astfalk, JUNK: rubbish to 
gold.
26	 Jivan Astfalck, Ibid.

147
JEWELLERY IS POLITICAL
27	 Ibid.
28	 Appadurai, ‘Introduction’, 13–14.
29	 M. Thompson, Rubbish Theory (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1979), 2.
30	 B. Kleyn, ‘Lifeline Urges People Not to Dump Clothing Outside Bins After 
Charities Inundated’, 15 January 2019. https​:/​/ww​w​.abc​.net.​au​/ne​ws​/20​19​-01​
-14​/c​harit​ies​-n​ot​-ac​cepti​ng​-do​natio​ns​-as​-bin​s​-over​flow/​10713​158.
31	 Jivan Astfalck, Rachel Darbourne and L. Bradshaw-Heap, ‘Beyond Junk: The 
Complex Art of Value-Hacking’, Making Futures 5 (2018). https​:/​/dr​ive​.g​oogle​
.com/​file/​d​/1XW​Ex44i​bUj7z​6QnH3​-18OH​LnXWj​qBEIx​/view​.
32	 Hughes, ‘Towards a Post-Consumer Subjectivity’.
33	 Arts Queensland and MAD Ethos, MAD Ethos: Marketing Australian Design, 
Design in the Third Dimension (Toowong, QLD: Arts Queensland, 1996).
34	 Kiem, ‘Theorising a Transformative Agenda for Craft’, 36.
35	 Ibid., 35–6.

10
Networks of economic 
kinship in Aotearoa New 
Zealand craft markets
Fiona P. McDonald
Introduction
N
early every day for ten years, I have checked social media in the morning. 
As part of this quiet ritual, I travel through the digital vortex of Facebook 
and more recently have included Instagram in this process because the people 
I engage with are continually expanding their digital reach and upping their 
hashtag game. In this daily exercise, I routinely check the craft pages I follow 
and groups that have accumulated my ‘likes’ over the years: profiles of makers 
(some of whom are now friends) to see either what markets they are attending 
or new ideas they are working on; groups I have joined (at least those that still 
remain active); and events all centering around contemporary craft and craft 
markets in Aotearoa New Zealand. In this daily ritual, I am undertaking three 
things. First, I am selfishly sating my sensory desire to see recent works created 
by artists and crafters that I first met when I began fieldwork in Aotearoa New 
Zealand in 2011. Second, I am responding to emergent modalities provided by 
the possibility of digital ethnography and participant observation that connect 
this project to recent movements for distributed research beyond physical 
field sites into public virtual landscapes.1 And third, I have been witness to the 
profound economic agency of women in craft markets where an argument is 
to be made for their omission from almost all economic theorizing2 and where 
economic kinship ties are evident in their daily lives. 

149
NETWORKS OF ECONOMIC KINSHIP IN CRAFT MARKETS
Understanding the politics of craft often starts with a personal anecdote 
that captures what one might call an ‘aha’ moment. As an anthropologist, 
I find it deeply tempting to frame this whole chapter as an aha account 
that traces back to my own realization of economic ‘craft-scapes’ as they 
unfolded before me in Aotearoa New Zealand and are now evident in digital 
worlds. After nearly a decade of reflection, observation and engagement with 
in-person and virtual craft markets and forums, this chapter emerges from 
rigorous reflexivity of memories, field notes and a personal image archive 
to present a critical discussion of the dynamic politics of craft markets in 
Aotearoa New Zealand.
This chapter actively takes up the understanding that a craft object itself has 
the potential to be deeply political and consequently an enchanting thing, as 
the late anthropologist Alfred Gell argued about the power of material objects.3 
From what an object represents (be it iconography, symbolism, language and 
beyond) to the strategic choice of materials that it is made from, craft has 
been an enduring site of investigation for anthropologists concerned mostly 
with tourism and local consumption practices.4 My goal in this chapter is not 
to define craft in Aotearoa New Zealand, but rather accept that objects made 
and sold at in-person craft markets and in online markets are self-defined by 
their makers as craft. Taking from anthropologist Nicholas Thomas’s directive 
that just as it is not an anthropologist’s place to judge the qualities of what 
makes a work of art a work of art,5 it is also not my place to label anyone as a 
maker or a crafter.6 Rather, I look to those who self-identify their work as craft 
when selling online, and further take their work, vetted as handmade, as the 
requisite for participation in craft markets in Aotearoa New Zealand. And in 
doing so I can turn my focus upon the localization of emergent and sustained 
craft markets and the women whose social connections are bound together 
in a shared effort (either overt or covert) to foster a transformative economic, 
and thereby political, space. With emerging venues for craft markets in person 
and online as sites for social networks, the definition of what is craft and who 
makes craft is absolutely ever-shifting in Aotearoa New Zealand. 
And while the art of craft, and the objects themselves, are well argued to 
be political,7 what has been under-examined is the politics of craft markets 
as sites of agency for women in generating what I propose is something 
beyond social networking and rather is akin to a form of economic kinship.8 
Kinship here is a ‘system of meaning and power’ created within a culture 
to determine connection to another person and in so doing ‘define[s] their 
mutual expectations, rights, and responsibilities’.9 Pushing this further, and 
perhaps more aligned with what is known as chosen or fictive kinships, I 
argue that in the context of women engaging in craft markets from a fiscal 
perspective, they form a sort of economic kinship with others who have built 
and maintained in-person and online craft markets, and who share mutual 

150
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
connections and reciprocal economic labour responsibilities that are explored 
throughout this chapter.
Coming to know networks of women in Aotearoa New Zealand is not new 
to me. In 2005, through sheer coincidence, I met five women in their early 
eighties, all war brides who had been meeting bi-weekly as part of the Albany 
Spinners and Weavers Guild in the hinterland of Auckland. In the journey 
of coming to know them as friends, what transpired was a happenstance 
ethnography, or rather An Unexpected History Lesson: Meeting European 
‘Colonial Girls’ through Knitting, Weaving, Spinning, and Cups of Tea.10 It is a 
project that tells the story of women, networks, survival, war brides, teachers, 
mothers, wives, entrepreneurs and friends through material culture.11 
Setting the scene for craft markets 
and kinship ties
Nestled deep within the South Pacific, Aotearoa New Zealand is a small 
island nation that boasts a current (2020) national population of approximately 
4.9 million residents.12 Prior to European contact in the eighteenth century, 
Māori were the original inhabitants. And post-colonization, large and small 
European settlement communities began to take root with the insurgence of 
immigrant populations from Britain. The continuing diversity of the national 
population includes citizens from immigrant populations across the South 
Pacific as well as European New Zealanders and Māori populations. The 
settler colonial history of the nation has, in its short existence, been fraught 
with tension, bloodshed and misinterpretations of treaty agreements over 
land and sovereignty. The founding colonial document, the Treaty of Waitangi, 
was signed in 1840 between Māori chiefs and the Crown.13 Prior to the Treaty, 
all lands on the three main islands (including foreshore and seabed) were 
owned by Māori iwi (tribes). 
At this time, woollen blankets were one of the many items traded for land 
and since then have had a strong presence in Aotearoa New Zealand’s material 
history. In 1887, the New Zealand Woollen Manufacturing Company was 
established and eventually, in 1904, renamed as the Onehunga Woollen Mills, 
given its location in one of the suburbs of the Auckland isthmus. According 
to historian Heather Nicholson in The Loving Stitch: A History of Knitting and 
Spinning in New Zealand, ‘textile manufacture began in New Zealand as a 
cottage industry’.14 Several other mills eventually popped up throughout the 
country and produced mostly plaid-patterned blankets.15 It is these blankets 
and their distinctive patterns that have been transformed into craft and items 
of commerce and that evoke an emotional connection between maker and 

151
NETWORKS OF ECONOMIC KINSHIP IN CRAFT MARKETS
buyer. This is one of the first aspects of what I argue is entangled in economic 
networks and kinship.
Networks
In 2011, I conducted field work in order to understand the various physical and 
aesthetic transformations of woollen blankets into works of contemporary 
art, craft and Indigenous regalia in various parts of North America and 
Aotearoa New Zealand.16 Through this investigation, I followed the blankets 
into art galleries, museums, studios, archives, homes and craft markets. 
The blankets I traced around the globe were the same objects traded in the 
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries by fur traders in North America, used 
in treaty negotiations, gifted as wedding treasures in the 1950s, 1960s and 
1970s throughout the white settler nations (a.k.a. the Commonwealth), and 
produced originally in the United Kingdom by the Weavers of Witney from the 
seventeenth century. Eventually they were fabricated through replication of 
technology in settler states in colonized territory where small woollen mills 
were set up, and around which settler communities grew. These blankets 
are the hard-edged colonial objects with their own legacies of trauma for 
Indigenous communities. And in the craft markets of Aotearoa New Zealand, 
these woollen blankets, that once covered beds across the Islands only to 
vanish into the backs of cupboards when synthetic duvets or ‘doonas’ and 
candlewick bedcovers were introduced in the 1950s, remain popular today. 
As I note in ‘Charting Material Memories’,
But while the woollen blanket was removed from its everyday use, it was 
not displaced [from] people’s memories. [. . .]. [Today], those working with 
woollen blankets [. . .] were young children at this time and who remember 
the woollen blankets on their bed. This group, known more broadly as Gen 
Xers, are the demographic of people born between 1965-1981 and comprise 
the group of women I [. . .] came to know in Aotearoa New Zealand [in craft 
markets], as well as the demographic of those, mostly women again, who 
attended and purchased goods from various types of craft markets.17
Now, in the craft markets, the transformed blankets and their makers have 
found new political lives, or social lives if we draw on the critical work of 
anthropologist Arjun Appadurai whose seminal work on globalization argues 
that objects, like people, possess social lives as they move (or are moved), 
and through which they gain value and meaning.18 In the various stalls of 
craft markets, the politics of the blanket became tangible, creative and 

152
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
consumable. The objects into which the blankets have been transfigured are 
remarkable and to varying degrees serve alternative utilitarian functions that 
reflect the persistence and durability of the blankets’ material properties. The 
list below (in alphabetical order, and by no means exhaustive) is indicative of 
the many items Gen X women in Aotearoa New Zealand have created from 
blankets  for commercial ends from 2011 to the present (Figure 10.1).
●
●
Baby blankets (patch-worked and quilted)
●
●
Book covers and notebooks
●
●
Brooches (in various shapes, mostly flowers and Hei Tiki19 forms)
●
●
Bunting (decorative flags and garlands)
●
●
Children’s clothes
●
●
Christmas ornaments (tree decorations)
●
●
Clothes-peg angels
●
●
Coats (short and long in various styles) and vests
●
●
Coffee-cup sleeves, protectors
●
●
Coffins
FIGURE 10.1  Hayley Lowe Designs, 2011. Photo by Fiona P. McDonald.

153
NETWORKS OF ECONOMIC KINSHIP IN CRAFT MARKETS
●
●
Cushions (various sizes)
●
●
Door stops (weighted)/draft blockers
●
●
Dresses (adult)
●
●
Eyeglass cases
●
●
Hot water bottle covers
●
●
iPad and laptop covers and cases
●
●
Jewellery cases
●
●
Kids’ tunic dresses
●
●
Lamp shades
●
●
Ottomans/footstools
●
●
Pencil cases
●
●
Pot holders and oven mitts
●
●
Purses (clutches)
●
●
Scarves
●
●
Sewing pincushions
●
●
Tea-cosies
●
●
Teddy bears
●
●
Tooth fairy holders
●
●
Toys in various shapes (Hei Tiki, foxes, Scottie dogs, squirrels, 
elephants, whales, giraffes, robots, mice, matryoshka [Russian 
stacking] dolls)
●
●
Wall hangings
●
●
Wheat bags (heating bags)
●
●
Wristbands and bracelets
Documenting the various forms woollen blankets have taken within the 
context of craft is secondary to my focus in this chapter. That is because 
the blankets led me to see that there were remarkable social networks tied 
to economic kinship. After visiting each market, I learned more about the 
makers’ larger cosmological frames and the complex social networks that 
exist in craft markets. Being present to observe the sale of blanket-made 
items often created additional depth in understanding how the transformation 

154
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
of materials is part of the consumption process, a process whereby the maker 
is a magician, turning a blanket into a technology of enchantment that allows 
people to be mystified by and drowned in nostalgia.20 
But in this draw to the political content of the craft object given the colonial 
history of the woollen blanket, as any anthropologist knows, we must look at 
the broader social context that objects move in and through (again, gesturing 
to the work of Appadurai) in order to explore beyond the enchantment of 
the object and the performative behaviour of consumption. In this instance, 
it is the physical space of craft markets scattered through large and small 
communities in the North Island of Aotearoa New Zealand where my focus 
now rests. 
Craft markets in Aotearoa New Zealand
When you witness someone utilizing or purchasing a woollen blanket that is 
transformed into an object at a craft market, it is a window into an intimate 
sensory moment where the craft object evokes memories, nostalgia and a 
connection to the maker. I observed many of these rich moments throughout 
my fieldwork, which subsequently led to conversations and interviews where 
the role materials play in eliciting various regimes of knowledge – touch, 
smell, sight and memory – were entangled in a commercial transaction. More 
importantly, these moments allowed me entry into the studios, kitchens and 
social worlds of the women selling their work at craft markets and their own 
‘social community of craft’.21
One of the characteristics of this community and their work that drives 
an economy is that of the handmade. The values associated with handmade 
objects evoke a sense of authenticity for many consumers.22 Joseph McBrinn’s 
work on craft offers a very succinct reflection on the idea of the handmade in 
craft. ‘The signification of craft evolved as handmade objects became imbued 
with symbolic meanings of authenticity, tradition, and heritage, and became 
seen as agents of transformation, changing everyday commodities into signs 
of modernity.’23 This is an essential element of what is now called the ‘maker 
movement’.24 This movement, while it has been compared to the historic Arts 
and Crafts movement of the nineteenth century, stakes its success on the fact 
that the artisanal products are of high quality manufacture, and the makers 
forge networks in which to sell these objects through sites and market 
communities such as Facebook, ETSY, Felt​.co​.nz and others.25
An object’s handmade-ness in local craft markets and fairs across the North 
Island, as I observed, is often one of the criteria a seller must meet in order 
to be able to sell their work. I attended several such markets in rotation such 

155
NETWORKS OF ECONOMIC KINSHIP IN CRAFT MARKETS
as Crafternoon Tea, Kraftbomb (identified at that time as one of the ‘edgier’ 
markets), Devonport Craft Market, Craft 2.0, Coatesville Market and others 
(Figure 10.2). When observing blankets as wall hangings, toys and purses I also 
took note of the costs, with an eye to the economics of markets. On average 
the cushions ranged in price from NZ$15 to $150, while smaller items like 
purses were between NZ$10 to $25. Toys and teddy bears ranged between 
NZ$20 to $50, and small tree ornaments were around NZ$5 to $15. Walking 
through handmade craft markets was continually an act of tracking economic 
markets in flux based on the basic mechanics of supply and demand.
Networks of encounter (spaces of production, 
distribution and consumption)
The craft market or craft fair is one of the most discerning social spaces as it is 
‘the ground of cultural creativity’.26 The craft market is truly a rich social context 
where local cultural aesthetics are formed, transformed, transmitted and 
‘downloaded’,27 and where the maker movement, in part, takes place. After 
my first time in the field in Aotearoa New Zealand, I spent several months 
systematically tracking where and when craft markets took place and who 
organizes them, and diligently attended every possible market on its rotating 
schedule. It was at the craft markets where I first understood how and where 
social relations coalesce.28 The relationship between those working in the 
arena of craft items became more visible as I tracked the networks that made 
up the craft matrix of Aotearoa New Zealand. The network of craft is rich with 
linkages, social specificities, protocols and relationships. It has become a 
space for ‘sharing knowledge [that] creat[es] new types of makers [that] fuel 
new communities of practice’.29 
FIGURE 10.2  Left: Devonport Craft Market. Right: Coatesville Craft Market. 
2011. Photos by Fiona P. McDonald.

156
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
In my experience in Aotearoa New Zealand, craft markets are organized 
regionally and have a central focus on sellers whose work is classified as 
handmade. These sellers and makers form a discrete group of individuals. 
Women are at the forefront of contemporary craft markets in Aotearoa 
New Zealand. Beyond organizing, the women are also the main sellers and 
consumers. Women entrepreneurs reflect an economic and social reality 
of craft in the country. As I repeatedly observed, women working with 
craft, especially craft that involves textiles, make up a distinct community 
of practice (CoP) within these markets. As related anthropological studies 
on CoPs have shown,30 they emerge from a shared interest. In the context 
of Aotearoa New Zealand, this is a shared interest in generating profit from 
craft by way of small home-based businesses that allow women to be 
primary caregivers, as well as contribute to family resources as income 
earners. Here we have the essence of kinship: a chosen kinship and social 
network with reciprocity, responsibility and value. Additionally, these kinship 
groups participate in articulating their cultural values and showcasing their 
skills and labour at the same time as fulfilling their economic needs. As 
with all kinship groups that are not biological, ‘communities of practice 
are formed when social units are united by common areas of concerns 
or interests, interact regularly, share a common vocabulary, and, even 
without acknowledging it, learn with and from one another in the process’.31 
Therefore, I push beyond a CoP here to call this truly what it is, economic 
kinship. 
What makes this aspect of their economic group political is that it is created, 
sustained and invested in predominantly by women. This is a women’s only 
economy. The demographic of makers who participate in selling goods at 
these markets forms a well-networked group of savvy, compassionate, 
collegial and generous women. Several times it was indicated that, with 
increasing numbers of women starting up home businesses with the aim of 
selling at local markets, more competition was evident than in previous years. 
But competition was not expressed to me as a negative, but rather as a way 
to become more focused on selling efforts. The composition of these flexible 
kinship groups consists of women who fall within an age demographic of thirty 
to fifty years, and often disclose their role as mothers. Some women I met, 
at times, would self-identify as ‘mumpreneurs’. However, I found this term 
became a somewhat polarizing label among women who operate small home-
based businesses while simultaneously raising a family and contributing to the 
household income. There was not enough opportunity in the field to further 
explore what percentage of women actually applied this as an identity marker 
consistently. And over the past decade, the term has egregiously fallen out of 
fashion completely online. The demographic of consumers purchasing goods 
at craft markets, through my observation only, is members of their peer-group, 

157
NETWORKS OF ECONOMIC KINSHIP IN CRAFT MARKETS
who likely have disposable income and who share an interest in supporting 
handmade goods and seeking objects of nostalgia. As Dennis Stevens notes, 
While these fairs reflect some characteristics of traditional craft fairs, the 
difference is that vendors are mainly Gen Xers who are commercially savvy, 
art-educated, conscious of good design, and who seek to transform what 
was once considered mere feminine and domestic forms of creativity and 
decoration into something new. In these fairs, it seems that DIY craft as a 
subculture has an interest in capitalizing on the subversive allure of hipness 
in an effort to subvert hegemonic systems of taste and consumption.32
To this I would add that playing to a local aesthetic that is informed by nostalgia 
and the articulation of a national identity through the use of specific materials 
and symbols is just good business! 
Within Aotearoa New Zealand, being handmade and made in the country 
are two important classifications on any manufactured item. At several stalls 
within craft markets (that clearly base participation on handmaking) and at retail 
shops that sell handmade goods, makers often exhibited small signs indicating 
their pledge to a handmade ethic and movement. Through investigating the 
history of ‘I TOOK THE HANDMADE PLEDGE’, a movement spearheaded by 
FIGURE 10.3  ‘I TOOK THE HANDMADE PLEDGE’, 2011. Devonport, 
Auckland. Photo by Fiona P. McDonald. 

158
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
a consortium of organizations mostly within the United States guided in large 
part by the online global marketplace of craft known as ETSY​.co​m, it appears 
to be promoted mostly during the December festive season to encourage 
support of independent makers (Figure 10.3). However, in Aotearoa New 
Zealand, promoting participation in the handmade pledge campaign had, at 
one time, an additional economic signification to reflect national values of 
‘home grown’ products in light of other formalized national evaluation systems 
that promote the manufacture of goods and products within Aotearoa New 
Zealand.33
Economic kinship – online
Through the resurgence of craft markets in the past decade, give or take a year 
or two in this timeline, flexible economic kinship relations have become more 
networked through social media. There also exists an online niche market for 
the sale of handmade craft items in Aotearoa New Zealand. Many makers 
operate their own websites and mediate sales and giveaways online through 
personal websites and Facebook. However, a central site such as Felt​.co​.nz 
offers its services as an online marketplace that takes its inspiration from sites 
like ETSY​.co​m. ‘There is no single type of online culture, more of a multiplicity 
of sub-cultures, dependent on the aims or agenda of participants.’34 This is 
exactly what Bruno Latour argued when he wrote that any ‘good ANT [Actor 
Network Theory] account is a narrative or a description or a proposition where 
all of the actors do something and don’t just sit there. [. . .] As soon as actors 
are treated not as intermediaries but as mediators, they render the movement 
of the social visible to the reader.’35 
The social activity that takes place beyond the formal market setting, a 
central ‘sphere of activity’ found in community centres and church halls, 
extends into coffee groups and virtual networks of online communities.36 Over 
the years, there have been several of these groups that capture what one 
could call ‘online labour’,37 concerning the sales of handmade goods that run 
parallel to the in-person craft markets. The networks of professional support 
that play out on Facebook and Instagram, as I have observed, have increased 
due to the services provided by social media platforms to enhance sales and 
social connections. And here we do not have competition with the in-person 
market, but rather an extension of capitalist efforts by the economic kinship 
groups to create online markets. 
To draw out an example, a central group that once operated on a national 
level, but is now defunct, was the New Zealand Handmade38 organization (as 
of May 2020, their last post was from 12 October 2014). In its heyday, the 

159
NETWORKS OF ECONOMIC KINSHIP IN CRAFT MARKETS
organization identified its ambition as supporting ‘independent craftspeople 
designing and producing New Zealand made, quality goods. We incorporate 
a diverse range of New Zealand designers, artisans, and craftspeople. Our 
goal is to promote members [sic] handcrafted work both within New Zealand 
and internationally and to create a vibrant creative community.’39 With regular 
posts on their blog at that time, they featured local craft businesses by ‘blog-
hopping’, and via weekly or bi-weekly email announcements to members 
enrolled on their listserv. With the establishment of Felt​.co​.nz in 2007 by Lucy 
Arnold, a site committed to social enterprise and local economies and makers, 
a space was created where individuals can feature their own works and 
engage in online marketing by linking to their profile, and by association be 
read as professional sellers thanks to the website’s intuitive and user-friendly 
design.40 
In my process of learning how women connect with each other to form 
economic kinship, I found that they were establishing groups to exchange 
information about sales, strategies, highs and lows in their sales, etc., but 
this was all done less formally and on a more regional level where smaller 
organizations mobilize both in person and online. Again, in this context, their 
economy was strengthened by mutual support, shared responsibilities and 
embracing competition to grow in order to ensure sustainability. During my 
time in Auckland, I became involved with one such collective of makers called 
the Auckland Homebase Business Hookup Group (AHBBHG). It was a closed 
group on Facebook, and they communicated issues online in advance of 
meetings that were organized at a local café in a suburb of Auckland. These 
meetings took place during the day (various times) either weekly or bi-weekly 
depending upon participant schedules and availability, and never in conflict 
with a weekend market. 
Women-only gatherings like this, mostly mothers, at cafés, allowed them 
to bring their children to what is, for home-based business owners, a version 
of a business meeting. The members actively participated in every meeting, 
and their conversations often carried on with members at markets where 
they sold their works at independent tables/stalls. Having sat in on several 
AHBBHG meetings, joined their Facebook community, observed them at 
markets, and carried out one-on-one interviews with many of the women, it 
became apparent that central to their network was friendship, camaraderie 
and trust – the core elements of chosen kinship. 
The semi-structured meetings at coffee shops, interrupted by children’s 
needs or ringing mobile phones concerning orders for products, followed an 
agenda set in advance. The participants addressed current issues or concerns 
that small business owners have about items such as web design, Facebook 
sales, EFTPOS terminals (debit machines), laws, branding and identity 
placement, as well as craft stall design and layout. Their mutual support, by 

160
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
talking through issues like growing their business, in some cases, beyond the 
kitchen table, allowed members to identify with struggles their fellow makers 
were experiencing such as lack of spousal support. Invited speakers were 
welcomed to share their expertise, and members took turns to share their 
own strengths in some of the aforementioned areas. Some members work 
within the same medium selling similar products, while others are completely 
new to advancing what is often called an amateur hobby of ‘prosperous 
excess’ into a professionalized economic business.41 
Conclusion
Economic kinship groups, like the ones discussed above, play out online and 
in craft markets. They are political by not being political, which means that 
their unified actions create a counter-culture of consumption that challenges 
globalization and fosters buying local and valuing the handmade. In their shared 
efforts, values, reciprocal exchanges and responsibilities, the women in the 
kinship groups show how local networks emerge, are sustained, and become 
central to the everyday life of the makers. These networks demonstrate how 
technology, politics and personality participate in their formation of economic 
structures, the articulation of national and personal essences, and the complex 
matrix, rather than continuum, of handmade values and craft.
My experiences both in person and online have been sustained for a decade 
and, as such, made visible that objects in craft markets may be political in 
the message they convey about sovereignty or identity, as well as identify 
how objects enchant the consumer and create a connection to the maker. 
Extending from this is the dynamics of the creation of spaces for consumption 
– that is, craft markets – that become the vehicle and catalyst through which 
female crafters build small businesses, forge economic kinships and make 
themselves a visible resource and political force to be reckoned with. 
Notes
1	 Sarah Pink, ‘Doing Ethnography Remotely’, interviewed by Dr. Sylvia 
Yanagisako, Center for Global Ethnography, Stanford University, 18 May 
2020. https​:/​/ww​w​.you​tube.​com​/w​atch?​time_​conti​nue​=2​21​&v=​z_​_t7​WkQ2c​
4 &feature=emb_logo; Gerald Samuel Collins and Matthew Slover Durington, 
Networked Anthropology: A Primer for Ethnographers (Abingdon, Oxon: 
Routledge, 2015); Sarah Pink, Heather Horst, John Postill, Larissa Hjorth, 
Tania Lewis and Jo Tacchi, Digital Ethnography: Principles and Practices (Los 

161
NETWORKS OF ECONOMIC KINSHIP IN CRAFT MARKETS
Angeles: Sage Publications Limited, 2016); Yarimar Bonilla and Jonathan 
Rossa, ‘#Ferguson: Digital Protest, Hashtag Ethnography, and the Racial 
Politics of Social Media in the United States’, American Ethnologist 42, no. 1 
(February 2015): 4–17; Sarah Pink, Doing Visual Ethnography (London: Sage 
Publications Limited, 2007); Daniel Miller and Don Slater, The Internet: An 
Ethnographic Approach (London: Berg, 2000); Jacquelyn Burkell, Alexandre 
Fortier, Lorraine Yeung, Cheryl Wong and Jennifer Lynn Simpson, ‘Facebook: 
Public Space, or Private Space?’ Information, Communication & Society 17, 
no. 8 (2014): 974–85; Leah Lievrouw, Alternative and Activist New Media 
(Cambridge, UK: Polity Press, 2011).
2	 Victoria Bateman, The Sex Factor: How Women Made the West Rich 
(Cambridge, UK: Polity Press, 2019).
3	 Alfred Gell, ‘The Technology of Enchantment and the Enchantment of 
Technology’, in The Art of Anthropology: Essays and Diagrams, ed. Eric 
Hirsch (Oxford: Berg, 1999), 159–86; Alfred Gell, Art and Agency: An 
Anthropological Theory (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998).
4	 Ruth Phillips, Trading Identities: The Souvenir in Native North American Art 
from the Northeast, 1700-1900 (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 
1998).
5	 Nicholas Thomas, Entangled Objects: Exchange, Material Culture, and 
Colonialism in the Pacific (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1991); 
Gell, Art and Agency.
6	 Craft historian Lacey Jane Roberts argues that ‘[s]o many types of practices 
and makers exist who are claiming craft – the terrain is so deeply rich and 
endlessly shifting – that critical craft discourse is positioned to redefine 
material and visual culture’. Lacey Jane Roberts, ‘Put Your Thing Down, Flip It, 
and Reverse It: Reimagining Craft Identities Using Tactics of Queer Theory’, 
in Extra/Ordinary: Craft and Contemporary Art, ed. Maria Elena Buszek 
(Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2011), 243–59, 249.
7	 Maria Elena Buszek, ed., Extra/Ordinary: Craft and Contemporary Art 
(Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2011); Glenn Adamson, Thinking 
Through Craft (London: Berg, 2007); Glenn Adamson, The Craft Reader 
(London: Berg, 2010); including fellow authors of this volume.
8	 Sylvia Yanagisako, ‘Family Firms as Kinship Enterprises’, Economics 
Discussion Papers, No. 2019–12, Kiel Institute for the World Economy 
(February 2019). http:​/​/www​.econ​omics​-ejou​rnal.​org​/e​conom​ics​/d​iscus​sionp​
ap​ers​/2019​-12; Kenneth Guest, Essentials of Cultural Anthropology: A Toolkit 
for a Global Age, 2nd edn (Toronto: W.W. Norton and Company, 2018).
9	 Guest, Essentials of Cultural Anthropology, 234.
10	 Fiona P. McDonald, ‘An Unexpected History Lesson: Meeting European 
“Colonial Girls” through Knitting, Weaving, Spinning, and Cups of Tea’, in 
Colonial Girlhood in Literature, Culture and History, 1840-1950, ed. Michelle 
Smith and Kristine Moruzi (London: Palgrave-Macmillan, 2014), 228–44.
11	 Ibid.
12	 Stats New Zealand/Taturanga Aotearoa. http:​/​/arc​hive.​stats​.govt​.nz​/t​ools_​and​
_s​ervic​es​/po​pulat​i​on​_c​lock.​aspx

162
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
13	 Anne Salmond, Between Worlds: Early Exchanges Between Maori and 
Europeans 1773-1815 (Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press, 1997); Claudia 
Orange, The Story of a Treaty (Wellington, NZ: Bridget Williams Books, 1989); 
Mason Durie, Ngā Tai Matatū: Tides of Māori Endurance (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2005).
14	 Heather Nicholson, The Loving Stitch: A History of Knitting and Spinning in 
New Zealand. (Auckland: University of Auckland Press, 1998), 178.
15	 For a full history of the mills, see Fiona P. McDonald, ‘Charting Material 
Memories: A Visual and Material Ethnography of the Transformations of 
Woollen Blankets in Contemporary Art, Craft, and Indigenous Regalia in 
Canada, Aotearoa/New Zealand, and the United States’ (PhD diss., University 
College London, 2014).
16	 Ibid.; Fiona P. McDonald, ‘The Woollen Blanket and Its Imagined Value(s): 
Material Transformations of Woollen Blankets in Contemporary Art’, in The 
Social Life of Materials, ed. Adam Drazin and Susanne Küchler (London: 
Bloomsbury, 2015), 245–64.
17	 McDonald, ‘Charting Material Memories’, 171.
18	 Arjun Appadurai, ed., The Social Life of Things: Commodities in a Cultural 
Perspective (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1988).
19	 Māori god, or the first-born man in the Māori world.
20	 Gell, Art and Agency.
21	 Dennis Stevens, ‘Validity is in the Eye of the Beholder: Mapping Craft 
Communities of Practice’, in Extra/Ordinary: Craft and Contemporary Art, ed. 
Maria Elena Buszek (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2011), 43–58, 53.
22	 Joseph McBrinn, ‘Handmade Identity: Crafting Design in Ireland from 
Partition to the Troubles’, in NeoCraft: Modernity and the Crafts, ed. Sandra 
Alfoldy (Halifax, NS: The Press of the Nova Scotia College of Art and Design, 
2007), 121–36, 122; Adamson, Thinking Through Craft, 24; Adamson, The 
Craft Reader.
23	 McBrinn, ‘Handmade Identity’, 122.
24	 On the industrially manufactured and the handmade, Jacques Manquet’s ideas 
are relevant. He writes: ‘Industrial fabrication does not affect the aesthetic 
potentialities of objects; they are not disqualified from having an aesthetic 
value because they are mass-produced. But the technique of production 
– hand or machine – affects their forms. Handmade objects usually fail to 
achieve sharpness of lines, symmetry of shapes, regularity of textures, and 
uniformity in hues and brightness to the same degree that machine-processed 
objects do. This kind of formal perfection conveys meanings to the beholder 
other than what the handmade form conveys.’ Jacques Jerome Pierre 
Manquet, The Aesthetic Experience: An Anthropologist Looks at the Visual 
Arts (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1986), 196.
25	 The Economist, ‘Artisanal Capitalism: The Art and Craft of Business’, The 
Economist, 4 January 2014. http:​/​/www​.econ​omist​.com/​node/​21592​65​6​/p​rint
26	 Renato Rosaldo, Smadar Lavie and Kirin Narayan, ‘Introduction: Creativity in 
Anthropology’, in Creativity/Anthropology, ed. Smadar Lavie, Kirin Narayan 
and Renato Rosaldo (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1993), 1–8, 3.

163
NETWORKS OF ECONOMIC KINSHIP IN CRAFT MARKETS
27	 Owe Ronström, ‘A Different Land: Heritage Production in the Island of 
Gotland’, Shima 2, no. 2 (2008): 1–18, 1.
28	 Gell, Art and Agency.
29	 Daniel Charny, Victoria and Albert Museum, Crafts Council (Great Britain), 
Power of Making: The Importance of Being Skilled (London: V & A Publishing, 
2011), 7.
30	 Roy Wagner, The Invention of Culture (Chicago: The University of Chicago 
Press, 1975).
31	 Stevens, ‘Validity Is in the Eye of the Beholder’, 46.
32	 Ibid., 52.
33	 A national interest in producing and promoting products as ‘made in New 
Zealand’ has a larger commercial history that is now formally integrated 
into the arts sector as well. Starting in 1988, the Buy New Zealand Made 
campaign was launched to promote the desire of consumers in Aotearoa 
New Zealand to purchase and export New Zealand made goods. Identified 
by the small kiwi bird within a triangular shape (for various forms of the 
logo, visit: https​:/​/ww​w​.buy​nz​.or​g​.nz/​Categ​ory​?A​ction​=View​&Cate​gory_​id​
=13​57), makers, manufacturers, and business retailers must register with 
the organisation in order to have their products formally branded with the 
Buy New Zealand Made logo. It appears that the companies participating in 
this registered programme tend to operate larger scale productions when 
compared to home-based small businesses producing crafts such as the 
ones that sell at local handmade craft markets. While this is more relevant 
to critical and ongoing work on Indigenous intellectual property, the Toi Iho 
Kaitiaki Incorporated (TIKI) is a membership programme for artists that was 
‘instituted [and incorporated in 2010 after an alliance with Creative New 
Zealand] to advance the authenticity and quality of Māori arts. Artistic works 
that carry the Toi Iho brand are approved by TIKI as genuinely Maori Made.’ 
http://www​.toiiho​.co​.nz/
34	 Joanne Turney, The Culture of Knitting (Oxford: Berg, 2009), 149.
35	 Bruno Latour, Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-Network 
Theory (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005), 128.
36	 Fred Myers, ‘Introduction: The Empire of Things’, in The Empire of Things: 
Regimes of Value and Material Culture, ed. Fred R. Myers (Santa Fe, NM: 
School of American Research Press, 2001), 3–61, 32.
37	 Daniel Miller, Tales from Facebook (Cambridge, UK: Polity Press, 2011), 21.
38	 New Zealand Handmade. http://www​.newzealandhandmade​.co​.nz/
39	 Looking at the lens of history, I wish to insert some insight about a critical 
online survey New Zealand Handmade conducted in 2012. Eager to support 
the local maker movement in Aotearoa New Zealand, the online survey used 
Survey Expression Software to ask questions about makers, buyers, and 
online networks. The survey was organized into three parts: (1) General – 
gathered demographic data such as age, gender, income, and participation 
with handmade goods (that is buyer or seller), as well as assessing what 
sort of handmade goods are made or bought; (2) Markets, Fairs, Fetes, 
etc. – queried participants about their spending patterns and participation 

164
CRAFT IS POLITICAL
at markets both locally and online; and (3) Online Purchasing – aimed at 
collecting data about ‘online labour’ and sales techniques. While it is not 
acceptable or accurate to draw any definitive conclusions from a survey with 
such a low number of respondents as this one, it is interesting to note some 
of the information sought as part of the survey. Therefore, percentages are 
only presented here as they are documented by the survey. The results of 
the New Zealand Handmade – Craft Buyers Survey were made available to 
sellers so that they could avail themselves of insight into buyer trends and 
preferences for costs, transaction types (cash verses credit cards), as well 
as online giveaways. Again, with such a low number of respondents to the 
survey I feel that it is the makers and sellers who observed more accurately 
the buying trends at the markets. To my knowledge no similar survey 
has been conducted to date. I might speculate that this is often because 
individuals can track their own stats via personal website traffic, social media 
data, sales via online markets such as Felt​.co​.​nz.
40	 https://felt​.co​.nz​/about​-felt
41	 Adamson goes on to suggest ‘amateurism can be the very definition of 
unconscious cultural practice’ where ‘it can also prompt anxieties of the 
most self-conscious kind’ (Adamson, Thinking Through Craft, 141).

11
It goes without saying
Craft talks politics
D Wood
Politics is the domain in which the members of a society decide 
in what kind of society they want to live. Politics thus goes far 
beyond political parties. Care for the public domain, though a 
profoundly political commitment, is at the same time transpolitical 
insofar it exceeds – or better should exceed – the interests of the 
government in turn.1
This quotation by Gui Bonsiepe expands politics from the arena of government 
and power to the realm of ‘the people’. For the purposes of this chapter – and 
book – the focus is the realm of craftspeople. Bonsiepe states that ‘care for 
the public domain’ is a political commitment; craft’s care for the public domain 
includes ethical procurement of resources and disposal of waste, small-
scale enterprise, connection with community and quality of manufacture and 
materials to ensure longevity. And for a small number of craftspeople, issues 
in the public domain are the catalyst for their making.
Some craft practitioners, while caring about the world in which they live, 
are reluctant to attach the word ‘political’ to their work. They would rather 
– for reasons discussed later in the essay – call it rhetorical, a more benign 
designation, even though an analysis of rhetorical yields a concurrence with 
transpolitical. Van Hilliard describes rhetorical art as ‘art that is centered in 
social action, employs culture-specific forms as its text, and seeks to transform 

166
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
a previous social order’.2 He says that rhetorical art addresses ideology more 
than aesthetics, concerns society more than the self and envisions artist and 
audience in a transformative conversation. It uses recognizable accessible 
forms that are given new meanings.
As an example of rhetorical art, Hilliard discusses the AIDS Memorial Quilt. 
Envisaged and begun in 1987 in San Francisco, it was intended to bring attention 
to the numbers of young white homosexual men who were succumbing 
to a rampantly spreading illness identified as HIV/AIDS. As the Quilt grew, 
attracting divergent communities and stitched memorials dedicated to non-
whites, women and haemophiliacs, the rhetoric changed. The quilt was seen 
as a didactic device to educate voters and politicians; the display of almost 
2000 panels, in October 1987, in Washington signified the extent of the national 
crisis; and by 2016, when the quilt comprised 52,000 panels created by more 
than 100,000 individuals,3 it spoke about the ongoing deaths due to HIV/AIDs. 
Adopting embellished fabric as the vehicle to honour the deceased aligns with 
Julia Bryan-Wilson’s view: ‘Textile handicraft has played a significant role both 
in the consolidation of national identities, especially in moments of turmoil or 
upheaval, and in agitational actions and anti-authoritarian protest cultures…’4 
I would argue that the textile genre is, by far, the most prolific transmitter 
of political messages,5 but what about other craft media? Are practitioners in 
clay, glass, metal and wood similarly inspired by issues and events in society 
to indicate their ‘care for the public domain’? This chapter surveys the work of 
contemporary Western craft artists who dedicate some or all of their oeuvre to 
themes that are rhetorical or political. Since Hilliard’s ‘rhetorical art’ and Bonsiepe’s 
‘politics’ both aim to transform society, the choice of label is, itself, a political act. 
Some of the artists begin creating from the economic, social or environmental 
subjects around them; others are provoked by a specific context or event. And 
whereas some makers express a political ethos in abstract terms, I have taken 
the position of highlighting work that is unambiguous about its message.
In establishing groupings for the work, I could have used a specific political 
focus – the environment and climate change; social justice; war; unsettlement6 
of peoples and cultures; identity. However, because some artists address 
multiple issues, I have chosen to categorize via ‘the medium serves the 
message’. This choice admittedly leaves out practitioners who employ new 
materials and technologies. Needless to say, my selections are subjective and 
representative, not exhaustive.
Clay
The Smithsonian American Art Museum has one of the finest collections of 
craft in the United States. Its 2019 exhibition, Connections: Contemporary 

167
IT GOES WITHOUT SAYING
Craft at the Renwick Gallery,7 displaying over eighty objects, included several 
that contain political content. One is Viktor Schreckengost’s Apocalypse '42. 
The glazed terracotta sculpture was created not long after the bombing of 
Pearl Harbor and consists of a disconcerted horse whose riders are Hitler, 
Mussolini, Hirohito and a figure of Death: it refers to the rise of fascism world-
wide. Schreckengost justified the comic style for the sculpture: ‘I’ve always 
felt that you can say more with one vivid cartoon than you can with a lot of 
heavy words.’8 His sentiments are echoed by many of the makers engaged in 
rhetorical – tacitly persuasive – art.
While Apocalypse '42 commented on a simultaneous situation, two 
Canadian ceramic artists look to historic pottery as inspiration for contemporary 
work. Laurent Craste references the nineteenth century, specifically the 
periods of French revolution. He pays homage to forms of Sèvres porcelain 
and alters them to remind viewers of the depravity, torture and poverty that 
existed at the same time as kings enjoyed chocolat chaud from fine china. In 
Iconocraste à la barre à clou,9 a crowbar is buried in a perfect Sèvres vase. The 
vase is white with gold motifs, in contrast to the steel of the mass-produced 
hardware store crowbar; the form envelops the forceful blow. Craste was born 
in France and moved to Quebec where he studied ceramics, engaging with 
and respecting its traditions. His work questions that tradition through a lens 
of revisionist history. About Craste’s ceramics, Pascale Beaudet states: ‘The 
object of the artist’s reflections is, ultimately, the vast repertoire of abuse that 
human beings invent to torment their enemies and themselves.’10
Lindsay Montgomery delves deeper into history, examining Italian 
Renaissance pottery traditions.11 In sixteenth century Urbino, Italy, istoriato 
was a style of decoration whereby mythical, historical or biblical subjects 
were painted onto majolica pottery. The images reflected the concerns of the 
time. Montgomery’s Company of Wolves Charger refers to Gaston Phébus’s 
Livre de la chasse (Book of the Hunt)12 which was a guide for hunters written 
and illustrated in 1387. The press-moulded earthenware plate is ‘decorated’ 
with an imaginary natural setting in which wolves do what they do – kill and 
eat wildlife. Montgomery uses the Medieval reference for her Neo-Istoriato, 
posing a question about modern ecology: is elimination of flora and fauna that 
interfere with our lifestyle justifiable?13 The theme of animal rights links past 
and present.
War has permeated the art canon throughout history. While the various 
modes of depiction were created for a variety of reasons – celebration of 
victory, memorialization, rehabilitation, glorification – a few, like Picasso’s 
Guernica, acknowledge the horrors of war. The ceramics of Ehren Tool are 
among the latter. Tool served in the United States Marine Corps for over five 
years, doing duties in Iraq and Saudi Arabia during the Gulf War of 1991.14 
When he left the military, he took advantage of the G.I. Bill to study art and 

168
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
earned an MFA from the University of California Berkeley. Tool blames Ben 
Sakoguchi,15 his painting and drawing instructor, for the route his art has taken. 
Sakoguchi told Tool, ‘All art’s political. Period.’
Tool’s wife calls his ceramics ‘war awareness art’.16 He makes cups – only 
cups – and each one bears an image relating to war. It could be a skeleton, 
weapons, insignia of a particular battalion, a flag or gas mask. Some are 
graphically horrific with cringe-inducing blood-and-guts, displaying the reality 
of war for the men and women who are sent to battlefields. Tool has also 
destroyed his art. As a graduate student he made 393 cups to represent the 
number of American combat deaths in the first year of the Iraq war.17 He 
decorated, fired and glazed the cups and then turned on a videotape as he 
shot them with a pellet gun. The video commemorates the lives that were 
snuffed out.
Tool has made 21,000 cups and given every one away in the twenty years 
he has made them.18 Most go to veterans and their families, refugees and 
parents whose children have died by violent means. Some recipients are 
willing to drink from the cups whereas others display them on the mantel. 
Tool thrives on the stories that the cups provoke – he believes that is their 
most important role. He says, ‘My grandfather didn’t talk about his war and 
my father didn’t talk about his war until I came back from my war.’19 Ehren 
Tool’s ceramics create a conversation about a topic steeped in the politics of 
government, religion, capitalism and peace.
Glass
Andrew Page, the editor of Glass: The UrbanGlass Art Quarterly, observed: 
‘Those artists working with the medium of glass must often overcome the 
preconception that their work is first and foremost materials-based, and that 
it is therefore not concerned with larger conceptual or political issues.’20 One 
of the conceptual artists to whom he was referring is William Morris. Morris 
did not, to my knowledge, profess overt political intentions during his twenty-
five-year career, yet his work was deliberately about ‘harmony between 
humanity and nature’, bonding us to ‘a world that is often forgotten, ignored 
and abused’.21 His respect for the animal kingdom plus reverence for ancient 
Indigenous peoples resulted in sculpture and vessels that are invested with 
a haunting sense of the extinction of creatures and civilizations and what 
humankind continues to destroy. Morris’s imagery influenced many young 
makers who assisted him in his studio.
Raven Skyriver was introduced to Morris and worked with him from 
2003 to 2007.22 His art is almost exclusively about marine life: sperm whale, 

169
IT GOES WITHOUT SAYING
otter, sea turtle, seahorse and abalone shell are among his subjects. Robert 
O’Connell, writing in American Craft, stated: ‘Skyriver’s work may be a 
celebration first, but it also acts as a kind of warning, a reminder of what 
could be lost if we don’t protect the environment.’23 While this message is 
not explicit in Skyriver’s carefully detailed sculpture, the artist says he would 
be willing to address environmental issues head-on if he were offered a 
museum show. As Skyriver realistically points out, ‘I think it’s [environmental 
change] a little harder sell, as far as the galleries are concerned.’24
Installations of commonplace objects in glass might seem like simply 
virtuoso technique, but Wendy Fairclough’s pieces are not to be taken at face 
value. She says: ‘a lot of my work has a social or political inspiration or subtle 
comment’.25 Bringing It Home 20 March 2003 consists of an array of black 
blown glass oil cans that reference the American invasion of Iraq. Fairclough 
states that Bringing It Home ‘arose from my confusion and questioning of our 
disgust at the invasion and knowing oil and petrol were big motivators, yet 
using it in our daily lives guiltlessly’.26 Amber Palace Jaipur was created as a 
tribute to Indian women cementing a plaza at the Amber Palace, while tourists 
of various nationalities walked blithely past.27 The replicated women’s tools in 
concrete and cast lead crystal contrast with a small form in amber glass that 
echoes the curves in the arches of the Palace. This and subsequent pieces 
highlight the commonalities between religions, races and cultures. 
Cultural and social issues motivate Jaime Guerrero. He grew up in East 
Los Angeles, an area known historically for crime and gangs. This background, 
including his Mexican heritage, has fuelled his glass production. He says, ‘My 
work embraces the notion that art can influence social change. It is important to 
bring awareness to the moral inequities that exist in society today.’28 Guerrero 
starkly addresses inequities in his latest project, Cuando el Río Suena (When 
the River Sounds), which opened at the Pittsburgh Glass Center in October 
2019. The exhibition was the result of a nine-month residency at the Center 
and focused on the plight of Central American children attempting to cross the 
border into the United States.
Guerrero has rendered the Honduran child pictured with Donald Trump on 
the cover of Time (2 July 2019) in blown opaque glass. She is life size, crying, 
looking up.29 Her stance, clothes and shoes are replicated as accurately as 
possible in the medium. The exhibition also depicts other glass children whose 
experiences represent crossing the border, detainment and separation. The 
rendering of the figures in glass speaks of the universal fragility of children; 
their opacity makes them visible and invisible – they exist, yet the lack of 
distinctive hair colour, skin tone and fabric pattern generates the forgettability 
that happens when the media leaves the story behind. In addition, four 
angels, who were modelled on actual children who died in border related 
circumstances,30 emphasize the immorality of immigration policies worldwide.

170
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
Metal
Soft power is a phrase originating in diplomacy whereby cultural and economic 
means, rather than war, are used to obtain preferred outcomes. In 2019 the 
San Francisco Museum of Modern Art gave the phrase to an exhibition that 
explored ‘the ways in which artists deploy art to explore their roles as citizens 
and social actors’.31 Metalsmithing might conjure images that are anything but 
soft, yet the hammer and forge are not averse to rhetorical message-making.
Chastity belts were historically commissioned by fathers and husbands who 
wanted to maintain control over the sexual organs of their women. This control 
was managed by a lock whose key was retained by a man or, in more stringent 
circumstances, the belt was welded shut. Women also wore the belts to 
prevent rape.32 In 2002, the sculptor and jeweller, Ira Sherman, began a series 
of beautifully crafted chastity belts called Impenetrable Devices. They are made 
of stainless steel and other metals as well as gems. Sherman interviewed rape 
victims and learned that their overwhelming desire was that perpetrators be 
caught and punished. As a result he created an Injector Anti-Rape Device that 
incorporated pneumatic syringes that injected dye and a sedative so that the 
rapist would be marked as well as disabled. Regarding sexual assault, Sherman 
stated: ‘There’s so many – if you add molestation, incest, prison rapes, general 
public – I don’t think anyone is immune to knowing somebody [who has been 
assaulted]. Then there are all the attacks which aren’t reported.’33 Initially the 
belts brought unwanted notoriety, but Sherman decided to take advantage of 
his ‘fame’. He launched a Chastity Couture Collection that addressed the needs 
of both women and men for protection against unwelcome sexual attention. 
Each commissioned piece has a key which, unlike belts in the past, is retained 
by the wearer or shared with select persons. The Collection models reported 
that the safety and security of a chastity belt empowered them.
Stacey Lee Webber is reluctant to attach political themes to her metalwork 
because she does not want to be seen as judging nor does she want to be judged 
for anything other than her craft.34 Webber is known for her transformation 
of discarded coins into objects and jewellery. The underlying theme of this 
work is the labour and time that ‘blue collar’ employment requires. Webber’s 
Craftsmen Series consists of the tools of the trade – electric drill and Skilsaw 
complete with cords, plane, ladder, screwdrivers, plumber’s wrench, metal 
snips – executed in American pennies and quarters. These handsome and 
painstakingly made objects could be seen as kitsch, in the sense of popular 
art. However, they are rife with symbolism as can be seen in Shovels, another 
item in the 2019 Smithsonian Connections exhibition.
Shovels consists of a flat and a digging shovel, each with long handles. 
They are made of pennies as is the floor at their base. The references are to 

171
IT GOES WITHOUT SAYING
manual labour and its denigration and disappearance in a technology-revering 
culture; the wages that manual labour was and is paid; and the perceived 
valuelessness of manual labour and the valuelessness of the penny – countries 
including Canada, Australia, Belgium and South Africa have discontinued its 
use as currency. Shovels is also about ‘The Craft of Digging’35 and the loss of 
traditional crafts that were once valued for survival. 
Nicholas Bell, former curator at the Smithsonian, comments: ‘There 
are different ways to think about craft as a political response. You can look 
at Stacey Lee Webber’s work with coins, how she’s making all these tools 
out of pennies and adding a great commentary on labor in the process.’36 
Another artist addressing labour is John Bisbee. His exhibition, American 
Steel, appeared at the Center for Maine Contemporary Art in 2018. In this 
‘aggressive spectacle; my patriotic and poetic re-examination of America’,37 
Bisbee reimagines his modus operandi.
Prior to 2018 Bisbee’s work was abstract but when ‘Donald Trump came 
down the escalator’,38 he knew he had to engage with narrative. American 
Steel is the result. Bisbee’s assemblages are entirely made of nails of all kinds 
and sizes – bent, twisted and welded. When asked if he considers himself a 
craftsman, Bisbee replied that he is an artist.39 In his view, craft is functional, 
but he cannot ignore the fact that his practice is akin to that of a blacksmith. 
In addition, Bisbee says that the nails are ‘lovingly crafted’.40
American Steel consists of multiple parts. Trumpence – humorous wordplay 
that is absent from Bisbee’s abstract work – comments on the soundtracks 
coming from the Oval Office by means of a replication of a vintage gramophone 
horn.41 On the adjacent wall, American Bits is a map of the United States 
made of nail heads resembling coins. The coins are held together by magnets, 
that is positive and negative poles. Metaphorically, when the negative force 
is activated some elements drift to the floor and outside the US boundaries, 
in the same way that manufacturing has moved offshore or ‘fallen’ into the 
dust. Likewise, the title, American Steel, is written in script by linked chain 
(made of nails) to refer to the steel industry – its abandoned tools and detritus 
litter the floor beneath. Carl Little described the exhibition: ‘This smorgasbord 
of hammered and welded nail-work represents a bravado take on the times, 
at once flippant, political, and provocative. It invokes our state of disunion 
…’42 John Bisbee feels that his foray into overt political themes has been so 
satisfying and inspiring that he will abandon the nonrepresentational.
Wood
In 1974 Enzo Mari, an Italian industrial designer whose designs appear in 
galleries and high-end design stores, published Autoprogettazione (Proposal 

172
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
for Self-Design). It contained designs for practical furniture that could 
be made with rough timber and nails. Mari was specific about the book’s 
intended audience: ‘An elementary technique so that every person may 
face contemporary production with a critical capacity (anybody, excepting 
the industry and merchants, may use these designs to produce them).’43 
He believed that, ideologically, design treats all people equally.44 Mari’s 
democratization of wooden furniture is timely in the wake of poverty, the 
proliferation of refugee camps and the urge to do-it-yourself. In 2014 Mari 
granted CUCULA – Refugees Company for Craft and Design – the rights to 
use Autoprogettazione to teach refugees how to design and build furniture. 
Examples made with recycled wood from refugee camp huts and planks from 
refugee boats45 reflect the increasing political displacement of hundreds of 
thousands of people.
Ian Norbury is a British woodcarver whose work relies on past motifs to 
tell a current narrative. Using a variety of woods with the addition of other 
materials, he is known for his figures, such as the Fool who appears in 
Shakespeare, commedia dell‘arte and Tarot cards. Norbury depicts a vain Fool 
whose complicity with the ubiquitous fashion and beauty industry requires 
him to check for wrinkles in a hand mirror.46 A nude African woman, carved 
in walnut, whose arms are chained to her neck, is accompanied by Norbury’s 
view of colonialism: ‘year in, year out, we hear of hideous violence, the death 
of millions from war and famine, corruption and tyranny that would not be 
tolerated almost anywhere else in the world. And most of it is caused by 
western exploitation and greed.’47
Another craftsman who addresses Africa is Kim Schmahmann. His 
Deconstructing Colonialism comes with an artist statement: ‘This table 
tells the story of colonialism and how it has tried over centuries to suppress 
ethnic cultures by overlaying a level of “civilizing” authority and aesthetic.’48 
Schmahmann was born in South Africa and describes his privileged upbringing 
with no knowledge of the culture of the Xhosa people and, therefore, their 
dignity. The table, which took several years to make because of its meticulous 
joinery and marquetry, is composed of elements – top, undercarriage, legs, 
drawers – that each refer to an aspect of apartheid. 
Schmahmann’s Apart-Hate: A People Divider is dedicated to the women who 
survived and resisted South African apartheid. The free-standing room divider 
is made up of three interconnected panels: one devoted to the foundations of 
the apartheid system; a second referring to the documentation that pervaded 
daily life under the regime; and the third highlighting the racial classification 
system that required Blacks and Coloureds to carry passbooks. The extensive 
iconography of the marquetry and collages is detailed in a pamphlet created 
by Schmahmann. Apart-Hate is in the permanent collection of the Museum of 
Arts and Design in New York.

173
IT GOES WITHOUT SAYING
Textiles
Political textile art has been created throughout recorded history, including The 
Bayeux Tapestry/ Embroidery, propaganda about the Norman defeat of the 
Anglo-Saxons in 1066; embroidery (1569) by Mary Queen of Scots – a political 
rival of Elizabeth I – containing a message to the Duke of Norfolk alluding to 
the barren-ness of Elizabeth while Mary was fruitful;49 the marching banners 
of the Suffragettes (c. 1908);50 and the flower-power jeans of free love and 
liberation in the 1960s and 1970s. The recognition of these female-dominated 
arts waxed and waned over time; now, according to Kirsty Robertson, ‘textiles 
are again at the forefront of a politicized praxis, ranging from anarchist knitters 
braving the tear gas at mass protests to a widespread resurgence of knitting 
in public, and from global anti-sweatshop actions to artists using handwork, 
often knitting or embroidery, to push the boundaries of global art’.51
Since textiles, more than any other medium, are a vehicle for social action, 
they are the anchor for this perspective on contemporary craft. Space permits 
me to name only a few of the artists engaged in ‘politicized praxis’: Lisa Anne 
Auerbach’s knitted panels and garments; Abdul Abdullah’s fabric panels; Nick 
Cave’s Soundsuits; Sonya Clark’s Unraveling and Unraveled [Confederate Flag]; 
Josh Fraught’s hand-woven textiles and other fibre media; Shan Goshorn’s 
baskets; Noelle Hamlyn’s After the Icon series and Lifers, Repurposed Suit 
Jackets Tailored over Found Life Jackets52; Barb Hunt’s antipersonnel – knitted 
miniature pink landmines; Ramekon O’Arwisters’s Cheesecake and Crochet 
Jams; and Elaine Reichek’s knitting and samplers. This list does not include 
quiltmakers, whose threads and fabrics have served political communication 
since the early nineteenth century.53 So I end this survey, as I began, with 
quilts.
My recognition of political craft began in 2003 when I gave a presentation 
at the Wild by Design [Quilt] Symposium, University of Nebraska Lincoln. 
Entitled ‘Quilts that Care’,54 the lecture showed the work of ten makers 
whose quilts conveyed a rhetorical message. My choice of Barbara Todd as 
one of those artists was because of her Security Blanket series. During the 
1990s the series was mounted in cities across Canada and I remember it 
still for its appropriate synthesis of medium and narrative, bold and retention-
inducing graphic design, dark humour and timelessness. It was significant 
in my evolution as an artist and undoubtedly fostered my interest in craft for 
conveying political content.
Todd admits to a ‘poetic and politicized sensibility’.55 Security Blanket: A 
Child’s Quilt was prompted by the birth of her first son. The central image is 
‘Little Boy’, the bomb that was dropped on Nagasaki. The irony of the subject 
matter is complemented by its construction using woollen suiting fabric, 

174
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
the substance of supposedly protective patriarchal military uniforms. The 
combination of the warmth and care of female handiwork with the dominant 
masculine motifs of our civilization demonstrate the dichotomy between 
domestic security and military security. Todd’s extraordinarily potent and 
long-lasting message – these quilts date from 1989 to 1995 – is all the more 
pertinent now.
Terese Agnew’s Practice Bomber Range in the Mississippi Flyway56 
deploys the same subject matter and medium as Security Blanket, yet the 
creator seduces the viewer with pattern, colour and texture in advance of the 
narrative. This quilt, at first glance, is an aerial view of a rolling landscape of 
ploughed fields and the tops of trees; the surface is machine embroidered 
to enhance the greens, golds and browns of agriculture and nature. But, in 
the centre of the quilt is a square that contains the arcs of a radar pattern 
that a bomber would use to home in on its target. Suddenly the narrative 
changes from bucolic serenity to frightening degradation as one imagines 
what could come next. Agnew says, ‘Craft has a long history of addressing 
political issues from a unique vantage point. Because it comes from traditional 
mediums, anyone who nods to the tradition and breaks out of it, at the same 
time, conjures up a kind of thunderbolt due to the contrast between the two 
things.’57
Portrait of a Textile Worker58 is Agnew’s most well-known quilt. It is a benign 
portrait of an Asian woman operating an industrial sewing machine. This time 
the colours are muted, sepia-toned to replicate Charles Kernaghan’s original 
black and white photo.59 Agnew reflected that while brands in the fashion 
industry are primarily designers’ names – Ralph Lauren, Donna Karan, Victoria 
Beckham, Burberry – the offshore garment makers are utterly unknown. 
Paradoxically the quilt is made of thousands of garment labels, thereby 
connecting designer and maker. Furthermore, the quilt connects maker and 
user as the labels were cut from clothes in wardrobes around the world and 
sent to Agnew. Portrait of a Textile Worker predates the 2013 Rana Plaza 
garment factory collapse in Bangladesh in which over 1,134 people died. The 
quilt’s political relevance increased as factory owners were forced to upgrade 
working conditions.60
Agnew’s quilts take up to three years to make; their size is approximately 
2.4 metres (8 feet) wide by 1.8 metres (6 feet) high; after placement of fabrics, 
appliqué and machine embroidery, Agnew hand-quilts the layers. She says 
that when she came out of art school, the work she saw in museums and 
galleries was vacuous. Agnew decided she wanted to say something that 
might make a difference61 and has used the medium of quilts since 1993. 
Her current one, Forest Floor in Spring, is a lament for the beauty of natural 
creation and the tiniest things we are losing in the wake of environmental 
degradation.

175
IT GOES WITHOUT SAYING
Conclusion
When I asked Rachel David, a blacksmith, if her work was overtly political, she 
said ‘no’. It is imbued with her passion for environmental and social justice, 
yet she’s addressing those issues in the abstract. She said, ‘I’ve toned it down 
on my website and feel embarrassed that my politics are not compatible 
with some people wanting fine forged ironwork.’62 John Bisbee’s American 
Steel, scheduled to be exhibited at another venue following its Maine debut, 
was cancelled due to its overt political content.63 Abdul Abdullah’s fabric 
hangings depicting soldiers were removed from an exhibition after objections 
by politicians and the Returned and Services League Australia.64 While 
craftspeople may want to express their care for what’s happening in society 
and the environment, they have to make a living and remain safe. The dilemma 
of our times is that critical issues need attention, but activism and morality are 
divisive and dangerous.
Care for the public domain, according to Bonsiepe, provokes political action. 
Terese Agnew expresses the maker’s view: ‘It’s one thing to be yelling in a 
demonstration and it’s an entirely other thing to be reminding people of why 
they’re protesting. You’re protesting, always, because you love something, 
because you care about something. It’s not because you hate, it’s because 
you love.’65 Craft is political in its care about the cosmos and its creatures.
Notes
1	 Gui Bonsiepe, Some Virtues of Design, November 1998. www​.guibonsiepe​
.com › pdffiles › virtues, 13.
2	 Van Hilliard, ‘Census, Consensus and the Commodification of Form: The 
NAMES Project Quilt’, in Quilt Culture: Tracing the Pattern, ed. Cheryl B. 
Torsney and Judy Elsley (Columbia, MO: University of Missouri Press, 1994), 
112–24, 112.
3	 NAMES Project Foundation, ‘Quilt Facts’, http: aidsquilt​.o​rg
4	 Julia Bryan-Wilson, Fray: Art & Textile Politics (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 2017), 12.
5	 See craftivism discussed in the Introduction. Also Leslie Camhi, ‘Some of 
the Most Provocative Political Art Is Made with Fibers’, New York Times, 
14 March 2018. https​:/​/ww​w​.nyt​imes.​com​/2​018​/0​3​/14/​t​-mag​azine​/art/​fiber​
-knit​ting-​weavi​ng​-po​litic​s​.htm​l
6	 Unsettlement is defined in the Introduction. It also refers to foreboding about 
problems such as geopolitical instability, intercultural conflict, inequalities, 
technological change, and, most recently, pandemics, compounded by the 
inconsistency of information about these issues. Tony Fry, Remaking Cities: 
An Introduction to Urban Retrofitting (London: Bloomsbury, 2017), 40–4.

176
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
7	 Smithsonian American Art Museum. https​:/​/am​erica​nart.​si​.ed​u​/exh​ibiti​ons​/c​
onnec​tions​-2019​
8	 Smithsonian American Art Museum. https​:/​/am​erica​nart.​si​.ed​u​/art​work/​
apoca​lypse​-42​-2​1944
9	 Iconocraste is a play on the word iconoclast (in French: person who destroys 
work of art) and the artist’s name. https​:/​/ww​w​.lau​rentc​raste​.com/​abuse​s​?
lig​htbox​=data​It​em-​k350b​0vk
10	 Pascale Beaudet, ‘Laurent Craste: Disjunctions’, Ceramics: Art & Perception 
106 (October 2017): 6–11, 8.
11	 D Wood, ‘Istoriato Reborn: The Narratives of Lindsay Montgomery’, Ceramics 
Monthly (March 2019): 38–41.
12	 Melanie Egan, Aberrant Tales: Lindsay Montgomery (Toronto: Harbourfront 
Centre, 2016).
13	 See The Biggest Little Farm, Director John Chester, 2019. The film addresses 
the issue of coyotes and other biological ‘predators’ in the maintenance of a 
sustainable farm.
14	 FaceTime interview with Ehren Tool, 29 October 2019.
15	 Sakoguchi was himself inspired by his experience of war in that he 
was interned in the US as a Japanese American citizen during WWII. 
bensakoguchi​.c​om
16	 FaceTime interview with Ehren Tool, 29 October 2019.
17	 Bonnie Azab Powell, ‘From Jarhead to Bowl Maker: Grad Student Ehren 
Tool’s Art of War’, UC Berkeley News, 27 October 2004.
18	 C. J. Chivers, ‘The Price of the Artist’s Work? A Conversation About the 
Horrors of War’, The New York Times Magazine, 1 May 2019.
19	 FaceTime interview with Ehren Tool, 29 October 2019.
20	 Andrew Page, ‘A History of Sculptural Expression in Glass’, in Contemporary 
Glass, ed. Blanche Craig (London: Black Dog Publishing Ltd., 2008), 10–15, 
15.
21	 William Morris, ‘Bio’. https://www​.wmorris​.com​/artist​/bio/
22	 Raven Skyriver, ‘Bio’. http://www​.ravenskyriver​.com​/bio
23	 Robert O’Connell, ‘Aquaman’, American Craft, April–May 2019: 45–9, 49.
24	 Ibid.
25	 Wendy Fairclough, Email to author, 3 December 2019.
26	 Ibid.
27	 Ibid.
28	 Jaime Guerrero, Press Release, 25 July 2019. http:​/​/www​.guer​rerog​lass.​com​
/w​p​-con​tent/​uploa​d​s​/20​19​/07​/ Guerr​ero​-P​ress-​Relea​se​-Cu​andoE​lRioS​uena​2​
019​.p​df
29	 The original photo shows the child looking up while her mother is being 
patted down by a US Border Patrol agent. Although the child was not being 
separated from her mother the situation was exploited to highlight the plight 
of immigrant children detained apart from their parents.

177
IT GOES WITHOUT SAYING
30	 Jaime Guerrero, FaceTime interview with the author, 24 October 2019.
31	 San Francisco Museum of Modern Art. https​:/​/ww​w​.sfm​oma​.o​rg​/ex​hibit​ion​/s​
oft​-p​ower/​
32	 Suzanne Ramljak, On Body and Soul: Contemporary Armor to Amulets 
(Atglen, PA: Schiffer Publishing, 2014), 14.
33	 Pollo del Mar, ‘Artist’s Metal Chastity Designs Shine Fashion Show Spotlight 
on Sexual Assault’, Huffpost Contributor, 16 February 2017. https​:/​/ww​w​.huf​
fpost​.com/​entry​/arti​sts​-m​etal-​chast​ity​-d​esign​s​-shi​ne​-fa​shion​-show​_b​_58​a5​
757​8e4b0​fa149​f9ac1​ee
34	 Stacey Lee Webber, Email to author, 4 December 2019.
35	 ‘The Craft of Digging’ is a chapter in Alexander Langlands, Cræft: How 
Traditional Crafts Are About More Than Just Making (London: Faber & Faber 
Ltd., 2017).
36	 Smithsonian American Art Museum, ‘“40 Under 40”: Sneak Peak with Artist 
Stacey Lee Webber’.
https​:/​/am​erica​nart.​si​.ed​u​/vid​eos​/4​0​-und​er​-40​-snea​k​-pea​k​-art​ist​-s​tacey​-lee-​
webbe​r​-154​253
37	 johnbisbee​.c​om
38	 John Bisbee, FaceTime interview with the author, 25 October 2019.
39	 Ibid.
40	 News Center Maine, ‘Sculptor John Bisbee Is Back with Nails and a 
Message’. https://youtu​.be​/x​-GbZLzTakw
41	 For example: ‘The White House Has Requested That Congress Appropriate 
$33.4 Million to the National Endowment for the Humanities (NEH) for the 
Orderly Closure of the Agency’. National Endowment for the Humanities, 
‘Press Release: NEH Statement on Proposed FY 2021 Budget’, 10 February 
2020. https​:/​/ww​w​.neh​.gov/​news/​neh​-s​tatem​ent​-p​ropos​ed​-fy​-2021​-budg​et
42	 Carl Little, ‘John Bisbee’s Fearless American Steel’, Hyperallergic, 
16 September 2018. https​:/​/hy​peral​lergi​c​.com​/4602​26​/jo​hn​-bi​sbee-​ameri​can​
-s​teel-​cente​r​-for​-main​e​-con​tempo​rary-​art/
43	 Giuseppi Lotti, ‘Enzo Mari, or On Critical Design/Enzo Mare, o del progetto 
critico’, Firenze Architettura 19, no. 1 (2015): 150–7, 154.
44	 David Ryan, ‘Enzo Mari and the Process of Design’, Design Issues 13, no. 3 
(Autumn 1997): 29–36, 34.
45	 Emma Tucker, ‘Enzo Mari Grants Berlin Refugee Organisation Rights to 
Reproduce His Furniture’, de zeen, 16 November 2015, dezeen​.c​om
46	 Titled Because he’s worth it. Ian Norbury, The Art of Ian Norbury: Sculptures 
in Wood (East Petersburg, PA: Fox Chapel Publishing, 2004), 26–7.
47	 Titled Africa. Ibid., 14–15.
48	 Kim Schmahmann. https​:/​/ki​mschm​ahman​n​.com​/home​/deco​nstru​cting​-colo​
niali​sm/​?e​t​_fb=​1​&Pag​eSpee​d​=off​
49	 The embroidery contains the Latin phrase, ‘Virtue flourishes by wounding’. 
Roszika Parker, The Subversive Stitch: Embroidery in the Making of the 
Feminine (London: Women’s Press, 1984), 77.

178
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
50	 Sarah Sexton, ‘Subversive Suffrage Stitches’, The Quilter, no. 154 (Spring 
2018): 26–9.
51	 Kirsty Robertson, ‘Rebellious Doilies and Subversive Stitches: Writing a 
Craftivist History’, in Extra/Ordinary: Craft and Contemporary Art, ed. Maria 
Elena Buszek (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2011), 184–203.
52	 Artist and the Viewer, ‘Interview with Artist Noelle Hamlyn’, 13 October 2019. 
https​:/​/th​earti​stand​thevi​ewer.​com​/i​nterv​iew​-w​ith​-a​rtist​-noel​le​-ha​mlyn-​2/
53	 Karla Friedlich, ‘Quilts of Conscience’, The Clarion (Spring 1991): 47–54. 
Friedlich quotes the inscription on a cradle quilt at a Ladies Anti-Slavery Fair 
in 1836: ‘Mother! When around your child/ You clasp your arms in love,/ and 
when with grateful joy you raise/ Your eyes to God above – /Think of the 
Negro mother / When her child is torn away – /Sold for a little slave – oh then, 
/For that poor mother pray!’, 47.
54	 For an edited version of the presentation, D Wood, ‘Medium for a Message’, 
Textile Perspectives (Summer 2004): 4–5.
55	 Barbara Todd. http://www​.barbaratodd​.com​/about/
56	 Terese Agnew. https​:/​/am​erica​nart.​si​.ed​u​/art​work/​pract​ice​-b​omber​-rang​e​-mis​
sissi​p​pi​-f​lyway​-7189​7
57	 Terese Agnew. Skype interview with the author, 21 October 2019.
58	 Terese Agnew. http://www​.tardart​.com​/html​/ptw​.php
59	 pbs​.or​g, ‘Charles Kernaghan on Portrait of a Textile Worker’, PBS Series, Craft 
in America: Threads, 11 May 2012.
60	 Michael Safi and Dominic Rushe, ‘Rana Plaza, Five Years On: Safety of 
Workers Hangs in Balance in Bangladesh’, The Guardian, 24 April 2018. https​
:/​/ww​w​.the​guard​ian​.c​om​/gl​obal-​devel​opmen​t​/201​8​/apr​/24​/b​angla​deshi​-poli​ce​
-ta​rget-​garme​nt​-wo​rkers​-unio​n​-ran​a​-pla​za​-fi​ve​-ye​ars​-o​n
61	 Terese Agnew. Skype interview with the author, 21 October 2019.
62	 Rachel David. Email with author, 1 December 2019.
63	 John Bisbee. FaceTime interview with the author, 25 October 2019.
64	 Holly Richardson, ‘Violent Salt Artist Abdul Abdullah Enrages RSL, George 
Christensen with Depictions of Soldiers’, ABC News, 8 December 2019. 
https​:/​/ww​w​.abc​.net.​au​/ne​ws​/20​19​-12​-09​/o​utrag​e​-sol​dier-​artwo​rk​-vi​olent​-sa​lt​
-mack​ay​/11​74668​0
65	 Terese Agnew. Skype interview with the author, 21 October 2019.

PART 3
Craft World View

180	

12
Crafts as the political 
Perspectives on crafts from 
design of the Global South
Fernando A. Álvarez R.1
N
eoliberal capitalism, sheltered under professions such as archaeology, 
anthropology and design, among others, has imprisoned crafts amidst 
a frantic sales strategy based on the blurry notion of identity as market 
exoticism.2 Following this vein, Latin America has increasing numbers of neo-
artisans. According to the census of Colombia’s Statistical Information System 
for Artisanal Activity (SIEAA), the National Department of Statistics (DANE) and 
the National Learning Service (SENA),3 numbers rose from 12,000 artisans in 
2015–2016 to over 25,000 in 2019. What these numbers probably fail to show 
is the uprooting of artisans from their cultural context. Industrialization and 
exploitation in the service of commerce are current strategies,4 identified in 
this article as ‘commodification of the culture of communities’. The creative 
economy (orange economy) is the name currently given to this and other 
strategies of neoliberal capitalism, and it has monetized the cultural sphere. 
The relaunching of crafts as the regional brand, national/country brand, 
or denomination of origin is proof that this factor is critical in the quest for 
recognition.5 Below is an attempt to present an alternative point of view for 
crafts. This perspective on crafts originates from design of the South, more 
precisely revisiting ancient cosmology (Pachasophy) as an ontological and 
ethical approach to recognize the Andean praxis that has been hidden by 
economic and political dynamics.

182
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
Why are crafts political? Craftsmanship holds an ontological relationship 
with Pachamama and with the community: that which in the West is called 
nature or environment is known as Pachamama by Indigenous Andean 
people; it is Mother Earth since she is deemed an entity, a living being.6 The 
enduring sense of strong relationality7 is political: that is to say, a connection 
with the Mother provides spirituality and materiality, as well as with the 
community which, by means of crafts, acts to care for its material and 
symbolic surroundings. For clarification, crafts are a politics of caretaking the 
ongoing conditions of life, and the social and symbolic linkage to Pachamama. 
In this sense, craft practices and trades are an integral praxis of relationality 
in the service of sustainment. That being said, this article clearly departs from 
crafts as co-opted by the cultural industry and merchandise pertaining to the 
capitalist economy. 
Crafts and Pachamama
That which is known nowadays as crafts (handcrafts, artisanal handicraft 
or handmade, artisanry, handcrafting, crafting, handcraftsmanship and 
handcrafting) did not originally have this name, or perhaps other names. The 
crafts developed with women/men’s abilities along with their symbolic and 
material productions, and have been called industries and technologies as 
archaeologists, among other scientists, have understood ancient activities (for 
instance: lithic industries8). Traditional crafts can be more precisely considered 
embedded in the everyday practices of practical and symbolic making for the 
conditions of survival worldwide. In the Andes they were and still are seen as 
evidence of the bonds with Mother Earth especially among cultural groups. 
As a cultural and convivial means of making,9 craft has not only turned into 
a symbol of ancient cultures, but also a shaper of material surroundings and 
social relations. Concretely, craft also plays an ontological role in the formation 
of makers and users: this is at the core of its political and symbolic function. 
While this ‘organic’ understanding of craft is under threat from Western 
consumerism (which mostly views crafts as an exoticism10), maintaining this 
function is the essence of its politics. 
As such, craft creates, circulates and recreates the worlds of meanings 
carried with each process, artefact and social use. In other words, in the 
crafts, practice is established as a ritual tie with Pachamama, who supplies 
her raw materials, and as the ethos of the maker who configures and 
reconfigures social relations and material products.11 When an artisan or 
craftsman takes what Pachamama provides for them, the Andean runa 
(man) performs a transaction. Artisans from the Andes, the Amazon and 

183
CRAFTS AS THE POLITICAL
those from the coast are well aware of preventing any imbalance to occur 
with Pachamama, Saywas (powers) or Chakanas (bridges: hanaq pacha, to 
the worlds above; uray pacha, to the worlds below; kay pacha, to here and 
now). This political linkage with Mother (Pacha) is called Reciprocity.12 These 
actions are political since, for the sake of reciprocity, men/women request 
permission (licenciaykiwan) and also pay homage, send messages, provide 
payments and gifts (t´inkay) to the supplier (Pacha) to restore or renew 
their connections. This engagement is very different from just extraction of 
materials from the environment.
Thus, this political dimension is inherent in crafts and directive of the 
activity through which handmade and symbolic artefacts are conceived, 
designed and built. Craft possesses a political dimension that is the basis of 
a praxis13 whose aim is to serve and take care of the other; social tissues are 
structured and the natural ones renewed, not only in connection with work, 
but also during social use. Consequently, a reference is made to ethics as: 
what is ‘good’, what gives back, what helps, re-establishes and harmonizes 
life for others, which bears a pan-Andean connection with wellness (Sumak-
kausay in Quechuan; Suma-qamaña in Aymara; and the South American idea 
of wellbeing).14 Besides, it is crafts that renew and recreate the symbolic, 
aesthetic and social tissue by means of everyday or ritual use. 
As a result, not only does the praxis of artisans or craftsmen interpret 
the values within the community but also serves to maintain and protect 
them. Rituals, belongings, tools and everything that has to do with both the 
community and Mother Earth are a contained praxis of political actions. To 
clarify: the political here does not refer to the management of power, control, 
rules and laws, nor even does it refer to the governing or managing of life or 
bodies (bio-politics) in the natural world (the other beings and materials of such 
beings, so often set apart by Western man). Instead, the political does refer to 
an orientation towards service, the tissue of relationality and the caretaking of 
others,15 and to the reinterpretation of feeling (aesthetic modes of relating), to 
sensitivities and to wise, technical and symbolic actions.16 
This article also acknowledges that the cultural artefacts or products 
given birth within the core of crafts are also, in general, technological tools 
for coexistence. Ivan Illich stated that the tools for conviviality are such, as 
long as men and women have control especially over the political forces that 
may be unleashed by such tools.17 On that account, social, productive and 
symbolic forces are contained within the crafts and social artefacts (material 
or immaterial). In this vein, the tools as tissue (allwiy) represent the values, 
symbols and ideals of the well-being (Sumak-kausay) of the community. 
Furthermore, Raymond Panikkar18 established that those tools which are 
gestated within technical processes, and in turn generate technical uses, 
might have the potential to surpass the strength, time and autonomy of men, 

184
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
unleashing huge political forces. Even though women/men may be unaware 
of this, they might be enslaved by technique (for instance, types of slavery 
derived from production relationships). This argument explains why the role 
played by artisans in their communities is crucial, as a bridge (chakana) for 
social ways of feeling, and as a catalyst for the forces that their creations may 
unleash (political, symbolic and aesthetic: sumak ruray).19,20 
What will now be presented offers a different perspective to the hegemony 
of Western technology. From the standpoint of the Andean runa, crafts and 
their role in articulating a new world inside the world, abiding by the principles 
of kamay (re-creating, organizing), Yachay (knowing, getting to know), Llank´ay 
(working) and Munay (loving, cherishing), make up the chakana andina, a 
fundamental of the Andean culture.21,22 This argument prompts us to reconsider 
the role of crafts as a contraposition to industrial productivity, as an alternative 
to the contemporary crisis suffered by production-and-consumerism-oriented 
societies, whose dramatic environmental imbalances have pushed crafts 
away from their political and social roles. 
Political crafts as chakana
Getting closer to the Andean perspective of crafts requires an appreciation of 
the approach of the artisan as a recipient and agent of the Andean principles of 
reciprocity, complementarity and relationality, and their contemporary social 
dynamics. In such a relationship any separation between our species and 
Pacha is unthinkable: we are just one species among many.23 So positioned, 
the Andean craft worker contributes to maintaining a balance with Mother 
Earth and the community. 
In this regard, an artisan is essentially a political being, a chakana,24 who 
serves as a transitional bridge by means of a praxis which as much takes 
care and celebrates as it preserves cosmic order, meaning that the Andean 
runa artisan mediates both with the beings of Mother Nature through the 
prefiguration and the creation of sense, and also as a chakana who harmoniously 
brings his community together and, therefore, participates in the community’s 
everyday life, solving basic (utilitarian) and spiritual needs. Above all, as stated 
by Estermann, the Andean runa contributes to and participates in ritual and 
celebrative ways.25
To showcase this perspective, it is important to approach the declassification 
of the consumeristic notion of crafts.26 Put clearly, artisans are not viewed 
as professionals in the Western sense of the term, yet rather as chakana. 
Declassification permits decolonizing and dismantling of the Western notion 
of crafts inasmuch as the intended universality and classification27 of these 

185
CRAFTS AS THE POLITICAL
cultural alternatives are not easily acknowledged as principles of EcoSophy, 
PachaSophy, RunaSophy and RawanaSophy.28 As chakana, a craftsman is a 
relational being, not a worker, a convivial being, who preserves and celebrates 
their culture in daily life.
Upon dismantling that which surrounds crafts, a revision is made taking 
into account the Andean cosmovision of the false divisions among technology, 
design, science, technique, knowledge and trades noting that, from the Andean 
viewpoint, such separation is senseless, especially considering that artisans 
articulate most of their knowledge through myths, rituals, celebrations, healing 
and work informed by knowledge gained informally. Likewise, their technical 
knowledge has been continuously underestimated, yet more and more texts 
are written that disclose the knowledge and skills of Indigenous and artisanal 
communities existing in numerous locations.29 
Similarly, when attempting decolonization of the consumeristic notion 
of crafts using pacha-sophical notions, there is an intention to emancipate 
artisans and their crafts from modern economic models which commodify 
culture, as previously observed. The task of disarticulating the Western notion 
of crafts and their practices means striving to present the role of the craftsman 
in society, whether as a being of relational wisdom or as a chakana between 
the beings inhabiting his communities. The artisan is a political and symbolic 
being, transforming and preserving a role that must also be highly esteemed. 
Artisans must no longer be seen as ‘marginal’, ‘poor’, ‘undermined’ beings, 
and the notion of contemporary artisanal-cultural tourism is a neoliberal 
strategy that requires decolonization. It is urgent that decolonization or 
decoloniality strategies of thought and praxis are implemented.30 A holistic 
defuturization is valuable here, considering that, in depth, the real situation is 
the existence of humankind, and the planetary crisis of society, symbolism 
and resources.31 
An alternate idea worth considering from the Andean perspective is that 
crafts hold an ontological relation with Pachamama and the community, the 
collective, and particularly with life in ayllu (‘the most profound force in the 
community tissue’).32 Being in ayllu, as stated by Josef Estermann and Raquel 
Gutiérrez among others, is essentially the collective entity that provides 
Andean people with a sense of being inside a community; the concept of 
subject (individual) and community equally requires declassification and 
decolonization. The next challenge is to look at Andean philosophy and other 
non-Western types of knowledge.33 There the role of crafts (maki kapchiy)34 
finds its richest roots, at least in the cultures of the Andes.
When artisans transform materials through their practices, they have 
first requested permission from Pachamama, considering, for example, her 
harvesting seasons, celebrations and moon phases. Concerning the ontological 
relation with their community, craftspeople act as a bridge between their 

186
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
ancestors and the present generation. This has a double implication: on one 
hand, artisans are a bridge between the past and present when they replicate 
a certain practice or make a vernacular artefact; on the other, artisans are a 
bridge between their future and their past35 when, through their knowledge 
and creativity, they are able to transform elements of their own culture to 
generate a new material culture or evolve their craft with the insertion of new 
functions, uses, configurations, materials, relations, etc. This evolution in their 
communitarian world of crafts encompasses the feelings of the community, 
its symbols, uses, rituals and everyday customs. 
Alternate context
It is important here to continue contrasting the interpretations36 occurring in 
Andean philosophy by listening to Josef Estermann’s words when he points 
out that, whereas Western philosophy has separated37 women/men from 
the rest of beings and attempted to proclaim life as an isolated entity, as a 
‘monad’, this is inconceivable in the Andean worldview, where there is no 
such thing as an isolated, separated and disengaged being. 
Disconnecting oneself from the natural and cosmic nexuses (a postulate of 
the Enlightenment), would mean to the Andean runa signing his own death 
sentence . . . When I resort only to my own self when thinking, acting and 
judging, because I consider myself both the fundamental and the norm 
(‘autonomy’), I no longer ‘am’ (non sum) in a strict sense, since I reduce 
myself to a monad confined in a world without relationships.38
Likewise, in the essential perspective of life in Andean ontology, it is necessary 
to refer to the connecting dimension of chakana, as previously explained. In 
this regard, crafts can be considered as the human capability of acting as 
a bridge that re-establishes harmony with Mother Earth. Consequently, the 
proposal here is to ‘declassify’,39 to dismantle crafts and craft practices, as 
previously indicated, and in accordance with the ideas of García Gutiérrez. 
In this manner, pluralities and holisms of artisanal practical responses make 
their way into articulating and harmonizing Pachamama and the community 
around the notion of sumac kausay (well-being) of Abya-Yala.40 This is a radical 
deviation from the notion of crafts and their practices as known by marketing 
and consumerism.41 Tony Fry, in reviewing a draft of this essay, gives the 
example of digital programming as a component of the possibility of a 
‘totalized’ craft: crafts as human ability. Such programming is associated with 
obtaining unique pieces, which arise from production. In the Global South we 

187
CRAFTS AS THE POLITICAL
insist on dismantling, decolonizing and defuturing, and opting here for human 
crafts that are a bridge and re-establish harmony with Mother Earth.
According to this approach, crafts become a vital activity in overcoming the 
superfluous singularity of the structure of market-consumerism. Nevertheless, 
the proposal hereby discussed embraces para-consistency,42 that is to say, it 
does not overlook the fact that, in any case, artisanal products and practices 
have had a regular role in the capital economy,43 especially in Latin American 
countries. For clarification, crafts do not exclude dynamics but rather broaden 
their understanding.44 
Briefly, we45 will add that crafts, and the guilds and trades that constitute 
them in a classical and broad sense (ceramics/pottery, wood carving, 
weaving, basketry, forging, making of leather goods, jewellery, stone carving, 
and glasswork, among over a hundred mediums)46 did not reach their peak 
prior to the Industrial Revolution. On the contrary, they occurred, based on 
traces of lithic industries, dating back to 3.3 million years ago and evidence of 
teaching and learning processes dating back to the Lower Palaeolithic period.47 
Conceptualizing, feeling and practising political crafts (chakana) places human 
beings as a species on the same level as the actions of other creatures, 
whether beavers, birds, ants, etc., creatures we walk along with, transform 
with, propitiating life instead of keeping an isolated and inviable cost-benefit 
attitude apart from market-consumerism/ mass production. Hence this essay 
goes beyond the econometric mentality and considers politics entirely carried 
out by being an artisan in harmony with Pachamama.48 
EcoSophy and feel-think-design-do
What is presented above requires revisiting the question: how to approach 
the status quo from a place other than the customary and traditional one of 
Western hegemony? The answer is an intercultural polylogue aimed at feeling-
thinking other cultures and acknowledging, in the case of the Americas, other 
Indigenous cultures presently recognized as Abya-Yala, which reunites the 
native populaces and vindicates the battles for resistance against colonialisms, 
mainly by Euro-North American cultural groups.49
Conditions are given for the resurgence of handcrafts in association with 
ontological design and design of the South, along with the inclusion of other 
visions of the world.50 The notion of political crafts is based upon cultural 
interaction, with the result that a design based on Andean philosophy is 
proposed: ‘Andean philosophy presents the political as an instrument of life 
care in all its dimensions, as much cosmic and physical as those social and 
cultural.’51 

188
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
The perspective of Andean philosophy is highly pertinent, and it brings to 
relevance what Estermann has described as EcoSophy, in the way that ‘the 
human being is not the master of life but its caretaker and facilitator’.52 It is worth 
keeping in mind that intercultural philosophy fits with the vindication of other 
visions of the world in an egalitarian polylogue, beyond intentionally unique 
Western philosophy (even its origin has been an erroneous interpretation of 
Greek philosophy, which is in turn of African-Asian origin53).
Within this inter-culturalism, acknowledging the existence of an Andean 
philosophy is an assertion of the idea ‘feel-think-do’,54 which is convivial with 
the earth and all of its creatures.55 By being intercultural, the best from each 
culture is embraced, but at a different pace, as clarified by Panikkar, inasmuch 
as it opposes techno-chronicity and the dehumanized homo technicus.56 
Andean feel-thoughts affirm the natural cycles and, integral to them, the 
synrythmia,57 heteronomy and the kairos (opportune moment), where crafts’ 
political practices become meaningful.58 In the face of the frantic technical 
pace of the West, Panikkar as well as Estermann and Rodríguez59 (who 
disassembles the conception of time in capitalism) demand that women/
men recuperate their own pace instead of that imposed by technique and 
acceleration dynamics. 
Thinking with Mother Earth, feeling with Mother Earth, taking care of 
Mother Earth, designing with/for Mother Earth,60 doing with Mother Earth: it is 
from here that the feel-think approach is complemented with the perspective 
this text has adopted. To feel-think-do puts us on a path of design as a human 
capability that includes feeling and thinking. The reference to ‘doing’ is 
oriented towards a transformative type of doing, quite characteristic of design 
(we propose that, as a human activity, design lies at the core of crafts), a 
‘doing’ that is convivial, projective and set in the future.61
Despite the above, it is important to acknowledge the Greek concept of 
praxis, contextualized in Latin America by Sánchez and Dussel,62 who spoke 
of a dynamic relation between theory and practice. This must in turn be 
combined with the Andean Ecosophical concept of the experience of life. 
As emphasized by Estermann of Andean cultures, it is in the experience of 
life where lies the occurrence of thinking, feeling, designing, doing and all 
communitarian activities. 
Therefore, Western monadism which separates man from nature, rational 
from sensitive, and theory from action, is also overcome. In synch with 
the homeomorphic equivalent of holism, it is proposed that the Andean 
Ecosophical way of thinking gives sense to everything and to Pachamama; 
woman/man here rearticulates itself as a species, like the other ones, 
feeling/thinking, and design/doing in an artisanal political praxis as weaver of 
relationality, complementarity and reciprocity. 

189
CRAFTS AS THE POLITICAL
Revisiting crafts before crafts came to be
To make matters clear for those readers unfamiliar with Latin America and 
the Abya-Yala native peoples, paradoxically, crafts were only recognized in 
the overall Americas upon the arrival of the invaders from the West: Spanish, 
Portuguese, English, Germans, etc. In the fifteenth century, according to 
several chronicles, crafts did not exist, as far as the invaders determined, 
and Europeans came to teach native peoples about them. For example, 
Manuel Romero de Terreros y Vinent63 narrates how in Mexico, thanks to 
the ‘efforts’ of Brother Pedro de Gante and to the collaboration of mentors 
among the conquerors, ‘good artisans’ were produced (besides being 
evangelized) and by the seventeenth century all liberal crafts practices and 
arts had emerged.64 In the same text, he mentions what was found by the 
kind conquerors: ‘As written by Brother Jerónimo de Mendieta, even though 
indigenous people lacked the necessary hammer tools for plowing, they 
certainly outdid the Spanish silversmiths when it came to melting any piece 
or molded jewel . . . because they melt a bird whose head, tongue and 
wings are even movable.’65 
This denial of dexterities in the Mexican crafts before the conquest was 
only rectified after the arrival of the Spaniards, who brought mechanical arts 
and trades with them since, according to canonical history, the Indigenous 
people lacked certain knowledge. A similar opinion was declared by an author 
about works made of iron, bronze and ceramic, among others, materials 
supposedly not used by ancient Mexicans or ignored by the conquerors.66 
Likewise, this can be observed in other Latin American cultures whose crafts 
and skills were reduced, if not obliterated, by the conquest and succeeding 
colonization.67
In Colombia, for instance, The Guilds’ Handbook, adopting a discourse 
on popular education by Spanish author Pedro R. de Campomanes, was 
transferred to the guild of artisans for its implementation since, like Mexico, 
the enlightened of the era did not acknowledge the existence of manufacture-
savvy peoples. ‘In a word, there was no such thing as full-time consolidated 
artisanal trades.’68 With such a painful introductory description, it is worth 
pointing out how the crafts for the Abya-Yala peoples, as well as for all Native 
American peoples and those in the Caribbean, underwent a bloody colonial 
indoctrination.69 Keeping this in mind, it now makes sense to refer to the 
terms re-articulation and recuperation of that which used to be an essential 
component of the Andean people’s worldview, before their overwhelming 
conquest. The sophistication of the Andean man’s crafts had a very different 
purpose than those from the West: it was eminently ritualistic and celebrative, 
and it kept harmony in and between Pachamama and the community.

190
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
Re-articulating worlds from the 
perspective of Andean philosophy
It is important that this proposal sheds light on the fact that what is known 
today as crafts had been industries in the past, and, more accurately, the 
activities that made it possible for men/women to survive and weave their 
cosmic relation with the worlds above (hanaq pacha), below (uray pacha), 
the space here and now (kay pacha), between left (lloq´e) and right (puña), 
with the times before (ñawpaq) and after (qhepa), thus achieving connection 
with Pachamama.70 Hence chakana is a transition point between these 
complementarities (clarifying that in Pachasophy there are no dualities but 
only complementarities).71 
These practices of the Andean world, known today as trades and crafts, as 
utilitarian and celebrative-ritualistic, have become not only a symbol of its past 
cultures but also of a transformation in the way in which women and men live in 
the world, of what they are, and in the relation they have established with Mother 
Earth and her creatures. For clarification, this idea indicates how the crafts 
have played an ontological, functional and symbolic role in many worldviews’ 
edification.72 Therefore, the transformative role of the crafts (chakanas) contains 
a political dimension, precisely because the model of the world harmoniously 
exists with each process, artefact, material and/or action functioning to create 
an organic whole. A relationship is established in the Andean worldview in 
which a continuous transformation with Pachamama occurs.
For the vindication of the praxis 
of crafts as politics
Attempts have been made to consider how Andean philosophy offers 
a different political perspective of crafts. In addition to interpreting the 
community’s feelings, aesthetics (sumak ruray) and values, praxis in crafts 
also serves, maintains, cares for and protects the ayllu and the Pacha, as 
noted before. Rituals, utensils, tools, everything that is manufactured with a 
sense of community possesses, by correspondence, a political quality: their 
purpose is to be of service, care, ‘transitioning’ and protection. Moreover, 
these artefacts are, in general, technological tools for coexistence. Panikkar 
establishes that tools might have potential to overcome men’s strength, time 
and autonomy.73
Huge forces are also released (for example, slavery to production 
machines), even if women/men are unaware of it. It happens today as much 

191
CRAFTS AS THE POLITICAL
with modern machinery as with digital technologies. Ultimately, we must 
look back at the role of crafts as an alternative to the contemporary crisis 
in society, productivism, consumerism and environmental imbalances. Fry 
states a crucial question: how can craft gain any transformative agency from 
its position of weakness and marginality? A clear answer is elusive, except 
for the elements put forward for discussion in this chapter. But, the critical 
political issue is thus an invitation to participate with new ideas.
A system is proposed which rearticulates sustainment with the approach 
not only of sustainability but also, from Fry’s standpoint,74 on the ability 
for sustaining (sustain-ability), identifying, defuturing and propitiating an 
alternative lifestyle than that currently promoted by the West. Let us take 
the best of the West within its own shortsightedness: ‘we are incapable 
of acknowledging that our modern industrial system, with all its intellectual 
sophistication, consumes the foundations upon which it has been built.’75
For instance, we should take into account the deep ecology systemic 
thinking,76 the complexity of frontier contemporary paradigms and the holism 
of the entirety that escapes from all that is archetypal in the West. But only 
in the manner of the Andean runa, linked in a feel-think-design-do77 that is 
ecosophical and pachasophical, in harmony with all creatures, will the planet 
go successfully forward. Finally, Latin America is a cosmos of complexity, 
para-consistency and idealism. We share a hope for change of peaceful 
convivence and harmony. Undoubtedly, in daily life, possibilities occur for 
those materializations. Academics, social leaders, Andean runas, and people 
from around the world are working to find where, innovatively, crafts can be 
part of the answer.
Notes
1	 Special thanks to Tony Fry whom I consider my master. He had the 
patience and kindness to review this text, and to make very assertive 
suggestions. I hope that my ideas make sense of his efforts.
2	 Nick Shepherd, Cristóbal Gnecco and Alejandro Haber, Arqueología y 
Decolonialidad [Archaeology and Decoloniality] (Buenos Aires: Ediciones 
del signo, 2015); Gilles Lipovetsky, El Imperio de lo Efímer [The Empire  
of Ephemeral] (Barcelona: Anagrama S.A., 2009); Victor Papanek,  
Diseñar Para el Mundo Real [Design for the Real World] (Barcelona:  
Pol-len, 2014).
3	 Ministerio de Comercio, Industria y Turismo. Artesanías de Colombia, Estudio 
Ocupacional de los Subsectores Artesanales de Tejeduría y Cerámica – 
Alfarería [Occupational Study of the Handicraft Sub-sectors of Weaving and 
Ceramics-Pottery] (Técnico, Artesanías de Colombia, Bogotá: Artesanías de 
Colombia, 2012), 67.

192
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
4	 SIART. Sistema de Información Estadístico de la Actividad Artesanal - 
Sistema de Información para la Artesanía [Statistical Information System on 
Craftsmanship - Information System for Crafts]. Daniel Serrano. 10 July 2019. 
http:​/​/art​esani​asdec​olomb​ia​.co​m​.co/​Porta​lAC​/C​_sect​or​/si​stema​-de​-i​nform​
acion​-esta​disti​co​-de​-la​-a​ctivi​dad​-a​rtesa​nal​_9​429
5	 Manuel Ortiz and Richard López, ‘Caracterización Socioeconómica de la 
Comunidad Artesanal de Nariño, Colombia [Socioeconomic Characterization 
of the Artisan Community of Nariño, Colombia]’, Lecturas de Economía, 
no. 82 (January–July 2015): 247–81; María Otero Gómez and Wilson Pérez, 
‘El Turismo Cultural Desde una Perspectiva Sistémica [Cultural Tourism 
from a Systemic Perspective]’, idus​.us​.​es. idUS. Depósito de Investigación 
Universidad de Sevilla. 2013. https​:/​/id​us​.us​.es​/x​mlui/​bitst​ream/​handl​e​/114​
41​/52​980​/o​tero-​gomez​.pdf?​seque​nce​=1​&isAl​lowed​=y); C. Laorden, M. 
Montalvo, J. M. Moreno and R. Rivas, La Artesanía en la Sociedad Actual 
[Craftsmanship in Today’s Society]. Vol. 90. (Barcelona: Salvat Editores, S. 
A., 1986); Inés G. Chamorro, Artesanías y Cooperación en América Latina y 
el Caribe: Programa de la OEA (1969-1989) [Crafts and Cooperation in Latin 
America and the Caribbean: OAS Programme (1969-1989)] (Cuenca: Cidap, 
2006).
6	 Josef Estermann, Filosofía Andina [Andean Philosophy] (Quito: Abya-
Yala, 1998); Patricio Guerrero, La Chakana del Corazonar [The Chakana of 
Hearting] (Quito: Universidad Politécnica Salesiana, 2018).
7	 Arturo Escobar, Autonomía y diseño. La realización de lo comunal [Autonomy 
and Design. The Realization of Communal] (Popayan: Universidad del Cauca, 
2019).
8	 Stone tool technology using glassy materials like obsidian and flint.
9	 Enrique Dussel, Filosofía de la producción [Philosophy of Production] 
(Bogotá: Nueva América, 1984); Ivan Illich, Tools for Conviviality, 1973. http:​/​/
www​.davi​dtina​pple.​com​/i​llich​/1973​_tool​s​_for​_conv​ivali​ty​.ht​ml
10	 ‘It is erroneous to believe that within the same epistemic frames which 
have sustained the coloniality of power, knowledge and being, it is possible 
to build up another horizon of existence, since those epistemic frames 
have been the foundation of a dominating individualistic mercantilism-
driven system that has denied the existence of other forms of knowledge.’ 
Guerrero, La chakana del corazonar, 69.
11	 Estermann, Filosofía Andina, 162, 177–9.
12	 Ibid.
13	 In the philosophy of production, Dussel revisits the Greek concepts of praxis, 
which indicate the practical relationship among men, ‘especially the political 
relationship, or the production of social relationships’. In the meantime, 
poiesis ‘refers to the relation man-nature, particularly the technological 
relationship’. Dussel, Filosofía de la producción, 13. The latter merges into a 
sole occurrence in crafts as praxis since every ‘poietic’ action of the Andean 
runa occurs with/for the beings of Mother Earth and the ayllu. Their work 
is chakana, which transforms the beings of earth (through ceramics or 
stone carving), wood and fibers (through carving, carpentry, and imitation 
jewellery), metal (with forge or jewellery), etc. Both beings and man belong 

193
CRAFTS AS THE POLITICAL
to Pachamama, so a politics and poietic praxis relationship develops. Adolfo 
Sánchez, Filosofía de la praxis [Philosophy of Praxis] (Mexico D.F.: Grijalbo, 
1980); Tony Fry, Design as Politics (New York: Berg, 2011).
14	 Javier Medina, Suma Qamaña. Por una convivencialidad postindustrial [Suma 
Qamaña: For a Postindustrial Conviviality] (La Paz: Garza Azul Editors, 2006); 
Estermann, Filosofía Andina; Raquel Gutiérrez, Los ritmos del Pachakuti: 
movilización y levantamiento indígena-popular en Bolivia (2000–2005) [The 
Rhythms of Pachakuti: Mobilization and Indigenous-Popular Uprising in 
Bolivia (2000–2005)] (Buenos Aires: Tinta Limón, 2008).
15	 Fry, Design as Politics, 104–5.
16	 ‘Those political things (practices and material relations) that constitute the 
everyday.’ Ibid., 104.
17	 Illich, Tools for Conviviality, 1973; Ivan Illich, ‘Convivial Technology’, in Man-
Made Futures. Readings in Society, Technology and Design, ed. Niguel 
Cross, David Elliot and Robin Roy (London: Hutchinson & Co. Ltd, 1980), 
340–50.
18	 Raymon Panikkar, Técnica y Tiempo [Technique and Time] (Buenos Aires: 
Columba, 1967).
19	 ‘Sumak ruray as an insurgent aesthetic, aims toward bringing light to its 
ancestral memory, to its culture, in order to sow the seed of a spiritual and 
political aesthetic that meets the demands of life’ (Guerrero, La chakana del 
corazonar, 603).
20	 Ibid., 601.
21	 Four powers, fundamentals, pillars or Saywas. Patricio Guerrero and Daniel 
Tunque agree on two pillars: Munay and Yachay: Guerrero, La chakana 
del corazonar, 20–1; Daniel Tunque Choque, Diccionario de quechua - 
castellano. [Quechua - Spanish Dictionary] (Cusco: Moderna, 2009). It 
is important to clarify that the former, Guerrero, is an Ecuadorian author 
whose Quechua is Ecuadorian (Kischwa), while Tunque is Peruvian with 
Inca Quechua or Runasimi (Qichwa) Ministerio de Educación Ecuador. 
Kichwa Yachakukkunapa Shimiyuk Kamu [Kischwa Dictionary], ed. CARE – 
UASB (Quito: Ministerio de Educación Ecuador, 2009), 7. Guerrero thinks 
that the strength of the Ushuay which defines spirituality is one of the 
powers and the Ruray is one more of the Saywas that refer to the act 
of doing. Tunque calls work llank’ay, very close to what is discussed by 
Guerrero. In the case of Páramo, it can be said that both are authors’ 
approaches to the Pan Andean culture of Abya Yala, both being equally 
valid and rich. Guillermo Páramo, Lógica de mitos: lógica paraconsistente. 
Una alternativa en la discusión sobre la lógica del mito [Logic of Myths: 
Paraconsistent Logic. An Alternative in the Discussion on Myth Logic] Ideas 
y Valores, 1989.
22	 Tunque Choque, Diccionario de Quechua – Castellano; Estermann, Filosofía 
Andina; Guerrero, La chakana del corazonar.
23	 ‘The human being is an intrinsic “part” of the cosmos (pacha); it is precisely 
this which gives men their exceptional dignity and position.’ Estermann, 
Filosofía Andina, 231.

194
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
24	 Josef Estermann, Si el sur fuera el norte [Whether the South Were the 
North] (La Paz: ISEAT, 2008), 84; Estermann, Filosofía Andina, 197–206.
25	 Estermann, Si el sur fuera el norte, 86.
26	 Antonio García Gutiérrez, En pedazos [In Pieces] (Madrid: Asociación Cultural 
y Científica Iberoamericana, 2018).
27	 Antonio García, ‘La descolonización de los saberes. Itinerarios de 
paraconsistencia. 20 años del Capítulo Español de ISKO [The Decolonization 
of Knowledge. Itineraries of Paraconsistency. 20 Years of Spanish Chapter 
of ISKO]’, Actas del X Congreso ISKO Capítulo Español (Ferrol, 2011) 
(Universidade da Coruña, 2012): 31–48.
28	 Estermann, Filosofía Andina.
29	 Vladimir Serrano Pérez and others, Ciencia andina [Andean science] 
(Quito: Abya-yala, 2008); Alexander Herrera Wassilowsky, La recuperación 
de tecnologías indígenas. Arqueología, tecnología y desarrollo en los 
andes [Recovery of Indigenous Technologies. Archaeology, Technology 
and Development in the Andes], ed. Serie estudios de la Sociedad Rural. 
Vol. 41 (Lima: IEP, Universidad los Andes. Facultad de Ciencias Sociales; 
CLACSO; Centro de Investigación Andina, PUNKU, 2011); Medina, Suma 
Qamaña; Miguel Quintanilla, ‘Tecnica y Cultura [Technique and Culture]’, 
Teorema XVII (1998): 49–69; María Gisela Hadad, ‘Prácticas económicas 
heterodoxas, decolonialidad y etnicidad. Dos experiencias mapuche de 
economía social en Argentina [Heterodox Economic Practices, Decoloniality 
and Ethnicity. Two Mapuche Experiences of Social Economy in Argentina]’, 
De prácticas y discursos cuadernos de ciencias sociales (Universidad 
Nacional del Nordeste. Centro de Estudios Sociales) 7, no. 10 (October 2018): 
157–78; Vine Deloria, Jr., ‘Traditional Technology’, in Power and Place: Indian 
Education in America, ed. Vine Deloria, Jr. and Daniel Wildcat (Golden, CO: 
American Indian Graduate Center and Fulcrum Resources, 2001), 57–66.
30	 Santiago Castro-Gómez and Ramón Grosfoguel, ed., El giro decolonial: 
reflexiones para una diversidad epistémica más allá del capitalismo global 
[The Decolonial Turn: Reflections for Epistemic Diversity Beyond Global 
Capitalism] (Bogotá: Siglo del Hombre Editores; Universidad Central, 
Instituto de Estudios Sociales Contemporáneos y Pontificia Universidad 
Javeriana, Instituto Pensar, 2007).
31	 Tony Fry, A New Design Philosophy: An Introduction to Defuturing (Sydney: 
University of New South Wales Press Ltd., 1999).
32	 Gutiérrez, Los ritmos del Pachakuti; Estermann, Filosofía Andina; Escobar, 
Autonomía y diseño.
33	 ‘Ayllu is both the “cell of life,” the celebrative and ritual “atom” and also the 
economic foundation for survival and internal bartering.’ Estermann, Filosofía 
Andina, 203.
34	 From Quechua, maki (hand) and kapchiy (art): handicraft, handmade artefact. 
However, further references are not found in variants of Quechua. https​:/​/es​
.glos​be​.co​m​/qu/​es​/Ma​ki​%​20​kapch​iy
35	 Qhipnayra uñtasis sarnaqapxañani- Aymara aphorism. According to Silvia 
Rivera: ‘An approximate translation to this aphorism goes as follows: 

195
CRAFTS AS THE POLITICAL
‘Looking back and ahead (the past-future), we can walk along the present-
future’, albeit more subtle meanings get lost in translation.’ Silvia Rivera 
Cusicanqui, Sociología de la imagen. Miradas ch’ixi desde la hisotria andina 
[Sociology of Image. Ch'ixi Views from Andean History] (Buenos Aires: 
Nociones Comunes - Tinta Limón, 2015), 12. In another of her texts, Rivera 
translates ‘looking into the past so as to walk along the present and the 
future’. Silvia Rivera Cusicanqui, Oprimidos pero no vencidos. Luchas del 
campesinado aymara y qhechwa 1900–1980 [Oppressed But Not Defeated. 
Struggles of the Aymara and Qhechwa Peasantry 1900–1980] (La Paz: 
UNRISD, 2010), 17.
36	 See, for example, Mario Mejía Huamán, Hacia una filosofía andina [Towards 
an Andean Philosophy] (Lima: Mario Mejía Huamán. 2005).
37	 As an example, the Cartesian way of thinking: ‘Epistemology proceeds to 
divide the world it analyses and sets limits to, into components and types 
following patterns, properties or conditions, whether physical or immaterial 
objects, imbuing them with a particular and unquestionable sense.’ García 
Gutiérrez, En pedazos, 34.
38	 Estermann, Filosofía Andina, 98.
39	 ‘The declassified proposal would consist of a strategic intervention of the 
core sources of reasoning, the place where it emerges and, simultaneously, 
becomes tainted.’ García Gutiérrez, En pedazos, 44.
40	 ‘We once were cultures who talked to the stars’ which is why, thanks to 
the wisdom of the Kuna people, our continent was named Abya-Yala: ‘fully 
grown earth’. Guerrero, La chakana del corazonar, 53.
41	 ‘What leading a good life is all about, or what knowing how to live well 
consists of. Two strong reasons of concern that were forgotten by the West in 
its unbridled race toward producing and consuming, along with its well-known 
consequences.’ C. E. Maldonado, Complejidad de las ciencias sociales. Y de 
otras ciencias y disciplinas [Complexity of the Social Sciences. And of Other 
Sciences and Disciplines] (Bogotá: Ediciones desde abajo, 2016), 77.
42	 Páramo, lógica de mitos: lógica para consistente, 27–67; García Gutiérrez, En 
pedazos.
43	 A reference is made, for instance, to the current Latin American 
organizations for crafts exportation and the regional impulse to the ‘region 
brand’, the ‘origin denomination’, and the ‘nation brand’, all of which conceal 
cultural diversity, co-opting it and standardizing many crafts-related/artisanal 
products. https​:/​/co​nnect​ameri​cas​.c​om​/es​/cont​ent​/l​a​-exp​ortac​ión-d​e-art​esaní​
as-un​a-opo​rtuni​dad-p​ara-a​méric​a-lat​ina#
44	 A recent example of how crafts are now being reconciled with the market 
and the environment is the activism for the ceramic trade. Created in Italy in 
2014, the open group, More Clay Less Plastic, has three purposes: rethink 
everyday life objects, substitute plastic with other sustainable materials such 
as ceramic, and identify the local artisans producing such items. https://
moreclaylessplastic​.org/
45	 Recently, in Colombia, authors are using the first person ‘I’ to connect with 
readers. For others the first-person singular sounds egotistical. In my case 

196
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
I prefer ‘we’, as my being part of the commons, not an isolated person. 
Further, this choice of pronoun reflects the political discussion surrounding 
anthropocentricity.
46	 Laorden et al., La artesanía en la sociedad actual.
47	 Sonia Harmand and others, ‘3.3-Million-Year-Old Stone Tools from Lomekwi 
3, West Turkana, Kenya’, Nature, no. 521 (May 2015): 310–15; Ella Assaf, 
Ran Barkai and Avi Gopher, ‘Knowledge Transmission and Apprentice 
Flint-Knappers in the Acheulo-Yabrudian: A Case Study from Qesem Cave’, 
Quaternary International (2015): 1–16.
48	 ‘By all means, the West forgot how to live, and yet it has recently started 
to learn that, for example, and thanks to the Andean worldview, life is a 
phenomenon which is impossible outside of, apart from or above nature.’ 
Maldonado, Complejidad de las ciencias sociales, 77.
49	 Héctor Rosales Ayala, Sentipensar la cultura [Feel-Think the Culture] 
(Cuernavaca: UNAM, Centro Regional de Investigaciones Multidisciplinarias, 
1998); Arturo Escobar, Sentipensar con la tierra [Feel-Think with the Heart] 
(Medellín: Ediciones UNAULA, 2014).
50	 Fry, Design as Politics; Alfredo Gutiérrez, ‘Resurgimientos: sures como 
diseños y diseños otros [Resurgences: Southeastern as Designs and 
Designs Others]’, Nómadas (Universidad Central), no. 43 (2015): 113–29; 
Fernando A. Álvarez Romero, Tecnología y diseño desde la filosofía Andina 
[Technology and Design from Andean Philosophy], Diseño + tecnología 
(Universidad ICESI) 10, no. 22 (2012): 213–30; Fernando A. Álvarez Romero 
and Alfredo Gutiérrez Borrero, Diseño del Sur: interculturalidad en la vida 
cotidiana [Design of South: Interculturality in Daily Life], Chapt. 1 (Bogotá: 
IDARTES, 2017).
51	 Estermann, Si el sur fuera el norte, 166.
52	 Ibid.
53	 Eleni Kalantidou, ‘Back to the Third World. The Greek Experience’, in Design 
in the Borderlands, ed. Eleni Kalantidou and Tony Fry (New York: Routledge, 
2014), 37–60.
54	 Escobar, Sentipensar con la tierra; Fernando A. Álvarez Romero, ‘Polílogo 
de saberes en el diseño industrial: intuición, técnica, tecnología y ciencia 
desde el diseño del Sur [Polylogue in Industrial Design: Intuition, Technique, 
Technology and Science from Design of South]’, in Bienal Tadeísta de Diseño 
industrial 2: 2014: Bogotá. Encuentros cardinales: acentos y matices del 
diseño, ed. Alfredo Gutiérrez et al. (Bogotá: Universidad de Bogotá Jorge 
Tadeo Lozano, 2016), 256.
55	 Illich, ‘Convivial Technology’.
56	 Panikkar, Técnica y tiempo, 18–25.
57	 The ancient Greek word ‘synrhythmia’ means the sharing of regulated 
movement, the process of acting together in the same way or in 
complementary ways. 
58	 Panikkar, Técnica y tiempo; Estermann, Filosofía Andina; Guerrero, La 
chakana del corazonar.

197
CRAFTS AS THE POLITICAL
59	 Juan C. Rodríguez G., Tiempo y ocio [Time and Leisure] (Bogotá: Universidad 
Externado de Colombia, 1992), 83.
60	 Tony Fry, ‘Design for/by “The Global South”’, Design Philosophy Papers 15, 
no. 1 (April 2017): 3–37.
61	 Álvarez Romero, Polílogo de saberes en el diseño industrial; Tony Fry, 
‘Futuring Design After Design’. www​.youtube​.com. 10 September 2018. 
https://youtu​.be​/ZnG0EQuBqsU
62	 Sánchez, Filosofía de la praxis; Dussel, Filosofía de la producción.
63	 His titles include Marquis of San Francisco, Knight of Malta, Director of 
the Mexican Academy of History, Corresponding Member of the Academy 
of Fine Arts of San Fernando in Madrid, and the Academy of Fine Arts and 
Historical Sciences of Toledo, and Academician of the Academy of Rome.
64	 Manuel Romero de Terreros y Vinent, Las artes industriales en la Nueva 
España [The Industrial Arts in New Spain] (México: Libreria de Pedro 
Robredo, 1923), 9.
65	 Ibid., 17.
66	 Ibid., 45, 59, 153.
67	 Mora Alberto Mayor, Cabezas duras y dedos inteligentes. Estilo de vida 
y cultura técnica de los artesanos colombianos del siglo XIX [Hard Heads 
and Smart Fingers. Lifestyle and Technical Culture of Nineteenth Century 
Colombian Craftsmen] (Medellín: Hombre Nuevo Editors, 2003), 15–46.
68	 Ibid., 35.
69	 Arturo Escobar, La invención del tercer mundo [The Invention of Third World] 
(Caracas: Fundación Editorial el perro y la rana, 2007).
70	 Estermann, Filosofía Andina, 146.
71	 Ibid., 155.
72	 Escobar, Autonomía y diseño. La realización de lo comunal; Tony Fry, 
Becoming Human by Design (London: Berg, 2012).
73	 Fernando A. Álvarez Romero, ‘Tejiendo allwiya kamay en el fieltro convivial 
[Weaving Allwiya Kamay on Convivial Felt]’, Congreso 2019 de la Asociación 
de Estudios Latinoamericanos, 24–27 May 2019: 1–10 (Boston: LASA). www​
.lasaorg​.com
74	 Fry, A New Design Philosophy; Fry, Becoming Human by Design.
75	 E. F. Schumacher, as cited in Joaquim Viñolas, Diseño ecologico [Ecological 
Design] (Barcelona: Blume, 2005), 140.
76	 Fritjof Capra, Las conexiones ocultas [Hidden Connections] (Barcelona: 
Anagrama, 2003).
77	 Álvarez Romero, Tejiendo allwiya kamay en el fieltro convivial.

13
Chilean arpilleras
Hand-stitched geographies and 
the politics of everyday life in 
Santiago’s poblaciones 
Nathalia Santos Ocasio 
A
rpilleras (pronounced ‘ar-pee-air-ahs’) are burlap sack wall-hangings 
embroidered with yarn, scraps of fabric and other elements of everyday 
life, like foil, matches and cardboard. The scenes depicted in the arpilleras 
vary, but some themes are recurrent, like military repression, economic 
precarity, protests in front of detention centres and community subsistence 
activities. In one arpillera, small fabric figures raise their hands in surrender 
while other figures in black point at them with little wooden sticks as we 
witness a night raid. In another, fabric figures of mothers and children with 
fabric bowls mattress-stitched into their hands gather around a big steamy pot 
to receive their daily portion of soup. Some arpilleras depict scenes that take 
place inside a room or a workshop, but most take place outside, where we 
are reminded that we are in Santiago de Chile by a chain of mountains – the 
Andes – decorating the background. 
My favourite arpilleras also include tiny colourful houses that tap electricity 
from the main grid with improvised lines of red or pink yarn. These geographic 
and urban elements contextualize the scenes in the poblaciones of Santiago, 
poor and working-class neighbourhoods often located at the peripheries of 
the city, where land is cheaper and services and infrastructure scarce. Except 

199
CHILEAN ARPILLERAS
on these burlap sack wall-hangings, poblaciones are not characterized for 
their bright colours, as the unpaved roads and lack of green areas generate 
rather dusty and grey scenery. However, similar to the fabric houses in the 
arpilleras, the houses of the poblaciones have historically been built out of 
scrap materials put together by the hard work and creativity of their residents.
The arpilleras described above were created by women from Santiago’s 
poblaciones during the Chilean dictatorship of Augusto Pinochet (1973–1990) 
to depict their experiences under military rule and earn vital incomes. Thirty 
years after the end of the dictatorship and the decline of arpillera making,1 
the arpilleras created during this period continue to circulate around the world 
through exhibitions, workshops and archival collections. As I have walked 
around galleries and flicked through arpilleras in back rooms of museums, I 
have often wondered about the tensions between what I see in the arpilleras 
and the international reputation that Chile has held until recently. While the 
arpilleras depict poverty, human rights violations and mass mobilization, 
post-dictatorial Chile has been celebrated and emulated2 for its economic 
performance and political stability relative to the rest of the region. 
Although academics, activists and the general public have written about 
and extensively denounced the inequalities behind the Chilean success story 
for decades, the mainstream reputation of Chile is finally faltering under the 
pressure of millions of Chileans who have taken to the streets since mid-
October 2019 to denounce economic inequality and precarity and demand a 
new constitution. As we reckon with these events, this chapter takes a look 
back at the dictatorial period responsible for establishing the neoliberal model 
that people are still protesting and the repressive tactics used to enforce it and 
to repress the masses that resist it, including in the recent mobilizations. But 
beyond the authoritarian regime itself, I emphasize how the failure of the pro-
democracy political leadership to challenge the neoliberal model towards the 
end of the dictatorship compromised the tone of the transition and ultimately 
limited democracy in the post-dictatorial period. 
In the literature that I review below, these shortcomings are associated with 
the abandonment of the social movements that helped to restore the social 
fabric eroded by the dictatorship through grassroots organizing while also 
opening space for negotiating the transition to democracy. Many of these were 
centred around Santiago’s poblaciones, their subsistence activities and their 
socioeconomic demands for change. Thus, in this chapter I set out to recover 
the experiences and demands of these grassroots groups with the help of 
arpilleras, as they were part of the social and political strategies deployed by 
pobladores – residents of poor, working class neighbourhoods – to survive the 
social emergency created by the dictatorship and to demand structural change. 
Their visual content and materiality show how neoliberalism undermines social 
reproduction, or the convoluted arrangements that sustain life on a daily and 

200
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
generational basis, as well as the transformative power of organizing around the 
issues of everyday life. Beyond Chile, this chapter responds to the imperative 
of attending to the aesthetics of crafts – or folk art – not as lifeless decorative 
objects produced by anonymous ‘people’, but as classed and gendered 
production rooted in the urban experiences of poor women,3 as well as their 
fundamental contributions to livelihood strategies and political resistance.
This chapter is structured in the following manner. First, I introduce 
Santiago’s poblaciones with a brief historical background where I highlight 
experiences of economic and human rights violence during the dictatorship. 
This section ends with a review of the central role that grassroots organizing 
based in the poblaciones played during the dictatorship and the transition to 
democracy. In the second section I draw on social reproduction theories to 
analyse the contributions made by arpilleras as I try to distil the impact of 
neoliberal restructuring in the everyday lives of the urban poor, and the political 
potential of organizing around issues related to social reproduction. The last 
section summarizes the main arguments of this chapter and highlights the 
pedagogic and political potential of arpilleras in their afterlives. My analysis 
relies on a literature review of scholarly work about Santiago’s poblaciones and 
arpilleras, as well as on a close reading of the visual content and materiality 
of selected tapestries. 
Economic violence and grassroots organization
To understand the contributions that arpilleras made to the politics of everyday 
life in Santiago during the Chilean dictatorship, it is important to understand 
the material and political circumstances behind their creation. Although some 
dictatorial arpilleras were created by relatives of the detainee-disappeared 
from other socioeconomic classes,4 the arpilleras discussed in this chapter 
were created by women from poor and working-class neighbourhoods of 
Santiago and nearby towns, locally known as poblaciones. Given the different 
affiliations and circumstances under which each población was formed,5 it 
is hard to generalize about their demographics, politics and role in the urban 
landscape of Santiago. However, the term poblaciones has been historically 
and broadly employed by state agents, the media and pobladores themselves 
to describe the material conditions and collective identities of poor and 
working-class neighbourhoods where residents have had a major role in the 
construction and organization of housing and urban infrastructure.6 Consistent 
with this broad description, many poblaciones were established in the mid-
twentieth century as the city grew and the state lacked political willingness 
and ability to meet housing demands. In fact, by 1952, 36 per cent of Santiago’s 

201
CHILEAN ARPILLERAS
population lacked appropriate housing.7 In this context, many poblaciones were 
established through land seizures, auto-construction and the self-organization 
of residents, who drew on party affiliations and other strategic alliances to 
negotiate land titles, basic services and urban infrastructure from the state.8 
It is no surprise, then, that the relationship between the state and the 
pobladores has always been complicated, when not violent. After the 
military coup, the poblaciones of Santiago not only faced systematic political 
repression and human rights violations, but they also experienced harsh 
economic precarity. Many residents lost their jobs as political punishment, 
and all were impacted by the ‘shock treatment’ aimed at neoliberalizing the 
Chilean economy, which saw a drastic reduction of state expenditure and 
initially caused inflation and industrial decline.9 Inflation and widespread 
unemployment effectively exacerbated the material precarity already pervasive 
in the poblaciones, provoking food shortages, water and electricity cuts, 
as well as complicating housing and health issues. However, the economic 
struggles endured by the pobladores cannot be understood in isolation. The 
authoritarian neoliberalism that characterized the regime of Augusto Pinochet 
thoroughly restructured the Chilean economy, reorienting production towards 
exports and recasting state activities in the economic and social spheres.10 The 
latter, of particular interest to this chapter, was characterized by privatization 
and decentralization of public services and welfare, (in)famously transforming 
the health, pension and education systems into commodities that can be 
purchased in the market by those who could afford them.11 
In terms of urban policy, Navarrete-Hernandez and Toro12 identify four 
critical transformations: deregulation of planning, social housing privatization, 
devolution of territorial taxation and decreases in public service provision. 
As a result, the socio-spatial segregation that characterized Santiago13 was 
exacerbated, effectively displacing poor populations into the outskirts of the 
city14 where there is ‘minimal infrastructure investments and little access to 
public services’.15 Indeed, around 187,000 people were forcibly displaced by 
the state from poor campamentos (encampments) between 1979 and 1984, 
as city boundaries were redrawn, and land was put to the service of real-
estate development and speculation.16 
Drawing on their historical experience with political and social organization, 
the pobladores of Santiago began to organize soon after the coup to counter 
unemployment and attend to their subsistence needs. For instance, comedores 
infantiles (children’s dining halls) and soup kitchens started to appear as early 
as November 1973, followed by other subsistence organizations, as well as 
cultural, educational and recreation groups.17 With political parties outlawed 
and the welfare state dismantled, the Catholic Church and NGOs assumed an 
unprecedented role in the life and organization of pobladores, providing space, 
financial aid and legal assistance to the different groups. Women also became 

202
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
central actors during this period, contributing to the household economy and 
the subsistence of their communities through paid work and other activities, 
including the arpillera workshops.18 But beyond attending to the immediate 
needs of pobladores, subsistence activities and cultural organizations like 
soup kitchens, health groups and shopping collectives proved essential in 
keeping popular culture19 alive and (re)creating solidarities during these critical 
years. Working to face the social emergency together strengthened the class 
consciousness of pobladores and demonstrated the value of collective action.20 
Furthermore, many groups’ mission was explicitly (if clandestinely) educative 
and/or political, tying their services to the political and economic situation21 
and providing popular education to foment and strengthen leadership and 
provide social and political formation.22 
By 1983, when the economy went through a recession and unemployment 
soared to 30 per cent nationwide and up to 50 per cent in the poblaciones, 
the consciousness and solidarities that had been cultivated through collective 
subsistence and cultural activities became central catalysers of a national 
strike and the cycles of protests that followed. Although the national strike 
of May 1983 was convocated by the copper trade union, its success is 
associated in the historical literature with the participation of diverse sectors, 
particularly the pobladores.23 Within this group, women and young people 
who grew up within the constraints of authoritarianism became key figures. 
The actions deployed by this resistance reflected the everyday issues 
(re)created by the very same neoliberal policies that people were protesting, 
while strategically avoiding direct confrontation with the police and military, 
albeit to a limited extent. For example, people were encouraged not to send 
their children to school, not to make any purchases and to bang cooking pots 
inside of the house starting at 8:00pm when the curfew started.24 During 
this period, arpilleras depicting protests, including barricades and picket lines, 
started to appear, and the arpilleristas themselves joined the demonstrations 
in the streets.25 Although met with new rounds of violent repression, the 
mass mobilizations of the early 1980s effectively eroded the psychological grip 
of the dictatorial government and opened space in the political arena, where 
party leaders started to regroup to strategize and negotiate a transition to 
democracy. It is important to note that the leaders of traditionally leftist parties 
were significantly decimated through state violence and exile. Furthermore, 
the government explicitly banned the Communist Party, excluding it from 
negotiations. In this context, the negotiations, and by extension the transition, 
was limited from the beginning. 
As the previous section suggests, the pobladores of Santiago played 
a key role in the social movements that ultimately led to the end of the 
dictatorship, restoring the social fabric through grassroots organizing and 
producing new and unsuspected political actors that created pressure around 

203
CHILEAN ARPILLERAS
issues related to everyday life. However, when decisions had to be made 
regarding the end of the dictatorship and political leaders started to assume 
direct power over the transition, excisions emerged over the issues that 
would be prioritized, ultimately leading to internal divisions within the Socialist 
Party that spearheaded the negotiations with the state.26 In this context – 
understandable under the pressures of the period – the political leadership 
settled for an ‘institutional exit’ that was prescribed by the military regime 
in the 1980 Constitution. In preparation for the 1988 referendum that would 
determine if Pinochet had popular support to continue his mandate for eight 
more years, the coalition of parties for the ‘NO’ vote garnered strength by 
recruiting support from the pobladores’ movement. However, the Coalition 
did not prioritize local struggles related to housing, subsistence and economic 
inequality in the negotiations, ultimately abandoning their social movements 
and popular bases. Thus, although the end of the dictatorship and the triumph 
of NO in the referendum were not without merit, the failure of the Coalition 
to embrace the socioeconomic demands of the popular bases significantly 
compromised the transition and ultimately limited Chilean democracy in the 
post-dictatorial period.27 This is overwhelmingly true in the economic sphere, 
where the post-dictatorial governments have not only embraced the neoliberal 
policies brutally imposed by the dictatorship but have also legitimized them 
under the guise of electoral democracy. 
Thirty years after the official end of the dictatorship, the ongoing mass 
demonstrations demanding structural change require a critical recovery of the 
voices and social claims that were abandoned by the transitional and post-
dictatorial governments in favour of private and elite interests. Given their 
fundamental role in the poblaciones and beyond during the dictatorship and 
their widespread circulation today, arpilleras provide us with a visual and 
performative tool to understand how the neoliberal model brutally imposed 
by the dictatorship filtrated into the everyday experiences of the urban poor, 
as well as demonstrating how craft practices can be fundamental to navigate 
and resist these challenges. Analyzing them through the lens of social 
reproduction, the next section also aims to highlight the political potential of 
organizing around the seemingly mundane issues of everyday life. 
Arpilleras and the politics of social reproduction
As we saw in the previous section, pobladoras – or women from the 
poblaciones – became key social and political actors during the dictatorship, 
at the same time that traditionally masculinist party politics was banned, 
and men were disproportionally targeted by state violence. Gender and 

204
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
motherhood mediated women’s experiences with poverty and repression, as 
well as in the ways that women navigated them.28 Accordingly, subsistence 
activities like soup kitchens, actions like cazerolazos (the banging of empty 
pots to protest food scarcity) and the creation and sale of arpilleras can be 
understood in relation to the ways in which the socioeconomic policies of 
Pinochet’s neoliberal regime invaded and undermined the sphere of the 
household29 and social reproduction more generally. 
Social reproduction is broadly understood in terms of biological and 
generational reproduction, material and ideological reproduction of labour 
power, and social provisioning secured by individuals and institutions. Although 
initially articulated in relation to the unpaid domestic activities of middle-
class women in the Global North, many writers and feminist activists have 
expanded the sites, subjects and arrangements that ensure the reproduction 
of individuals, communities and capitalist systems more broadly to include 
the forced labour of slaves in plantation economies, community efforts to 
make cities liveable for queer folk,30 the replenishing function of churches,31 
transnational care chains,32 and many others. In all cases, analyses that employ 
the analytic tool of social reproduction reveal that non-waged labour and other 
undervalued activities considered to be outside of the circuit of capital are a 
fundamental source of accumulation within capitalist systems. By the same 
token, writers and activists have exposed how social reproduction is mystified 
as ‘a natural resource or a personal service’33 when it is not mediated by 
wages or recognized as work, instead relying on class, gender and other social 
differences to naturalize and coerce its responsibilities. 
By accounting for a wide variety of care arrangements and social 
infrastructures, the analytic tool of social reproduction allows us to attend to ‘the 
complex network of social processes and human relations that produces the 
condition of existence’.34 These include ‘how we live’,35 survive and replenish 
through sexual reproduction, food, shelter, rest and the other ‘fleshy, messy, 
and indeterminate stuff of everyday life’.36 Furthermore, by bringing life and its 
fundamental messiness to the centre of analysis, social reproduction expands 
our understanding about the way in which seemingly abstract systems like 
capitalism37 ‘filtrat[e] into everyday practices, relationships and experiences’.38 
This type of analysis is particularly relevant to neoliberal regimes, where 
market logistics permeate every aspect of life, as well as the conditions and 
institutions that should support it, in unprecedented and unsuspected ways.39 
Because reproductive activities are virtually invisible, naturalized and (often) 
coerced, their social funding has been an easy target for neoliberal reforms, 
which have been defunded to unsustainable levels and/or privatized. In the 
process, individual and collective arrangements mediated by race, gender, 
class and geography are put under stress, as those who cannot afford the 
progressively commodified forms of care and reproduction are insufficiently 

205
CHILEAN ARPILLERAS
served or actively denied access to basic social infrastructures and services, 
resulting in their further marginalization and uneven burden. 
As a model of orthodox implementation of neoliberalism, social reproduction 
has been notoriously undermined in the Chilean experience. Specifically, key 
services and institutions that sustain life on a daily and generational basis have 
either seen a cut in their funding or been privatized, the latter of which is infamously 
represented in health, pension and water systems since the dictatorship. 
Unevenly positioned within the geographies and socioeconomic strata of 
Santiago and the Chilean society more generally, the pobladores have historically 
faced challenges to their social reproduction, starting with their very habitation 
and position within the city in the mid-1900s and peaking in the previously 
discussed social emergencies faced during the dictatorship. Emerging within this 
context, arpilleras were able to visually represent the everyday manifestations of 
the structural changes brutally imposed by the dictatorship while also performing 
the work of social reproduction at multiple levels (Figure 13.1).
This is concisely depicted in an arpillera that I had the chance to see at 
SUNY Potsdam’s Gibson Gallery,40 where a fabric figure bakes bread in a 
FIGURE 13.1  Arpillera #17. A joyful scene in the outskirts of the city. In Chile 
spring flourishes in September. People come together to celebrate as pan amasado, 
a traditional bread, is made in a communal oven. (in colour at https​:/​/ww​​w​.for​​
gingm​emory​.org/​colle​ction​-item​/17). SUNY Potsdam’s Art Gallery and the Forging 
Memory Team (reproduced by permission).

206
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
clay oven while the other figures bring little wooden sticks to feed the fire. 
The scene takes place in a población of Santiago, which is suggested by the 
colourful houses and the background mountains also stitched into the picture. 
Different from arpilleras that depict the graphic face of fascism, including 
the bombing of the presidential palace, night raids in the poblaciones and 
torture chambers, arpilleras like this one give us a window into the mundane 
‘stuff’ of everyday life, as experienced by their uniquely positioned creators. 
In this way, they sift through the technicalities of political and economic 
discourses to show the effects of neoliberal restructuring on daily functions 
like food provisioning, which is shown here to be achieved through collective 
baking.
Besides documenting the different caring arrangements of pobladores, 
the materiality of arpilleras, as well as their sale and distribution, further 
captured and performed the work of social reproduction. As a craft made 
for sale, arpilleras became one of the most famous subsistence and cultural 
initiatives to emerge in the poblaciones during the dictatorial period. 
Engaging up to two thousand women in Santiago and nearby towns, the 
sale of arpilleras offered women the opportunity to earn vital incomes to 
buy food, clothing and schooling for the children, among other things.41 
The arpillera depicting the bread baking arrived at SUNY Potsdam as 
part of a larger collection of tapestries via Jubilee Crafts, a fair-trade women’s 
collective in Philadelphia that, like many other fair-trade organizations in this 
era, presumably bought them for re-sale to support women in Chile. In fact, 
some of the arpilleras that I saw during my visit to Potsdam had a price tag 
of US$14. 
Back in Chile, arpillera workshops prompted other activities that either 
generated money, for instance baking and selling empanadas (turnovers) and 
bread, or directly resolved the material necessities of the women and their 
families by means of shopping cooperatives and soup kitchens.42 In my visit 
to Potsdam, I noticed that most arpilleras, including the one discussed here, 
had the word HARINA (flour) stencilled onto the back of the burlap fabric upon 
which the scene was embroidered (Figure 13.2).
In fact, the word arpillera means burlap fabric in Spanish, and the arpilleras 
of the dictatorship were often made from flour sacks. Thus, the material 
composition of these crafts was itself indicative of the socioeconomic situation 
of their creators and the ways that crafting practices became a strategy to 
navigate and resist them. Relying on the literature, we can speculate that 
the flour sack that served as the backing of the Potsdam arpillera was 
purchased through the shopping cooperative programmes that emerged in 
the poblaciones during the dictatorship to reduce the cost of groceries and/or 
was left over from an actual bread sale, another popular subsistence activity 
from this era.43 

207
CHILEAN ARPILLERAS
Beyond the scale of the household and the local community, arpilleras 
became important objects and catalysers of political transformation. On the 
one hand, they were used to raise awareness about the situation in Chile 
and recruit international solidarity. As briefly mentioned above, arpilleras were 
smuggled or inconspicuously transported outside of the country as fair-trade 
merchandise. Once abroad, they were exhibited, circulated and sold by exiles 
and other allies of the Chilean cause.44 Their role as hand-stitched newspaper 
was fundamental to the creation of international pressure in a pre-internet 
context, when the state and its right-wing capitalist interests controlled 
most mediums of communication.45 On the other hand, arpilleras became 
important catalysers for the political education and politicization of their 
creators. As we saw in the previous section, most grassroots subsistence 
activities had an underlying educational and political agenda (whether explicit 
or not), and arpillera workshops were no exception. Arpillera workshops 
were organized by the Vicaría de la Solidaridad (Vicariate of Solidarity), an 
organism of the Catholic Church that at the time was influenced by liberation 
theology’s concerns for the poor. Furthermore, many of the Vicaría employees 
and volunteers were middle-class people tied to Salvador Allende’s Unidad 
Popular party and movement, the democratically elected government that 
FIGURE 13.2  Arpillera #17. Reverse detail (in colour at https​:/​/ww​w​.for​ging
m​emory​.org/​colle​ction​-item​/17). SUNY Potsdam’s Art Gallery and the Forging 
Memory Team (reproduced by permission).

208
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
was ousted by the military coup. Thus, while gathering around the crafting 
circle, arpilleristas (makers of arpilleras) learned to think along Marxist lines46 
and were socialized into the pro-democracy movement.47 
In addition to absorbing didactic material and meeting other victims of 
the dictatorship, the arpilleristas were politicized through the creation of the 
arpilleras themselves, as the Vicaría staff would encourage women to depict 
the reality around them and the act of crafting together stimulated exchange 
and comradeship. Thus, ‘making arpilleras engaged the women in observing, 
analysing, and discussing indicators of poverty and political repression’,48 
and ultimately in thinking of themselves as agents of political change. As a 
result of their engagement in crafting practices and other subsistence and 
cultural activities, pobladoras became key figures in the everyday politics of 
the poblaciones and the national protests of the 1980s. Understanding how 
the creation and sale of arpilleras went from subsistence activities to political 
devices catalysing social change is important because it demonstrates the 
potential of organizing around social reproduction – a blurry ‘sphere’ that is 
rendered invisible through social hierarchies and undermined and marketized 
to unprecedented levels within neoliberal regimes. 
The afterlives of arpilleras
In this chapter, I reviewed the material context behind the creation and 
sale of arpilleras during the Chilean dictatorship. Careful of providing a 
gendered, classed and geographically nuanced analysis, I have relied on social 
reproduction theories calling forth the everyday implications of the economic 
restructuring that took place during the dictatorial period, unleashing a social 
emergency that unevenly affected poor people and pushed them to engage 
in subsistence activities like making arpilleras to improve, or simply make 
possible, their lives in the city. While distilling the everyday implications of 
neoliberalism, this discussion aimed to recover the socioeconomic struggles 
of the popular movements that made the transition to democracy possible 
but were abandoned by the political elites who prioritized the performance 
of official economic indicators. Thus, while the economy has grown at a 
relatively consistent rate since 1980, Chile shares the highest index of 
economic inequality for OECD countries with Mexico,49 while household debt 
is on the rise.50
Economic inequality and precarity are animating the cycles of mass 
mobilization taking place in Chile since October 2019. What started with a 
demonstration against the increasing costs of transportation has evolved into 
a call for structural changes backed by a new constitution, demonstrating, 

209
CHILEAN ARPILLERAS
once again, the transformative power of the politics surrounding everyday 
life. In these decisive times, re-reading the crafting practice of arpilleras 
through the lens of social reproduction can be a productive exercise to test 
the inconsistencies of democratic power and neoliberalism, as well as to 
rally around the socioeconomic policies that should be prioritized this time 
around. Furthermore, and given that the neoliberal policies inherited from 
the Chilean dictatorship have been prescribed and emulated elsewhere,51 
arpillera exhibitions around the world could highlight their value as historic 
artefacts providing a window into the everyday life of pobladores during the 
dictatorship, as well as contemporary political objects that interrogate the 
promises of neoliberalism. Beyond the visual and narrative registers, Chilean 
arpilleras contribute to our understanding of the types of political projects and 
agencies that can emerge from shared practices of crafting. Then, as now, in 
Chile and around the world, arpilleras show the potential of craft practices in 
the grassroots organizing of marginalized urban communities as well as their 
transformative potential beyond. 
Notes
1	 J. Adams, ‘When Art Loses Its Sting: The Evolution of Protest Art in 
Authoritarian Contexts’, Sociological Perspectives 48, no. 4 (2006): 531–58.
2	 M. Taylor, ‘The Reformulation of Social Policy in Chile, 1973–2001: 
Questioning a Neoliberal Model’, Global Social Policy 3, no. 1 (April 2003): 
21–44.
3	 E. Bartra, Crafting Gender: Women and Folk Art in Latin America and the 
Caribbean (Durham: Duke University Press. 2003).
4	 M. Agosín, I. Allende, P. Kornbluh and P. Winn, Tapestries of Hope, Threads of 
Love: The Arpillera Movement in Chile (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield 
Publishers, 2008).
5	 C. Schneider, Shantytown Protest in Pinochet’s Chile (Philadelphia: Temple 
University Press, 1995).
6	 N. Angelcos and M. Pérez, ‘De la “desaparición” a la reemergencia: 
Continuidades y rupturas del movimiento de pobladores en Chile [From 
‘Disappearance’ to Reemergence: The Continuities and Ruptures of the 
Pobladores’ Movement in Chile]’, Latin American Research Review 52, no. 1 
(2017): 94–109.
7	 M. Garcés, ‘El Movimiento de Pobladores Durante la Unidad Popular, 1970-
1973 [The Pobladores’ Movement during the Unidad Popular, 1970-1973]’, 
Atenea 15, no. 2, (2015): 33–47.
8	 Ibid.; Schneider, Shantytown Protest in Pinochet’s Chile.
9	 B. Mullings, ‘Neoliberalism’, in Encyclopedia of Geography, ed. B. Warf 
(Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc., 2010), 2011–2015.

210
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
10	 Taylor, ‘The Reformulation of Social Policy in Chile, 1973–2001’.
11	 Ibid.
12	 Pablo Navarrete-Hernandez and Fernando Toro, ‘Urban Systems of 
Accumulation: Half a Century of Chilean Neoliberal Urban Policies’, Antipode 
51, no. 3 (June 2019): 899–926.
13	 Garcés, ‘El Movimiento de Pobladores Durante la Unidad Popular’.
14	 Angelcos and Pérez, ‘De la “desaparición” a la reemergencia’.
15	 Navarrete-Hernandez and Toro, ‘Urban Systems of Accumulation’, 9.
16	 Angelcos and Pérez, ‘De la “desaparición” a la reemergencia’.
17	 M. Garcés, ‘Los Pobladores y la Política en los Años Ochenta: 
Reconstrucción de tejido social y protestas nacionales [Pobladores and 
Politics in the Eighties: The Reconstruction of the Social Fabric and the 
National Protests]’, Historia 396, no. 1 (2017): 119–48.
18	 J. Adams, Surviving Dictatorship: A Work of Visual Sociology (New York: 
Routledge, 2012); J. Paley, Marketing Democracy: Power and Social Movements 
in Post-Dictatorship Chile (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2001).
19	 As in other languages, in Spanish, popular culture or cultura popular refers 
to the culture of the masses and the working classes, as opposed to the 
culture of the elites. In the case of Chile, the cultura popular is highly leftist 
and politicized.
20	 Paley, Marketing Democracy.
21	 Ibid.
22	 Garcés, ‘Los Pobladores y la Política en los Años Ochenta’.
23	 M. Garcés, ‘Las luchas urbanas en Chile en el último tercio del siglo XX 
[The Urban Struggles in Chile during the Last Third of the 20th Century]’, 
Trashumante: Revista Americana de Historia Social, no. 1 (2013): 74–95.
24	 Ibid.
25	 Adams, ‘When Art Loses Its Sting’.
26	 Garcés, ‘Los Pobladores y la Política en los Años Ochenta’; Paley, Marketing 
Democracy.
27	 Ibid.
28	 Adams, Surviving Dictatorship.
29	 C. Boyle, ‘Touching the Air: The Cultural Force of Women in Chile’, in "Viva": 
Women and Popular Protest in Latin America, ed. S. A. Radcliffe and S. 
Westwood (London and New York: Routledge, 1993), 156–72.
30	 M. J. Andrucki, ‘Queering Social Reproduction: How Gay Men Save the City’, 
societyandspace​.or​g, 31 October 2017.
31	 Carmen Teeple Hopkins, ‘Mostly Work, Little Play: Social Reproduction, 
Migration and Paid Domestic Work in Montreal’, in Social Reproduction 
Theory: Remapping Class, Recentering Oppression, ed. Tithi Bhattacharya 
(London: Pluto Press, 2017), 131–47.
32	 Beverley Mullings, ‘Neoliberalization, Social Reproduction and the Limits to 
Labour in Jamaica’, Singapore Journal of Tropical Geography 30, no. 2 (2009): 
174–88.

211
CHILEAN ARPILLERAS
33	 Silvia Federici, Caliban and the Witch: Women, the Body and Primitive 
Accumulation (New York: Autonomedia, 2004), 8.
34	 Tithi Bhattacharya, ‘Introduction: Mapping Social Reproduction Theory’, in 
Social Reproduction Theory: Remapping Class, Recentering Oppression, ed. 
Tithi Bhattacharya (London: Pluto Press, 2017), 1–20, 2.
35	 K. Mitchell et al., ‘Introduction: Life’s Work: An Introduction, Review and 
Critique’, Antipode 35, no. 3 (July 2003): 415–42, 416.
36	 C. Katz, ‘Vagabond Capitalism and the Necessity of Social Reproduction’, 
Antipode 33, no. 4 (September 2001): 709–28, 711.
37	 R. Nagar, ‘Locating Globalization: Feminist (Re)readings of the Subjects and 
Spaces of Globalization’, Economic Geography 78, no. 3 (2002): 257–84.
38	 L. Kern, and B. Mullings, ‘Urban Neoliberalism, Urban Insecurity and 
Urban Violence: Exploring the Gender Dimensions’, in Rethinking Feminist 
Interventions into the Urban, ed. Linda Peak and Martina Rieker (London and 
New York: Routledge, 2013), 23–40, 30.
39	 I. Bakker, ‘Social Reproduction and the Constitution of a Gendered Political 
Economy’, New Political Economy 12, no. 4 (2007): 541–56.
40	 I want to thank the SUNY Potsdam’s Art Gallery and the Forging Memory 
team for hosting and allowing me to spend time with its beautiful collection 
of arpilleras in November 2019. For more information see https://www​
.forgingmemory​.org/.
41	 Adams, Surviving Dictatorship.
42	 Ibid.
43	 Adams, Surviving Dictatorship; Paley, Marketing Democracy.
44	 Ibid.; J. D. Shayne, They Used to Call Us Witches: Chilean Exiles, Culture, 
and Feminism (Washington, DC: Lexington Books, 2009).
45	 J. Adams, ‘Art in Social Movements: Shantytown Women’s Protest in 
Pinochet’s Chile’, Sociological Forum 17, no. 1 (2002): 21–6.
46	 Ibid.
47	 Ibid.
48	 J. Adams, ‘Movement Socialization in Art Workshops: A Case from 
Pinochet’s Chile’, The Sociological Quarterly 41, no. 4 (2000): 615–38, 628.
49	 OECD (2020), Income Inequality (indicator). https​:/​/da​ta​.oe​cd​.or​g​/ine​quali​ty​/
in​come-​inequ​ality​.htm.
50	 C. Han, Life in Debt: Times of Care and Violence in Neoliberal Chile (Berkeley, 
CA: University of California Press, 2012).
51	 See Taylor, ‘The Reformulation of Social Policy in Chile, 1973–2001’.

14
From essential skill to 
productive capital 
Perspectives on policies and 
practices of craft education 
in Finland
Anna Kouhia
C
raft education has a long and debated history in the Finnish school system 
because of the established position that crafts have had as a mandatory 
subject of study from the dawn of compulsory general education in the mid-
1800s.1 At the time, craft making was rooted in the idea of social and cultural 
maintenance, and it reflected extensively the moral norms regarding good 
citizenship and the basic skills needed in a society.2 Although the aims of 
education have changed tremendously ever since, crafts have persisted as a 
form of education that aims to cater to practical purposes that equip people 
with a readiness to overcome quotidian challenges with functional, down-to-
earth skills and knowledge of practice. 
This essay sheds light on the changing politics of craft education and 
ponders the role that crafting has in the current national cultural policy. With 
the aim of reflecting how the meaning and value of crafts have historically 
evolved from an essential skill to productive capital as highlighted today, the 
essay considers shifts in the objectives of craft education, particularly related 
to the gendered issues that have revolved around the teaching and learning 

213
FROM ESSENTIAL SKILL TO PRODUCTIVE CAPITAL
of crafts in Finland. The essay begins with an overview of the shifts of school 
craft during different time periods and continues with an examination of the 
role of crafts in today’s national politics. In conclusion, the essay maps out 
how crafts are embedded in Finland’s cultural policy, as a reflection of the 
skills and innovation highlighted as the building blocks for the wellbeing and 
prosperity of the nation. 
Craft education in changing political climate
In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, artisanship played a prominent role 
in Finnish society. In general, crafts were regarded as part of the livelihood as 
tasks related to proper home economics and a decent rural lifestyle; crafting 
not only provided a resource for catering to the needs of the household but 
also formed an important source of income for smallholders throughout the 
Finnish countryside.3 As a culture based on skilled workmanship, Finland has 
contextualized crafts by practicality, which initially incorporated the content 
and objectives of craft teaching to serve the needs of a modern society.4 
Overall, craft education has largely focused on teaching the skills needed in 
everyday life with the objective of helping people to meet the practical needs 
of homes and society5 and informing them about aesthetics and proper taste.6 
This approach has profoundly contributed to a view of crafting as ‘a nostalgic 
glance to the traditional way of life’7 contrasting crafts to the art industry and 
design-related entrepreneurialism.8
The presence of craft teaching in primary school has been compulsory in 
the Finnish education system since 1866. Its existence in the core curriculum 
has been mandated by successive governments whose political agendas were 
linked with the social agendas that characterized Finnish life. For example, 
at the dawn of the nationwide school system, craft education focused on 
educating people towards higher civic virtues, such as morality, patience and 
perseverance, and values like thriftiness and austerity, and promoting the 
wealth of the poor nation through the learning of individual managerialism.9 
Later, school crafts were undertaken widely in the name of lifelong learning, 
in order to nurture broader cognitive and educational competencies and skills 
needed for the development of a sustainable and equitable view of the future.
The political impetus varied over time, as can be seen by the following 
outline of the history of the evolution of craft education. Marjanen and 
Metsärinne10 have divided school crafts into different time periods with respect 
to the particularity of the needs of students, the subject and society: craft 
for home well-being (1866–1911); craft for civic society (1912–1945); craft for 
independent hard-working citizens (1946–1969); equality craft (1970–1993); 

214
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
and unlimited craft (1994–2014). During these periods, school crafts have 
been offered to serve the changing rationales of the society and have thus 
contributed to the learning of skills and competencies considered vital for the 
at-the-time political climate. 
The first phase, craft for home well-being (1866–1911), marks an era when 
the School Act of 1866 introduced craft education to the Finnish school system. 
The 1866 Act was initiated under the influences of liberalism, nationalism and 
philanthropy, and it harnessed craft education for the purposes of cultivating 
proper citizenship by ‘increasing individuals’ economic well-being and home 
and improving the welfare of the whole nation’.11 At the time, school craft 
was divided into two separate realms based on gender, Women’s and Men’s 
Handicrafts, both of which had their own goals and content for learning.12 
The division of the subject not only affected the teaching of the means of 
manufacture but also set foundations of categorical asymmetry among the 
subject areas: in general, boys were taught woodwork, whereas girls, whose 
craft skills were particularly valued at the time, were educated to make useful 
products for the household, mostly by knitting and doing needlework.13 
During the period called craft for civic society (1912–1945), which began 
with the launch of a new model for craft education enacted in 1912 and lasting 
to the end of the Second World War, the educational policy of craft education 
shifted towards more society-centric goals.14 Overall, the civic society period 
covers profound changes in the educational system, like the enactment of 
the Compulsory School Act in 1921 and the Rural Primary School Curriculum 
in 1925 that were instigated shortly after Finland gained its independence 
from Russia in 1917. With these changes, the emphasis of education was 
set on providing common schooling to all social classes and genders. In 
general, education was targeted to the teaching and learning of cognitive and 
academic skills that could contribute to the wealth of the nation.15 Despite 
the aims of common education, school craft remained as a disunited subject 
of study, which was separated as Girls’ and Boys’ Handicraft. Both study 
realms had their own learning objectives and practices for enhancing pupils’ 
capability to make artefacts needed in daily life. Society-centric goals were 
also highlighted through the teaching and learning of specific craft techniques: 
for instance, metalwork was emphasized in boys’ school craft as a response 
to the demands of the nation’s developing economy.16
In Finland, the post-war period (1946–1969) is often discussed in relation 
to the establishment of the welfare state.17 On that subject, Marjanen 
and Metsärinne interpret post-war craft education as a period of craft for 
independent hard-working citizens (1946–1969) that served the learning of 
people as individuals, providing them with work-life-related knowledge and 
qualifications that were needed in the changing economic environment of 
the country.18 Nevertheless, the rapid industrialization of the country also led 

215
FROM ESSENTIAL SKILL TO PRODUCTIVE CAPITAL
to the increase in value of society-centric learning goals especially in boys’ 
school crafts, where craft education tended to be largely attributed to the 
practices of vocational training and where educational goals continued to be 
paired with the needs of industry.19 On the other hand, girls’ school crafts 
emphasized handicraft techniques essential for the maintenance of the 
household, like crocheting, knitting, darning, embroidery and sewing with a 
sewing machine. However, girls’ craft curriculum also covered more artistic 
and experimental content such as sketch drawing and material technology 
patching.20 Interestingly, similar discussions of the goals of craft education, 
especially in relation to the teaching and learning of technical skills, take 
place today by the stakeholders representing technical craft education and 
industry,21 as if today’s school craft should cater for the needs of industry and 
the labour market rather than act as a resource for increasing creativity, skills 
and innovation in society as a whole.
According to Marjanen and Metsärinne, the period ranging from 
1970 to 1993 can be seen as a time when there was a shift towards equality 
of education.22 At the time, the comprehensive school curriculum enacted in 
the 1970s made profound changes to school craft: the focus of craft education 
moved from practical learning goals to creative thinking and educational 
objectives began to emphasize the importance of the crafting process as a 
creative and exploratory activity. Accordingly, the learning goals of the era 
were built on developing subject-specific skills and reinforcing pupils’ ethical 
objectives, personality and mental health as well as their sense of aesthetics.23 
In the 1970s, school craft became officially a gender neutral subject of study, 
since fundamental gender orientation was lost when the name of the subject 
changed from Girls’ and Boys’ Handicraft to Textile and Technical Work.24 
However, crafts have still tended to be envisaged as gendered practices based 
on traditions related to certain craft techniques and materials.25 Indeed, as 
Kokko has noticed, the impact of gendered traditions has had profound effects 
on the teaching of crafts at school in Finland: even in the twenty-first century, 
school crafts have continued to be culturally established and maintained both 
through informal sociocultural learning and formal education at school, through 
connecting textile craft with femininity and technical craft with masculinity.26 
In the 1990s, as Marjanen and Metsärinne have written, craft education 
came to the phase of unlimited craft (1994–2014).27 During this period, general 
educational goals were set on sustainable development, multiculturalism 
and civic education, as well as on promoting inclusive learning through the 
implementation of wide thematical topics and projects in schools. In addition, 
the role of state-normative management was decreased in schools, since the 
municipalities were given more independence to enact educational goals and 
practices defined by the National Core Curriculum. At the time, differences 
in school culture and regional politics led to varying interpretations of the 

216
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
National Core Curriculum. In school craft this often meant a transition towards 
two disassociated craft subjects.28 Textile Work and Technical Work largely 
persisted as separate study realms until the school curriculum reform in 2004, 
which eventually mandated crafts as a single combined compulsory subject 
taught generally for all pupils.29 
Despite joint pedagogical aims, deep-rooted gendered segregation between 
the two craft subjects still remained in the practices of education along with 
issues and challenges related to creative governance and regional instatement 
of the National Core Curriculum.30 However, the period ranging from the mid-
1990s to the mid-2010s can be seen as background to the innovative policy 
that revolves around creativity and culture today: increasing attention began 
to be paid to holistic learning processes, as well as multiculturalism, social 
sustainability and equity of education.
The current Craft Curriculum initiated in 2014 and enacted in 201631 emphasizes 
the pedagogical space constituted by the holistic craft process, where all 
phases from ideation, design and manufacturing to assessment and evaluation 
are conducted by the same person or group of makers.32 In this vein, today’s 
school craft holds the idea of the learner as a unique individual and a member 
of an interrelated community of learners, who takes up exploratory, inventive 
and experimental craft activity and solves real-life problems arising from his or 
her own living environment and the multi-material world.33 Indeed, the general 
aims of the current National Core Curriculum build on developing an inclusive 
school culture by bringing together knowledge and skills of different school 
subjects, in order to meet the global trends of lifelong learning and equip pupils 
with transversal competencies and twenty-first century skills with which to 
solve the problems of the future.34 In today’s school craft, learning tasks may 
be constituted as multi-material craft design projects combining contents in 
and across practices and working methods based on textile and technical 
work. More subject-specific adaptations of crafting may be still undertaken in 
terms of different craft materials and techniques: a holistic design process and 
the framing of learning tasks are the key goals of such craft projects. However, 
the structure of the system does not change instantaneously, even if craft 
teachers adopt curricula changes apace and begin to enact new educational 
techniques based on the new principles. 
A crucial puzzle related to the Core Curriculum 2014 is the level of confusion 
caused by its enactment, as it does not take into account the management 
of education on the school level but emphasizes wider perspectives on the 
learning of skills that are needed in the future society.35 For instance, today’s 
school craft omits reassuring stereotypical gender roles that anchor ‘soft 
materials’, such as cloth and yarn, to female spheres and ‘hard materials’, such 
as wood and metal, to male spheres; furthermore, it restrains from dividing 
the practices of school craft according to gender.36 Indeed, the recent curricula 

217
FROM ESSENTIAL SKILL TO PRODUCTIVE CAPITAL
changes eventually phased out the gendered practices of choosing between 
textile and technical work, as most of the girls chose to study textile work and 
almost all the boys preferred technical work. 
According to Kokko, the changes led pupils to stick with traditional craft 
gender roles for fear of inadequacy or teasing and preference for a dominant 
gender community. She cites examples where girls who chose technical work 
as their preferred school craft had to represent their gender in a male-dominant 
group, fearing that their performance would be somehow inferior to that of the 
boys.37 As a reflection, Kokko has interpreted that girls tended to enjoy ‘the 
liberties in the textile work lessons and, consequently, learned to accept and 
appreciate textiles as being a special sphere of their gender’.38 Nevertheless, 
gender equality, sustainability and inclusiveness are promoted on many levels 
in the craft curriculum today: current school curriculum is designed to give all 
pupils the same opportunities to study crafts, with an acknowledgement that 
a pupil’s performance in crafts does not need to play any role in a person’s 
process of constructing her or his gendered identity.39
Crafts in Finland’s twenty-first 
century cultural policy 
Interestingly, arts and culture seem to have gained more social, educational 
and economic weight in recent cultural policy, and they have been supported 
and sustained by the Finnish government in its efforts to improve the nation’s 
creative competencies. Among other things, recent government initiatives 
have included strategic key projects supporting structures that bridge work life 
and the cultural sector and proposals for facilitating access to arts education 
among children and youth. A recognition of the value of creativity in revitalizing 
the country’s productivity40 has been apparent in these discussions, along with 
efforts to make creative entrepreneurship more visible with well-designed 
client-oriented products and services.41 Moreover, recent commentaries by 
the Finnish National Board of Education42 have emphasized the value of crafting 
in light of broader social, cultural and educational goals. In these discussions, 
crafts have been construed as a way to provide all children with strong basic 
skills in planning, designing, problem solving and divergent thinking in order 
to enhance skills needed both today and in the future.
The Strategic Government Programme 2016 presented key projects 
against which crafts in twenty-first century Finland can be viewed. Particularly 
essential in the craft-related cultural policy were efforts to ‘make Finland a 
leading country of modern learning and inspiring education’.43 The Strategic 
Government Programme 2016 emphasized the promotion of local educational 

218
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
solutions, creativity and experimentation with different learning methods and 
approaches such as digital learning. The purpose was to improve creative 
skills, cultural competence and capacity for learning among children and youth 
throughout the country, and to incorporate arts and culture into their daily 
lives in furtherance of greater opportunities to take an active part in cultural 
pursuits. Institutions providing early education, basic education and basic art 
education were set as strategic cultural policy actors but other arts and culture 
actors, such as libraries, museums, heritage associations and third-sector 
parties were also mentioned as prospective contributors. Craft associations 
have a weighty role in the country’s system of Basic Education in the Arts 
(BEA), which covers nine different art fields: music, dance, theatre, literature, 
circus performing, architecture, fine arts, audio-visual art and crafts;44 crafting 
was also pooled in the key projects. Overall, the arts and culture projects 
implemented during the Strategic Governmental Programme 2016-2018 
allocated €2.8 million to facilitate access to children’s cultural activities through 
clubs organized by schools and basic art education providers on school 
premises in the afternoons; €5.2 million was earmarked to improve access to 
art and culture in more general terms outside of educational institutions. By 
any scale of measure, this was not only an extensive strategic investment in 
the promotion of the conditions for everyday creativity through wider access 
to arts and culture, but also a venture in the development of the country’s 
anticipated productivity through innovation and enhancement of twenty-first 
century skills and key competencies for the construction of a creative future 
society.
It appears that creative economies, as well as arts and culture, have 
become important parts of the country’s innovation policy, which is based 
on the aims of increasing the competitiveness, productivity and wealth of 
its citizens. The Finnish Ministry of Education and Culture framed a creative 
economy and intangible growth as spearheading burgeoning sectors of the 
country in 2017, pointing to the tremendous relevance of culture and creativity 
in education and working life.45 Similar objectives are reflected in Finland’s 
current Government Programme 2019, with initiatives aimed ‘to create new 
growth and find solutions to global megatrends’ and enhance the well-being 
and prosperity of the nation.46 Imagining Finland as a country that promotes 
competence, education, culture and innovation to foster economic growth, the 
current Government Programme promotes a vision that commits to further 
education and skills and invests in the upskilling and continuous learning of 
the people.47 The Government Objectives include tasks to increase the level 
of education and competence among the population, emphasizing how 
‘education, culture and skills continue to build the foundation of our society’48 
and how education is considered as a focal point in enhancing sustainable 
growth and in strengthening Finland’s influence around the world. 

219
FROM ESSENTIAL SKILL TO PRODUCTIVE CAPITAL
Continuing the facilitation of cultural services, the current Government 
Programme focuses on enhancing gender equality and non-discrimination in 
society by improving opportunities for children to pursue a leisure activity of 
their choice as part of the school day.49 This includes initiatives to advance 
the quality of the schools’ morning and afternoon activities in cooperation 
with municipalities and third-sector providers and support for the promotion 
of projects targeted to children’s culture within the system of BEA. Neither 
crafts nor other realms of the BEA system are mentioned as contributors, 
but the emphasis within the Programme on the advancement of school 
afternoon clubs and activities paves the way for the culture of crafts to 
flourish among free-of-charge leisure activities undertaken after the school 
day. At least content-wise, crafts would seem to provide children and youth 
with opportunities to support creativity and channel it into innovation, and 
ultimately, develop skills that could affect the entrepreneurial potential and 
sustainable growth of the nation.
Conclusion
Craft education in Finland has been politically motivated depending on the 
agenda of governments in order that it reflect the essence of, or an idealized, 
Finland during a particular time period. Despite the changes in contemporary 
modern life, it is noteworthy that the resource-related orientation of crafting 
seems to be linked to developing measures to cultivate skills and competences 
in Finnish society. Throughout their 150-year-history in the Finnish school 
system, crafts have served the changing educational and moral rationales of 
the political powers-that-be and society. Whereas the roots of craft education 
were based on increasing individuals’ economic well-being with the learning 
of craft techniques seen as essential in the household, the emphasis gradually 
shifted towards creative innovation and social competencies in the increasingly 
globalized world. Today, craft education is valued for its potential to encourage 
cultural competence and creativity by teaching citizens to pay attention 
to the meaning of strategic planning, interaction with tools and materials, 
independent reasoning and responsibility for the environment. Overall, the 
current goals of school craft emphasize the worth and value of holistic process 
management and creative, solution-focused learning, which are also seen as 
important factors in the country’s cultural policy as a means of guaranteeing 
individual growth, freedom and equality. 
Finland has a long history not only in teaching and learning skills but 
also in putting value on the culture of practice based on these skills and 
competencies. Recent articulations of craft education associated with the 

220
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
initiation of the National Core Curriculum for Basic Education in 2004 share 
an understanding of crafts as a subject that unites the knowledge of many 
different materials and multiple techniques. Thus it is capable of providing 
all pupils with equal access to the roots of the knowledge of practice. The 
stakeholders representing textile craft education, especially, have considered 
the current craft curriculum beneficial for the growth of pupils as citizens 
and as members of society, as it puts all children in a position of equal value 
and expands the meaning and value of crafts in society.50 With such content, 
craft education is pictured today as a resource for promoting egalitarianism 
in schools and eventually throughout Finnish society in the name of the 
development of a more responsible and fair future.51 
Although craft education has had a profound role in enhancing gender 
equality and social justice in schools and, more widely, in society, crafts seem 
to be still veiled, at least to a degree, by traditionalism and exclusiveness 
related to the gendered realms of making. It is, however, worth noting that 
craft education is said to have been reassessed and eventually reconstructed 
in today’s technologically advanced urban society to meet the demands 
and challenges of the twenty-first century.52 Today’s craft education is 
conceptualized under the influence of individualism in terms of learning 
solution-centricity and the skills of planning and designing, and as a flexible 
and adaptable collaborative practice capable of further understanding diversity 
in the world and making compromises through social practices. However, 
it appears that craft education has recently – and increasingly – expanded 
to a range of different skills and competencies that require more and more 
knowledge of people-to-people interaction in order to bring about crafting as 
a productive activity for the nation. Above all, today’s school crafts seem set 
to ensure equality by providing all children with comprehensive and equitable 
skills for developing creativity, critical thinking and skills for divergent problem 
solving. The key to this is the promotion of a wide knowledge of craft practices 
without internal confrontation with notions that previously divided the subject 
to textile and technical work.
Notes
1	 E.g. Mia Porko-Hudd, Sinikka Pöllänen and Eila Lindfors, ‘Common and 
Holistic Crafts Education in Finland’, Techne Series-Research in Sloyd 
Education and Craft Science A, 25, no. 3 (2018): 26–38, 28.
2	 Päivi Marjanen, Koulukäsityö vuosina 1866–2003. Kodin hyvinvointiin 
kasvattavista tavoitteista kohti elämänhallinnan taitoja [School Crafts in 
1866–2003. From Wellbeing at Homes Towards Skills in Life Management]. 
Publications of the University of Turku C 344 (Turku: University of Turku, 

221
FROM ESSENTIAL SKILL TO PRODUCTIVE CAPITAL
2012): passim; Päivi Marjanen, ‘Koulukäsityö naiseksi kasvattamassa [School 
Crafts Raising to Be a Woman]’, Kasvatus & Aika 8, no. 1 (2014): passim; 
Päivi Marjanen and Mika Metsärinne, ‘The Development of Craft Education 
in Finnish Schools’, Nordic Journal of Educational History 6, no. 1 (2019): 
49–70, passim.
3	 Pentti Virrankoski, ‘Eighteenth Century Handicrafts in the Rural Areas of 
Northern Finland’, Scandinavian Economic History Review 27, no. 2 (1979): 
187–9; Eliza Kraatari, Domestic Dexterity and Cultural Policy: The Idea of 
Cottage Industry and Historical Experience in Finland from the Great Famine 
to the Reconstruction Period. Jyväskylä Studies in Education, Psychology 
and Social Research No. 544 (Jyväskylä: University of Jyväskylä, 2016): 
passim.
4	 Marjanen, ‘Koulukäsityö naiseksi kasvattamassa’, 58; Porko-Hudd, Pöllänen 
and Lindfors, ‘Common and Holistic Crafts Education in Finland’, 28.
5	 Marjanen and Metsärinne, ‘The Development of Craft Education in Finnish 
Schools’, 58, 64.
6	 Kraatari, Domestic Dexterity and Cultural Policy, 59.
7	 Ibid., 19.
8	 Tiina Veräjänkorva, Diagnoosi taidekäsityöstä. Tarkastelussa taiteen, 
muotoilun ja käsityön rajapinta [Diagnosis of Arts and Crafts. Examination 
of the Interface between Art, Design and Crafts] (Helsinki: Taiteen 
keskustoimikunta; Valtion muotoilutoimikunta, 2006), 17–18. http:​/​/www​.taik​
e​.fi/​docum​ents/​10162​/3107​6​/DIA​GNO​OS​I_​%28​EDM ​_14​_2555​_3520​%29​
.pdf
9	 Marjanen and Metsärinne, ‘The Development of Craft Education in Finnish 
Schools’, 54–6, 62; Marjanen, ‘Koulukäsityö naiseksi kasvattamassa’, 58.
10	 Marjanen and Metsärinne, ‘The Development of Craft Education in Finnish 
Schools’, passim.
11	 Ibid., 56.
12	 Ibid., 50.
13	 Ibid., 56; ‘Koulukäsityö naiseksi kasvattamassa’, 58.
14	 Marjanen and Metsärinne, ‘The Development of Craft Education in Finnish 
Schools’, 56–8, 62.
15	 Ibid., 57; Elizabeth Garber, ‘Craft Education in Finland: Definitions, Rationales 
and the Future’, International Journal of Art & Design Education 21, no. 2 
(2002): 132–45, 132.
16	 Marjanen and Metsärinne, ‘The Development of Craft Education in Finnish 
Schools’, 62.
17	 Anita Kangas, ‘New Clothes for Cultural Policy’, in Construction of Cultural 
Policy, ed. Pirkkoliisa Ahponen and Anita Kangas (Jyväskylä: Minerva, 2004), 
21–40, 24–7.
18	 Marjanen and Metsärinne, ‘The Development of Craft Education in Finnish 
Schools’, 58–9.
19	 Ibid., 59.

222
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
20	 Päivi Marjanen, Eila Lindfors and Sirpa Ketola, ‘School Craft in Memories of 
Three Generations’, Techne Series-Research in Sloyd Education and Craft 
Science A 25, no. 1 (2018): 1–16, 3.
21	 Okko Ojanen and Janne Rastas, ‘Teknisen työn opetuksen alasajo heikentää 
suomalaisten osaamista ja yritysten asemaa, uhkaa kansantaloutta ja 
lisää syrjäytymistä’ [The Downfall of Technical Work Weakens the Skills 
and Position of Finns, Threatens the National Economy and Increases 
Marginalization], 2018: passim. https​:/​/ww​w​.tek​ninen​opett​aja​.n​et​/do​cs​/Te​
knise​n​_tyo​n​_ala​sajo.​pdf
T. Sipola, ‘Teknisen työn ja tekstiilityön yhdistäminen ei lisännyt tasa-arvoa 
– sen sijaan se voi pahentaa ongelmaa, jota vientiteollisuus jo nyt pelkää’ 
[Combining Technical and Textile Work Did Not Increase Equality – Instead It 
May Exacerbate the Problem That the Export Industry Is Already Afraid Of] 
2019: passim. https://yle​.fi​/uutiset​/3​-11031718
22	 Marjanen and Metsärinne, ‘The Development of Craft Education in Finnish 
Schools’, 59–60.
23	 Ibid., 60.
24	 Ibid.; Peruskoulun opetussuunnitelman perusteet II [Elementary School Core 
Curriculum II] (Helsinki: Kouluhallitus, 1970): passim.
25	 Sirpa Kokko, ‘Learning Practices of Femininity Through Gendered Craft 
Education in Finland’, Gender and Education 21, no. 6 (2009): 721–34, 
passim; Sirpa Kokko, ‘Learning Crafts as Practices of Masculinity. Finnish 
Male Trainee Teachers’ Reflections and Experiences’, Gender and Education 
24, no. 2 (2012): 177–93, passim.
26	 Kokko, ‘Learning Practices of Femininity’, 731.
27	 Marjanen and Metsärinne, ‘The Development of Craft Education in Finnish 
Schools’, 60–1.
28	 Ibid., 60; Eila Lindfors, ‘Creativity, Innovation and Entrepreneurship in 
Education 2020 – Some Considerations from Crafts Part’, in In the Spirit 
of Uno Cygnaeus: Pedagogical Questions of Today and Tomorrow, ed. Aki 
Rasinen and Timo Rissanen (Jyväskylä: University of Jyväskylä, 2010), 
109–20, 110.
29	 FNBE 2004 [Finnish National Board of Education 2004]. Perusopetuksen 
opetussuunnitelman perusteet. [National Core Curriculum for Basic 
Education] (Helsinki: Finnish National Board of Education, 2004).
30	 Jaana Lepistö and Eila Lindfors, ‘From Gender-Segregated Subjects to 
Multi-material Craft: Craft Student Teachers’ Views on the Future of the Craft 
Subject’, FormAkademisk-Forskningstidsskrift for Design og Designdidaktikk 
8, no. 3, (2015): 1–20, 2.
31	 FNBE 2014 [Finnish National Board of Education 2014]. Perusopetuksen 
opetussuunnitelman perusteet. [National Core Curriculum for Basic 
Education] (Helsinki: Finnish National Agency for Education, 2014).
32	 For a definition of holistic craft, see Sinikka Pöllänen, ‘Contextualising Craft: 
Pedagogical Models for Craft Education’, International Journal of Art & 
Design Education 28, no. 3 (2009): 249–60.

223
FROM ESSENTIAL SKILL TO PRODUCTIVE CAPITAL
33	 FNBE 2014, 462.
34	 Bernie Trilling and Charles Fadel, 21st Century Skills: Learning for Life in 
Our Times (San Francisco, CA: John Wiley & Sons, 2009): passim; Eva 
Veeber, Erja Syrjäläinen and Ene Lind, ‘A Discussion of the Necessity of Craft 
Education in the 21st Century’, Techne Series-Research in Sloyd Education 
and Craft Science A 22, no. 1 (2015): 15–29, 25.
35	 Sirpa Kokko, Anna Kouhia and Kaiju Kangas, ‘Finnish Craft Education in 
Turbulence: Conflicting Debates on the Current National Core Curriculum’, 
Techne Series-Research in Sloyd Education and Craft Science A: passim.
36	 Lepistö and Lindfors, ‘From Gender-Segregated Subjects to Multi-material 
Craft’, 6.
37	 Kokko, ‘Learning Practices of Femininity’, 727.
38	 Ibid., 729.
39	 Ibid., 731.
40	 Ministry of Education, Luova talous ja kulttuuri innovaatiopolitiikan ytimessä 
[Creative Economy at the Heart of Innovation Policy] (Helsinki: Ministry of 
Education, 2009), 30, passim.
http:​/​/jul​kaisu​t​.val​tione​uvost​o​.fi/​handl​e​/10​0​24​/76​691; Strategic Government 
Program [SGP], Action Plan for the Implementation of the Key Project 
and Reforms Defined in the Strategic Government Programme (Finnish 
Government, 1/2016): passim. http:​/​/val​tione​uvost​o​.fi/​docum​ents/​10616​/1986​
338​/A​ction​+​plan​+for+​the ​+impl​ement​ation​+Stra​tegic​+Gove​rnmen​t​+Pro​
gramm​e​+EN.​pdf/ 
41	 Ornamo, Muotoilualan yritysten suhdanne- ja toimialaraportti 2013 [Design 
Business Cycle and Industry Report 2013] (Helsinki: Teollisuustaiteen Liitto 
Ornamo, 2014).
42	 E.g. Marjaana Manninen and Marjo Rissanen, Perusopetuksen tehtävänä on 
tarjota yleissivistystä, myös kädentaidoissa [The Aim of Basic Education Is 
to Provide General Knowledge, also in Handicrafts], (Opetushallitus [National 
Board of Education], 2019): passim. https​:/​/ww​w​.oph​.fi​/f​i​/blo​gi​/pe​rusop​etuks​
en​-te​htava​na​-ta​rjota​-ylei​ssivi​styst​a​-myo​s​-kad​entai​doiss​a​?fbc​lid​=I​wAR2Z​
gxoUr​jeTF_​M3dW2​I901B​YzVh2​1JQUQ​Aj4as​wDAm4​94g3f​0XQX2​vm​-I?​fbcli​
d​=IwA​R2Zgx​oUrje​TF​_M3​dW2I9​01BYz​Vh21J​QUQAj​4aswD​Am494​g3f0X​
QX2vm​-I
43	 SGP, Action Plan for the Implementation of the Key Project and Reforms, 30.
44	 See Seija Karppinen, ‘Craft-Art as a Basis for Human Activity’, International 
Journal of Art & Design Education 27, no. 1 (2008): 83–90, passim.
45	 Ministry of Education and Culture, Luova talous ja aineettoman arvon luominen 
kasvun kärjiksi [Promoting the Creative Economy and Intangible Value Creation 
as Spearheading Growth Sectors] (Ministry of Education and Culture, Finland 
2017), 18, passim. http:​/​/jul​kaisu​t​.val​tione​uvost​o​.fi/​handl​e​/1​00​24​/79​725
46	 Government Programme 2019, Inclusive and Competent Finland – A Socially, 
Economically and Ecologically Sustainable Society, Programme of Prime 
Minister Antti Rinne’s Government (Helsinki: Finnish Government 2019), 25, 
7–8. https​:/​/ju​lkais​ut​.va​ltion​euvos​to​.fi​/hand​le​/10​024​/1​61664​

224
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
47	 Ibid., 172.
48	 Ibid., 173.
49	 Ibid., 177–8.
50	 Tekstiiliopettajaliitto [Association of Textile Craft Teachers], Vastine Ylen 
uutiseen 10.11.2019 [Response to the News of Yle 10.11.2019]: passim. https​
:/​/ww​w​.tek​stiil​iopet​tajal​iitto​.fi​/u​utise​t​/vas​tine-​ylen-​uutis​een​-1​0​-11-​2019/​
51	 E.g. Manninen and Rissanen, Perusopetuksen tehtävänä on tarjota 
yleissivistystä, myös kädentaidoissa, passim.
52	 Lindfors, ‘Creativity, Innovation and Entrepreneurship in Education 2020 
– Some Considerations from Crafts Part’, 117; Sinikka Pöllänen and Māra 
Urdziņa-Deruma, ‘Future-Oriented Reform of Craft Education: The Cases 
of Finland and Latvia’, in Reforming Teaching and Teacher Education: Bright 
Prospects for Active Schools, ed. Eija Kimonen and Raimo Nevalainen 
(Rotterdam, Netherlands: Sense Publishers, 2017), 117–44, 117.

15
Sincerity not authenticity 
Craft’s political path out of a 
modernist trap 
Leopold Kowolik
His bitterness melted away. He felt scorn and pity for these 
people . . . He—had to remain incognito; they took his mask for 
his true face. Something inside told him that even if he were to 
read them his works, they would not know more of him than 
before. They considered anyone who happened to end up among 
them to be a person like them. What could you do . . .1
A
uthenticity is a grand word that frequently appears with powerful 
resonance in the contemporary Western consumer-centric world. 
It is a word that brings with it a morass of implications, coy suggestions 
and intended meanings, none of which is clearly articulated. This lack of 
grounded clarity or certainty is probably a significant part of the power of 
the word. Authenticity is also a word associated with craft. Again, quite what 
the concept of authenticity means in relation to making is nebulous, and 
for this reason I feel the relationship between the two should be treated as 
inherently political.
‘Handmade’ is another word, related and as similarly loaded as authenticity 
though without the same uncertainty. ‘Handmade’ telegraphs not only 

226
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
something of the manufacturing process by which the thing came into being 
but also what the thing stands against in terms of industrial processes, mass-
produced anonymity and profit-driven managing-director paycheck-rewarding 
dross. Interestingly, it is to the latter slew of implications rather than the 
actual production process that ‘handmade’ as a concept directs its most 
earnest attention. Sidewalks, after all, as an example that comes to mind, are 
handmade by skilled workers with rakes, two-by-fours and a brush. But we 
wouldn’t call a ubiquitous, anonymous, un-authored, urban, concrete walking 
surface ‘handmade’. Would we ask about its authenticity? Against what does 
‘authenticity’ stand? Is craft authentic?
In this chapter I will explore the implications of the concept of authenticity 
in relation to contemporary craft. In asking about the connection between 
‘authenticity’ and craft, I am asking about craft’s political identity deep within, 
on the peripheries of and tentatively outside contemporary capitalism. More 
than that however, I hope to uncover some of the assumptions about craft 
and in the process rediscover the potential of the allied concept of sincerity.
It is easy to dismiss the marketing function of the authenticity of craft both 
as it is used by craft itself and by the derivative appropriations of the concept 
of craft in other arenas. It is tempting, too, for me to revisit a theme I began 
developing elsewhere2 in which I pointed out how horribly close some aspects 
of populist politics – nostalgia-milking in particular – come to craft’s identity 
as the counter to industry and finance and mechanization and the city. I might 
have argued that authenticity is a philosophical construct which craft finds 
alluring in much the same way as the seduction of nostalgia. Might I have said 
that authenticity doesn’t even exist outside of a very narrow and specialized 
philosophical concept – and that ‘craft’ is the ideal notion to be repackaged 
as the phantom in the chase of a society yearning for value-myths? But 
this is something of a paper tiger as we will see. Craft’s relationship to the 
presumptions of authenticity are largely meaningless, whereas craft’s political 
potential as a function of sincerity is significant. 
I will not address the specialized notion of authenticity in relation to fakery 
or fraud. Though this relationship is important to art history and the art market 
and, of course, to making in certain commercial senses, it is less theoretically 
charged. Since the theme of this volume is craft and politics rather than history 
or credibility, the focus will not be on this narrow though intriguing application 
of the word.
In this chapter I will consider some of the contextual history of the concept 
‘authentic’ in relation to craft before then looking at craft’s engagement with 
authenticity. We will understand that craft has a political capacity to stimulate 
relationships and experiences with objects and processes that transcend the 
limited margins defined by authenticity. Good craft, escaping the confines of 
‘the authentic’, communicates what we really want to know about ourselves 

227
SINCERITY NOT AUTHENTICITY
and each other. Craft that can avoid the enticement of the conservative and 
individualistic call of authenticity can instead breathe freedom into those 
objects and processes of beauty and use. Whatever contemporary craft 
stands in opposition or counter to, it is its sincerity that makes it politically 
charged and therefore essential. 
Ruskin → Morris: authentic object, authentic life
Those of us familiar with the craft discourse, if we were set the task of 
explaining authenticity as it relates to objects, might reach in Ruskin’s direction 
and say something about honesty of purpose and functional integrity. In the 
second of his four lectures on architecture and painting delivered in Edinburgh 
in November 1853, Ruskin criticized the recently completed New Town. With 
his tongue very much in cheek, Ruskin reproached the architects whose use of 
neoclassical styles were, he felt, disingenuous and wasteful. He sardonically 
suggested that the audience consider the example of Rutland Street where 
many doctors lived: ‘you will see that a heavy and close balustrade is put all 
along the eaves of the houses. Your physicians are not, I suppose, in the habit 
of taking academic and meditative walks along the roofs of their houses; and, 
if not, this balustrade is altogether useless.’3 These neoclassical designs with 
their extraneous decorations were offensive to Ruskin not only because they 
were impractical and expensive but because they were not in keeping with 
the needs of the inhabitants and the purpose of the buildings. Ruskin was not 
against decoration but he saw far more integrity in Gothic decoration than in 
Grecian style. This criticism flows from his interest in intention and function. 
Breezy colonnades of the classical style help keep buildings in hot climates 
cool. In northern climates ‘the soul of domestic building is in the largeness 
and conspicuousness of the protection against ponderous snow and driving 
sleet’.4 This is just one example of Ruskin’s thinking about a design ethos that 
demands creative honesty and functionality with integrity and purpose. This is 
surely one possible path to an authentic object?
Let us also look to William Morris – the acolyte who really brought ‘craft’ 
into being. Situated at the birth of craft in the face of industry, Morris drew 
heavily from (while also contributing significantly to) the implications of ‘the 
authentic’, even though Morris didn’t use the language of ‘authenticity’ as we 
might expect to find it. The Industrial Revolution in Morris’s understanding 
adversely affected the authentic human experience. Morris found a great 
(and lasting) connection between authenticity of object and authenticity in a 
more philosophical sense. One of Morris’s particular concerns was that the 
blooming of capitalism had generated a new wave of middle-class values. 

228
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
On the one hand this had lowered the quality (and increased the quantity) of 
objects produced and on the other hand this growth had put all manner of the 
wrong sorts of pressure on most people both as consumers and producers. 
Morris was drawing on Marx who was drawing on Hegel (to whom we will 
return shortly). For all three, the question of the authentic life was the question 
of escaping society’s pressures on authentic human life. Here from Morris’s 
1884 speech Art and Socialism:
ridding ourselves . . . of this mountain of rubbish that would be something 
worth doing: things which everybody knows are of no use; the very 
capitalists know well that there is no genuine healthy demand for them, 
and they are compelled to foist them off on the public by stirring up a 
strange feverish desire for petty excitement, the outward token of which is 
known by the conventional name of fashion . . .
Do not think it a little matter to resist this monster of folly; to think for 
yourselves what you yourselves really desire, will not only make men and 
women of you so far, but may also set you thinking of the due desires of 
other people.5
This ‘thinking for yourself what you really desire’ had something of the ‘be 
true to yourself’ morality to it. The tone also came with a call to introspection 
to see past what you think you want (because capitalism has duped you) 
to consumer desires that are more reflective of the true you. The work of 
art itself and coming to know and understand art more generally in the face 
of the rubbish that the Industrial Revolution had thrown into society would, 
Morris felt, awaken and strengthen the people slumbering or lumbering under 
the suffocating burden of capitalism’s inauthenticity. He went on in this vein, 
searching for the authentic:
And here furthermore is at least a little sign whereby to distinguish between 
a rag of fashion and a work of Art: whereas the toys of fashion when the 
first gloss is worn off them do become obviously worthless even to the 
frivolous – a work of Art, be it ever so humble, is long lived; we never tire 
of it; as long as a scrap hangs together it is valuable and instructive to each 
new generation. All works of Art in short have the property of becoming 
venerable amidst decay: and reason good, for from the first there was a 
soul in them, the thought of man, which will be visible in them so long as 
the body exists in which they were implanted.6
The concept of the maker’s soul infused in the object is one of Morris’s 
enduring legacies to Eurocentric models of craft theory and may be one of 

229
SINCERITY NOT AUTHENTICITY
the key nodal points connecting Medieval and Christian sacred objects with 
the Morrisian view of craft’s power to embody or house a spirit. This node 
then lies at the root of contemporary claims to the venerated object, since the 
language of sacred containment has been used quite liberally in the search to 
articulate and claim access to and embodiment of ‘the authentic’. 
Morris’s beliefs in the power of art and craft to rediscover an authentic 
social, political human experience defined his oeuvre and his contribution to 
craft as a mode of object production, as a mindset and as a method of political 
activity. For Morris this search and discovery of authenticity could take place 
in the materials themselves, in the designs chosen and developed, in the 
communities of workers and consumers making the objects and in the very 
life spirit of the society as a whole. Commitment to a developed understanding 
of arts and crafts might reveal and overturn the pervasive presence of the 
inauthentic imposed, as it seemed to be, by the extra-human forces of money 
acquisition and labour power expropriation. 
Morris seems to have almost never used the words we might associate 
with authenticity – ‘authentic’ itself or ‘truth’ or ‘sincerity’ which enters our 
discussion now. Even his clear engagement with the issue is not conceptually 
formed in the manner we think of it. There is an important reason for this that 
plumbs right into the heart of modernity. The structure of the internal/external 
self that we take for granted and that plays a central role in our common 
sense of authenticity did not exist as such in the 1880s. This is the history of 
the modern subject. This bifurcated modern human is composed of the world 
of the psychological internal self (different, separated and removed) housed 
in the external, socialized self that is presented to the world. This new arena 
of human thought had been growing since the Renaissance and Descartes, 
but what happened in the nineteenth century was the shift we are still living 
through. Though in many ways this history lies at the heart of our question of 
authenticity, it is so large that we can in fact skirt around it without any great 
logical injustice. If we pick up the trail with Lionel Trilling, we see that Morris’s 
interests in ‘true human values’ were in fact merely in keeping with his time 
and that what Morris wanted for making in the face of industry had, by the 
1960s, become the dominant discourse in authenticity. What had been for 
Morris a route through simple, beautiful objects to emancipated human life 
became, by the twentieth century, a jaded bid for escape. 
Trilling: authenticity ⇄ sincerity 
Lionel Trilling was somewhat on the periphery of the philosophical and material 
culture fields opening up in the post-war period; he was centred slightly more 

230
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
on literary criticism. But in the general cultural discussion of Modernity,7 
Trilling articulated a concise read of the issue in the search for the authentic. 
Following the same trail Morris was on, Trilling, in his Sincerity and Authenticity, 
understood the Modern quest for the authentic to be connected to the older 
question of ‘being true to oneself’ – what he calls sincerity and hangs on 
Polonius’s advice to his son in Act 1 Scene 3 of Hamlet. The difference is that 
where the Shakespearian sincere self assumes a conception of the person 
as a part of the community whole that coheres naturally by definition, the 
Modern self is an individual in a society comprising atomistic individuals held 
together by external political forces. ‘At a certain point in history’, says Trilling, 
‘men became individuals.’8 And it is men in the history in general as in Trilling’s 
account specifically – that is surely not irrelevant. Certainly, before Descartes 
or Rousseau (or whatever specific point we might take) we were humans with 
the traits of personal experience and understanding. Trilling notes:
But certain things he did not have or do until he became an individual 
. . . He did not have an awareness of . . . internal space. He did not . . . 
imagine himself in more than one role, standing outside or above his own 
personality; he did not suppose that he might be an object of interest to his 
fellow man . . . It is when he becomes an individual that a man lives more 
and more in private rooms.9
In Trilling’s understanding, this shift in human self-conception resulted 
in sincerity (and the desire to be sincere) morphing into the new idea of 
authenticity. Without rehearsing Trilling’s entire argument, it is crucial to 
highlight that, like Morris, Trilling argued that Modern (urban) societal forces are 
to blame for the shift that results in a dissolving of sincerity into authenticity. 
Trilling is perhaps at his most Hegelian in explaining this mutation: 
Society requires of us that we present ourselves as being sincere, and the 
most efficacious way of satisfying this demand is to see to it that we really 
are sincere, that we actually are what we want our community to know 
we are. In short, we play the role of being ourselves, we sincerely act the 
part of the sincere person, with the result that a judgement may be passed 
upon our sincerity that it is not authentic.10 
Ultimately in Trilling’s moralizing account, contemporary authenticity is 
predicated on historical awareness – this in itself is an illustration of the 
centrality of Hegel to Trilling’s analysis. Moreover, Trilling’s suspicion of the 
bourgeois values that create the social pressure of sincerity is part of the 
Hegelian prompt for escape into disintegrated but autonomous existence 
away from the boring flattery of the social and towards the individual spirit.11 

231
SINCERITY NOT AUTHENTICITY
Whether or not we choose to view Trilling and Hegel as conservative or 
snobbish about the historic role of societal values in limiting the human spirit, 
the upshot was that Modern artists began to make work that was authentic – 
work that connected to a truth untouchable by social or political realities. This 
is where craft’s presence in the material culture story diverged from art (most 
notably sometime in the early twentieth century) and where craft adhered to 
politics when art was eschewing such material realities.
This sudden pressure of doubt upon one’s sincerity is due to the internal 
space of the Modern experience. Through the nineteenth century and through 
art in particular, the struggles for authenticity in the face of vanishing sincerity 
were borne out. In those art and culture discussions contemporary notions 
of authenticity emerged and condensed. ‘The work of art’, says Trilling of this 
new type of creating, 
is itself authentic by reason of its entire self-definition: it is understood 
to exist wholly by the laws of its own being, which include the right to 
embody painful, ignoble, or socially inacceptable subject-matters. Similarly 
the artist seeks his personal authenticity in his entire autonomousness – 
his goal is to be as self-defining as the art object he creates.12 
Authentic craft? Sincere craft!
Thus, the bid for authenticity seen in art starting perhaps with Impressionism 
was certainly apparent in Picasso and later in the Abstract Expressionists 
(to name obvious examples). Imbricated with this comprehension of the 
authentic is the concept of individualism. Born in the Renaissance, codified 
in Liberalism, it is the core of beliefs in freedom that Hegel identified, 
that Modernity celebrated and that the twentieth century took to absurd 
heights. The individual Modern genius whose access to an authentic 
version of existence is a combination of these Hegelian, Liberal notions, 
wrapped up with a healthy dose of Existentialism. Authentic art has meant 
(and continues to mean) art that has access to truths that exist behind 
the masks of material – social, political – existence. This is the Modern art 
claim to authenticity. But this is not the case for craft. What is this Modern 
authenticity to craft? What does Trilling’s viewpoint and art’s manifestation 
of the authentic mean to craft? Let us consider two examples immediately 
familiar to me, and then, in conclusion, try to distil the implications of this 
different course for craft’s engagement with the concept of authenticity, thus 
bringing together the potential of craft’s political position in contemporary 
Western society. 

232
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
To ask about the authenticity of Laura Brandon’s 2017–2020 project 
Illuminations would be meaningless. After five generations of silverware 
collecting in Canada and England (Brandon is in the sixth generation), the 
expression of middle-class social success embodied in these decorative 
arts objets no longer holds value. In a manner that might even be thought 
of as Hegelian, the sixth (seventh and eighth) generations decided they had 
no use for bourgeois statements in silver tea services and cutlery nor any 
use for such hard-to-maintain items of utility. So, after the museum-quality 
work was set aside, Brandon commissioned fifteen Canadian metalsmiths 
to convert the now scrapped silver into sculptural candlesticks. Each of these 
new works represents some part of the cultural and social work undertaken 
but largely unacknowledged by women since the ‘Fathers of Confederation’ 
established Canada in 1867. Taking quite literal lines, the fifteen new objects 
embody disciplinary themes like Creative Writing, Drawing and Painting, 
and Horticulture. Collectively the works intend to honour the undervalued 
contribution of women to a national history defined by men and celebrated in 
150th anniversary celebrations in 2017.13 
If discussion of this body of work and these objects were to be framed in 
terms of authenticity, we would end up analyzing the aesthetic understanding 
and presentation of the themes and the artists’ analyses of the curatorial 
message. This analysis, however, would be pegged against an unreachable 
comparator, some sort of absolute by which the works could be said to 
succeed (or fail). ‘Authenticity’ would be about cultural context, freedom 
of artistic expression within the parameters of the project and about the 
connection between the material and the message. 
This may all be very well. But it doesn’t really tell us very much beyond 
the objects themselves. If, however, we reverse the process Trilling described 
and we approach the work asking about its sincerity, far more interesting – 
and political – questions begin to arise: what is the role of the male voice 
in discussing historic female exclusion (two of the artists are men)? What 
does it mean to celebrate the 150th anniversary of a country founded by 
and perpetuated by colonialism? Are women as responsible as men for 
colonialism? Can we separate the gender and colonial implications of this 
collection? Of what significance is it that one of the artists – Mary Anne 
Barkhouse – is a member of the Kwakiutl First Nation? These are powerful 
questions that take the aesthetic experience far beyond the immediate art 
object into essential political realms. But it is only through an investigation of 
the works’ sincerity rather than their authenticity that we can begin to engage 
these questions. Authenticity is about the isolated work itself; sincerity is 
about the work itself in the social and historic – political – context. Unlike the 
work of the burgeoning Modern era that Trilling describes, makers in this era 
now have a relationship to that old notion of sincerity that returns meaning to 

233
SINCERITY NOT AUTHENTICITY
the double implication of Polonius’s advice: work that is true to itself (sincere) 
cannot help but be beautiful and useful. 
If that doesn’t seem proven, then let us consider Derek Jagodzinsky’s 
Rainbow Warriors line from his fashion company LUXX. Asking about the 
authenticity of this work leads to an opaque, multilayered colonial mess. 
The legend of the Rainbow Warriors – the keepers of the earth’s health – 
is probably Cree in origin, though such legends appear across many First 
Nations. Wikipedia, however, contends that the story is rather an Evangelical 
Christian subversion of an amalgam of traditional First Nations’ legends 
used for proselytizing and colonizing ends. In the 1960s and 1970s ‘Rainbow 
Warriors’ was appropriated by Greenpeace and other environmental and 
hippie movements – feel-good cultural appropriation either directly from the 
Indigenous legends or by way of the Evangelists. The authenticity of Rainbow 
Warriors is therefore a puzzling and troublesome issue in which appropriation 
may come from several different sides at the same time. Seeking an authentic 
in this maelstrom might be somewhat interesting – as a disinterested 
intellectual exercise or, more importantly, as an attempt at cultural historical 
reconstruction – but it doesn’t begin to produce positions or answers either 
about the work or (more importantly) about a living, current context. 
In the sincerity of the work we discover a powerful use of fashion (and 
craft with it) to sneak out of colonialism’s logic and make a break for a 
postcolonial statement about good craft, good clothes and, most importantly, 
a re-appropriative statement of autonomy. The mechanisms of colonialism 
were, in many places, so totalizing that connections with the essential cultural 
narrative were completely disrupted. Jagodzinsky (of the Whitefish Lake First 
Nation) draws from Rainbow Warriors, engages the legend – and in a fashion 
sense it is his for a moment – and the need for authentic, objective, academic 
confirmation dissolves. The clothing designs and their execution are sincere. 
The truth of the original legend is in its sincerity, not in a confirmable, supra-
social fact. This is what sincerity can mean and how craft facilitates this in a 
way that is profoundly political.
The politics of it all
The historic use of ‘the authentic’ as a colonizing power continues in 
nefarious and sometimes unintended ways as craft scholar Julie Hollenbach 
has shown.14 Whether as a creative resource, an appropriation reservoir or 
merely a cultural expectation, ‘authentic’ experiences, practices and objects 
are often sourced by Western middle-class makers. And so we see how the 
craft engagement with sincerity is characterized by craft’s employment of 

234
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
creativity and artistic freedom. This is where craft begins to show its great 
potential: if our discussion is limited only to an object, we are tied into a 
binding history and implication that destroys (creativity, freedom, etc.). 
If, however, we define according to a process, we open up the possibility 
for constant reinvention and we make that reinvention the standard. This 
is a core component of sincerity in creative production that is the defining 
characteristic of craft. This sort of thinking can have a profound effect on how 
we think about freedom and identity and an authentic human experience. 
Craft and its defining capacity to engage with counter-balancing forces like 
living invention and historic skill (or material and concept) gives craft unique 
insight and powerful resonance in social and political questions of cultural 
identity, non-state national sovereignty and personal freedom. Craft knows 
how to read the constantly fluctuating authenticity of the society through the 
sincerity of good works. Humans are political, according to Aristotle, because 
we communicate with each other – not only about what is dangerous, as 
animals do, but about values and concepts far beyond the current moment. 
The personal is political too, according to Carol Hanisch,15 so the values and 
concepts held and exchanged in the studios and places of craft community 
have social implications too. It is here that we find craft in the twenty-first 
century and the source of its sincerity with it.
When craft, in a misguided moment – guided either by political motivations 
related to nostalgia and conservative apprehension of history or by corporate 
appropriation – is connected to the concept of authenticity, it is towards some 
version of the existentialist’s belief in a ‘truth’ behind the material. The story 
might be told that a handmade mug or sweater or table is more authentic than 
one bought at Ikea. But this is absurd. This is a recapitulation of that Modernist 
myth, a colonizing retrograde gesture deeply connected to snobbism. Use of 
authenticity in craft should be read very warily. There are, of course, specific 
exceptions to this presumption, but they rely on a limited (bureaucratic 
even) application of the term. To refer to authentic Inuit sculpture is to say 
something about the identity of the maker and the arrival of the object on the 
market. What, though, shall we say of the authenticity of work by Kablusiak, 
an Inuvaluit artist making soapstone carvings of razors and butt plugs? This is 
why sincerity is a far more powerful, important, useful and political concept; 
this is why craft is potentially so politically powerful: because objects read 
as craft objects don’t have to tarry with worn out Modernist notions that 
end up siloing them into restrictive conversations. Sincerity doesn’t have the 
same hierarchical arrangement as authenticity has come to imply. As Paul C 
Taylor has commented about ethnographic authenticity, ‘visitors to African 
Art exhibits often still expect to find masks and carvings, and are still puzzled 
when confronted with video installations and photographs’.16 Modernity’s 
‘authenticity’ requires objects to relate to philosophical truths, absolutes in a 

235
SINCERITY NOT AUTHENTICITY
Hegelian sense; ‘sincerity’ is far more self-contained, fluid and ultimately far 
more reliable since if it’s real it can’t be faked. Moreover, sincerity allows for 
the possibility of meaningful spiritual embodiment – whatsoever that might 
mean – whereas ‘authenticity’ makes a museum artefact of the numinous 
role of materiality. 
Arthur Schnitzler’s character Eduard Saxberger feels, as the thoroughly 
Modern man that he is, that there is a real him – the poet he was in his youth 
– that the middle-class oafs who surround him can’t see and wouldn’t know 
how to access. But as Saxberger discovers, bemused, at the end of the story, 
his acolytes (apparently attuned to the authentic) haven’t read the book they 
celebrate him for. Their claims to know him – initiating his faith in their truths – 
are based on something superficial or passing – something that we might call 
insincerity. The real Saxberger, the authentic artist in the face of mediocrity, 
isn’t even conceivable.
‘Authenticity’ can be a labyrinth with no boundary – an idea that mires 
consumers in presumptions and societies in chains. But within craft there is 
a path to freedom. Quite how this works or what this is, I have not attempted 
to address here. But that it is there in craft can be read because of the works, 
not (only) in the works themselves. This is the political power of good craft: 
alluring, multi-faceted, often handmade, and empowered by meaningful 
contexts of sincerity.
Notes
1	 Arthur Schnitzler, Late Fame, trans. Alexander Starritt (New York: New York 
Review of Books, [1895] 2017), 45.
2	 See Leopold Kowolik, ‘The Right Politics: Conservative Craft in a Reactionary 
Milieu’, Craft Research 9, no. 1 (2018): 105–18; and Leopold Kowolik, ‘Craft 
as Property as Liberalism as Problem’, in The New Politics of the Handmade, 
ed. Anthea Black and Nicole Burisch (London: Bloomsbury Visual Arts, now 
published, 2020).
3	 John Ruskin, ‘Lectures on Architecture and Painting – Lecture II’, in The 
Seven Lamps of Architecture, Lectures on Architecture and Painting, The 
Study of Architecture by John Ruskin [Illustrated Cabinet Edition] (Boston: 
Dana Estes & Company Publishers, n.d.), 252.
4	 Ibid., 234.
5	 William Morris, Art and Socialism [23 January 1884]. https​:/​/ww​w​.mar​xists​
.org/​archi​ve​/mo​rris/​works​/1884​/​as​/a​s​.htm​. Morris gave this speech to the 
Leicester Secular Society at the Secular Hall, Humberstone Gate, Leicester, 
and it was subsequently circulated as a booklet by W. Reeves (Marxists​.o​rg 
Morris Chronology).
6	 Ibid.

236
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
7	 I have capitalized ‘modern’ in order to clearly delineate its use herein in 
connection to modernity and modernism. It is crucial that ‘modern’ not be 
mistaken for ‘contemporary’ by a reader.
8	 Lionel Trilling, Sincerity and Authenticity – The Charles Eliot Norton Lectures 
1969-1970 (Boston: Harvard University Press, 1972), 24.
9	 Ibid.
10	 Ibid., 10–11.
11	 See, among other places, G. W. F. Hegel, Phenomenology of Spirit, trans. A. 
V. Miller (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1977), 310 [¶511].
12	 Trilling, Sincerity and Authenticity, 99–100.
13	 Illuminations is a travelling exhibition. The artists are Beth Alber 
(Architecture), Jackie Anderson (Music), Mary Anne Barkhouse (Sculpture), 
Anne Barros (Photography), Lois Betteridge (Craft), Brigitte Clavette (Drawing 
& Painting), Charles Funnell (Dance), Chantal Gilbert (Gastronomy), Elizabeth 
Goluch (Horticulture), Kye-Yeon Son (Creative Writing), Fiona Macintyre 
(Fashion & Textile), Mary McIntyre (Film, Television & Video), Myra Tulonen 
Smith (Non-Fiction), Anne-Sophie Vallée (Theatre), Ken Vickerson (Design).
14	 Julie Hollenbach, ‘Moving Beyond a Modern Craft: Thoughts on White 
Entitlement and Cultural Appropriation in Professional Craft in Canada’, 
Studio Magazine 14, no. 1 (Spring/Summer 2019).https​:/​/ww​w​.stu​dioma​gazin​
e​.ca/​artic​les​/2​019​/m​oving​-beyo​nd​-​a-​moder​n​-cra​ft
15	 Carol Hanisch, The Personal Is Political (February 1969). http:​/​/www​.caro​lhani​
sch​.o​rg​/CH​writi​ngs​/P​IP​.ht​ml.
16	 Paul C. Taylor, Black Is Beautiful: A Philosophy of Black Aesthetics 
(Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, 2016), 142.

16
Bellwether 
Fingerprinting your woollies
Seema Goel
How do we understand something, we understand it by 
approaching it. How do we approach something, we approach it 
from any direction.1
Oily and soft, smelling of its animal origins, the wool pulls and twists into 
a string between my fingers. It is not just the beginning of the push–pull 
between maker and material, but also the connection to a human practice 
stretching millennia, to a community in front of me, and to a tactile and gentle 
entrance into one of the political conversations defining our epoch – climate 
change. 
Bellwether/belle weather/Lovely Weather 
Connecting craft and climate change began, for me, with the Lovely Weather 
project in 2010. This public art initiative asked artists to engage with the local 
community of Donegal, Ireland, in a climate change discussion. Not being 
Irish, but understanding that place was integral to this project, I sought a 
‘thing’ to which I could fasten my thinking and reached into my closet for my 
‘Donegal Cable’ sweater. As I read the label I had the first of many epiphanies. 
The object revealed a duplicitous and fictive identity as a co-opted piece of 

238
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
Irish iconography. Made in Thailand by American Eagle, it summed up a deep 
contradiction of material, making and cultural authorship. 
My own work comes out of finding places where relationships don’t make 
sense, where contradictions exist and usually go unexamined. I use materials 
with specificity, not just because of what they can do, but because of the 
information they house. I am aware that craft constituents and practice, in 
particular, offer accessible points of entry into theoretical concepts because 
of our long and deep relationships with materials and making over millennia. 
Our knowledge lives in the hand, head and heart as well as being part of our 
personal stories of handmade objects. Craft connects ‘the concrete and the 
abstract into a material symbol’.2 It is not just the final object and its use, 
rather it’s the material in concert with layers of connection that give the object 
resonance and meaning. The material and its connections let the public into 
a story to reveal and examine larger ripples of relationships and significance.
Climate change, as a discussion point, poses a host of questions, not least 
of which is ‘what is the root of the problem?’ Is it scientific, cultural, economic, 
political or moral? We know global warming as an environmental problem, but 
even there we understand little of its facts and consequences. We are rightfully 
afraid, but so too do we feel guilty, paralyzed, overwhelmed and resentful. 
I realized that to get the people of Donegal into a conversation on climate 
change I had to shift the scale of the issue from something as large as all life on 
the planet and the future of human civilization to something I could hold in my 
hand and use as a metaphor. The sweater became my approach, leading me to 
craft, contradiction and community as a framework for my research.
When my flight landed in Dublin my first observation was, ‘My God, 
there are sheep at the airport!’ They were grazing beside the taxiway. I 
soon discovered that sheep are ubiquitous in Ireland, as much a part of the 
landscape and culture as shamrocks and Guinness. Thus, it was appropriate 
that I began my research at Treen House farm with Mervyn and Joyce Norris 
where I learned more about the economics of sheep. 
A fleece from a single animal yields roughly 2.5 kg of wool. This was valued 
at €2 on the 2010 wool market, with the farmer paying €3.50 for the labour of 
shearing.3 2.5 kg of wool is enough for twenty-five pairs of homespun socks. 
The 100 gram skein normally used for this activity retails at around €10 at the 
wool shop. This means the processed value of the fleece is €250. Why are 
farmers paid less than 1 per cent of this amount, and why are they losing 
money on the wool? A farmer with only fifty head of sheep may not bother 
taking it to market since it would cost a day’s work. The logic of the ledger 
forces a recategorization of the wool from resource to waste product and 
leads farmers to believe that their wool is worthless. 
Humans domesticated sheep 11,000 years ago,4 and over hundreds of 
generations bred them for specific attributes in disposition, fleece, milk, meat 

239
BELLWETHER
and even fertility. As value has shifted to meat over their other products, 
breeds which produce twin lambs are favoured. In Ireland the Texel breed is 
becoming dominant, and while its milk and wool can be used, these factors 
are not a priority. I asked Mervyn if the wool market price was related to 
the breed. No, he told me, all the fleeces, regardless of breed, are priced 
according to weight. In this swift and standardizing stroke, the national wool 
market reduces all breeds to nothing more than wool. For most of us this 
will not register as significant, but to put the blanket (pun intended) term in 
perspective, it is akin to going to the cheese shop and saying, ‘I’d like some 
cheese’ with the expectation that all cheese is the same. There are hundreds 
if not thousands of types of cheese,5 just as there are hundreds of varieties 
of sheep, and their fleeces have particular characteristics which lend them 
to different methods of production and use. The purpose of all that breeding 
was intentional, but now the optimization has been ignored so the material 
is treated as homogeneous. Farmers and consumers lose value because the 
industry has decided variety is not relevant.
My wanderings in Carndonagh and Buncrana, combined with the wool 
and knitting questions I kept asking the locals, eventually led me to the 
Carndonagh Irish Countrywomen’s Association (ICA). Here was a bastion of 
knitting women who gathered weekly to make things, share company and 
find community. Attending their meetings, I found that none used local or 
even Irish wool. The majority of the women declared wool too expensive 
or fussy for their intentions and instead knit with acrylic. While my eyes 
grew round I did manage to keep my mouth shut. Acrylic is essentially 
plastic. It is made from a combination of petroleum and natural gas and 
it does not biodegrade. The few knitters who preferred wool drove over 
the border to Derry and bought New Zealand merino for special projects. 
I need to repeat at this point that there are sheep everywhere in Ireland. 
There are, in fact, almost as many sheep as there are people.6 A sheep was 
probably grazing less than 200 metres from the ICA at that very moment! 
Despite the ubiquitous abundance of raw material, the lack of availability 
as a processed product made it invisible to the women. Under capitalism’s 
spell, they were blind to what was around them and could not identify their 
own myopia as an ill. 
So far I had a Collection of Contradictions:
Identity – my Donegal sweater that was not from Donegal
Value – farmers pay more to have the sheep shorn than they receive at 
the market
Homogeneity – the wool market pays the same price for all wool
Invisibility – even though wool surrounds them, the Irish do not use the 
local material.

240
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
Realizing that wool tangled a huge diversity of climate change issues within its 
soft strands, I submitted my proposal to Lovely Weather and was selected to 
create the Carbon Footprint Project Studio in Carndonagh, Inishowen, a place 
to rediscover local wool through making.
Knowledge is only a rumour until 
it lives in the muscle7
I signed up for a one-day spinning course in County Dublin with Mary O’Rourke. 
In the studio she emptied a bag of raw Jacob and Cheviot fleeces onto the floor, 
passed each person a drop spindle made from a roughly cut cross-section of 
a tree branch and a notched stick, and said, ‘Now, all you need to learn how 
to spin is a stick and a potato.’ Within minutes we were transforming the wool 
into yarn. A pull and a twist, the wool forgiving and responsive, the group eased 
into the action finding comfort in genetic memory. That afternoon we moved 
onto spinning wheels, and by the end of the day we each had our first skeins. 
Mary’s approach was without fuss or demands. She taught us to spin 
with the greasy, uncarded and animal-smelling wool, saying, ‘Why add extra 
steps if you don’t need them?’ Everything was acceptable, and every process 
needed the body to figure it out. I know now the great gift of her mentorship. 
She imparted a sense of openness and experimentation where the idea of 
‘correct’ didn’t exist. Showing us her own way, she let us know that we should 
and could find ours too, and she would help if we became stuck. She knew 
that we had to learn with our hands and that this would teach us more than 
anything she could say. She taught us also about the many breeds of sheep 
and variations in fleece, the vocabulary of wool from staple length to lock, 
the differences between breeds best for spinning or felting or stuffing pillows 
or layering quilts. A fleece was spread on the floor and she pointed out the 
areas where it grew more coarsely, producing fibres that would make rope 
or carpet, and other parts where it was soft and suited to baby clothes. This 
was all from the same fleece. Listening to her made me aware of how distant 
we’ve become from the origins of this process and how little I knew.
Three bags full
I returned to Carndonagh and began a series of workshops in cafés, eldercare 
centres, elementary schools and the pub. Word spread that I was working 
with local wool, and it was given to me in huge bags labelled by breed. I took 

241
BELLWETHER
out my ‘stick and potato’ and began spinning, and before I knew it there was 
a crowd of people wanting to know more and willing to learn. 
Bellwether, an old middle English word, describes the flock’s lead sheep 
wearing a bell, but it is also used to reference an idea that is at the front. 
Wool truly was our bellwether material drawing us forward and leading the 
conversation. In the café, with my six-week-old child, I sat with other moms 
and their babies, and we spun and talked about the comfort of the company in 
making, of knowing how to make things and where they came from, of taking 
time and using millennia-old slow-tech methods. In the eldercare centre, 
octogenarians reminisced about their grandmothers spinning and warbled out 
The Spinning Wheel song.8 They learned to spin in minutes, and immediately 
knit up the yarn to admire its softness and strength. I mentioned the farm it 
came from and they talked of sheep and how grand to be using wool from up 
the road. In the pub I just spun and let people have go at it, and there wasn’t 
much talk, but there was curiosity about this Canadian woman who was so in 
love with Irish wool that she’d come all the way to Donegal to teach people to 
spin (Figure 16.1).
By this time I was quite ‘brainy’ about the wool. Having spent over a 
year thinking about it I had armed myself with all the relationships and 
connections that fuel every good artist’s statement. I went into the schools 
FIGURE 16.1  Kathleen and Laoise 
using a wooden drop-spindle at 
Spin-in art-action event. Photo: 
Paul McGuckin. Reproduced with 
permission.

242
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
and proselytized like a new convert. Connecting art and science, I praised 
wool as a portrait of the landscape made of the air, soil and water of Donegal. 
I talked about rethinking materials and technology and how wool was used in 
oil spill clean-up, as a fire retardant and as insulation. I mentioned its qualities 
to absorb moisture but retain warmth in a piece of clothing, especially if some 
of the oils are left in the yarn, making it ideal for Ireland’s damp climate. We 
looked at the gross domestic product (GDP) graph and compared it with the 
greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) graph and examined the mathematics that 
proved this connection. Then we asked each other, could we make things 
without increasing the GHG? (Figure 16.2) (Figure 16.3) (Figure 16.4)
I even suggested that we could describe wool as a form of carbon capture 
by looking at its structure and recognizing that it is 44 per cent carbon by 
mass. From this height of exuberant discovery, I asked the children if they had 
ever used wool. Raising his hand, a ten-year-old responded, ‘Yeah, we throw it 
in the bog and use it for traction when we’re cutting the peat.’ Brought down 
to earth very quickly, I taught them to spin. Every single one of those kids had 
sheep in their family history, and this was the first time they had ever used 
wool other than as a waste product.
I set up the Carbon Footprint Project Studio in an empty store, hired 
Ruth McCartney, a local fibre fiend, as my studio assistant, and borrowed a 
spinning wheel from Johnny Shiels, the last spinning wheel maker in Ireland 
who happened to live in the same town. People came in, curious about this 
new entity in their village. There was nothing for sale, just raw wool and free 
workshops. We helped people through the steps of spinning. Sometimes they 
left slightly bemused with oily hands and the smell of sheep, or with a drop 
spindle and a hank of wool tucked into their bag. And then it blossomed. People 
came and offered to teach what they knew. The group taught each other, Ruth 
FIGURE 16.2  Irish Gross 
Domestic Product in 
US$ billions. Source: 
http://www​.worldbank​.org

243
BELLWETHER
made up a schedule so the space was always busy and I became tangential. 
We learned to felt, create dye from onion skins, and spin. A drum carder arrived 
from England and we added it to the supplies. A sock-knitting class was held, 
the high-school students came in after school, and the Studio became a place 
to hang out where the only stipulation was to do something with wool. 
Making it visible
On the wall we posted our motto: Inishowen wool is made of Inishowen. 
This was our starting point. The graphs of the GDP9 and GHG were displayed 
FIGURE 16.3  Irish CO2 
production in parts per 
million. Source: https​:/​/ou​
rworl​dinda​ta​.or​g​/co2​/coun​
try​/i​relan​d​?​cou​ntry=​~IRL
FIGURE 16.4  
Correlation between 
Irish CO2 and GDP. 
Analysis by Dr. Stephen 
J Kirkland. Reproduced 
with permission.

244
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
to remind us of the instigating ambition – how to diminish the correlation 
between those graphs? Gradually discussions emerged through the group: 
the wool led us. By teasing out the questions we began to expose the 
problems endemic to textiles: where was this made; by whom, with what; 
were they paid; will it degrade; what were the effluents and wastes attached 
to it; how and how far did it travel; whose idea was this; where does the 
money go; what happens at the end of its life; and why is fleece so cheap but 
yarn so expensive? We found a web of interconnected relationships that all 
came down to rethinking the idea of cost. The failure of our system and the 
resulting problem of climate change comes down to our refusal to recognize 
an economic system which fails to distinguish the difference between cost 
and cost. That is, what we pay monetarily to purchase something versus the 
social and ecological consequences of that purchase.
A line into the future long enough to walk on10 
Full cycle thinking, referred to as the triple bottom line (TBL), attempts to 
include people, planet and profit as part of the economic evaluation of business. 
Even though there is growing awareness of the TBL it is rarely invoked as a 
component of the practical marketplace, and there is no regulation requiring 
its implementation. This inclusive economic accounting also attempts to 
monetize natural ecosystems.11 While this may help to demonstrate Mother 
Nature’s value were she paid in dollars and cents, it does not equate to being 
able to replace those natural systems with human-made ones. For example, 
as the ocean acidifies we cannot create a substitute for coral reefs in the 
ocean’s food web no matter how much money is available. The idea of the 
triple bottom line is long overdue but it lacks political teeth and is naive in its 
quantifications of natural ecosystems.
Citing the 1987 Brundtland Report as a primary resource, proponents of the 
TBL define sustainability as ‘the premise that development should occur in 
ways that meet the needs of current generations while maintaining conditions 
and opportunities for future generations to do the same’.12 This early definition 
of the term sustainability focuses on the question, ‘how much more should 
we protect?’ rather that its more current interpretation ‘how much more can 
we take?’ With the protection option in mind a further question arises: how 
does craft help us connect with sustainability ambitions and make a line into 
the future long enough to walk on? 
A list of the points of polarization were exposed in the wool studio: 
handmade 	
manufactured
heterogeneity 	
homogeneity

245
BELLWETHER
known maker 	
anonymous maker
human scale 	
industrial scale
personal production 	
mass production
local production 	
distant production
slow/retro technology 	
fast/high technology
slow fashion 	
fast fashion
natural (biodegradable) materials	
synthetic (petro-chemical-based) 
materials
personal and fair-wage labour 	
sweatshop low-wage labour
valued materials 	
worthless materials
micro-economies 	
globalization
We learned that everything in the left-hand column related back to our 
autonomy and our ability to act. When we make things, we gain skills and 
find agency, build identity on a personal and cultural level with unique objects, 
respond to local problems directly and devise local solutions, work on a small 
scale and take time for the making. Ultimately, we value where things come 
from and the labour involved in their production, and because we know the 
makers, we care about them and their products which form part of our story. 
We revitalize local economies, and these expand to bring more activity to 
villages. By knowing where things come from we are more likely to endeavour 
to protect the land/labour/resources that are impacted in production. 
The phenomena in the right-hand column started with colonization and 
became normalized in the Industrial Revolution which both centralized 
production and shifted attention away from the individual. That production 
model was further entrenched through globalization and trade structures, 
now making it impossible to trace the origins of clothes back to their human 
makers. Instead we just know brands with origins in Asia or Eastern Europe. 
A piece of fabric can be made with cotton grown in the United States, spun 
and woven in China, dyed in India, then cut and sewn in Bangladesh, to finally 
return to an American retail shelf. What if it is synthetic? Then we need to 
take account that it is made of fossil fuel products, will never degrade and 
ultimately end up in landfill. 
We don’t often think of our purchasing power as part of the climate change 
debate, or consider that what we buy and where it comes from changes 
the amount of carbon released into the atmosphere. It is true that mass 
production in far-off countries makes things cheaper, yet this manufacturing 
model cheapens everything it touches – materials, humans, places, aesthetics. 

246
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
Purchasing is a political choice, requiring insight into more than what appears 
in fashion magazines and on style blogs.
To spin a revolution
We held a spin-in to reactivate empty shopfronts with our simple industry. The 
village turned up – children, parents, politicians and carpenters stood in the 
streets spinning wool. We called this our Gandhian ploy, invoking his spirit as a 
forefather of the craft-activist movement. We understood at that moment the 
power of making as defiance of global market forces through the simple act 
of spinning.13 Like Gandhi, our ambition was not just to collapse the distance 
between producer and consumer, but to value the material, the land and 
farmers that produced it, our abilities to collectively act, our community, and, 
most of all, to identify an approach to an impossible challenge. 
At the end of the Carbon Footprint Project (CFP) the group had an exhibition 
in Letterkenny. We made garments translating climate data into tactile, human-
scale objects: socks with patterns revealing rain fall increases, and hurricane 
hats describing the air currents above Ireland. We celebrated the ten weeks of 
the studio and the many friendships and discoveries made. Then I packed up 
my spinning wheels and left for Dublin. Six months later I received an email 
announcing the opening of the Yarnspinners of Inishowen Spinning Collective. 
The group persisted for seven years bringing focus to the value and use of 
local wool. When I returned to Canada I learned that all the issues facing the 
Irish farmers are part of a global dilemma. Everywhere, wool is worth so little 
that it is often discarded, it is priced by weight and local product is often 
difficult to find. I continue to work with this material and teach people to spin 
to bring these aspects to light and draw attention to craft’s potential to reveal 
larger world problems. 
I’ve often wondered about the magic of the Carbon Footprint Project 
and why it resonated so much and continues to hold sway as an action and 
narrative. In my conversation with Judith Leemann,14 a friend and fellow fibre 
artist, she spoke of the need to train ourselves to face impossible tasks, that 
we need to practise and, perhaps, this initiative was part of that training. It 
allowed those involved to think of the impossible through a material – wool – 
and to reactivate and learn its potential. 
In addition to this idea, I believe the CFP’s real success lies in its life as 
craft rather than art. Prior to this project I doubted the craft–art divide. It was 
always based in materials: wood, glass, clay, fibre, metal. Since my practice 
is so connected to material information, I never understood this as a rationale 
for the division and denied craft’s possibilities. The CFP clarified the difference 

247
BELLWETHER
through the simple presence of authorship, or rather the lack of it. Craft is 
egalitarian, democratic, welcoming to all voices. The authorship of this work, 
as belonging to me, quickly disappeared during the first weeks. Instead, the 
participants owned and shaped the project, so much so that after I left, they 
knew they didn’t need my involvement or permission to keep the project 
running. Craft doesn’t have authorship. Dwelling in the hand and the process, 
craft sits with apprenticeship, community, collectivity, shared tasks. While it 
is almost always something created in response to need and function – that 
is usually a technology responding to a problem, like how do I collect water, 
keep warm, adorn myself, eat? – craft also has an openness to knowing there 
are many ways to solve problems and the approach is to remain flexible and 
adaptable. When I spin, I don’t worry about being derivative or assuming 
someone else’s voice, I just spin.
Craft confronts climate change only when it has an intention to do so. While 
the history of craft aligns strongly with sustainability, it is important to recognize 
that this is not a given. Historically this was an accident of circumstance. 
Materials were local and biodegradable because that was the only option. 
Craft didn’t enslave distant labour because that economic structure was alien. 
Today though, craft can assume any material and any position of power. It 
can be, and often is, part of globalization without that even being considered. 
Polyester fabric from China, sewn into unicorns and sold on Etsy to be shipped 
across the globe, do not a sustainability paradigm make. In order to place 
craft in the sustainability realm it needs to extend beyond the rescaling of 
production to include understanding of how and where materials are made 
and what they are made of. Craft needs to anchor itself with intention to an 
awareness of its carbon finger-and-foot-print and understand its own place in 
the conversation. 
Fingerprint or footprint
The Inishowen group’s most insistent revelation was the importance of 
choosing where materials come from and what they are made of. We stressed 
the local, but we struggled to understand how to talk about the meaning of 
a larger picture. A carbon footprint is a general accounting of the trail of GHG 
released through the manufacture and transportation of an item or the activity 
of a person or entity.15 This exclusive focus on GHG numbers flattens the issue 
with no consideration of place and people. For example, mass production uses 
an economy of scale to produce efficiencies, and these may actually reduce 
the GHGs attached. But in addition to possibly being part of sweatshop labour, 
mass production creates overproduction and immense waste by making items 

248
CRAFT IS POLITICAL 
disposable through abundance as well as using cheaper materials to increase 
profit margins. These in turn create objects that are less robust. Decentralizing 
production and making things locally costs more, but allows another way of 
thinking about carbon as having a fingerprint. A carbon fingerprint includes 
carbon identity and demands a local emphasis. It asks us to personally connect 
with and identify the elements of production, and touch those elements in our 
own communities. In Inishowen, I reminded the school children that wool 
is actually made of the soil, water and air of Inishowen, and this awareness 
changed their relationship to the material. 
At the beginning of this essay I noted that as a public, we understand little 
about the implications of climate change. Here are three things – more might 
be overwhelming – to bear in mind as you consider the imperative for action 
to address the conditions of the Anthropocene: 1. For every 1ºC increase in 
temperature, the air holds 7 per cent more water. Where will this come from 
and where will it go?; 2. The thermohaline cycle drives the ocean currents. It is 
what keeps Ireland and England temperate rather than frigid. This is expected 
to collapse when the glaciers melt due to the change in relative salinity driving 
the ocean’s pump16; and 3. The ocean garbage patch, consisting of plastic, is 
currently the size of Texas and will persist for hundreds of years if not removed. 
Humanity needs to find do-able actions to address what we have wrought. 
Basic craft practice has the power to bind us together and spur action by priming 
us, through the simplicity our hands, to rise to what seems an impossible 
challenge. As Captain Picard says, ‘Things are only impossible until they are 
not.’17 Craft says, begin with your hands, pull the wool apart, twist, pull again.
Notes
1	 Matthew Goulish, 39 Microlectures: In Proximity of Performance (London: 
Routledge, 2000).
2	 Jack Zeljko Bratich and Heidi M. Brush, ‘Fabricating Activism: Craft-Work, 
Popular Culture, Gender’, Utopian Studies 22, no. 2 (2011): 233–60, 246.
3	 While the numbers have shifted slightly over the last ten years the 
discrepancy persists at the time of this writing. https​:/​/ww​w​.the​journ​al​.ie​/
pric​e​-of-​wool-​indus​try​-4​34​014​1​-Nov​2018/​
4	 J. R. S. Meadows, ‘Sheep: Domestication’, in Encyclopedia of Global 
Archaeology, ed. C. Smith (New York: Springer, 2014). https​:/​/li​nk​.sp​ringe​r​
.com​/refe​rence​worke​ntry/​10​.10​07​%2F​978​-1​-4​419​-0465​-2​_22​15
5	 For a short list see Monty Python’s Flying Circus, ‘The Cheese Shop’, 
Episode 33.
6	 2018 census reports 3.73 million sheep in Ireland and 4.83 people. https​:/​/
ww​w​.agr​iland​.ie​/f​armin​g​-new​s​/map​-how-​many-​sheep​-are-​ther​e​-in​-i​relan​d/; 
https​:/​/ww​w​.wor​ldome​ters.​info/​world​-popu​latio​n​/ire​land-​popul​ation​/

249
BELLWETHER
7	 Papua New Guinea proverb.
8	 John Francis Waller. Irish ballad from the mid-1800s. https​:/​/ww​w​.liv​eabou​t​
.com​/the-​spinn​ing​-w​he​el-​35529​51
9	 From 1967 to 2006, the correlation value for the two data sets (GDP 
and CO2) is r = 0.9024. This means there is a strong positive correlation 
between the GDP and CO2 data sets – that is as one quantity increases, so 
does the other. To put the strength of this correlation into perspective, the 
largest possible correlation value for r is 1. The statistical significance of the 
correlation was also tested. Here we set up the null hypothesis (that r = 0, 
and the two data sets are uncorrelated) and the alternative hypothesis (that 
r is not 0, and they are correlated). For a 1% level of significance, the critical 
value for r is about 0.405. Since our value r = 0.9024 is much larger than 
0.405, we reject the null hypothesis, accept the alternative hypothesis, and 
conclude that the value of r is statistically significant to within a 1% level of 
significance. What this means is that there is less than a 1% probability that 
the correlation we found was due to chance. Consequently, we conclude 
that the CO2 and GDP data sets are indeed strongly positively correlated. 
Analysis supplied to author by Dr Stephen J. Kirkland.
10	 Sabina Kim, Fort Sanity Chapbook, 1987.
11	 Janet Hammer and Gary Pivo, ‘The Triple Bottom Line and Sustainable 
Economic Development Theory and Practice’, Economic Development 
Quarterly 31, no. 1 (February 2017): 25–36.
12	 Ibid.
13	 Gandhi’s awareness of textiles as a galvanizing political force centred around 
the spinning wheel’s egalitarian quality and the revitalizing opportunity 
in decentralizing production by bringing it back to the people. He also 
understood craft, all craft, as an area of ingenuity, problem solving, identity, 
and vitality. Armed with a spinning wheel, he defied the British mills and led 
a non-violent revolution which resulted in the emancipation of India from 
British rule in 1947. Susan Bean, ‘Gandhi and Khadi, the Fabric of Indian 
Independence’, in The Textile Reader, ed. Jessica Hemmings (London: Berg, 
2012), 234–46. https​:/​/ww​w​.mkg​andhi​.org/​momga​ndhi/​ch​ap8​6​.htm​
14	 Judith Leemann is an Associate Professor of Fine Arts 3D/Fibers at the 
Massachusetts College of Art and Design. She gave the Keynote address 
at the Crafting Sustainability Conference at the Ontario College of Art and 
Design, Toronto, in 2015. During our airport delay we became friends and 
have continued the climate/craft conversation. I spoke with her about the 
impossible in January of 2020.
15	 https​:/​/ww​w​.bri​tanni​ca​.co​m​/sci​ence/​carbo​n​-foo​tprin​t
16	 Jianjun Yin et al., ‘Is a Shutdown of the Thermohaline Circulation 
Irreversible?’ Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres 111, no. D12 
(June 2006). https​:/​/ag​upubs​.onli​nelib​rary.​wiley​.com/​doi​/f​ull​/1​0​.102​9​/200​
5JD00​6562
17	 Star Trek: The Next Generation, ‘When the Bough Breaks’. Season 1, Episode 
17, 15 February 1988.

Epilogue
D Wood
A
s 2020 progressed, the statistics relating to the cases and deaths due to 
COVID-19 reached into the millions. The most vulnerable populations – 
those living in crowded, densely populated areas; the impoverished; people 
with compromised health and domestic environments; families that have 
inadequate access to medical care – are more likely to succumb to this 
and future viruses. Craftspeople in developing countries are some of the 
vulnerable, and after reading the essays in Craft is Political one can’t help but 
wonder about the well-being of Alanna Cant’s Oaxacan woodcarvers, Geoffrey 
Gowlland’s Indigenous Taiwanese, Anne-Marie Willis’s Egyptian potters, 
Çiğdem Kaya’s Turkish embroiderers or Nathalia Santos Ocasio’s arpilleristas.
On 15 May, The Guardian1 reported a potential humanitarian disaster as the 
coronavirus reached the Rohingya refugee camp in Cox’s Bazar, Bangladesh. 
Not only was I concerned about the women embroiderers who were the 
focus of David Palazón and his colleagues in their essay, but I was worried 
about the three researchers who are based in Cox’s Bazar. I sent an email 
to David and he replied, ‘The first case appeared this week. All UN agencies 
and Humanitarian sector are working around the clock to minimise the 
impact through awareness campaigns and building new isolation adequate 
spaces. We will go through together.’ In addition, David reported on the craft 
described in these pages. He said he was ‘full on with the project, despite the 
circumstances and to keep providing an income to the embroidery women, 
we have arranged home assignments so they can work from their homes’. 
It is heartening to know that the craft intervention by the Rohingya Cultural 
Memory Centre has resulted in the women producing 300 items, changing 
their economic and political world view. David enclosed photos of Kurshida, a 
twenty-year-old wife and mother, who is making face masks to distribute to 
relatives, embroidery colleagues and their families. She is quoted as saying: 
‘Masks are important because they protect from dust, coronavirus and disease. 
I feel privileged to contribute something in these difficult circumstances. 
Maybe I can help protect many lives’2 (Figure E.1).

251
EPILOGUE
Kurshida and her masks exemplify craft’s sustain-ability, its propriety 
as an agent of change and its inherent care. I hope that other craft 
communities, enduring compromised and life-changing situations as a result 
of the coronavirus, are capable of summoning up the same resilience. These 
photographs of Kurshida, modelling her masks, are the image of hope with 
which I end Craft is Political.
Notes
1	 Rebecca Ratcliffe and Redwan Ahmed, ‘Fears Rohingya Refugees Face 
Disaster After Covid-19 Reaches Cox's Bazar,’ The Guardian, 15 May 2020. 
https​:/​/ww​w​.the​guard​ian​.c​om​/wo​rld​/2​020​/m​ay​/15​/fear​s​-roh​ingya​-refu​gees-​
face-​disas​ter​-a​fter-​covid​-19​-r​eache​s​-cox​s​-baz​ar
2	 IOM, Rohingya Cultural Memory Centre, ‘The Happy Tailor’, May 2020.
FIGURE E.1  Kurshida. Cox’s Bazar, Bangladesh, May 2020. 

252	

Author biographies
Fernando A. Álvarez Romero is an Associate Professor at Jorge Tadeo 
Lozano University in the Product Design School. He has a doctorate in Design 
and Creation, University of Caldas. His research interests focus on archeo-
design, technology, sustainment and design of/by/for the South theory. He has 
published on design for social innovation. His most recent paper (co-author) is 
Case Study of a Participatory Process based on Industrial Design with Female 
Inmates in the San Diego Jail, Cartagena de Indias (2018). 
Lisa Binkley is an Assistant Professor in the Department of History at Dalhousie 
University in Halifax, Canada. She is an Anishinaabe (Algonquin) settler scholar 
specializing in textiles and needlework by Indigenous and settler women during 
the long nineteenth century. She is the co-editor of Stitching the Self: Identity 
and the Needlearts (Bloomsbury 2020). Forthcoming publications include 
Making Canada: Women’s Identity through Quilts, 1800-1900 (UBC Press); 
chapters in Craft and Heritage: Intersections in Critical Studies and Practice 
(Bloomsbury, 2021); and Locations/Dislocations: Transnational Perspectives 
on Feminism and Art, 1960-1985 (Routledge, 2021). Her current research 
focuses on Mi'kmaw needle artist Christianne Paul Morris and decolonizing 
the fur trade through textiles and needlework. 
Alanna Cant (PhD) is Lecturer in Social Anthropology at the University of 
Reading, United Kingdom. She is a specialist in Latin American anthropology, 
with an emphasis on the state of Oaxaca, Mexico. Her work considers how 
different ideas of culture, history and aesthetics impact on people’s everyday 
lives, as seen through the lenses of ethnic arts and crafts, tourism, heritage 
and religion. Her current research investigates the restoration of a sixteenth 
century monastery in Oaxaca, and her book, The Value of Aesthetics: Oaxacan 
Woodcarvers in Global Economies of Culture was published in 2019 by the 
University of Texas Press.
Seema Goel is an artist, writer, curator and STEAM educator. Her education 
includes a B.Sc. from McGill University, an Associate Arts diploma from 
the Ontario College of Art and Design and an MFA in sculpture from the 
Rhode Island School of Design. She is currently completing an M.Sc. in 
Interdisciplinary Studies connecting environmental engineering and aesthetics 
with specific attention sustainability projects. Goel’s art practice focuses on 

254
AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES
the manipulation of human-animal and human-place relationships. She draws 
on her dual background in the arts and sciences to create pieces that point out 
the contradictions and incongruencies in our actions. 
Geoffrey Gowlland is Honorary Research Fellow at the Museum of Cultural 
History, University of Oslo. He has research interests in material culture and 
heritage and their relation to the politics of indigeneity. He has conducted 
fieldwork with the Paiwan people since 2012. Previously, his research 
addressed craft ceramics, heritage and apprenticeship in China and Taiwan. 
Çiğdem Kaya is Associate Professor at Istanbul Technical University (ITU), 
Department of Industrial Design, where she teaches at the undergraduate 
level and supervises graduate and PhD research. Her teaching practice in 
applied design and methodological inquiry in design research is informed and 
enriched by her art training and practice. She studied art at San Francisco Art 
Institute and design research at Sheffield Hallam University. She was a senior 
researcher at the H2020 Marie Skłodowska-Curie Project ‘trans-making’ 
funded by the European Union. She is a Fulbright alumna. In 2020, she was 
awarded the Middle Eastern Technical University, Prof. Dr. Mustafa N. Parlar 
Education and Research Foundation Research Encouragement Award.
Anna Kouhia, PhD, is a researcher, craft practitioner and academic, who 
works as a university lecturer in the Craft Teacher Education programme at the 
University of Helsinki, teaching across courses on yarn crafts, craft pedagogy 
and crafting as material culture. Her current research initiatives are driven by an 
interest in lived experiences at the intersection of making and materiality. Her 
research focuses on autoethnography, textiles and dress, new materialism, 
community heritage, digital materiality and the meanings of hobby crafts, 
especially emerging in social media and popular culture. 
Leopold Kowolik is an instructor in the Craft and Design programme at 
Sheridan College in Ontario. He has degrees in history and art history from the 
University of Chicago and the University of Edinburgh and is currently pursuing 
a PhD at York University in Toronto in Social and Political Thought. Kowolik was 
Editor in Chief of Studio Magazine, dedicated to Canadian craft and design, 
from 2011 to 2019. He has written about the theoretical and political cross-
contextualization of craft and material culture and worked in public and private 
galleries in the United States, United Kingdom and Canada. 
Lurdes Macedo has a PhD in Communication Sciences with specialization 
in Intercultural Communication and Communication for Development (C4D). 
She is Professor of Communications at Lusófona University in Porto, Portugal. 
Macedo is also a Cultural Studies researcher at Communication and Society 

255
AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES
Research Centre of Minho University (Portugal) where she works on social 
and cultural memory research. Her current project is ‘Memories, cultures 
and identities: how the past weighs on the present-day intercultural relations 
in Mozambique and Portugal’. She is a consultant for the International 
Organization for Migration (IOM) team working to establish the Rohingya 
Cultural Memory Centre.
Shahirah Majumdar is a writer, journalist and researcher. Based in Cox's 
Bazar, Bangladesh, she has reported on and worked with Rohingya refugees 
extensively since 2017. She is a member of the IOM team working to establish 
the Rohingya Cultural Memory Centre, and Associate Professor of writing at 
BRAC University in Dhaka, Bangladesh.
Verity Marques is a writer, editor, translator and communications consultant 
currently based in Porto, Portugal. She specializes in the social and 
environmental sciences and has worked with organizations in Southern Africa 
to produce publications on such issues as human and land rights, development, 
environmental protection, culture, identity and citizenship. 
Fiona P. McDonald is an Assistant Professor of Visual Anthropology at the 
University of British Columbia, Okanagan, where she is the Director of the 
Collaborative + Experimental Ethnography Lab. Her current research focuses 
on water rights, cold climate housing, sensory ethnography and open 
access digital publishing. She is a founding member of the Ethnographic 
Terminalia Collective, which curated exhibitions at the intersections of art and 
anthropology from 2009–2019. Her ongoing research looks at historical and 
contemporary uses of woollen blankets when transformed by contemporary 
artists, craft makers and Indigenous communities in North America and 
Aotearoa New Zealand.
Heidi McKenzie is a Toronto-based ceramic artist. She completed a Diploma 
in Crafts and Design at Sheridan College, Canada and an MFA in Curatorial 
Practice and Art Criticism at the Ontario College of Art and Design University. 
She is the recipient of Craft Ontario Awards, Best in Show Ontario Artists 
Association Biennial Award, and the 2020 NCECA Helene Zucker Seeman 
Curatorial Research and Critical Writing Fellowship for Women. Work from a 
2019 solo exhibition was acquired by Global Affairs Canada. McKenzie’s work 
engages issues of race, identity and belonging. She is an active arts journalist 
and ceramic arts reviewer.
David Palazón is a designer, visual artist, curator, researcher, producer and 
award-winning documentary filmmaker and photographer. He produces 
projects internationally in which people and art blend together in creative 

256
AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES
ways. Driven by a curiosity for exploration combined with a unique sense of 
humour, his work is a constant enquiry about the human condition. Based in 
Cox’s Bazar, Bangladesh, Palazón is the Curator leading the IOM team working 
to establish the Rohingya Cultural Memory Centre.
Nathalia Santos Ocasio is a PhD candidate in the Department of Geography 
and Planning at Queen’s University, Canada. She has a Master’s degree 
in Comparative Literature from the Université de Montréal. Her research 
concerns the afterlives of Chilean arpilleras and, more broadly, the role of art 
practices in the social reproduction and political resistance of marginalized 
urban communities.
Elizabeth Shaw is Program Director of the Bachelor of Fine Art and Convenor 
of Jewellery and Small Objects at Queensland College of Art, Griffith 
University, Australia. Shaw’s academic research focuses on ethical practice 
and the social and cultural values and meanings associated with objects; she 
is an international member of the advisory board for Ethical Metalsmiths. Her 
studio practice is informed by traditions of silversmithing and sculpture. Shaw 
exhibits regularly and is interested in rethinking the role of the maker within 
society, and reconsidering working methodologies and materials to address 
societal and environmental needs. 
Yasuko Suga, PhD (Royal College of Art) and Fellow of the Royal Society of 
Arts, is a design historian and was a founding member of the Design History 
Workshop Japan. She is Professor at Tsuda University, Japan. She has published 
books and articles in a variety of academic journals on different aspects of 
design history. Her research interests cover nineteenth and twentieth century 
British and Japanese design and culture, Japonisme, Modernism, the cultural 
history of plants at home, transnational design, design in the diaspora and the 
prison industry. The Way of Tea in the Ura-Senke style is one of her hobbies. 
Anne-Marie Willis researches and writes about design and visual culture. She 
has taught at universities in Australia, Hong Kong and Egypt, including four 
years as Professor of Design Theory at the German University in Cairo. She 
is the editor and author of five books, most recently the Design Philosophy 
Reader (Bloomsbury, 2019). She is currently exploring the relation between 
design and fiction via curatorial practice, through workshops with The Studio 
at the Edge of the World, Launceston, and postgraduate study in the School 
of English, University of Tasmania.
D Wood earned a Diploma in Crafts and Design in furniture at Sheridan 
College, Canada, and an MFA in Furniture Design at the Rhode Island School 
of Design. Her PhD from the University of Otago, New Zealand, addressed 

257
AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES
the history and presence of studio furniture in New Zealand in the context 
of the contemporary craft movement. She taught design at undergraduate 
and graduate levels in the United States, New Zealand and Canada. Her 
craft-focused writing has appeared in American Woodturner, Capital & 
Class, Ceramics Monthly, Glass Quarterly, Journal of New Zealand Studies, 
Metalsmith and Surface Design Journal. 
