Love to Hate

America’s Obsession with 
Hatred and Violence
Jody M. Roy
columbia university press new york

Columbia University Press
Publishers Since 1893
New York      Chichester, West Sussex
Copyright © 2002 Columbia University Press
All rights reserved
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Roy, Jody M.
Love to hate : America’s obsession with hatred and violence / 
Jody M. Roy.
p. cm.
title: America’s obsession with hatred and violence.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
isbn 0–231–12568–2 (cloth : alk. paper)
isbn 0–231–12569–0 (paper : alk. paper)
1. Violence—United States.
2. Hate—United States.
3. Prejudices—United States.
4. United States—Social conditions.
I. Title: America’s obsession with hatred and violence. II. Title.
HN90. V5 R69
2002
303.6'0973—dc21
2002018894
Casebound editions of Columbia University Press books 
are printed on permanent and durable acid-free paper.
Printed in the United States of America
Designed by Audrey Smith
c 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
p 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

For John R. Barﬁeld Jr. (1963–1990)


Foreword
ix
Acknowledgments
xiii
Introduction
xv
Part 1. Our Love-Hate Relationship with Hatred
Chapter 1. Us Versus Them
3
Chapter 2. Hate Talk: The Mind/Language Connection
22
Chapter 3. Hate Is Cool
43
Part 2. Hate, American Style
Chapter 4. Youthful Hatred: Are We Tough Enough?
71
Chapter 5. Glamorized Hatred: Our Obsession with Serial Killers
89
Chapter 6. Organized Hatred: Supremacy Movements
114
Conclusion: Freeing Ourselves from our Obsession with 
Hatred and Violence
145
Appendix 1. The Five Most Critical Resolutions Each of Us 
Can Make to Free Ourselves from Our Obsession with 
Hatred and Violence
167
Appendix 2. Self-Assessment Tools
168
contents

Appendix 3. Twenty-Five Small Steps Toward Freeing 
Ourselves from Our Obsession with Hatred and Violence
170
Appendix 4. Tips for Parents (and Teachers): Raising Hate-Free 
and Hate-Proof Kids
173
Appendix 5. Resources
180
Notes
187
Index
195
viii contents

Before the arrival of the new millennium, I was fascinated by the notion
that as we approached the year 2000 everyone seemed either to be
scared or to be downright depressed. All we seemed to hear about on the
news was Y2K bug, God’s really mad, and the world will blow up at the
stroke of midnight. In fact, as the likely end of the world neared, we were
advised to start stockpiling food so that we could hide in the basement.
This was supposed to be the new millennium. An event of a lifetime.
Why were people so scared and depressed during a time that should be
used as a stepping-stone to learn the lessons from the past millennium
and incorporate them into the future?
It was during this time that I met Martin Bedogne and we decided to
collaborate as ﬁlmmakers. We formed New Light Media to address what
we felt were critical questions for all Americans: Why were people so
negative when it came to the millennium? What had soured us about
our present and our future? After a lot of thought and research, the
answer became very clear: it is hate. Discovering that answer prompted
new questions. Why is it that one group dislikes another group? Why do
some people become so hostile toward others that they actually kill those
who are different from them? And from exploring these questions we
came to a startling realization. How one person or one group feels about
another causes most of the social ills that plague our world. Unchecked,
our willingness to hate will bring our world to its destruction.
We realized that we had discovered the secret, the reason so many of
foreword

us felt hopeless as we approached the year 2000. In order to get along in
this world in the new millennium, in order to restore not just our hope
but also our compassion, we needed to begin a dialogue on why we
hate. So we created the documentary, “Journey to a Hate Free Millen-
nium,” which depicts the stories of Matthew Shepard, James Byrd Jr.,
and the students at Columbine High School, all victims of tragedies
inspired by hate. Throughout the documentary, we discover how the
victims’ families are handling the deaths of their loved ones and how
hate has affected their lives. More important, we discover how each
family has dealt with their own hate and turned it into something posi-
tive. Each offers a towering example of the power of compassion and
hope to eradicate hatred and violence. Each of them also offers solu-
tions we all can enact to end hate in the world.
Our documentary has been very successful. I personally have trav-
eled to more than two hundred colleges and universities, one hundred
middle and high schools, and various symposia addressing the issue of
hate and how we can overcome it in our lives. I found myself shocked
by how many people, especially young people, were starving for the
opportunity to talk about this subject and how it affects their world, their
lives. 
It was during my travels with the documentary that I went to Ripon
College, a small, private school in Wisconsin, where I met Jody Roy.
Jody attended my presentation and soon e-mailed me saying that her life
had been changed by the encounter. She explained that she was writing
a book on the subject of hate and asked if I would be interested in read-
ing it and possibly writing the preface. At ﬁrst, I resisted the idea, for I
was in the process of writing my own book, My Journey with Judy, which
is based on my experiences with Judy Shepard and our efforts to make a
difference in this world when it comes to the subject of hate.
As time went on, Jody and I began to correspond by e-mail more fre-
quently and, as our relationship evolved, I began telling her of various
projects under way at New Light Media. One of them was our educa-
tional guide for Journey to a Hate Free Millennium. Our goal was to be
able to advance the educational mission of our documentary by marry-
ing it to an accessible and compelling guide that would allow educators
themselves to present our program to those people who would most
beneﬁt from it: the young people who soon will emerge as our leaders
in the new millennium. In the ﬁnal stages of developing our educa-
tional guide, I asked Jody to take a look at what we had produced so far. 
x foreword

Jody studied the draft and sent me back her ideas and notes  on how
we could expand what was, in my opinion, already an amazing educa-
tional guide. I was incredibly impressed with her contributions. She was
able to take our material and add a component that transformed the
guide into exactly what I had envisioned it to be in its ﬁnished state. She
was able to add to our guide the necessary ingredients that would allow
educators to understand how to use our materials so that they could
tackle what can be both a very simple and a difﬁcult subject to tackle—
the subject of hate.
So impressed was I with her contributions, that I was ashamed to
admit I had not yet spent the necessary time to read her book, Love to
Hate. I took the next week to spend time with her book and truly digest
the concepts she was presenting in its pages. In doing so, I allowed
myself, the supposed expert, to learn a great deal more about this sub-
ject called hate. Once ﬁnished, I realized why she and I had been
brought together. Jody and I were meant to work together in some way.
Whether it was to have her contribute to our guide or for me to write this
preface, I came to a realization about what connects both of our works. 
Both of our works had accomplished what it is that I think is most
important when it comes to the daunting task of ending hate in this
world. We had both created educational vehicles that had become part
of the solution and not part of the problem. This is the very essence of
New Light Media. Our overall goal is to become part of the solution. To
create educational materials and to be so passionate about our goal to
constantly and consistently be part of the solution that we inspire others
to make the same commitment.
We all must understand that each of us has the ability throughout the
day, every day, to become part of the solution when it comes to ending
hate in our world. This can be represented in many ways, and my most
favorite representation came during one of my lectures when a young
mother stood up in the audience saying that choosing to be part of the
solution or the problem had been a ongoing struggle for her. She
explained that while driving to my seminar she had picked up her two
kids from high school and as she was rushing them home so as not to be
late for my presentation, she had passed two boys beating each other up
on the sidewalk in front of the high school. She knew both of the boys
and their parents. She realized as she was sitting in my audience that she
had done nothing. She never stopped the car to try to talk to the boys.
She chose not to call the school to report the incident to the principal,
foreword
xi

and she had yet to contact the parents to let them know that she had wit-
nessed a problem with their children. She looked at me as she ﬁnished
and, with tears in her eyes, she said, “I think I am part of the problem.”
This story truly illustrates the degree to which each of us can be part
of the problem. Choosing to ignore that hate exists and denying that it
is around us each and every day is, I truly believe, being part of the prob-
lem. I know without a shadow of a doubt that each of us has the ability
to be part of the solution when it comes to the subject of hate and over-
coming it in both our personal lives and our world. This book, Love to
Hate, is part of the solution. It will allow you to begin the process of
understanding why it is that we Americans truly love to hate and what it
is that we can do to become part of the solution rather than part of the
problem.
Brent Scarpo
Producer/Executive Director
New Light Media
Denver, Colorado
xii foreword

I wish to thank all the people whose encouragement and assistance
enabled me to create Love to Hate: America’s Obsession with Hatred and
Violence. I owe much gratitude to the following people for the particu-
lar help and motivation they have given to me: John Michel and Susan
Heath of Columbia University Press, for their wise counseling during
the revision process; Donna Marquart and Deano Pape, for technical
support above and beyond the call of duty; Maggie Dalton-Herzberger
and Alan Herzberger, for offering me invaluable feedback early in the
writing process; Brent Scarpo and the staff of New Light Media for
inspiring me to broaden my vision of the purpose of my work and pro-
viding me with exciting opportunities to act on that new vision; the
Ripon College speech majors, for constantly challenging me to think
about old topics from new angles; the men of the Wisconsin Gamma
chapter of Phi Delta Theta, for keeping me grounded; Jean Hooker,
Jason Fischer, and, especially, Toby Olsen, for keeping me sane and the
rest of the world safe throughout this entire process; Eric “Stugen” Val-
lafskey, for always having my back; Tony McClintock, for being my
uncannily powerful “good luck charm”; Matt Belling, without whom
none of what I now do would be possible; Jon Roy, for his constant sup-
port and for tolerating without complaint the sheer amount of time in
our lives and space in our home Love to Hate consumed in recent years;
Elizabeth Dalton Roy, for inspiring me in ways I never could have imag-
ined a few years ago; and the late Donald D. Dalton, for everything.
acknowledgments


A lone gunman rushes the door of a Jewish community center, opening
fire on any person in his path. A group of kindergarten-aged students are
the first to encounter him. He does not discriminate—his bullets rip
through three of the children, a teenage helper, and an adult employee of
the center. While fleeing, he shoots and kills a postal worker.
Two young men wearing long black trench coats enter a suburban high
school. It is their high school, filled with their classmates and teachers.
They take their time. More than two hours pass before they kill themselves.
In those two hours, they kill thirteen others. 
All across the nation, small-town residents lock their doors and windows
tightly at night, many for the first time in decades. Those living near train
tracks suffer a special fear as the so-called Railway Killer eludes police again
and again. From Texas to Illinois, the tally of slain bodies continues to climb.
The first report is of a black man shot down in front of his children. Soon
after, word crosses the airwaves that a group of Orthodox Jews has been
targeted by a drive-by shooter. Almost immediately reporters announce
that a car driven by Asian teens also has been hit. One day later a Korean
student is killed outside his church. It is the Fourth of July—America is cel-
ebrating her national identity: the land of the free and the home of the
brave. 
introduction

Being American always has required bravery. The bravery to ﬁght
oppression, the bravery to forge a nation from a diverse mix of people,
the bravery to embrace democracy not simply as a theory of government
but as a way of living. It is only recently that being American has come
to mean being brave enough to go to school, brave enough to walk down
a public street, brave enough to close your eyes and drift to sleep in your
own bed. 
The four stories recounted above most probably sound familiar.
Sadly, they are real cases of violence that occurred over the course of
just four months in 1999. While they were among the most highly
reported incidents of violence during that time, the victims constitute
only a fraction of the total number of Americans violently attacked by
other Americans in any given four-month period. 
Although we have long conceived America as the land of the free and
the home of the brave, these days we perhaps are reﬂected more accu-
rately in the phrase used by Pope John Paul II to describe us: a culture
of death.1
But are we really a culture of death? The phrase “culture of death”
seems to imply that we somehow enjoy, even cherish the violence and
those who commit it. Surely we do not. Don’t we revile these terrible
acts? Don’t we label the perpetrators “monsters”? Of course we do. The
four cases above are the cases of Buford Furrow, the white supremacist
who attacked the children in the Jewish Community Center’s day camp
in California; Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold, the Columbine High
School students from Littleton, Colorado, who committed the most
lethal of the string of school shootings in the 1990s; Angel Maturino
Resendez, among the most recent serial killers to terrorize Americans;
and Benjamin Smith, the disenchanted university student who brieﬂy
afﬁliated himself with the World Church of the Creator and later ram-
paged through a two-day killing spree in Illinois and Indiana.
We recognize all these killers as bad people, even evil people. We
don’t live in a culture of death, we say, because we despise those who kill.
But it is unlikely that we can name even one of their victims. What
do we know about the three children attending day camp? Their
teenage helper? The employee of the center? The postal worker? Any of
the twelve students who will never graduate from Columbine High
School? The teacher who will never again teach? We are unlikely to
remember the name of the woman killed by the tracks in a small Texas
town or the names of any of the other seven people who lost their lives
xvi introduction

to the Railway Killer or the black man whose children watched him die
or the Orthodox Jewish men or the Asian teens or the Korean student.
We reward the violent with one of our most valued commodities:
celebrity. We do not celebrate the innocent. We usually don’t even
remember their names. When we remember them at all, we remember
only that they were killed. But the killers we remember. And by remem-
bering them, we write our own legacy. America at the turn of the mil-
lennium no doubt will be judged by future generations as we ourselves
judge the past: by the records we leave of those who emerge from the
masses to become known.
The question then becomes, how do we escape the culture of death?
How do we rein in the violence that has become a deﬁning characteris-
tic of America? Individually and as a society, we ﬁnally have to admit
that we are, as a country, obsessed with hatred. Although we like to
romanticize it, our fascination with hatred is not romantic. It is a seedy
ﬂirtation, an illicit affair. We publicly profess our commitment to com-
passion and peace, yet we carry on with hatred and violence on the side.
In recent decades, we’ve become ever more brazen, parading our liason
out in public for all the world—including our children—to witness.
Should it really surprise us, then, that some of our children, born as they
were into the midst of our ﬂirtation with hatred, lash out violently?
Should we be shocked that our longtime obsession ﬁnally spawned a
culture of death? Of course not. We should be surprised, shocked, and
even appalled only at our own foolishness in believing we somehow
could sustain a long-term ﬂing with hatred and violence without com-
promising the integrity of our commitment to compassion and peace.
How then do we begin to change? We ﬁrst must admit that we have
been willing parties to this affair. No one forced it on us. While hatred
and violence can be seductive, we ultimately chose and keep choosing
to give in to their temptations. By ﬁnally, fully owning up to the fact that
we have been willing parties in this obsessive relationship, we empower
ourselves to end it. As we all know, it only takes one side leaving to end
a love affair.
I began thinking of America’s relationship with hatred and violence
as an obsession several years ago. As a professor of communication, I
have focused my scholarly research for more than a decade on the ques-
tion, “How do people become persuaded to hate other people?” From
my formal studies of organized hate groups to my informal discussions
with students about their reactions to violence in the media, I’ve come
introduction
xvii

to realize that we Americans like to accuse other people of hating and
being violent, but nearly all of us, myself included, harbor a fascination
with hatred and violence. We are quick to point the ﬁnger of blame at
killers, hate group members, even rap artists for promoting violence, yet
we have a voracious appetite for both real and ﬁctional stories about the
very people we say are dangerous. 
My thoughts about our relationship with hatred and violence crys-
tallized in 1999 when news broke of the Columbine massacre. I hap-
pened to be at home that afternoon and, like millions of others, watched
the live coverage of a mass murder in progress. I couldn’t take my eyes
off the television. “How could this happen?” I asked myself. “What has
our world come to?” The news reporters echoed my thoughts, asking
“Why? Why?,” as we all watched video of a bleeding teenage boy hang-
ing out of a window as SWAT team members dared a rescue attempt. 
Having spent more than ten years studying the most extreme incar-
nations of hatred and violence, I am more jaded than most people. Over
the years, I have developed a necessary survival skill, the ability to dis-
tance myself from my research subject. My scholarly detachment
enabled me to watch coverage of earlier school shootings—Jonesboro,
Pearl, Paducah, among others—as little more than cases-in-point of
established academic theories. So what was it that made Columbine
unique for me? Was it the live coverage? No. Was it the sheer number
of victims? No. Columbine was unique for me because as I sat on the
edge of my seat watching live coverage of a mass murder, I cradled my
infant daughter in my arms. Columbine was the ﬁrst time I encoun-
tered my research area not just as an academic but as a parent.
I am a professor and a mother, a researcher and a consumer of pop-
ular culture. In writing Love to Hate, I have tried to balance those roles,
drawing on scholarly approaches to the critical study of hatred and vio-
lence to create a book that is an engaging, accessible, and ultimately
practical resource for anyone who is concerned about hatred and vio-
lence in our society. Thus my primary goal in Love to Hate is not to
deepen academics’ theoretical understanding of hatred but, rather, to
invite a much wider audience to join in the conversation about how
hatred and violence are affecting us all. 
As a result of the events of September 11, 2001, many people are anx-
ious to participate in such conversations. The terrorist attacks on the
United States and the ensuing international “war on terrorism” have
taken center stage in conversations, as well as in the American cultural
xviii introduction

consciousness. On some levels September 11, 2001 and its aftermath
have changed most Americans profoundly.
Yet, as attention has narrowed onto threats from abroad, Americans
have risked losing sight of the forms of home-grown hatred that so recently
gave rise to the rash of school shootings, the Oklahoma City bombing,
and other horriﬁc acts of violence. The hatred that inspires such violence
has not left America. If anything, the “war on terrorism” provides new
impetus and outlets for hatred and violence here in the United States. For
example, within less than a week of September 11, more than two hun-
dred people perceived to be Middle Eastern or Moslem were the victims
of hate crimes in the United States; two were killed.2 Additionally, the fear
and anger nearly all Americans have felt since September 11 make people,
individually and collectively, more vulnerable than they have been in
decades to the seductive powers of hatred. 
While Love to Hate does not directly focus on the events of Septem-
ber 11, 2001, it is about the American attitudes toward hatred that gave
rise to violence before those events and that have continued to inspire
violence every day since. If we hope ever to live in an era free of hatred
and violence, we must not allow our legitimate concerns about interna-
tional terrorism to distract us from equally legitimate concerns about
the persistent reality of hatred and violence within our own culture.
I wrote Love to Hate with two purposes in mind. First, I want to help
my readers realize the subtle ways in which our fascination with hatred
expresses itself in our popular culture and in our everyday lives. Instead
of waiting for another outrageous act of violence like the Columbine
shootings to force us to take notice, we need to become aware of the
constant stream of messages in our culture telling us all that hatred is
cool and that violence is a viable solution to life’s problems. More
important, we all need to consider how we react to those messages and
the ways in which we too may be conveying those messages to others, in
particular to children. Second, I hope Love to Hate will inspire my read-
ers to take a stand against our society’s casual tolerance of hatred and
violence. As I’ve already stated, the most difﬁcult but most critical task
will be for each of us to admit the part we have played in carrying on
America’s love affair with hatred and violence. There are many steps we
can take individually and must take as a society to secure a safer and
more loving future. I will explore some of these solutions throughout
the pages of this book.
Love to Hate is divided into three parts. The ﬁrst, “Our Love-Hate
introduction
xix

Relationship with Hatred,” explores the very nature of hatred in our lives
and how we send and receive mixed messages about hatred almost con-
stantly. The second part, “Hate, American-Style,” examines both obvi-
ous and subtle manifestations of hatred, from neo-Nazi supremacy
groups and serial killers to the popular music, movies, and television
shows we and our children enjoy. Finally, “Freeing Ourselves from Our
Obsession with Hatred” offers practical solutions we can take—as par-
ents, as consumers, and as voters—to move America away from the cul-
ture of death and toward a culture of life. In the appendices, I have pro-
vided some interactive tools that the reader can use to begin the process
of changing their own attitudes toward hatred and violence.
I ask readers to understand that in order to disempower our obsession
with hatred and violence we must ﬁrst dissect it. At some points in Love
to Hate, some readers may ﬁnd the process of dissection itself to be
extremely difﬁcult. In particular, the consideration of how popular cul-
ture constructs stories of serial killers in chapter 5, and the exploration of
a tragic hate crime in the conclusion, may be difﬁcult for some readers
to encounter. I have included these discussions not to sensationalize vio-
lence but, rather, to reveal how violence is sensationalized. I ask readers
to remember that I am not telling “new” stories but simply retelling sto-
ries most Americans have heard before. In hindsight, the horror of the
cases is almost overwhelming. However, it is important to remember that
when these stories were told originally, most Americans did not recoil in
horror; rather, they sat in rapt attention as various media spun out the
most gruesome details of extraordinary acts of hatred and violence. 
Of course, we cannot dive into a consideration of this subject with-
out ﬁrst pausing to deﬁne hatred itself. A dictionary offers synonyms for
“hatred” such as “repugnance,” “detestation,” and “abhorrence.” Those
terms don’t really help us grasp the scope of “hatred.” Hatred is complex
and dynamic. It is at once an emotion, a passion, a force, a cultural com-
modity, a motivation, a value, a status symbol, and a source of power.
Hatred is not a static thing, an object we can bottle up and label. Rather,
hatred exists between and among us. Hatred is not simply a term denot-
ing a feeling humans sometimes experience but a ﬁlter through which
we humans at times choose to see the world and be in the world. We
give hatred life in our thoughts and words. And when we fail to realize
the power of those thoughts and words to inﬂuence our behavior, we
invite the kind of violence that led Pope John Paul II to label America
at the dawn of the new millennium a “culture of death.”
xx introduction

Love to Hate


part 1
Our Love-Hate 
Relationship with Hatred


India versus Pakistan, Black versus White, Muslim versus Jew, the Allies ver-
sus the Axis, North versus South, America versus Britain, Men versus
Women, Shirts versus Skins, Bears versus Packers, Pepsi versus Coke . . .
Comparing and contrasting is a normal, even a necessary, part of
being human. It allows us to learn about everything and everyone in our
world. Dividing the world into categories allows us to manage the vast
amount of information we must process in order to survive. But we are
not computers, sorting facts into categories with complete objectivity.
Because we are human, our categories are heavily laden with biases and
so we sometimes move beyond the normal and necessary use of com-
parative thought and into the dangerous arena of “us versus them” think-
ing. In this chapter we will examine when and how we cross that line and
learn how such thought patterns can enable, even encourage, hatred.
our concepts of self and other: us and them
For most of my early years, I cherished my best friend, Brian. Then, sud-
denly, we despised each other. It turned out that my best friend in the
chapter 1
Us Versus Them

whole world, my pal Brian, was . . . it’s still hard to say . . . Brian was . . .
one of them . . . you know what I mean . . . Brian was . . . well . . . a boy. 
Until the summer we both turned seven, our co-ed friendship had
never been a problem. He was Brian, I was Jody, and that really was all
that mattered. We were not yet mature enough to know that little boys
and little girls often do not get along with each other very well. But dur-
ing our seventh summer, we stopped being Brian and Jody and started
being “a boy—yuck!” and “a girl—gross!” 
Tension between little boys and little girls is a normal, if sometimes
painful, part of growing up. We come to understand the nature of who
we are by comparing and contrasting ourselves to others. Very small
children often play doctor as an innocent means through which to learn
how girls’ and boys’ bodies differ. They approach the differences with a
scientist’s curious but matter-of-fact air: they note what makes each body
unique without judging one to be somehow better than the other. By
grade school, most children spend at least some time believing that the
opposite sex has what we used to call “cooties,” a second-grade term
meaning repulsive. At this age, children swear they will never develop a
romantic interest in “them” and threaten either to run from or punch
in the arm any one of “them” who might ever proffer a kiss. To the cha-
grin of parents, of course, this stage is followed by puberty and adoles-
cence.
What we must understand, though, is that the sexual attractions
between adolescent boys and girls (and adult men and women, for that
matter) could not occur if they were not preceded by the childhood bat-
tle of the sexes. During those years, boys and girls develop a sense of
their own identity in comparison to those of the same sex and in contrast
to those of the opposite sex. They begin to deﬁne the self in relation to
others. As children, we use “them” to discover “us.” 
As adults, we continue to use ideas of “us” and “them” in a variety of
useful ways. Perhaps most basically, concepts of “us” and “them” deﬁne
families. For example, “we” are the Roy family. The members of my
family, both immediate and extended, are united by various biological
and legal ties. Those ties offer all of “us” a sense of security and comfort
in a vast world of “thems.” Literally, family provides the familiar. For as
much as we all (and I do mean all) at times complain about our fami-
lies, families offer something few other groups can offer: people who
have known us and whom we have known for most, if not all, of our
lives. 
4 Our Love-Hate Relationship with Hatred

A powerful sense of belonging attends such familiarity. Recently one
of my cousins paid me a visit. We had not seen each other in several
years and, for at least ten years before that, had seen each other infre-
quently. Because of our age difference we had not even been especially
close while growing up. Yet, from the moment he walked through the
door, we were completely at ease with each other. Why? I think it has
something to do with his loaning me his bib overalls after I fell (got
pushed) into a mud puddle on Easter morning about thirty years ago. I
think it has something to do with how much he used to like to eat pud-
ding. I think it has something to do with the smell of our grandma’s
basement, the taste of her apple pies, the feel of the afghan that rested
on the back of her couch. Although we hadn’t seen each other in years,
my cousin and I still share “us” today.
Of course, families do not hold exclusive rights to such connections.
Friendships are born of two people choosing to unite as “us.” On college
campuses, some students opt to ensure that they will belong to an “us”
by pledging a fraternity or sorority. Potential members, so-called
rushees, are drawn to promises of lifelong friendships and immediate
entry into a powerful network of alumni/ae. The pledging rituals of the
Greek organizations stress the paramount importance of loyalty to the
group and, while tensions and dissensions do occur, generally the mem-
bers of the groups rally around each other in times of crisis and cele-
bration. In this way, such formalized friendship associations are much
like families—while not all the members necessarily always get along,
they’re all right by your side in bad times and always show up for the big
events in your life, especially if you’re serving food.
Corporate America also relies on the ideas of “us” and “them.”
Recruiting of new employees often focuses on appeals such as “join the
winning team at Company X.” Once hired, new employees undergo
some type of training or orientation process that, if it is constructed
wisely, attempts to develop loyalty to the company. And corporate loy-
alty is a priceless commodity: it reduces turnover and the attendant costs
of retraining; it bolsters “free” public relations as happy employees dis-
cuss “our” company with outsiders; it even reduces the likelihood that
an employee will hurt the company by revealing sensitive information.
Perhaps most critically, though, employee loyalty boosts productivity.
Loyal employees work for “us,” not just for a paycheck.
Clearly, concepts of “us” and “them” play important and healthy
roles in society. By helping us develop our understandings of our selves
us versus them 5

and of others, us/them thinking patterns allow us to grow up and, once
there, to form relational bonds with others in our families, among our
friends, and on the job. Yet, while such thinking is a necessary part of
our lives, sometimes it can become twisted into a dangerous form of
polarizing thought that lies at the very core of hatred.
the self against the other: us versus them
At what point does normal, healthy “us and them” thinking cross the
line and become the potentially dangerous “us versus them” thinking?
As a general rule, people cross the line into “us versus them” thinking
when they use attacks on the other as a way to strengthen the self. In
other words, this kind of thinking involves pushing down “them” in an
attempt to raise up “us.” We all are guilty of thinking in such patterns
some of the time. 
Let’s return to the childhood battle of the sexes. As I have noted ear-
lier, for at least some period of time we all go through a phase of distaste
for the opposite sex as a normal part of our development. During this
phase, girls and boys often move beyond the basic comparisons and con-
trasts needed for self-awareness and into playground variations on us ver-
sus them patterns. Suddenly games pit boys and girls against each other
because neither will willingly be on the same team. All children under-
stand that the winners of such contests are the superior sex, at least until
the next ringing of the recess bell.
Of course, not all instances of us versus them thinking revolve
around male-female feuding. Regardless of gender, bullies are veritable
icons of the us versus them phenomenon. Children who fall victim to a
bully are often told by parents and teachers that the bully simply is act-
ing tough, that he actually is scared and insecure. For the bully’s young
victim such advice is of course totally useless. However, it really does
seem to be true in most cases. Bullies normally are scared and insecure.
They prey on other children as a means of bolstering their own sense of
self. For the school yard tough, who he is, sadly all he is, is what he can
take from another child for the moment: the bully’s “me” is elevated
only by hurting “them.” Unfortunately for all of us, of course, the really
dangerous bullies are not found on playgrounds but in boardrooms and
in political ofﬁce.
In order to fully understand the nature of the “us versus them” mind-
6 Our Love-Hate Relationship with Hatred

set, we need to consider several of the destructive thinking patterns that
characterize it. Among the most important thinking patterns that play a
part in this mentality are absolutism, stereotyping, scapegoating, and
dehumanization.
absolutism
Absolutism occurs when a person sees only two sides of an issue and
then polarizes those sides. It lies at the very center of us versus them
thinking. In fact, it would be fair to say that healthy “us and them” think-
ing begins to devolve into the potentially dangerous form “us versus
them” when absolutism comes into play. 
Absolutism is perhaps easiest to understand in terms of colors. A per-
son in the grip of absolutist thinking sees only black and white. The per-
son not only refuses to recognize red, green, and yellow but cannot even
allow himself to appreciate the shades of gray in between black and
white. 
While few people are absolutist in all aspects of their lives, many of
us approach certain issues about which we are particularly sensitive
with absolutist thinking patterns. For example, many otherwise open-
minded people simply refuse to consider that there may be sides other
than the “right” side and the “wrong” side of the hotly contested abor-
tion debate in America. According to pro-life advocates, almost all of
whom ground their position on abortion in their beliefs about religion,
their side is the side of “right,” the “moral” side, the side supported by
God. Because they are convinced that their position is not simply a right
position, but the only right position, they necessarily believe that all who
disagree with them must be wrong. In this case, as with any case in
which the position is rooted in religious claims, the belief that God is on
“our” side entails the conclusion that the other side is evil.
In the case of the contemporary debate over abortion, this tendency
toward absolutism has done much to cloud the issues. Most basically,
when members of the pro-life movement apply absolutist thinking pat-
terns to their opposition they sometimes falsely portray the existence of
pro-abortion lobbyists instead of pro-choice representatives. Few Amer-
icans have actually heard of anyone who is pro-abortion. Why? Because
no one is advocating that abortion is a great thing, something all women
should want to experience. The assertion that a pro-abortion movement
us versus them 7

exists is, itself, what logicians call a straw-man argument, meaning it is
an illusion of an opponent the arguer herself creates then, not surpris-
ingly, is able to defeat. Because they are based on faulty reasoning, straw-
man arguments are labeled fallacious.
I am not indicting all the arguments of the pro-life movement as fal-
lacious. But I am saying that as a result of taking an absolutist stand on
abortion, members of the pro-life movement sometimes fallaciously
assert the existence of a pro-abortion countermovement. By doing so
they create a world that is painted only in black and white. Lost are such
complex shades of gray as we might ﬁnd among people who believe
women should have the right to choose but pray no woman ever ﬁnds
herself in the position of needing to choose.
Members of the pro-life movement are certainly not the only people
who tend toward absolutist thinking. In fairness, some members of the
pro-choice movement can be equally absolutist. The more radical
members of both the pro-life and pro-choice camps display classic abso-
lutist thinking when they suggest that anyone who is not with them may
as well be against them. This position rests on the notion that everything
is either black or white. When someone says, “You’re either with me or
against me,” they are denying the legitimacy of a third, fourth, or even
millionth side of an issue. Most fundamentally, “You’re either with me
or against me” denies us the right simply not to have an opinion on a
particular issue. Absolutists cannot accept the fact that others may be
completely unconcerned with the issue to which they are devoting so
much energy.
Absolutist thinking patterns carry heavy risks—and not only for those
who use them. When a person polarizes an issue, he or she makes com-
promise an impossibility.1 If they conceive their position to be wholly
“good” and the opposition to be wholly “evil,” then they simply cannot
allow themselves to come to the bargaining table. Those who embrace
absolutist thinking, of course, see no problem with the inability to com-
promise; for them, compromise with the opposition, regardless of the
issue at hand, is a form of compromising with the devil. As such, stalwart
unwillingness to negotiate is seen as a virtue. But with compromise no
longer a viable option, only two courses of action remain: giving up the
cause or escalating attacks on the opposition. 
While those who espouse an absolute mindset see the issues at hand
as perfectly clear-cut, to those looking in from the outside, complicating
exceptions quickly emerge to even the most absolute of arguments.
8 Our Love-Hate Relationship with Hatred

Let’s return to the abortion debate for a moment. Even among the most
adamant pro-lifers, it is possible to ﬁnd those who believe abortion to be
morally acceptable if the life of the mother is at stake. Clearly, if this
exception can be made, then “abortion is wrong” is not a wholly right
position. Here we ﬁnd one of those troublesome shades of gray.
But I do not want to give the impression that any of these problems
are the private property of the pro-lifers. Pro-choice advocates face the
same tensions within their arguments when they assume an absolutist
stance. For instance, within the ranks of pro-choice advocates are some
who believe that teenage girls should have to provide proof of parental
notiﬁcation and consent before being allowed to have an abortion. Yet
another shade of gray.
Clearly, absolutist thinking patterns can be problematic. Absolutism
polarizes sides artiﬁcially and thus enables us versus them thinking. By
disallowing compromise, absolutism also encourages radical action in
response to the opposition. There is perhaps no better example of this
than the killing of doctors who perform abortions by members of radi-
cal factions of the pro-life movement. How ironic. How gray.
stereotyping
Stereotyping is categorizing gone bad. As I have already described, sort-
ing things, and people, into groups based on common characteristics is
not only a normal but a necessary mental faculty that allows us to man-
age the immense amounts of information to which we are exposed over
the course of a lifetime. Obviously, while the items we sort into various
categories share many things in common, sometimes we must oversim-
plify their commonalities in order to make our own mental ﬁling system
useful. For example, if we sort automobiles into the categories of car,
truck, and van, we create a workable basic sorting system. But into
which category do we place a Jeep Grand Cherokee? By oversimplify-
ing its characteristics, we can label it a car, a truck, or even a van. Or, if
we encounter lots of vehicles similar to the Jeep, we could create a
fourth category: sports utility vehicle.
While categorizing is both a normal and necessary human mental
function, some categorizing simpliﬁes too much and becomes stereo-
typing. Generally, we can say that a person is stereotyping if he or she
forms an oversimpliﬁed category based on ignorance about the items or
us versus them 9

people in the category. Stereotyping actually occurs as a result of the
logical fallacy known as hasty generalization, in which a person makes
conclusions about all members of a group based on too limited infor-
mation about a particular member of the group. For example, I would
commit a hasty generalization if I decided that all members of the col-
lege graduating class of 2003 were worse than average writers because a
particular member of that class wrote an extraordinarily bad paper for a
course I teach. By extending that single, unique example into a stand-
ing belief about all the members of the class of 2003, I would be guilty
of stereotyping.
Stereotypes represent a dangerous form of thinking in our society.
When a person stereotypes a group of people, he or she reduces those
in the group to only one or a few characteristics based either on very lim-
ited experience with the group members or based simply on prejudices
learned from others. Let’s return to the example of the class of 2003.
When I stereotype the group based on the actions of only one member
and conclude that the members of the class of 2003 are all bad writers,
I reduce the class members to that one skill. Regardless of whether or
not they are in fact bad writers, by deﬁning them only in terms of that
characteristic, I overlook their other qualities—in this case, relevant aca-
demic skills involving mathematics, speaking, and critical thinking. So
when I stereotype the class, I hurt them in two ways: ﬁrst, I unfairly con-
clude that what is true for one member of the group must be true for all;
and, second, I focus all attention on one characteristic and thus tend to
ignore other qualities that deﬁne the group members.
Stereotyping is an all too common thinking pattern in our society
and, sadly, rarely deals with characteristics so benign as writing skills.
Rather, stereotyping can be found at the core of almost all forms of
active prejudice against groups of people, whether those prejudices
center on race, ethnicity, religion, gender, socioeconomic class, or sex-
ual orientation.
Throughout American history, whites have held stereotypical views
of people of color. The earliest European explorers to ﬁnd land met and
immediately stereotyped native peoples in America and Africa as ani-
malistic, savage. Such stereotypes about people of color allowed the
institution of slavery to develop. While socioeconomic classism raged
within white communities, even the most elitist of whites did not con-
sider the enslavement of poor whites to be a viable option in a healthy
society. Why? Because they perceived even the poorest of whites still to
10 Our Love-Hate Relationship with Hatred

be fundamentally like themselves. In contrast, because stereotypes of
people of color involved accusations of savagery and exaggerated ani-
mal-like qualities, whites could rationalize slavery on the grounds that
the slaves were fundamentally “other” than themselves. In other words,
the stereotypes whites had created about people of other races allowed
whites to divide the world neatly, absolutely into “us”—whites/humans
—and “them”—non-whites/somehow not fully human.
Although the institution of slavery was destroyed in America more
than a century ago, some people continue to believe racial stereotypes
even today. Young black men, in particular, are feared by many whites.
Are most young black men people to fear? Hardly. Most young black
men, like most young white men, busy themselves with school, work,
and family obligations. Yet, sadly, many whites really are afraid if they
encounter a young black male or, especially, a group of young black
males. 
Such fears, most often groundless in reality, can be traced to the
legacy of stereotypical thinking. Because of the de facto segregation that
persists in many areas of the country, many white people have had little
actual contact with black people. For these whites, then, the bulk of
their knowledge of young black males comes either from the media or
from what they have heard from other members of their segregated
community, a community that is, by deﬁnition, ignorant of the realities
of young black men simply because it includes no such men. Such
stereotypical thinking about people of other races will continue in our
culture until information from actual encounters replaces assumptions
derived from stereotypes.
Of course, we must realize that people of all races can fall into the
pattern of stereotyping and can fall victim to the stereotypical thinking
of others. Too often we fail to consider the stereotyping of whites by
blacks, for example. Clearly, because whites traditionally have held the
reins of power in society, their stereotyping and attendant prejudices
have had more potential to do harm. Those who study race relations
often note the critical distinction between “prejudice” and “racism.”2
Prejudice means simply to prejudge—it is often based on inaccurate
stereotypes and is often unfair because it occurs before real experience.
However, prejudice is not necessarily harmful because the person who
holds the prejudice may not have the power to act on his or her biases.
For example, a poor white woman may have prejudices against black
men that center on her belief in the stereotype that black men are
us versus them 11

“lazy.” She boasts to her friends, “I’d never hire one of them.” Of course,
because she herself is poor, she is not in a position to hire or ﬁre anyone.
Her prejudice has no more force than the breath behind her idle words
to her friends.
On the other hand, racism is prejudice backed with power. In the era
of slavery, both whites and blacks in the South held prejudices about
each other. But because whites had all the power in that society, only
whites were capable of being racist. Today, although whites still hold
power in disproportionate numbers, people of diverse racial and ethnic
backgrounds have gained power in a variety of areas of society. As a
result, it is now possible for the color lines of racism to shift. A poor white
woman could be the victim of the racism of a wealthy Latino man, for
instance, if his prejudice against whites kept him from employing her
in his factory. Ironically, as a perk of overcoming the obstacles of racism,
many people of color now ﬁnd themselves moving into positions of
power from which racism is possible.
Not all stereotyping occurs at the larger societal level we think of
when we think of issues such as racism. For many people, stereotyping
and its consequences are encountered ﬁrst, and quite profoundly, at
school. Schools are veritable gold mines for those who want to study
stereotypes because the social structure of cliques is a manifestation of
stereotypical thought patterns. No person is simply a “jock,” “nerd,”
“society girl,” “hood,” etc. Yet, within American schools, especially at the
high-school level, students are deﬁned by each other and, in some cases,
by teachers and administrators based on the stereotypes associated with
their clique. 
The classic 1980s teen ﬁlm, The Breakfast Club, is a testament to this
phenomenon.3 In the ﬁlm, ﬁve students, each representing a different
social set, spend a Saturday together in detention. Over the course of the
day they unite in opposition to the school administrator who himself
stereotypes them completely. As the students interact, they begin to
break down the artiﬁcial walls that divide them and learn of the reality
of each person. Yet their individual realities include the very real con-
straints they face as a result of the power of cliques in the school. For
example, the society girl at one point admits that while she has devel-
oped relationships with the other four, she probably will not speak to
some of them in the hall the following Monday because she fears the
ramiﬁcations: namely, she knows that if she were to speak to a nerd she
would be ostracized by the members of the society clique.
12 Our Love-Hate Relationship with Hatred

Until recently, I believe most of us believed that school cliques were
simply an unavoidable part of growing up. Although we perhaps wished
they would go away, we never really thought, after we ourselves reached
age twenty or so, that they were cause for substantial concern. Then we
all heard the news reports about the school shooting in Littleton, Col-
orado. In the 1950s, stereotyping kids into categories such as “jock” and
“nerd” was not right, but it was not deadly. Today, the stereotyping that
deﬁnes school cliques seems to have become every bit as dangerous as
the stereotyping that underlies racism or any other form of adult hatred
of “them.”
scapegoating
Scapegoating occurs when we unfairly place blame for a problem onto
another person or group. Because that person or group is in fact not at
fault, or at least not solely responsible for causing the problem, scape-
goating is a fallacy of causal argument. 
Small children are notorious for scapegoating. Children often redi-
rect blame toward another child, most often a child who is younger and
innocent. How often have you heard, “I didn’t do it, Billy did!” from the
mouth of a child standing all alone at the scene of a household crime,
often covered in such evidence as mud or grease? By pushing the blame
for the problem onto another child, the scapegoater tries to escape
responsibility. With small children, the motivation for scapegoating
normally involves avoiding punishment. When the child claims, “I did-
n’t do it, Billy did!” she is essentially saying, “Please don’t punish me.”
Many times when adults use scapegoating tactics they too hope to
avoid punishment. For example, adult criminals sometimes offer up
someone else’s name under interrogation, claiming that the other per-
son actually was responsible for the crime. “I may have been there, but
I didn’t pull the trigger—Bill did!” Like a child, the adult criminal
attempts to push the blame for his or her crime off onto another person
in order to escape punishment or at least to reduce culpability and, with
it, the degree of punishment.
It would be unfair to suggest that children and criminals hold exclu-
sive rights to scapegoating. In fact, we are all susceptible to the thought
pattern of scapegoating when we face difﬁcult situations. As a college
professor, I sometimes see otherwise intelligent and ethical students fall
us versus them 13

into scapegoating patterns when they fall behind in their studies. “The
professor in my math class gives too much homework. It’s not fair. He
doesn’t understand that I have other classes. That’s why I need to ask for
an extension on my deadline in your class, Professor Roy.” “I broke up
with my girlfriend last week. Now she keeps calling me every night want-
ing to talk about it. So I haven’t been able to do my reading when I nor-
mally try to do it.” “My car wouldn’t start again. That car is no good. I
keep telling my dad I need a new car, but he just says ‘I’m not getting
you another car, you don’t take care of the one you have.’ I don’t know
what he’s talking about. It’s just not fair. I mean, doesn’t he realize that
I am too busy to be walking to and from classes all day. I have things to
do, you know. My dad just doesn’t understand. So, that’s why I didn’t get
my paper in on time.” Competing priorities, the demands of romantic
relationships, and cars and fathers are all real issues in the lives of most
college students. Of course, they are not the causes of a student’s failure
to complete assigned work on time. That failure is the result of the stu-
dent’s decision not to do the work in a timely fashion.
We all tend toward scapegoating, at least for a moment, when under
extreme pressure. When faced with an irate boss or spouse, or a police
ofﬁcer who says we were doing thirty-ﬁve m.p.h. in a twenty-ﬁve m.p.h.
zone, almost all of us revert back to our younger days and rehearse in
our minds all the things other people have done/are doing that caused
us to miss the meeting, forget to pay the utility bill, or need to drive too
quickly. In other words, for a split second we try on, “I didn’t do it, Billy
did!” just to see if it stills ﬁts. Most of the time we are grown up enough
to admit that it does not. In fact, a large part of laying claim to being an
adult is taking responsibility for problems when we truly are the one at
fault. 
Yet, throughout history, Americans faced with what they have per-
ceived to be crises have fallaciously placed blame onto “them” and ele-
vated scapegoating to a mass, or public, phenomenon. The McCarthy
era of the 1950s serves as an excellent case in point. For several years,
under the leadership of Joe McCarthy, a United States senator from Wis-
consin, many Americans came not only to believe that communists had
inﬁltrated the government and several other sectors of society but also
that these alleged inﬁltrators were responsible for almost all the problems
then facing middle-class Americans. “Reds” were blamed for everything
from destabilizing national security by stealing nuclear secrets to crip-
pling America’s moral ﬁber by playing rock-’n-roll on the radio. 
14 Our Love-Hate Relationship with Hatred

While such claims seem clearly erroneous today, at the time they
were very appealing to many otherwise rational, middle-aged, middle-
class Americans. The 1950s were an era of great change and, therefore,
great challenge to the traditional values and lifestyle of those same mid-
dle-aged, middle-class Americans. Advances in technology resulted in
dramatic changes in awareness of the wider world and, with it, its
threats. The proliferation of affordable air travel, automobiles, and tele-
visions, just to name a few innovations, brought new inﬂuences into
middle-American living rooms. A farmer in central Iowa watched his
daughters swoon to the sights and sounds of Elvis Presley on The Ed Sul-
livan Show playing a kind of music traditionally associated with black
rhythm and blues nightclubs. He also watched news reports of New
York City beatniks, Little Rock segregation protesters, and Russian
advances in space technology. The whole world opened up, and it
opened up right in the middle of the farmer’s central Iowa living room.
It was a time of dramatic change, dramatically played out right in front
of the farmer’s eyes. Even though precious little actually changed
immediately on his farm or in his community, he perceived the great-
ness of the changes in the world because with advances in technology
he now was party to the changes. And some of them scared him because
they seemed to threaten to chip away at the value of the kind of life he
always had lived. “Who is responsible for this?” “Who is trying to take
away my way of life, the American way of life?” Senator Joe McCarthy
offered a neat and convenient answer: “The Communists, of course.”
Very real threats to safety, both physical and emotional, exist when
large sectors of the public fall into the thought pattern of scapegoating.
In the McCarthy era, for instance, many people lost their jobs as a result
of the public madness that led to the scapegoating of social ills onto
alleged Communist spies. A century earlier, when American Protestants
blamed the social and economic upheavals of the times on newly
arrived Catholic immigrants, many people lost their lives in the violent
riots that plagued most eastern cities. 
Of course, history’s most outrageous and deadly example of the dan-
gers of scapegoating occurred in Germany in the ﬁrst half of the twen-
tieth century. Adolf Hitler centered the Third Reich around the belief
that the Jewish people were to blame for literally all of the problems
then facing Aryan Germans. In Mein Kampf he portrayed Jews as a par-
asitic infestation of German culture, destroying Aryan ideals and prom-
ise from within.4 Onto the Jews Hitler heaped blame for everything
us versus them 15

from the economic collapse following the German loss in World War I
to the spiritual malaise of the German people following decades of war
and economic depression. Hitler’s arguments in Mein Kampf, as well as
in his many rallying speeches during his reign, made the Jewish people
the scapegoats for German problems. While Jews long had been held as
“other” by virtue of their ethnicity and faith, Hitler further encouraged
the German people to view the Jews as a threatening other by making
them the scapegoats for substantial social and economic woes. The Jew-
ish people thus were turned from a relatively benign “them” deﬁned by
ethnic/religious differences into an allegedly sinister “them” deﬁned by
evil motives to hurt “us,” the innocent and superior German people led
by Hitler.5
Ironically, when we offer up another as a scapegoat as a way to
absolve ourselves of blame, we actually endow “them” with greater
power. If the scapegoat is alleged to have caused the problem, then the
scapegoat is bestowed with the power to have caused the problem. We
tend to make scapegoats of those who are less powerful than we are sim-
ply because we can do so; those with more power would be able to stop
our unfair blaming. Thus the child blames a spill on her younger sib-
ling, not on her mother, because she knows that mother has the power
to disprove the claim. Yet by placing blame for our problems onto
another we elevate their claim to power. If I blame my baby sister for
spilling the milk, I suggest to others that she has the power—in this case
the agility and strength—to have lifted the milk carton in the ﬁrst place.
In order to be blamed for causing a problem, one must be described to,
at least, have the capability to cause the problem.
Scapegoating, then, involves placing blame on someone with less
power and, in the process, making it appear as if they have more power.
Before Joe McCarthy terriﬁed Americans about the so-called Red Scare,
the Communist Party in America was, at most, a consortium of urban
intellectuals that carried little or no signiﬁcant political weight. How-
ever, after McCarthy blamed them for causing the breakdown of Amer-
ica’s moral core and national security, they suddenly were a force to be
reckoned with in American society—a force that would preoccupy Con-
gressional debate, media coverage, and the public’s fears for quite some
time. Likewise, it was Hitler’s diatribes blaming the Jews for the collapse
of Germany’s strength that elevated the Jewish community to the level
of perceived power that made them a threat to the German people.
Because the Jewish community had little power, Hitler could make Jews
16 Our Love-Hate Relationship with Hatred

his scapegoat; yet, in doing so, he himself endowed them with power—
speciﬁcally, with the power to be credible as a force that could destroy
Germany from within.
Clearly, when we fall prey to the thought patterns of scapegoating,
we lose sight of normal standards for what is reasonable. Although
scapegoating can provide us with some temporary relief from culpabil-
ity—and guilt—about the situations we face, it also puts those we falsely
blame at risk of repercussions. In an odd twist, scapegoating also neces-
sarily forces us to vest power in the scapegoat even though the scapegoat
originally had less power than we did. While scapegoating seems illog-
ical and even counterproductive when we calmly examine it, the sheer
frequency with which it is used—by individuals and by whole soci-
eties—provides proof that it is, unfortunately, a common thought pat-
tern in the world of “us versus them.”
dehumanization
When we dehumanize another person, we strip “them” of any connec-
tion they might possibly have to “us.” Dehumanization is a prerequisite
to acts of extreme violence because it allows us to deny that our actions
actually are hurting, even killing, another human, another one of “us.”
Although we most comfortably associate the use of dehumanizing
thought patterns with serial killers and other social outcasts, dehuman-
ization patterns also characterize the rhetoric we ourselves produce or,
at least, accept during times of war and of signiﬁcant domestic turmoil.
American leaders make use of techniques of dehumanization in
order to rally the public against an enemy during times of war. For
example, since September 11, 2001, President George W. Bush has char-
acterized Osama Bin Laden and the Taliban regime of Afghanistan as
“evil-doers,” suggesting at times that their motivations and actions are
nothing short of demonic. President Bush’s use of dehumanization tac-
tics is not without precedent. A decade earlier his father, President
George H. W. Bush, described Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein as mur-
derous, inhumane, and savage. President Reagan had used similar tac-
tics to cast Manuel Noriega as a monster during America’s brief military
engagement in Panama. And during the Vietnam War both President
Johnson and President Nixon portrayed the North Vietnamese leaders
as vicious and inhumane.
us versus them 17

Of course, for a war effort to succeed, dehumanization tactics must
be applied to the opposition troops as well as to opposition leaders.
American GIs do not normally face off with the leadership during com-
bat. Rather, they must be prepared to face and kill other soldiers. When
troops meet in combat, especially in the kind of close combat waged
most recently in Vietnam, soldiers must encounter another person,
another human, another one of “us” in the ﬁeld and then be able to turn
off the recognition of “us” (humans) and focus narrowly in on the idea
of “them” (the enemy fully dehumanized) if they are to kill. Soldiers are
not essentially killers: they are people serving in a position that some-
times requires killing. As such, they must be trained not simply to com-
mit the acts that result in killing but, more critically, to undergo the
thought processes of dehumanization that allow them to kill. Only if
such training is successful can the soldier, who until being called to
service had been, for example, a grocery store clerk, look into the eyes
of the enemy and not wonder what that man or woman does for a living
when not at war, whether they have children, if they too are scared. The
soldier who looks into the eyes of the enemy and sees “us” instead of
“them” is not only an ineffective link in the military chain but very likely
to become a casualty of war.
While dehumanization tactics are necessary in times of war, they are
simply dangerous when they inﬁltrate human thought in other contexts.
Serial killers and rapists dehumanize their victims because they only
can be so cruel if they lose sight of the person they are hurting. Know-
ing this, law enforcement agencies make every effort to rehumanize vic-
tims who are believed to be hostages of such criminals. By repeating
such a victim’s name, showing photos of the victim engaged in various
activities, and allowing the victim’s family to plead for their loved one’s
safe return, the authorities hope to force the killer or rapist to see the vic-
tim as a person, for once the victim again is perceived as human, it
becomes much more difﬁcult for the criminal to hurt them.
Sadly, tactics of dehumanization can be found in a variety of forms
in media to which most of us are exposed on a daily basis. In the pow-
erful video series entitled Dreamworlds, Sut Jhally, a professor of com-
munication at the University of Massachusetts, presents a startling per-
spective on the dehumanization of women in many music videos made
since the debut of MTV in 1981.6 Jhally forces viewers to see images
embedded in the videos—images we take for granted as “normal” dur-
ing casual viewing—by showing strings of repetitive images without
18 Our Love-Hate Relationship with Hatred

their accompanying soundtracks. Images of female body parts and of
women performing overtly sexual behaviors seem to jump off the screen
at the viewer when seen in silence or in the company only of monoto-
nous tones. Dreamworlds has inspired some controversy because Jhally
also intercuts images of sexual violence from music videos into the gang
rape scene from the movie The Accused. When viewers watch the
images from the music videos while hearing the soundtrack of the rape,
many ﬁnd it difﬁcult to keep track: which image is the rape and which
is the “harmless” music video?
Although difﬁcult to watch at some points for virtually all audiences,
Dreamworlds raises important points about the ways in which women
are portrayed in the “dream world” of music videos. Many videos con-
tribute to the dehumanization of women by showing only a few body
parts (legs, buttocks, and breasts in particular) instead of whole women,
thus encouraging viewers to objectify women by losing the person in the
part. “She” becomes merely “that piece of ass.” Further, even when
women are shown “whole,” they tend to be shown in roles that place
them in inferior positions to the men in the videos. Men are rock stars
while women are back-up singers or dancers; or, men are rock stars
while women are strippers or prostitutes hired by the band. In some
cases, women actually are portrayed as animalistic, shown chained or
caged, prowling on all fours, even bending to lap up a drink with their
tongues. By reducing a whole woman only to certain body parts, by
placing women in inferior roles, and by infusing women with animal-
like traits, some music videos dehumanize women and thus enable plot
lines in which women are made the passive sexual objects and targets of
violence for the men in the videos.
Perhaps the most important point made in Dreamworlds, though, is
the implicit one that all these images parade before us on a daily basis,
but we do not see them until they are wrenched from their normal con-
text. I have used the Dreamworlds videos in courses with college stu-
dents for ﬁve years now. Each semester I watch my students watching
Dreamworlds. Inevitably, their faces ﬁrst register looks of disbelief. Sub-
sequent writing assignments bear out this observation. Several students
in each class will admit that, for as much as the ﬁrst half-hour of the doc-
umentary, they felt Jhally was simply sensationalizing. Signiﬁcantly,
those students who initially most resist the documentary tend to be
those who self-report the heaviest viewing of MTV and other video net-
works in their leisure time. The real power of Dreamworlds comes in the
us versus them 19

second half hour when Jhally’s editing refuses to give viewers a break
from the painful monotony of these dehumanizing images of women.
At this point in the documentary, my students become very quiet. The
shufﬂing of papers and clearing of throats that characterize even a nor-
mally attentive audience give way to dead silence in the classroom. In
their writings, students frequently recall wanting the video to be over
and feeling as if they themselves were trapped (though, as an important
side note, viewing of this video is completely voluntary for my students).
Dreamworlds is too compelling to walk away from, yet too disturbing to
embrace.
Dreamworlds feels confrontational. Dreamworlds feels like an
assault. Yet it is assaulting us with the same images we readily consume
not only in music videos but in all forms of media, including advertise-
ments, countless times each day. The genius of Jhally’s Dreamworlds is
that it forces, or perhaps invites, us to look at the images surrounding us
as if we were seeing them for the ﬁrst time without hundreds of thou-
sands of other similar images jading our view. Dreamworlds thus makes
us feel like video virgins. And from that perspective images of women
we have come to take for granted as “normal” suddenly appear demean-
ing and terribly, terribly sad. The line between attraction and repulsion
dissolves as we encounter women being thrown around rooms, women
being locked in cages, women being dragged across ﬂoors, women
being pushed into walls, women being shoved onto beds, women being
fondled, women being licked, women being bitten, women being
stripped, women being taunted, women being written on, women being
chained, women being whatever the males in the video desire them to
be. As we endure these images, over and over and over, absent their
catchy lyrics and familiar tunes, we begin to really see the images. As I
have said, watching Dreamworlds is painful, because at some point
almost everyone who watches it realizes that they are ﬁnally seeing what
they have been watching every day for years: a dream world in which
women are fully dehumanized and, therefore, “legitimate” targets of
sexual aggression and even violence.
Thinking patterns that involve notions of “us” and “them” are normal
and allow us to compare and contrast, sort and categorize, and perform
other critical mental functions. However, sometimes we cross the line
from “us and them” thinking and enter the realm of “us versus them.”
Absolutism, stereotyping, scapegoating, and dehumanization tactics
20 Our Love-Hate Relationship with Hatred

characterize the “us versus them” mentality. As I have demonstrated,
while such fallacious thinking patterns can be found in relatively
benign forms in everyday life, they also can become horribly dangerous
in some circumstances.
In this chapter, I have offered only a few brieﬂy considered examples
of what can happen when the thought patterns that characterize us ver-
sus them thinking are not kept closely in check. In the chapters that fol-
low I will explore in great detail some of the most dangerous instances
of the uses of these thinking patterns in recent years, including the rise
of substantial white supremacist activity in America and the seemingly
endless stream of mass murderers and serial killers who terrify us. But
before we launch into the analysis of such extreme cases, we need to
consider carefully the subtle ways in which hatred is manifested
throughout our culture and how we have come not only to tolerate but
even to encourage hatred.
us versus them 21

“I hate you!” We’ve all heard it. We’ve all said it. As small children we
spat “I hate you” at those we most loved—our parents—before we really
even understood what the words meant. But while we may not have
understood the meaning of “I hate you,” we already understood at a very
early age the power of the word “hate.” As adolescents, we blazed
through our ﬁrst romances, often falling into “I love you” only to crash
down into “I hate you” within a matter of days. As adults, most of us
reserve “I hate you” for the most extreme situations. We now understand
not only the power, but also the tragically terminal meaning of saying
these words to another human. Yet circumstances do arise that inspire
us to utter “I hate you.” And more often than we say the words aloud, we
think them about another person in the privacy of our own minds.
“I hate you” has meaning in the English language and power within
our culture. We can look “hate” up in the dictionary. If we speak the
word “hate” to other English speakers, they will identify rather precisely
the emotional state to which we are referring. But what if “hate” had no
meaning? What if the word “hate” never had been in dictionaries of the
English language? What if you screamed “I hate you” at an enemy and
they looked quizzically into your eyes and said, “What does that mean?”
chapter 2
Hate Talk: 
The Mind/Language Connection

What if we lived in a culture where the language system did not include
the word “hate”? Would we still be able to hate if we were raised not
knowing hatred even existed?
Our obsession with hatred is embedded in our language. We social-
ize our children—as we ourselves were socialized—to tolerate hatred
and violence. In this chapter of Love to Hate, I explore how profoundly
language structures inﬂuence how we think about ourselves and others.
First, I consider the very nature of the mind/language connection. I
then look at particular language structures we all commonly use that
can embody our obsession with hatred and thus carry it forth into each
new generation. While many elemental language structures and com-
munication patterns have an impact on our thinking, I focus on only
four in great detail: naming, diminutives, reduction, and metaphors.
Throughout the study of these four language structures, I pay particular
attention to the ways in which our use of language intersects with, rein-
forces, and even enables the elemental thought patterns of hatred I
introduced in chapter 1: absolutism, stereotyping, scapegoating, and
dehumanization. 
the mind/language connection
A relative of mine teaches in a remote village high in the mountains of
Papua New Guinea. According to the correspondence I receive from
her and her husband, one of the greatest challenges they face is getting
their students to turn in homework on time. Such a challenge is, of
course, far from unique: teachers all across America face the same chal-
lenge every day. My relative explained, however, why teaching timeli-
ness is a particular obstacle in that region of Papua New Guinea. At the
end of the day when she reminds her students, “Don’t forget, your report
is due tomorrow,” the students sincerely reply, “Which tomorrow?”
Many of the indigenous peoples of Papua New Guinea do not share the
Western concept of time as a linear progression from the past through
the present and toward the future. Nor do they share the Western under-
standing of time as something that can be parceled out in allotments—
days, this day, the next day—as if humans controlled time itself. Words
such as “tomorrow” have no real meaning for people who do not con-
ceive time in the same way as it is conceived in the West.
Cross-cultural barriers to communication force us to see the inﬁ-
hate talk 23

nitely complex relationship between culturally dependent understand-
ings of the world and how those understandings are expressed in lan-
guage. What we normally fail to appreciate until confronted with such
an example is that every aspect of our experience as humans is shaped
by the culture in which we live and the language we speak. In order
really to comprehend how deeply our fascination with hatred is embed-
ded in our lives, we need to consider some basic elements of the rela-
tionship between culture and language—between how we talk and how
we think and what we value. Becoming consciously aware, at least for a
few moments, of the mind/language connection allows us to examine
our own ways of talking in a new light and helps us identify how lan-
guage structures we use nearly every day keep us entangled in our obses-
sion with hatred and violence.
Language theorists disagree about the direction of causality in the
relationship between culture and language: some argue culture shapes
language while some argue language shapes culture. As with so many
debates, the truth probably lies somewhere in the middle: language and
culture shape each other and thus develop and change over time
together. However, regardless of the direction of cause and effect, as
members of a particular culture raised within its unique cultural/lan-
guage system, each of us reﬂects the attitudes, beliefs, and values inher-
ent in the system itself.
Inextricably intertwined with each other, culture and language exert
enormous force on us throughout our lives. Think of culture and lan-
guage as a pair of contact lenses through which we view the world.
Once the lenses are in place, they shape how we see the world around
us. If we wear a pair of contact lenses designed to make everything
appear taller and thinner than it really is, we perceive everything we see
to be taller and thinner than it really is. Of course, if we actually wore a
pair of contact lenses that distorted reality, as soon as we realized the
problem we would return to the eye doctor and demand a new pair and,
likely, a refund. 
But when the contact lenses are cultural and linguistic, instead of
optical, we have little to no ability to determine the ways in which they
may distort our view of reality because we have no way to experience
reality directly. From the moment we are born, our interactions with
others begin to slide cultural/linguistic lenses onto our eyes. By the time
we are adults, it is as if the contact lenses of culture and language are
actually fused to our eyes: not only are we incapable of noticing the ways
24 Our Love-Hate Relationship with Hatred

in which they may distort our view of reality but we also lose the aware-
ness that we even are looking through lenses. In the following sections
of this chapter, I attempt to show how these lenses perpetuate our obses-
sion with hatred and violence.
what’s in a name?
Negative labels litter our language. Such pejorative references evidence
our deep-seated obsession with hatred. Negative labels have the power
to ostracize and stigmatize groups in our society. As with any element of
the mind/language connection, negative labels are most powerful when
we lose sight of the fact that the labels are creations of our hatred. Even
though we now toss around some pejoratives, such as “bitch,” in casual
conversations, the terms retain their ability to hurt because, when
uttered in the right tone, under the right circumstances, the full and
painful weight of the terms comes crashing down. 
Over the past three decades, progress made by the gay rights move-
ment has truly opened the closet door on the gay-lesbian-bisexual-trans-
gendered (GLBT) community. In the process, the term “gay,” in partic-
ular, has entered common usage of the English language as a descriptor
of a group of people. Yet, even in an era when gay characters can be
found on popular primetime television shows, “gay” can still function
as an attack when spat out in hatred. The history of labels applied to
members of the GLBT community provides an excellent case in point
of the complex relationship between what we call each other and how
we think about each other.
Even as I write this in the year 2001, after having taught several classes
about this particular case study, I ﬁnd myself perplexed by what name
to use. Although no longer carrying the intense social stigmas of the
recent past, “gay” is simply inaccurate because it does not necessarily
include lesbians, bisexuals, or transgendered persons. The most accu-
rate designation—gay/lesbian/bisexual/transgendered community—is
so awkward as to be nearly unmanageable. So, for the sake of compro-
mise, I will rely on the acronym GLBT in this section when referring to
the entire population of people who do not identify themselves as
strictly heterosexual.
The care it was necessary for me to take in thinking through and writ-
ing that previous paragraph is central to the issue we need to consider:
hate talk 25

how a name, a lack of a name, a name enforced by opponents, and a
name embraced by insiders can have an impact on our perceptions of
each other and whether we tolerate, or hate, each other. 
The twentieth century has witnessed many changes in the labels
attached to the GLBT community. But we must remember that the
labels themselves are more than just names. Name changes reﬂect
changes in thinking and, in turn, change thinking; the very process of
naming is an element of our language system that shapes, and is shaped
by, our thoughts.1 A closer look at the history of labels applied to the
GLBT community in the twentieth century will demonstrate how some
kinds of names, by their nature, encourage hatred among us, while oth-
ers at least have the potential to encourage an atmosphere of mutual
recognition and respect. 
Sexual desires and activities outside the boundaries of institutional-
ized heterosexual marriage are not a twentieth-century anomaly.
Ancient Greek literature acknowledges the existence of sexuality other
than heterosexuality within the culture of the time. And, as any antiho-
mosexual religious activist will tell you, the Bible contains several ref-
erences to homosexual activity. As Christianity became entrenched in
Europe, codes formalized against any sexuality outside traditional mar-
riage. Heavily inﬂuenced by early Puritan settlers, most American
colonies adopted strict laws governing sexual behavior and thus planted
the seeds of sexual bigotry in the American system.
Because most Western societies so wholly deplored same-sex rela-
tions, most people were raised to assume that such an outrageous “atroc-
ity” simply could not occur among their friends, family, or neighbors.
Ironically, this “assumption of heterosexuality,” as it is called in aca-
demic circles, for centuries allowed many people to maintain same-sex
relationships relatively safely: because the notion of homosexuality was
unthinkable, no one really thought to suspect or accuse. For example,
during the nineteenth century unmarried women sometimes lived
together throughout their adult lives, sharing ﬁnances and responsibili-
ties, as well as a particularly close friendship. Termed “Boston mar-
riages,” many of these arrangements were likely nothing more than mat-
ters of convenience between friends; but many, we now realize, were
long-term lesbian commitments.2 The assumption of heterosexuality
prevented even the most rabid homophobes of the nineteenth century
from seeing the reality of some Boston marriages.
Because society deemed same-sex relationships unthinkable, it
26 Our Love-Hate Relationship with Hatred

assigned no name—positive or negative—to those occasionally caught
in compromising sexual positions. Although the term “homosexual”
appeared in dictionaries of the English language in the early nineteenth
century, common references still centered on the notion of sodomy.
Instead of labeling the people, our ancestors simply labeled the deed.
Thus a person may have committed the act of sodomy, but the person
himself did not warrant an all-encompassing label based solely on the
act. People attracted to members of the same sex existed as a nameless
entity. The absence of a popularly accepted label such as “homosexual”
or “gay” facilitated the assumption of heterosexuality because it allowed,
even encouraged, society to deny the existence of GLBT people.
As such, the namelessness itself of the GLBT community evidenced
the absolutist thinking in society at the time. As I have discussed in
chapter 1, absolutism, or presuming everything either to be wholly good
or wholly bad, characterizes hatred; in order to hate, a person must con-
ceive others, and by implication also themselves, in absolute terms. 
For many years Americans condemned members of what we now
call the GLBT community to the ultimate fate of absolutism: name-
lessness. To be nameless is to not exist in the cultural-linguistic caul-
dron that is society. To be nameless is to be completely disenfranchised.
The nameless cannot organize to demand rights. The nameless cannot
call out to each other for help. The nameless cannot even identify
themselves with clarity in the privacy of their own thoughts, for even in
that haven they, as products of society, still do not have a richly textured
term of self-identity. Thus, namelessness truly is the absolute form of the
absolutist thought pattern of hatred. Whereas today’s racial bigots say, “I
am good because I am white. You are bad because you are black,” for
centuries society sent the then-nameless GLBT community the even
more profoundly damning message: “We are. You are not.”
In 1895 a scandal surrounding Oscar Wilde shattered the Western
world’s comfortable assumption of heterosexuality.3 The author of such
critically acclaimed works as The Picture of Dorian Gray and The Impor-
tance of Being Earnest, Wilde’s often ﬂamboyant, always egotistical
behavior drew attention on both sides of the Atlantic. Yet, even though
Wilde lived his life in the spotlight, the assumption of heterosexuality
insulated him from attacks for many years during which he routinely
engaged in same-sex romances.
Ultimately, Wilde’s greatest passion brought about his downfall. In
the early 1890s, Wilde fell madly in love with a dashing young man
hate talk 27

named Lord Alfred Douglas. The two remained nearly constant com-
panions even after their affair ended. Douglas, whose penchant for the
outrageous surpassed even Wilde’s, ﬂaunted his sexuality. As both
became increasingly less discreet, Douglas’s father, the legendary box-
ing enthusiast the Marquess of Queensberry, demanded that Douglas
stop associating with Wilde. When Douglas refused to comply, his
father took public aim at Wilde who, in turn, ﬁled a libel complaint
against the aristocrat.
Wilde’s suit against the Marquess of Queensberry backﬁred. Queens-
berry’s lawyers marched forth a parade of young men who testiﬁed that
Wilde had had sex with them. The judge threw out the libel suit and
charged Wilde with sodomy and indecent behavior. World media atten-
tion now focused not on Oscar Wilde the author, nor even on Oscar
Wilde the socialite, but on Oscar Wilde the predatory sexual pervert
who had corrupted young men. When the criminal trial ensued several
weeks later, the prosecutor turned Wilde’s own literary words against
him, asking, “What is the ‘Love that dare not speak its name’?”4 Never
one to back down from a challenge, Wilde described for the court the
intense love sometimes shared between two men. Wilde then spent the
next two years in prison.
Because the world press covered the scandal in such detail, the
impact of Wilde’s trial carried forth even as he himself languished in
jail. For many years the word “Oscar” entered British and American
slang as a term of contempt. Black-market pornographers amassed small
fortunes selling depictions of same-sex intimacies under titles such as
“The Sins of Oscar Wilde.” Most profoundly, though, the man who
coined the phrase “the love that dare not speak its name” had begun the
naming process. As the lead character explains in the novel Maurice, by
E. M. Forster, “I’m an unspeakable of the Oscar Wilde sort.”5
Although the controversy surrounding Oscar Wilde immediately
saved the GLBT community from the hell of namelessness, it also
helped usher in the pseudoscientiﬁc purgatory of labels such as “invert”
and “homosexual.” Before medical researchers put GLBT persons
under the microscope at the turn of the twentieth century, sodomy was
an act not a deﬁning quality of a person. With the advent of biological
and psychological studies of sexuality, a person who committed the act
of sodomy became an invert or a homosexual.6 An invert was nothing
more than an invert—it was all that the person was.
Such all-encompassing labels also carried implications of defective-
28 Our Love-Hate Relationship with Hatred

ness. An invert’s psychosexual development had stalled out. The homo-
sexual was emotionally immature. Sexual inversion resulted from
severe childhood trauma that the person was not strong enough to over-
come. While the researchers did suggest that homosexuals did not
choose their sexuality—in other words, they were not just ﬂagrantly
stamping on social customs—the researchers nevertheless concluded
that homosexuals were defective people. Thus, by creating labels for
GLBT persons, instead of for their behaviors, the turn-of-the-century
researchers deﬁned the people themselves as defective creatures. 
As such, the ﬁrst scientists to study homosexuals inadvertently dehu-
manized them. Another of the characteristic thought patterns of hatred,
dehumanization enables extreme acts of violence because it encourages
people not to recognize their shared humanity, the most fundamental
building block of tolerant relationships. Signiﬁcantly, many of the most
inﬂuential sexuality researchers in the early twentieth century were
German. Scientiﬁc “evidence” that homosexuals were defective mem-
bers of the human species was well publicized by the time Adolf Hilter
rose to power. During the reign of the Third Reich, Hitler insisted that
all known and suspected homosexuals be tagged with a pink triangle
and removed to concentration camps for extermination to ensure that
their defective traits would not weaken the “pure” Aryan bloodline.7
While the threat of persecution in Germany was unparalleled any-
where else, inverts and homosexuals throughout Europe and America
still had to be very careful about revealing their sexuality. The use of
insider code words such as “gay” and “queer” allowed members of the
GLBT community to arrange meetings and pass along information
without raising too much suspicion. “Gay” allowed people to self-
deﬁne. “Gay” allowed members of the GLBT community to assign their
own connotations to their identity.8 However, because “gay” functioned
as an insider code word—and had to for the safety of gay people—the
GLBT community simply could not use the term openly to combat pop-
ular negative labels such as “Oscar” and “invert.” 
By the 1950s, the once-secret code words used only by members of
the GLBT community had become derogatory slang hurled at the com-
munity by outsiders. Police in urban areas wised up to the meaning of
“gay” and used their new understanding to root out and raid under-
ground meeting places. The obsessive middle-Americanism of 1950s
culture rejected anyone who violated middle-class WASP norms. Gays
and queers did not meet society’s gender role standards. Gay men were
hate talk 29

“sissies,” “pansies,” and “fairies” who lacked the strength of “real” men.
Lesbians, though still rather rarely acknowledged at all, were written off
as “mannish” and incapable of attracting men.
The popularizing of such negative labels in the 1950s encouraged
stereotyping, yet another thought pattern characteristic of hatred. A
pansy could not ﬁght in a war, protect innocent women and children,
or probably even support them ﬁnancially. As a result of such stereo-
types about gay men, society effectively emasculated a man it labeled a
fairy. 
As I discussed in chapter 1, stereotyping and scapegoating often go
hand in hand. Scapegoating, or placing blame onto others, deﬁned
much of the 1950s as Joe McCarthy blamed all of America’s problems
on communist inﬁltrators. But we must not forget that McCarthy also
identiﬁed gay government employees as a particular risk.9 Why?
Because, he charged, they would be particularly susceptible to black-
mail plots by the Soviets. At the most basic level this notion relied on
society’s biases: because gays were not accepted by society, the prospect
of being revealed as gay was a sizable threat—careers, friendships, and
families all could be destroyed by the allegation of homosexuality. But
at an even more fundamental level, this McCarthy era theory of gays as
a national security risk also relied on the stereotypes about gays. A pansy
no doubt would be too weak to stand up in the face of a threat of black-
mail. A fairy would not have the courage to say “no” to the communists.
Clearly, then, the stereotypes attached to labels such as “gay,” “queer,”
“pansy,” and “fairy” in the 1950s enabled scapegoating of many of soci-
ety’s problems onto the GLBT community. That, of course, provided
further grounds for hatred.
When civil rights movements exploded onto the American scene in
the 1960s, the GLBT community began to organize as well. The young
movement demanded an end to persecution. As the movement became
fully established in the late 1960s and early 1970s, leaders began to use
the terms “gay” and “queer” as rallying cries. Protests featured slogans
such as “Gay and Proud” and “I’m Here, I’m Queer.” In the process of
demanding an end to homophobic laws, the GLBT community took
ownership of its own identity. What had been negative labels imposed
by outsiders now became symbols of empowerment as the GLBT com-
munity determined to assign its own, positive connotations to the
terms.10
In the four decades since the GLBT community organized publicly,
30 Our Love-Hate Relationship with Hatred

it has continued to co-opt negative labels once hurled by opponents.
The Nazis’ lethal pink triangle now symbolizes unity and identiﬁes safe
zones in schools, such as faculty ofﬁces where students may feel free to
discuss GLBT issues. Some leading groups within the GLBT commu-
nity actually have incorporated the old pejoratives into their names. For
example, one of the more radical GLBT rights groups goes by the name
Queer Nation. By adopting and ever so gradually redeﬁning the labels
once used to ostracize GLBT persons, the GLBT community has
undercut the power of such terms to propagate the process of hatred.
The progress of the GLBT rights movement in the late twentieth
century has been nothing short of astounding. Many states have abol-
ished antisodomy laws. Hawaii recognizes same-sex marriages; Vermont
grants full legal beneﬁts to domestic partners. Amid a storm of opposi-
tion, Ellen Degeneres “came out” in the mid-1990s, both in real life and
on her television sitcom, Ellen. Within only a couple of years of Ellen’s
controversial breakthrough, a comedy called Will and Grace, featuring
openly gay men, entered the primetime line-up with virtually no outcry.
Gay people still are a small minority in our society, but openly gay peo-
ple now exert a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on American popular culture. A bit
more each year, “gay” is becoming a demographic descriptor and losing
its power as a negative label.
Of course, the increasing tolerance of openly gay people does not
mean all gay people are safe from hatred and violence. The brutal 1998
slaying of Matthew Shepard reminded all of us that some of our fellow
Americans still perceive members of the GLBT community to be per-
verts of “the Oscar Wilde sort,” defective “inverts,” and even “queer”
threats to the American way of life. As members of Fred Phelps’s antigay
lobby protested Shepard’s funeral, they carried signs proclaiming “God
Hates Fags.” It is, sadly, clear that people like Fred Phelps still cannot
see past the dehumanizing hatred of terms such as “fag” to the human-
ity of a person like Matthew Shepard.
it’s the little things
I love Travis, my sweet, cuddly, little puppy. To me Travis’s soft black
nose—tinged with one tiny spot of pink—is just about the cutest thing
on this planet. Only his downy ears, which ﬂop slightly toward the
edges, rival his nose for my most tender affections. Travis is my dog-
hate talk 31

baby, my sweetest little friend, my puppy. To the rest of the world, of
course, Travis is an eighty-pound German Shepherd/Husky mix with a
decidedly bad temper. He ﬂails himself at the windows, sliming drool at
everything in his path, every time a bicycle passes in front of our house.
He barks viciously at anyone who dares pull into our driveway. Travis is
a seriously territorial guard dog with the size and temper to back up a
standoff with any intruder. But, to me, Travis is my precious puppy and
always will be.
I like to try to convince myself that I conceive Travis, now six years
old, still to be a puppy simply because I am one of those annoying dog
owners who views her pet as a child. Travis truly is my baby, albeit a very
large and noisy one. Yet, if I am honest with myself, I must admit that,
in part, I think of Travis as a “puppy” because it is convenient for me. If
Travis is a “puppy” instead of a six-year-old dog, I can blame his frequent
misbehavior on his youth instead of on my failure to train him appro-
priately. If Travis is a “puppy,” I can allow myself the fantasy that he
someday will grow out of his mischief. If Travis is a “puppy,” I can blind
myself to how scary he actually is to outsiders—my “puppy” is not really
a terrifying territorial beast, he’s just misunderstood.
When I think of Travis as a puppy, I am relying on a powerful ele-
ment of the mind-language connection called a diminutive. Diminu-
tives allow us to make another person, thing, or in my case dog, smaller
and younger than it actually is. As a result, diminutives also strip power
from the person, thing (or dog) to whom they are applied. Put simply,
“dogs” can be scary. My dog, Travis, really is scary. But puppies are not
scary. My eighty-pound “puppy” is, as I have said, just misunderstood.
Unfortunately, I am not the only person who uses diminutives. Nor are
most diminutives as innocuous as my insistent notion that Travis will for-
ever be a pup. Many of the diminutives that have entered common usage
in our language have contributed to the oppression of whole classes of
people for centuries. While we can cull any number of examples from our
history, perhaps none has had a more profound impact than “boy,” a
diminutive long assigned to black males of all ages in this country.
“Boy” originated as a reference during the era of slavery. Slave
traders, slave owners, and plantation overseers reduced adult black
males to boys and thus compounded their bondage by also denying
their adulthood. Even in the Northern states, free blacks faced substan-
tial and pervasive racial prejudice; there too whites commonly referred
to fully grown black men as boys. Following the Civil War and passage
32 Our Love-Hate Relationship with Hatred

of the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Amendments to the Con-
stitution—which, in combination, legally enfranchised blacks as full
American citizens—bigotry against blacks remained the norm; black
men, in particular, felt the wrath of racists. In reaction to blacks’ new
legal status, groups such as the Ku Klux Klan emerged. The Klan
helped pass the so-called Jim Crow laws that kept blacks from using their
newly secured rights. The Klan also used violent scare tactics, like
lynchings. Yet, whether legal or lethal, the Klan’s activities sent one
clear message: no “boy” would be allowed to freely exercise the rights
held sacred by white men.
As the twentieth century dawned, prejudicial treatment of blacks
persisted. When the Great Depression took hold in the 1930s, black men
suffered more than most. Because blacks already were clinging to the
bottom-most rungs of the economic ladder, they were displaced by the
crash in disproportionate numbers. White men desperate to feed their
families now took over jobs previously deemed ﬁt only for “boys.” Only
tip-driven service positions—valeting, bell-hopping, shoe-shining—
remained fully open to black males. Because the positions themselves
relied on subservient attitudes, the diminutive “boy” seemed to acquire
an appropriateness it had not so fully enjoyed since the days of slavery.
World War II marshaled in the ﬁrst outcries of resistance to the
demeaning of adult black males. Although blacks had served in the mil-
itary since aiding in the Union cause during the Civil War, the white
military establishment rarely allowed blacks to serve as full combat
troops in critical positions. The sheer size of the Allied effort in World
War II opened new opportunities for black men, opportunities that
challenged the assumptions underlying the term “boy.”11 Black soldiers
made even greater strides during the Korean War in the late 1940s.
But, ultimately, it was the onset of the large-scale Civil Rights move-
ment in the 1950s that marked the beginning of the end for the diminu-
tive. From the Little Rock, Arkansas, school desegregation protests of
the mid-1950s to Martin Luther King, Jr.’s March on Washington nearly
ten years later, black Americans demanded equal treatment under the
law. Although not a legal issue itself, a critical component of the strug-
gle for civil rights involved combating the attitudinal effects of several
centuries of adult black men being referred to as “boys.”
I want to consider here some of the profound effects “boy” has had
on both blacks and whites in America. Speciﬁcally, I examine how the
diminutive itself facilitated white hatred of blacks by perpetuating dan-
hate talk 33

gerous stereotypes. The word “boy” is another example of the power of
the mind-language connection, for it has encouraged hundreds of years
of hatred and violence.
The thinnest of lines divides hatred from fear. Even a cursory exam-
ination of white racists’ hatred of blacks reveals an underlying fear of
blacks. Throughout most of American history, white fears have
emanated from stereotypes about blacks in general and adult black
males in particular. Signiﬁcantly, of course, whites themselves created
and entrenched the stereotypes. As I demonstrated in chapter1, stereo-
types are a ﬂawed form of thinking because they are based on limited
and/or biased information. Nevertheless, once a stereotype is accepted
by a group of people, the stereotype itself functions as their reality. A
closer look at the diminutive “boy” suggests that the term helped whites
manage the fears they felt in the face of dominant stereotypes about
blacks. Thus, the diminutive—an element of the mind-language con-
nection—helped people cope with the effects of stereotyping, a ﬂawed
thought pattern of hatred. In what follows, I examine a few examples of
the stereotypes about black men in order to understand how “boy”
served as a coping mechanism for many white Americans.
The stereotype that blacks were childlike justiﬁed the institution of
slavery in America for about two centuries. Largely Christian, white
Americans simply could not have reconciled their religious beliefs with
slavery unless they could rationalize slavery itself as a moral good. The
stereotype that blacks were childlike allowed this rationalization. White
slave traders and owners felt that they were saving a people too mentally
and spiritually immature to save themselves. The term “boy” directly
reﬂects this stereotypical assumption about blacks.
But the diminutive exerted power far beyond the stereotype of blacks
as childlike: “boy” also undercut other stereotypes, those that made many
whites afraid of blacks. Perhaps most profoundly, “boy” helped verbally
emasculate adult black males. White thinking assumed blacks to be sav-
age and animalistic. As such, adult black males were believed to be
wildly sexual; their sexuality knew no limits—white women, in particu-
lar, were at risk in the presence of adult black males. By restricting all
black men, regardless of age, to a perpetual childhood, “boy” helped
whites suppress their fears of black male sexuality by encouraging whites
to perceive black men as nothing more than over-grown children.
Finally, the diminutive helped whites dismiss black men as a poten-
tial political or economic threat. Put simply, men challenge each oth-
34 Our Love-Hate Relationship with Hatred

ers’ dominance: boys do not scare men. By conceiving adult black males
as boys, whites denied (at least in their own minds) the legitimacy of
black men as a political voting bloc or consumer or labor sector. Thus,
in the years following the Civil War and well into the twentieth century,
white politicians rarely spoke to the interests of black men, just as adver-
tisers and investors rarely approached black men as a viable economic
force. “Boys,” it was presumed, had neither the intellectual horsepower
nor the material resources to be signiﬁcant players in the political and
economic worlds of men.
Clearly then, the word “boy” functioned as a diminutive in that it
made adult black men seem smaller, younger, and, as a result, less
threatening, to many white Americans. “Boy” grew out of early justiﬁ-
cations for slavery and, over the years, helped protect the institution of
slavery. After emancipation, “boy” contributed to the legitimacy of Jim
Crow laws and encouraged social and economic discrimination against
adult black males in particular. “Boy” eased whites’ fears about black
men and thus played directly into the stereotypes at the root of racial
hatred. “Boy” also insinuated itself into the consciousness of American
blacks, eating away at adult males’ self-identity and pride and adding a
painful internal obstacle to the struggle for equality: namely, the need
to accept one’s self as truly equal, fully enfranchised, adult.
Today, only the very, very old and the most virulent of bigots publicly
use the term “boy” in its diminutive sense. Yet the legacy of the diminu-
tive still persists in the mind-language connection. When white women
clutch their purses as an adult black male passes near them in an air-
port, “boy” echoes out from the past. When a white father chills as he
notices a black man noticing his teen-aged daughter, “boy” cries out.
“Boy” harnessed the stereotypes that drove fear and hatred like a well-
trained team. “Boy” is nearly dead now. And the stereotypes too are
showing their age. But when they do rally in moments of tension, “boy”
still haunts us.
you are such an arm!
Imagine yourself in the midst of a heated argument with one of your friends. A
point of minor disagreement happens to converge with the bad moods both of
you have been coddling all day long. Suddenly, you’re both ready to duke it out
over a relatively insigniﬁcant issue. Because you are friends, you would never
hate talk 35

dream of escalating to violence. But you will allow yourselves to vent your
accumulated rage at each other, knowing that a perk of friendship is inevitable
forgiveness. The barbs start ﬂying back and forth between you. Because you’ve
known each other so well for so long, you can track each others’ hot points
with a ﬁnely tuned radar. You coldly suggest your friend’s penchant for over-
dramatizing is causing the ﬁght. He rallies (with an exaggerated amount of
ﬂare, typically), blaming your tendency to overanalyze. Unbeknownst to your
friend, your boss also criticized you today for this trait: the tension is more than
you can take. Well . . . “over-analyze this, buddy!” you shout in frustration (and
with an accompanying gesture you remember from high school). Shocked at
your aggression, your friend looks you square in the eyes and declares, “You are
such an arm!”
How would you react to such an assault on your character? I know how
I would react: I’d laugh like a crazy person. And, why not? Obviously my
friend must be a crazy person to say something so crazy, so why not join
in?
In fact, the seemingly inane retort, “you are such an arm,” is a lan-
guage structure called reduction in which a whole person is reduced
simply to one part. Americans frequently use reduction. The reduction
“you are such an arm” sounds silly only because it violates the normal
pattern we use for reducing: namely, when we want to hurt someone by
reducing them, we reduce them to a body part about which our society
has some level of discomfort. This silly example makes it easier for us to
see the actual process of reduction simply because it is so absurd. 
But although this example is absurd intentionally to make a point,
reduction itself is very powerful. By deﬁnition, when we reduce another
person to one of their parts, we make them an object—they become
nothing more than the one part. As such, reduction necessarily dehu-
manizes because it keeps us from seeing whole people and thus prevents
us from empathizing with them and caring about them. A closer look at
some of the popular ways reduction plays out in our society will help
illuminate further how the use of this language structure contributes in
its own unique way to our obsession with hatred.
Perhaps because of our Puritan heritage, we Americans long have
preferred to reduce our enemies to the nether regions of the human
body. In moments of conﬂict, we do not refer to each others’ arms and
legs or ﬁngers and toes. No, we Americans aim our verbal punches
36 Our Love-Hate Relationship with Hatred

below the belt—directly below the belt. We reduce our opponents to
penises, vaginas, and anuses, though we usually do so via the most col-
orfully graphic slang terminology we can muster. By reducing people to
parts of the body our society deems “dirty,” we label the people them-
selves as dirty. Our preferred pattern of reduction suggests not only that
our enemies are not whole but also that they are unclean, impure. On
both levels, reduction encourages us to believe that those people we
reduce are inferior to us.
Although we tend to reserve verbal reductions for ﬁghts wherein
both parties clearly recognize the hateful intent of the terms, American
culture long has tolerated visual reduction. Because visual reductions
normally are not connected to an obviously confrontational situation,
we easily forget that they too promote the sort of objectiﬁcation and
dehumanization that lie at the very heart of hatred. I want to discuss
here two avenues in which visual reduction reigns supreme—the world
of pornography and the world of advertising.
American courts and legislatures have tried in vain for decades to
deﬁne obscenity. Hundreds of deﬁnitions have been offered, but all
seem somehow to include too much or too little to function as the bases
for viable laws. While apparently none of us Americans are able to
deﬁne obscenity adequately, we all seem to recognize the obscene when
we see it. Consider for a moment how to differentiate between an “artis-
tic” nude and a “pornographic” nude. What leads a person or a society
to declare one piece “art” and another “pornography”? No doubt there
are many factors, among them the context in which the work is dis-
played (for example, City Museum of Art versus Bobby Jack’s House of
XXX All-Nude All The Time). But even if we remove contextual factors
about location, marketing, and medium, the works themselves often
give clear evidence of their own nature. 
Visual reduction characterizes pornography; our subconscious
recognition of this trait helps us to identify pornography even when we
cannot deﬁne it. Many pornographic images focus on body parts not
whole people. The pornographer’s camera often literally reduces. Yet
even when whole bodies are shown, they are displayed in such a way as
to guide the viewer’s focus to a particular area of the body. A picture of
a whole woman, displayed spread-eagle on a motorcycle with her naked
crotch front and center of the photo, directs the eye to her genitals. All
of her may be in the picture, but only one part of her is the subject of
the photographer’s gaze and, in turn, the viewer’s gaze. 
hate talk 37

Although such techniques of visual reduction are most obvious in
the world of pornography, the world of advertising also makes use of
reduction to associate products with particular body parts. Advertise-
ments sometimes rely on lighting to direct the audience’s attention. For
example, an advertisement might use backlighting subtly to enhance
the triangular area between a standing woman’s legs. The woman her-
self recedes into the shadows of the background, while the product—
front/middle of the shot—is framed by her legs. Some advertisements
are far more overt.
Because advertising images bombard us constantly (estimates are
that we encounter about twenty thousand ads every year of our lives12),
we sometimes lose sight of the techniques commonly used in the adver-
tisements themselves. As products of our own culture, we have been
raised to accept the technique of reduction as a primary visual tool of
advertisers. We rarely stop to notice how pervasive reduction is in the
thousands of images we encounter each day. Of course, as I have
already demonstrated, we are at our most vulnerable when we have our
defenses all the way down.
While the level of reduction in advertisements is usually far less
severe than in pornography, reduction in advertising probably affects us
all the more because we do not stop often enough to question it. When
we encounter a pornographic magazine, we are naturally on the look-
out for techniques such as reduction that turn women and men into
objects. Yet those same techniques can and do sell perfumes, cars, and
vacation packages in magazines anyone can buy in the check-out line
of their local grocery store.
Perhaps because reduction now is so common in the world we see
around us, we also willingly tolerate reduction in our language.
Humans have been calling each other “asses” and the like for centuries.
It does seem, though, that in recent years we have become far more
accepting of the public use of such terms. Words once reserved for
moments of heated conﬂict now ﬂit casually about in conversations tak-
ing place in shopping malls and restaurants. A couple of years ago, a
man was actually taken to court for yelling some choice words at the top
of his lungs in a canoeing area where young children were present.13
The story made national news not because the public use of such lan-
guage was unique but because someone ﬁnally had been taken to task
for using such language in public.
Whether visual or verbal, reduction discourages us from seeing
38 Our Love-Hate Relationship with Hatred

whole people. By reducing others to parts, reduction makes it difﬁcult
for us to empathize with them and care about them. As such, reduction
helps us think of other people as objects, as somehow less human than
we are. The language and even visual structures of reduction thus
enable dehumanization, one of the key thought patterns of hatred. 
love is a battlefield
I cannot remember, let alone count, the number of times I have been
called a “bitch.” I have a relatively bad temper that I did not learn to har-
ness at all until I was well into my thirties. I am what you might call
short on patience and long on mouth. And, of course, there’s my job
and my attitude toward it. I am a professor. To the chagrin of some stu-
dents, I am a professor of the old-school variety, meaning I believe tough
assignments, strict deadlines, and “counting off for grammar errors”
build character. Under the circumstances, I’m quite sure I’m being
conservative when I say I have been called a “bitch” several hundred
times in my life.
Yet for all the times I have overheard mumblings in the hallway after
I have handed back exams and all the times I have heard grumblings by
waitstaff as I strode toward a restaurant manager’s ofﬁce waving a com-
plaint card, I only really remember one time someone called me a
bitch. And, although it has been nearly ten years, the memory of the
sound of that word spat out in judgment by a friend stings as much today
as it did so very long ago. 
In recent years, our society seems to have taken some of the taboo sta-
tus off the term “bitch.” For more than a decade now television network
censors have allowed prime time sitcom characters to call each other
bitches. “Bitch” also appears rather frequently in the lyrics of popular
songs. Many of us now use “bitch” as a humorous reference in casual
conversations.
Yet for all its common acceptance, “bitch” still retains its power to
sting. Buried beneath the popular, light-hearted usage of the term is the
original seed of its meaning. “Bitch” is a metaphor and, as such, its
meaning derives by comparing the person to whom the term is applied
to the actual meaning of the word. Although “bitch” is now used to refer
to aggressive women, “bitch” technically refers to a female dog. The
popular meaning of the term—the notion of the aggressive woman—
hate talk 39

builds from the image of a wild, snarling, protective, potentially lethal
mother dog. We may not consciously think of that true meaning of the
term when we teasingly tell a friend she’s being bitchy, but we all under-
stand that image: it is what gives “bitch” meaning not only as a popular,
humorous term but also as a powerful pejorative. The metaphor “bitch”
inherently dehumanizes the woman at whom it is aimed. The day one
of my dearest friend called me a bitch at the scene of a car accident, he
made me feel the true meaning of that term. At that moment, I felt
stripped of who and what I was not by the accident but by his words.
Metaphors function as one of the most common language structures
that, when used carelessly, perpetuate our attraction to hatred. So many
of the hateful names we call each other are metaphoric: dog, pig,
chicken, slug to name but a few. “Bitch” no doubt is one of the most
commonly used metaphors in our slang today. And, because it still does
have the power to hit its victims like a slap in the face, “bitch” is a very
obvious example of the power of metaphors to shape how we feel about
each other and how we make each other feel.
While “bitch” may be one of the most obvious examples of the power
of metaphors to carry hateful thought patterns like dehumanization, I
want to consider for a moment another example that is much harder to
see and, because of that, probably effects us all the more. As I warned at
the beginning of this chapter, looking inside our own mind-language
connection poses a signiﬁcant challenge. Few aspects of our language
so test our analytical abilities as the language surrounding language
itself, speciﬁcally the language we use when talking about arguing. It is
important to understand the ways in which we have been socialized to
think about arguments themselves, not just the hateful words such as
“bitch” that we sometimes use when arguing. 
Our society overtly deplores violence. From an early age we tell our
children not to ﬁght with their ﬁsts but, rather, to learn to resolve their
conﬂicts peacefully, with words. Many schools and even preschools now
teach children rudimentary tools of verbal conﬂict resolution. In other
words, we teach our children that physical ﬁghting is bad but that argu-
ing is okay and, if handled fairly, even healthy. I agree with this senti-
ment wholeheartedly on the surface level. Unfortunately, if we stop to
consider how we actually conceive argument in our society, we quickly
ﬁnd that the way we talk about arguing actually gloriﬁes hatred and, in
the extreme, physical violence.
Our entire understanding of argument rests on the metaphor of
40 Our Love-Hate Relationship with Hatred

argumentation as a war. The two parties in an argument are opponents.
They line up their positions. They attack. They defend. They marshal
facts. They win or lose. When in the heat of emotion, they may even
refer to killing each other’s arguments. These are but a few of the war-
like terms that shape our understanding of verbal conﬂict. The argu-
ment-as-war metaphor is deeply engrained in our mind-language con-
nection. I devote a class period in one of my courses to this concept. I
challenge my students to talk to each other about an argument we have
studied without using any terms that derive from the war metaphor. In
more than a decade of teaching, I have yet to have a student meet the
challenge. I’ve never met it either. The metaphor of argument as war is
so fundamental to our way of thinking about argument that we simply
do not have terms outside the metaphor with which to discuss the
process of verbal conﬂict (which, of course, is an instance of the war
metaphor, too!).
Our preoccupation with hatred resides in the argument-as-war
metaphor. Over the centuries Western culture has come to think of
argument as a battleﬁeld and thus subtly to train each new generation
to enter verbal disputes with a warlike mentality. By doing so, we teach
our children, as we ourselves were taught, that argument is not a true
alternative to violence but, rather, a different form of violence: in argu-
ment, the wounds are mental and emotional but nevertheless wounds
intentionally, hatefully inﬂicted on the enemy.
Because this metaphor resides so deeply in the core of our mind-lan-
guage connection, it may be easier for us to understand the way it effects
us if we consider a true alternative. In the early 1970s, a communication
scholar named Wayne Brockriede suggested that we should reconceive
argument in line with a metaphor of love in which arguers are lovers.14
In this view, the parties to an argument are not enemies waging battle
each with the intent to claim victory; rather, they are partners engaged
in a mutually reafﬁrming and productive intercourse that results in the
betterment of both parties. Instead of one side “winning,” both sides
cooperate to produce a compromise that beneﬁts everyone involved. It
is strange to imagine a world in which arguers are thought of as lovers.
We can barely wrap our brains around the concept because the
metaphor of argument as war is fundamental to our culture and to the
obsession with hatred our culture embraces. 
I doubt our society ever will abandon its commitment to the argu-
ment as war metaphor; it is too much a part of who we are and how we
hate talk 41

interact with each other. But we need at least to recognize the metaphor
for what it is: a powerful element of the mind-language connection that
shapes how we think and behave. The argument as war metaphor
encourages a conﬂict mentality. Argument as war pits us against each
other and reinforces the most fundamental aspect of our fascination
with hatred, the “us versus them” mindset. Argument as war is a
metaphor, just like “bitch.” And just like “bitch,” these days it normally
eases its way in and out of our lives barely even drawing our notice. But
no matter how innocuous it may seem, this metaphor too still has
power. It too can come crashing down on any of us at any time. Just ask
any “bitch” in a parking lot: trust me, she’ll tell you how much pain one
little metaphor can cause.
When the subject of hatred comes up, we all are tempted to point the
ﬁnger at those who hate obviously—hate group members, killers, and
other people whose extreme hatred expels them to the very fringes of
our society. But as I have shown in this chapter of Love to Hate, we all
perpetuate our attraction to hatred when we allow ourselves thought-
lessly to use certain elemental language structures in our everyday con-
versations. We can use the processes of naming, diminutives, reduction,
and metaphor in a variety of positive ways. However, we also can warp
these language structures to facilitate our fascination with hatred. When
we use such structures without thought to their impact, we deepen their
inﬂuence in our own lives. We also send our children another wave of
mixed messages about hatred and violence.
Several years ago, a movement called “political correctness” swept
across America. So-called PC advocates insisted that we all reform our
speech and writing to eradicate negative references to others. Some PC
advocates managed to enact speech codes on some college campuses
and in some businesses that made the utterance of certain racist and sex-
ist terms grounds for disciplinary action. Critics charged that speech
codes violated First Amendment guarantees of freedom of expression.
I myself do not advocate speech codes: I fear the compromising of
the First Amendment far more than I fear being the target of even the
most hate-ﬁlled words in our language. But what I fear most is our ten-
dency to ignore the power of the language we use to hurt others and,
ultimately, to hurt ourselves. I do not so much hate those who stupidly
spew out ugly words; rather, I fear living in a world with people who do
not fully comprehend the meaning and the power of “I hate you.”
42 Our Love-Hate Relationship with Hatred

Like most American children, I learned early to identify which kids in
my neighborhood were considered “cool.” Those deemed “cool” ruled
the loosely deﬁned territory of our neighborhood—a sprawling trailer
court and the adjacent lower-middle-class housing development in a
small Midwestern city. If a regular kid did not like me, then, well, some
regular kid did not like me, so what? But if one of the cool kids did not
like me, then I had a problem. Why? Because being rejected by the cool
kids meant the very great likelihood that all the kids in the neighborhood
would follow suit. So, like most American kids, I learned to know who
was cool and to play my cards accordingly. Fortunately for me, one of the
true kings of coolness in my part of town was my oldest cousin, thus pro-
viding me with a certain degree of social insurance just by association.
Researchers from a variety of ﬁelds have studied the complex dynam-
ics of human social hierarchies. From governmental and corporate
organizational structures to the social ladder of kids in any given neigh-
borhood, when humans meet up in groups they tend to arrange them-
selves in relation to a single leader or a small group of leaders. Within
social structures those in leadership roles center the group and function
as a base of authority. One way in which leaders enact their authority is
chapter 3
Hate Is Cool

by serving, albeit sometimes unconsciously, as role models for the
behaviors and attitudes of others in the group.1 The notion of leading
by example comes alive in most groups when lower-ranking members
emulate their leader(s) as a way of ﬁtting into the group itself. 
Signiﬁcantly, though, in a society as large and complicated as Amer-
ica we sometimes turn to role models who are not actual members of
our particular social structures. Over the course of the twentieth cen-
tury, as the mass media rose to prominence, popular cultural icons have
emerged. For better or worse, in a large and complex society where that
which is seen and heard via mass media is one of the few remaining
shared experiences of the people, these cultural icons sometimes
replace real leaders as role models for behavior and attitudes.
If cultural icons can serve as role models for behavior and attitudes,
what messages are our icons sending? In other words, when American
kids look around to ﬁnd out what is cool in their efforts to ﬁnd their
place in society, what cultural icons embody coolness? Unfortunately,
some of our most compelling icons—both past and present—suggest
that hate is cool. And in a society in which “cool” marks status in many
sectors, most signiﬁcantly those involving adolescents, we must be trou-
bled when the notion of being cool really means being cold to the
needs, rights, and feelings of others.
Of course, not all popular icons are icons of “cool” and thus not all
popular icons send that message. If any good has come about as a result
of the events of September 11, 2001, it surely is the emergence of every-
day heroes and heroines such as ﬁreﬁghters and police as cultural icons.
The mass media’s focus on the bravery of emergency service personnel
and other real-life heroes and heroines during and after the terrorist
attacks has provided American children—and adults—with a new
assortment of role models. I saw the impact of this during Halloween
2001 when, amidst the normal population of tiny ghosts, goblins,
witches, and cartoon characters, my daughter and I encountered a sur-
prising number of junior ﬁreﬁghters. But while the rise of real-life role
models of compassion and courage is heartening, it does not mean that
the icons of cool that have dominated the landscape of popular culture
for so many years have been replaced.
In order to get a clear understanding of icons of cool in our society
and how those icons send both subtle and overt signals about hatred, in
this chapter I discuss “cool” on a variety of levels. First, I consider a cou-
ple of the traditional icons of cool—cowboys and bikers—and examine
44 Our Love-Hate Relationship with Hatred

not only their place in American popular culture but also the ways sub-
tle and overt cues about hatred infuse each. Second, I consider a con-
temporary arena for icons of cool—the music industry—and analyze the
ways in which rock and rap stars sometimes convey hateful themes.
Finally, I explore reactions to today’s icons and uncover what I believe
are some of the most alarming messages about hatred American chil-
dren now encounter.
Before jumping into the analysis of cultural icons of cool, I want to
offer one note of caution. While it is tempting simply to blame those
who create or enact the icons (movie producers, rock stars, etc.) for the
presence of hatred in our society, we must remember that they create
the icons for a willing, even eager audience—us. Pushing the blame
onto those who help shape our icons of cool while we continue to con-
sume their messages is just another expression of our obsession with
hatred.
traditional icons of “cool”: the case of the cowboy
The image appears slowly over the horizon. With the sun blazing in the
background, we see him only in silhouette. The Stetson-style hat,
cocked to the side. The broad shoulders and lean waist. The holster and
guns draping loosely over sauntering hips that seem to keep time to
some inaudible tune. And, ﬁnally, as he emerges fully, the trademark
boots, the subtle clinking of the spurs. 
There he is. Wyatt Earp, Doc Holiday, Clint Eastwood, and John
Wayne rolled into one. One tiny six-year-old hero of the backyard fron-
tier, that is. For much of the twentieth century, American boys have pre-
occupied themselves with dreams and games involving cowboys. Pint-
sized “pardners” have roamed summertime streets and ruled recess for
decades. Late October normally brings a small herd of would-be cow-
boys to the costume shops. Those same tykes inundate Santa with
requests for child-size chaps, hats, holsters, and guns. 
Young boys’ quests for cowboy paraphernalia are themselves part of
our popular culture. For example, the very funny movie, A Christmas
Story, revolves around one boy’s yuletide campaign for a particular type
of pellet gun endorsed by his favorite movie-star cowboy.2 He leaves
notes and clippings about the gun around the house, mentions it often
in conversations with his parents, even features it in an essay for school.
hate is cool 45

Yet every time he raises the subject, some adult warns he’ll put his eye
out and dashes his dreams of being fully outﬁtted like his hero.
While we adults have an almost automatic response to a pellet gun—
“you’ll put your eye out”—we rarely if ever offer children cautions
about the larger issue: the very nature of the cowboy icon. It is after all
the adoration of such icons in movies, books, and television that fosters
in children the desire for toy guns. As such, we need to consider the
messages behind the symbol or, in this case, the cowboy behind the
gun, in order to understand both the positive and the potentially nega-
tive sides of this enduring icon of American popular culture.
First, and perhaps most fundamentally, the cowboy icon has two
basic incarnations: the cowboy hero and the cowboy villain. Cowboy
heroes often appear in roles such as sheriff, leader of a cattle drive, or
what I’ll call a “wandering hero,” such as the Lone Ranger, who appears
much like a frontier Superman wherever and whenever help is needed.
Writers and producers most commonly place cowboy heroes in conﬂict
either with “Indians” or with the cowboy villain. In contrast to the other
classic bad guys of the Western genre, cowboy villains pose a special
challenge because they are essentially the alter ego of the cowboy hero;
the cowboy villain shares the hero’s skill with a gun, his horse-riding
maneuvers, and his knowledge of the land. What distinguishes the two,
of course, is character: the cowboy hero is essentially good, while the
cowboy villain is essentially evil. 
Even if we assume that our cultural icon of the cowboy only involves
the cowboy hero—an assumption I suspect may not be as safe today as
it was in the 1950s—we still ﬁnd ourselves with a complex icon capable
of sending mixed messages about hatred and violence. Among the
issues surrounding the cowboy that merit some consideration are: the
actual proﬁle of the cowboy and thus the connotation of “us” offered to
those who identify with the character; the absolutism that seems a cen-
tral feature of almost all stories starring the cowboy; the tendency of the
cowboy to dehumanize his enemies; and, ultimately, what such features
of the icon say about the cowboy’s ﬁtness as a traditional role model for
“cool.”
I would like to begin with a basic consideration of the proﬁle of the
cowboy icon. What does he look like? How does he react in various sit-
uations? Who are his friends, his enemies, his family? How does he
accomplish his goals?
Although I have never in fact tried the following experiment, I’m
46 Our Love-Hate Relationship with Hatred

quite sure I know what results it would produce. Enter any classroom,
ofﬁce, factory lunchroom, shopping mall, or bar in America and ask
every person you meet to describe a cowboy. I can almost guarantee that
the ﬁrst word out of each person’s mouth would be “He . . .” Now, I
admit it seems rather obvious that a cowBOY would normally be con-
sidered a male. But let’s stop and consider the issue a bit more carefully.
While males surely were responsible for most of the sherifﬁng, cattle
driving, Indian skirmish-waging, and wild-horse corraling on the Amer-
ican frontier in the nineteenth century, they were not there alone. Hid-
den in the annals of history are the women—the settlers, farmers, teach-
ers, nurses, business speculators, missionaries, and, in a few cases, gun-
slinging Annie Oakley types. Also buried in the past are the other men
of the American West—the doctors, lawyers, farmers, ranchers, preach-
ers, investors, and carpenters to name just a few. The American frontier
was a complex social environment in which the cowboy was but one
character type.
Yet only the cowboy has been elevated to the status of cultural icon.
Several features of his proﬁle lend him a compelling air. First, and per-
haps most basically, the cowboy’s physique and physical prowess are at
the very pinnacle of American ideals for men. While the typical work-
ing cowboy in 1875 may have had a potbelly overhanging his gunbelt
and, after a few weeks on the hot and dusty trail, a scent worse than that
of a skunk, the cowboy icon has been portrayed almost universally in lit-
erature and movies as a ruggedly handsome, physically appealing char-
acter. Classic twentieth-century leading men such as John Wayne and
Clint Eastwood have shaped our notions of how cowboys looked in the
past.
The uniformity of advertising appeals based on the cowboy suggests
how very clear the image of the cowboy is in our minds. For example,
several popular brands of men’s cologne center their advertising cam-
paigns around the cowboy and the implicit argument that men who
wear the colognes will be appealing in the same way that the cowboy is
appealing. But let’s stop and think about that for a moment. Realisti-
cally, what would an actual cowboy have smelled like—on the trail, in
temperatures hovering over ninety degrees, for weeks on end, with a
bunch of cattle and a horse, and his last bath—taken in community
bath water at Miss Beverly’s Saloon—a distant memory? Is this a scent
one would really want to pay money for? I doubt it. But we don’t see the
model dressed like a cowboy holding a lasso in one hand and the
hate is cool 47

cologne bottle in the other and think of an actual cowboy; rather, we
think of the cowboy icon who, apparently, smells like pine trees, citrus,
and a tiny bit of synthetic musk. 
The cowboy icon, then, is a sanitized version of reality, an image
born of early “cowboys” such as Roy Rogers, then reborn in all the other
ruggedly handsome men who have enacted the icon, from the Duke to
the Marlboro Man. From the amalgam of their physiques and manner-
ism emerges the proﬁle of the cowboy icon: tall, lean, and muscular,
with a strong jaw and piercing eyes. His age varies, but he is never so
young as to be naïve nor so old that we even for a second would ques-
tion his virility. He is male, always and absolutely, rigidly upholding
social conventions about masculinity in all his actions and, in turn, rein-
forcing those conventions for those who watch him. 
Ironically, the cowboy’s traditional masculinity, though perhaps the
critical centering element of his character, almost never leads him into
the most traditional male social roles of husband and father. Rather, the
cowboy usually is depicted alone, though not obviously lonely. We
rarely see the cowboy with close friends. We rarely see his family of ori-
gin. We rarely see him take a wife and start a family of his own. To the
extent that the cowboy involves himself with women, he most often car-
ries on some sort of informal dalliance with a woman who, in the era of
actual cowboys, would have been socially taboo. But the cowboy does
not care: he loves the prostitute with the “heart of gold,” just not enough
to make an “honest woman” out of her in most stories. The cowboy is
not the marrying kind. He is unsettled and unsettling. No woman can
tame him. He is like the wild stallion—untamed, free, strong, proud.
And here we ﬁnd the essential “coolness” of the cowboy icon. He is
cool in the way the stallion is cool—he is a force of nature society may
sometimes think it has tamed but, in fact, never will. His innate wild-
ness and the fact that he alone controls the wildness inside himself are
the grounds of his claim to “cool.” His knowledge of these traits allows
him to slowly, conﬁdently walk down the dusty street, knowing he could
be shot at any moment, because he trusts that he will somehow sense an
opponent’s movement in time to spin, draw, and shoot to kill in the
knick of time. His self-knowledge guides his hand to his hat as he cock-
ily tips it to a local lady, making her blush because they both know she
will think of him that night as she lies in bed with her portly, timid hus-
band. Thus it is the coolness of the cowboy that raises him to the status
of icon, for without his cool he would be just another smelly guy on a
48 Our Love-Hate Relationship with Hatred

horse, riding quickly toward home so his wife does not get angry that he
is late for dinner.
With this general proﬁle of the cowboy icon in mind, I want to inves-
tigate what this “cool” character tells us about hatred. First, in the liter-
ature and movies where we ﬁnd him, the cowboy icon lives in a world
of absolutes. The cowboy hero, though sometimes shown to have a dark
side in his own personality, ultimately makes the commitment to ﬁght
for the side of “good.” The cowboy hero literally dons his white hat as a
symbol of his status as our hero. As such, he plays the sympathetic char-
acter in narratives; when we cheer him on we are cheering for all of “us”
and reinforcing our shared value commitments. In consequence, those
the cowboy battles are not simply “other” or “them” but necessarily
become a “bad” other because they are pitted in conﬂict with our hero.
In the basic plot lines of cowboy narratives characterization is overt,
even stereotypical; there is little room for complex and ambiguous
morality.
Yet, within the seemingly crystal-clear morality tales pitting good
against evil, a truly ambiguous message is often to be found: in a society
that claims it believes hatred is bad, one of our foremost popular culture
icons, the cowboy hero, is quite often saying that hate is cool. As I dis-
cussed in the ﬁrst chapter, absolutist thinking patterns themselves can
easily be warped into the dangerous form of “us versus them” thinking
that lies at the very heart of most hatred. In stories involving the cowboy
icon some elements of “us” and “them” are required simply to allow the
plotlines to advance because stories need some form of tension to
develop. However, normal conceptions of us and them cross into the
potentially dangerous arena of us versus them when the cowboy’s ene-
mies are deﬁned solely by their other-ness and not by any clearly
explained evil motivations. For example, stories of the cowboy icon con-
vey us versus them patterns when the “Indian” is delivered up as the
enemy simply because he is Indian. When the cowboy opposes others
simply because they are not “us,” with no reason or motivation given,
the cowboy icon is sending audiences a message: that cool guys hate
people who are not part of their group.
In addition to being deﬁned as bad because they are not part of the
cowboy’s group, the enemies of the cowboy in literature and the movies
are very often victims of various dehumanization strategies. Perhaps no
bad guy in American popular culture has been dehumanized quite so
fully or so frequently as the “Indian.” No doubt racist in origin, portray-
hate is cool 49

als of Native American characters as savage, animalistic, and thus essen-
tially subhuman typify most stories involving the cowboy hero. The
dehumanization of the Indian is, of course, a critical mechanism in the
stories involving cowboys: for if the cowboy is good and he kills the
Indian, then the Indian must be very bad. Dehumanization strategies
encourage us to view the Indian as negative and thus enable us to view
his death at the hands of the cowboy as justiﬁed. In this way, then, cow-
boy stories employ dehumanization strategies in the same ways govern-
ments do in times of war: as a means to rally us so solidly against an
enemy that we do not question killing the enemy as a moral good. 
Even when the Indian is moved out of the role of bad guy and into
the role of sidekick, he is often still shown in negative ways. Take, for
instance, Tonto, the sidekick of the Lone Ranger and perhaps the most
well-known Native American character in American popular culture.
While a good guy shown to be both compassionate to those in need and
loyal to the cowboy hero, Tonto nevertheless always is displayed as
somewhat uncivilized (by the Lone Ranger’s standards) because he
resists the white man’s style of dress and norms of behavior. His charac-
ter never fully develops: he is only the sum of his interactions with the
Lone Ranger and other whites. We never really learn about Tonto’s fam-
ily, his tribe, his ideas and values. Tonto inhabits what is called a satel-
lite role: he revolves around the lead character and has no real existence
outside of that character’s perspective. 
This could of course simply be written off by saying that Tonto is
treated rather poorly in the Lone Ranger tales because they are the Lone
Ranger tales, not the Tonto tales. While that is true—stories by their
very nature must focus in on a lead in order to develop—it nevertheless
misses the more fundamental point: there never have been lead roles for
the Tontos in the stories that comprise American popular culture
because the us associated with the cowboy icon does not include Indi-
ans, or women, or dentists, or any of the other roles people ﬁll in order
to keep our society functioning. Only cowboys refuse such roles and stay
truly “free.” As such, by the logic of the cowboy stories themselves, only
cowboys are fully human in our popular tales of the Old West.
What then do we learn from our hero, the cowboy icon, about what
it means to be “cool”? First, we learn that coolness involves an aura of
wildness, a sense of independence in the extreme that elevates him
above others but also isolates him and detaches him from others. Sec-
ond, we learn that it is cool to see the world in absolute terms and, as a
50 Our Love-Hate Relationship with Hatred

result, participate in us versus them thinking patterns. Finally, we learn
that it is cool to dehumanize those who are different not only when
“they” are the enemy, but even when “they” approach “us” in such tan-
gential roles as sidekicks.
The question then becomes, is the cowboy icon evil? I don’t think so.
But is the cowboy icon as good a social role model as we were raised to
believe? I don’t think that either. Rather, my examination of the cowboy
icon suggests that the icon itself and the stories involving the icon that
have featured so prominently in American popular culture for decades
send mixed, even contradictory messages about hatred. On the one
hand, our frontier hero defends us, leads us, and embodies such central
American values as independence and self-reliance. On the other hand,
however, the cowboy also tends to partake in absolutist and dehuman-
izing thinking patterns and to exist in a state of at least partial detach-
ment from society. The cowboy icon, then, symbolizes not just inde-
pendence but indifference, not just toughness but in some cases intol-
erance. He straddles the line between coolness of self and coldness to
others and thus embodies the ﬂirtation with hatred that runs parallel to
our culture’s commitment to compassion.
traditional icons of “cool”: the case of the biker
In recent years it appears as if Harley Davidson has taken the lead from
the Marlboro Man in the race for coolest honors in American popular
culture. Due no doubt to such factors as urbanization and the simple
passage of time, the reality of the cowboy falls farther into the past each
year. At the same time, however, increases in both leisure time and dis-
posable income have allowed thousands of Americans to act out their
fantasy of the biker’s rebellious life on the open road. The only catch, of
course, is that such weekend warriors are not Hell’s Angels, but ﬁre-
ﬁghters, business owners, contractors, and accountants.
Whereas the cowboy icon appeals to Americans of all ages and, in
fact, traditionally holds great sway among very young children, the biker
icon tends not to ﬁnd an audience below the age of adolescence. How-
ever, while few adults actually devote time and money to living out their
cowboy dreams, a large and growing segment of the American adult
population now dons black leather and mounts a “Hog” as often as they
possibly can. That being the case, I want to consider more carefully the
hate is cool 51

nature of the icon of the biker, the subtle ways in which hatred plays
into stories surrounding the icon, and how the icon seems to be moving
into an increasingly important position as a role model for adult Amer-
icans seeking to be cool.
Images of the biker have appeared in American movies, music, and
television shows for about half a century. In the 1950s and 1960s, motor-
cycle gangs often thrilled audiences as they roared through low-budget
ﬁlms. These B-movie bikers preoccupied themselves with alcohol, vio-
lence, and the corruption of “good” young women. The image of the
biker created in such ﬁlms is one of complete, or at least very nearly
complete, debauchery and detachment from the society at large. In fact,
the bikers appear to be attached only to each other through their mys-
terious gang bonds that have apparently been forged over years of vio-
lent, depraved hell-raising. In 1969, the ﬁlm Easy Rider began its ascent
to cult status and, with it, raised the image of the biker even higher on
America’s cultural awareness chart.3 More recently, the biker gang has
been presented as a futuristic nightmare in movies such as the Mad
Max series.4 Yet whether it is the old-fashioned biker B movie or the fan-
tasy bikers of science ﬁction, what emerges is a picture of the biker and
his gang as a barbarian horde on choppers.
While stories involving whole gangs of bikers were originally the
most common venues for the icon, another variation emerged in time
that cast the biker in the even more sinister role of demon. The 1980s
cult classic, Raising Arizona, provides a good example.5 Throughout the
movie, a grizzled, ﬁlthy, leather-encased man-beast tears across the
desert highways on a monstrosity of a motorcycle. He is a ghost, a vision
of hell, a demon, in this case comically encircling the main plot. Yet
while the comedic nature of the ﬁlm tames the character somewhat, an
essential fact remains: when the icon of the biker ﬁlls the role of demon,
the icon loses its connection to us humans even though it retains a pow-
erful mystique for viewers.
Perhaps the most signiﬁcant incarnation of the biker icon is that of
the biker with the heart of gold, the biker hero. Unlike the more generic
members of the biker gang, this biker always plays the lead role—he is
the biker who drives the plot and with whom we might be able to sym-
pathize. Unlike the demonic biker, this biker is not really evil, he is just
misunderstood. To the chagrin of some middle-class father in every
movie, it is always some semi-innocent young woman who believes she
alone understands the biker and that her love has the power to trans-
52 Our Love-Hate Relationship with Hatred

form him into the kind of man her daddy too could love. What she usu-
ally realizes in the ﬁnal scenes of the movie, of course, is that if she
changes him he loses that which drew her to him in the ﬁrst place. He
loses that indeﬁnable quality that makes sweet young things offer them-
selves up to him. He loses that charismatic presence that makes other
men intuitively know he is a force to be reckoned with, that it is his
birthright to be leader of the pack. Put simply, if he changes, he loses his
cool.
While present in many tales, the central image of the biker icon as the
biker hero was undoubtedly deﬁned by Marlon Brando’s performance in
the 1954 ﬁlm The Wild One.6 Brando’s character is deﬁant, rebellious,
and in large measure detached from mainstream society. He rebels for
the sheer sake of rebelling. Yet for all his antisocial posturing, the plot
reveals that beneath the bravado lies the proverbial heart of gold. 
Perhaps the most well-known biker hero in American popular culture
is the character Fonzie from the long-running television program Happy
Days. Fonzie too is a “wild one” whose innate goodness makes him the
show’s hero. However, a key theme of the show is Fonzie’s struggle to
reconcile his biker sensibilities and urges with his emotional connec-
tions to the patently middle-class Cunningham family and their values. 
From the generic bad boys of the 1950s and 1960s biker B movies to
the futuristic biker gangs of today’s science ﬁction, from the demonic
incarnation of the biker to the unlikely hero of the biker with a heart of
gold, the biker icon has clearly made its mark in American popular cul-
ture. Yet within the variations on the biker theme, what characteristics
are central to this icon? 
First, there is the actual physical appearance of the biker icon in the
mass media. Scattered throughout ﬁlm and television portrayals of bik-
ers are obese, long-haired, heavily bearded, ﬁlthy members of biker
gangs, demonic or otherwise. Normally, though, this image of the biker
is reserved for satellite characters: unimportant gang members in the B
movies, extras in larger crowd scenes, or generic biker bad guys in sto-
ries in which biker culture itself is not central to the plot. But when we
are dealing with the biker hero, he, like the cowboy, is normally shown
to have a ruggedly handsome face and lean, strong physique. He is phys-
ically attractive even though some of his actions are socially repulsive.
Of course, no discussion of the physical appearance of the biker would
be complete without mention of the outﬁt: dark pants (either jeans or
leathers), T-shirt, black leather jacket, black boots, and sunglasses. 
hate is cool 53

Beyond his general appearance and attire, the biker icon can be
identiﬁed by his attitudes. At heart, the biker is deﬁned by his position
in opposition to the establishment. Speciﬁcally, the biker is shown set-
ting himself against traditional middle-class American social structures
and values. Every aspect of his lifestyle expresses his hatred of the main-
stream. The thunderous roars of his engine and the ear-shattering cracks
of his pipes disturb the peace. The seemingly endless parties and bar-
hopping display his lack of regard for the mundane responsibilities of
family and job. He reduces women to ornaments to be possessed then
discarded. He threatens and may even harm the average man who
crosses his path. The drinking, the ﬁghting, and, of course, the sheer
speed at which he drives mock the very notion of public safety. Even the
black clothes he wears warn all he encounters that he is something dark,
something outside the red-white-and-blue norm.
The icon’s cool arises from the tension between the biker and the
society. Like the cowboy, the biker is cool because he is detached from
the rest of us. He too rarely is shown with family or close friends; at most,
he associates with the members of his gang, all rebels themselves, of
course. The women in his life, though ever-present, are merely con-
quests and not people with whom he forms deep emotional connec-
tions. He is alone, then, but not lonely. He is free, independent,
untamed as he cruises down the highway on his chrome stallion. And
we admire him as he speeds by because we declare that kind of free,
independent, and untamed man to be the very pinnacle of cool in our
society. There’s just one catch, of course: it is our society he has rejected
in order to be free.
And here we ﬁnd the place at which our convoluted relationship
with hatred again becomes an issue. While the biker icon often com-
mits hateful and violent acts in the mass media, the icon also conveys
mixed messages about hatred at a much more fundamental level.
Because the biker is deﬁned by his rebellion against society, the icon
necessarily stands in an us versus them relationship with mainstream
American values. Yet it is with precisely the people who hold dear those
mainstream American values that the biker has been elevated to the sta-
tus of pop culture icon. For example, it wasn’t Fonzie’s old gang mates
who made him the king of Milwaukee; rather, it was the Cunninghams
and all the families of all the other kids who hung out at Arnold’s Drive-
In, families who would be the butt of jokes in a biker-gang hangout.
Due to a variety of changes at the Harley Davidson corporation, not
54 Our Love-Hate Relationship with Hatred

least of which was the institution of an absolutely brilliant new market-
ing concept, hundreds of thousands of mostly middle-aged, middle-class
Americans have moved from watching the biker icon in the media to
enacting the biker lifestyle for themselves in recent years. These so-
called weekend warriors spend tens of thousands of dollars equipping
themselves not only with top of the line bikes but with additional
chrome, custom paint jobs, full-leather bags, and, of course, as many
variations on the outﬁt as they can ﬁt into their closets. Like the little
boys who ﬁll their holiday wish lists with chaps, holsters, and cap guns,
these bigger boys and girls desire more and more genuine Harley David-
son products so that they can continue to enact their fantasy of the life
of the biker learned from popular stories about the lifestyle of the icon.
There is just one horribly ironic catch to it all: living the lifestyle
made cool by the biker icon part-time is like being a little pregnant; it
just does not work that way. Ultimately, there is no such thing as rebel-
lion with a warranty. When members of the American middle-class—
those with enough disposable income actually able to afford to live out
the biker lifestyle on the weekends—roar off down the highway on their
bikes, they are participating in the fantasy of coolness that surrounds the
biker icon in popular culture; like kids playing cowboys, they literally
are playing biker. I know all the weekend warriors out there who see this
will immediately respond, “No, that’s not it. You just don’t get it. We
ride for the love of riding. We’re not ‘playing’ biker.” I happily accept
that argument from anyone and everyone who owns a motorcycle and
the gear needed to ride it safely and comfortably (i.e., leather jackets
and chaps). To those riders, I say, “More horsepower to you! Have a safe
and fun ride!” However, I’m skeptical of that argument made by anyone
who spends more money on T-shirts and chrome after-market decora-
tions than they spend on gasoline in any given year. Such purchases are
physical evidence of the desire to enact the fantasy life of the biker icon;
they don’t have one thing to do with cruising down the highway. In fact,
if the true sense of freedom were the actual goal, then lusting after such
items—and having to stay tied to a job in order to afford them—would
be counterproductive. 
I am not suggesting that people should not be able to outﬁt them-
selves and their motorcycles the way they see ﬁt. What I am saying is
simply that the recent craze for the biker lifestyle has as much if not
more to do with advertising and media-created images of the lifestyle of
a popular cultural icon of coolness than it has to do with actually riding
hate is cool 55

motorcycles, free and unencumbered by social pressures. On a Satur-
day night at a biker rally, the weekend warrior may appear poised to
rebel against any social norm he encounters. But, realistically speaking,
he is not going to rebel Monday morning, no matter how much he may
want to, when his alarm goes off. Why? Because the weekend warrior
has to go to work and earn a living so he can make the mortgage-sized
monthly payment on his new scooter and, maybe, even have enough
money left over for yet another T-shirt. Because what real honest-to-God
hard-core biker rebel wouldn’t pay $22.95 to wear a corporate logo on
his chest?
The biker icon differs dramatically from the cowboy icon in the age
of American it seems to entice and in the sheer amounts of money it
seems to encourage them to spend. However, beyond those distinc-
tions, both the cowboy and the biker play similar roles in our culture.
Both icons, at least in their heroic forms, are portrayed to be physically
attractive and are thus presented as appealing to the audience; the cow-
boy and the biker are the characters we are encouraged to be like
because they are presented as not just atop but actually above the social
ladder. By virtue of their appearance, actions, and attitudes, the cowboy
and the biker have earned the label “cool” and the status that label car-
ries with it. 
As the analysis offered above indicates, both the cowboy and the
biker have earned their cool in large part by detaching themselves from
society, by participating in violent actions, and by displaying hateful
attitudes that our society claims it tries to discourage. Yet we have ele-
vated both characters to the status of icons in our popular culture. As I
mentioned at the very outset of this chapter, it would be one thing if we
simply have icons who seem to celebrate our ﬂirtation with hatred by
sending mixed messages about hating. However, it is something entirely
different—and more serious—when we realize that we have such icons
in an era in which many people of all ages lack actual role models in
their daily lives. If the Lone Ranger and Fonzie were simply mass media
characters with little impact on us, then we need have little concern
over them. But when such characters become important, even primary,
role models for how to earn the social cash we call “cool,” then we can
only expect that children and the adults they grow up to be may very
well come to believe that developing the social coldness that comes
along with being that cool is the best way to become the leader of the
pack we call “society.”
56 Our Love-Hate Relationship with Hatred

cool (or ﬂy, or phat, . . .) today
Whereas images of cowboys and bikers have paraded in and out of our
mass consciousness for decades, new breeds of mass-mediated heroes
have arrived on the scene in more recent years. While it remains to be
seen if these new images will be raised by society to the status of lasting
popular culture icons, they already serve as important role models of
cool for America’s youth. I suggest that anyone doubting this claim
spends some time at a local mall where I can guarantee wannabe ver-
sions of at least two or three rock or rap stars can be found cruising up
and down the aisles on any given Friday night. Of course, not all ado-
lescents fully mimic the behavior of celebrities. However, most teens
can still be inﬂuenced by the general attitudes and values put forth by
cool music stars. Because they are at a stage of development inherently
ﬁlled with confusion, teenagers are particularly vulnerable when faced
with ambiguous messages about the appropriateness of hatred in our
society. In this section, I introduce just a few of the cool characters who
rule the mass-mediated school at which our young people now do much
of their learning and consider what kinds of messages they are sending
about the subject of hatred. Additionally, I consider how our reactions,
as a society, to these icons may be sending messages about hatred and
violence far more confusing and dangerous than anything rockers and
rappers themselves are saying.
the rap murders
Rap music exploded in popularity during the 1990s. Although rap as a
musical genre was several decades old, the 1990s witnessed the rise of
hip hop culture to prominence not just among young urban blacks but
across America’s youth culture. Sometimes funny, sometimes ominous,
rap lyrics and the sampled tracks that accompanied them could be
heard on the streets of Harlem and in the fraternity houses of Harvard.
Rap tracks consistently climbed to the highest levels of the charts. MTV,
accused by some in the 1980s of discriminating against black artists,
placed hip hop videos in heavy rotation by the mid-1990s.7
As rap continued to make inroads into the mainstream market,
tragedy struck at the very core of the hip hop community. In six months’
hate is cool 57

time, two of the most popular and important rappers of the decade were
shot to death. Signiﬁcantly, although both murders remain unsolved,
allegations continue to implicate the associates of each slain man in the
death of the other.
Tupac Shakur burst onto the hip hop scene in 1992 with his ﬁrst solo
album, 2Pacalypse Now.8 In the four years that followed, Tupac scored
hits with several more albums including 1995’s Me Against the World,
which debuted at number one on the charts. Tupac also explored his
acting talents, costarring in 1993 in the ﬁlm Poetic Justice and later in
Bullet and Gridlock’d. In the early and mid-1990s, Tupac Shakur’s name
became synonymous with hip hop success: his brand of so-called
gangsta rap helped deﬁne the era.
But Tupac’s name also became synonymous with trouble as his
exploits offstage drew police and, of course, the media. Although Tupac
had no criminal record before his rise to stardom, he often ran afoul of
the law after achieving fame. As a result of a variety of charges, he spent
much of 1993 and 1994 in jail. Between stints behind bars, Tupac was
wounded in a shooting. He claimed his assailant had attempted to rob
him, but some speculated that the pioneer of gangsta rap may have
been the victim of gang violence.
Following his parole in 1995, Tupac signed with Death Row Records,
one of the largest rap labels, which based much of its marketing on the
notion that its artists were authentic, that they lived the lives they
rapped. Around this time, the West-Coast-based Death Row in general
and Tupac in particular engaged in a verbal battle with various East-
Coast rappers. At the outset, it appeared as if the jibes were nothing
more than public tauntings, perhaps for the sheer amusement of the
audiences or perhaps part of a marketing scheme to draw media cover-
age to a brewing feud in the industry. Tupac contributed to the verbal
battle as much as any of the Death Row artists by claiming in one of his
songs to have had an affair with Faith Evans, wife of East-Coast rap phe-
nomenon, The Notorious B.I.G.
Yet nothing in the war of words prepared the hip hop community for
the news on September 13, 1996, that Tupac Shakur had been shot.
Although he survived for six days, Tupac never regained consciousness.
The assailants, who remain unknown, attacked Tupac as he rode in a
car through the streets of Las Vegas. Most commentators have argued
that Tupac’s murder was not a random act of violence but, in fact, bore
many of the characteristics of a gang-ordered hit. 
58 Our Love-Hate Relationship with Hatred

Unlike Tupac Shakur, The Notorious B.I.G., a.k.a. Chris Wallace,
was well known to police before his rise to fame.9 As a young man grow-
ing up in a rough section of Brooklyn, New York, Wallace was impris-
oned for selling crack cocaine shortly after dropping out of high school.
After reexamining his life, Wallace determined to turn his life in a new
and more positive direction and devoted himself to music.
Wallace’s major break came when legendary hip hop producer Sean
“Puffy” Combs heard one of his demos. Combs quickly signed Wallace
to his Bad Boy Records label where Wallace followed up successful
guest appearances on other performers’ albums with his own independ-
ent debut, 1994’s Ready to Die. Ready to Die earned The Notorious
B.I.G. Billboard’s Rapper of the Year award. 
Biggie stayed in heavy demand. During 1995 and 1996, he appeared
on a variety of albums, including a guest spot on a Michael Jackson
track. B.I.G. even experimented with acting, playing himself on the TV
show New York Undercover. Meanwhile, because of the success of his
ﬁrst solo album, the hip hop community anxiously awaited a new solo
release by The Notorious B.I.G.
Life After Death . . . ’Til Death Do Us Part hit music store shelves in
1997. Ironically, while promoting the album in March of that year,
Chris Wallace was gunned down in Los Angeles. Immediately, rumors
spread that the murder of The Notorious B.I.G. was an act of vengeance
for the death of Tupac Shakur. To the extent that the proverbial silver
lining can be found in the very dark cloud that hung over the hip hop
community in the 1990s, that silver lining appears to be the 1999 posthu-
mous release of The Notorious B.I.G.’s Born Again. Produced by Big-
gie’s long-time friend and collaborator, Bad Boy Records’ Sean “Puffy”
Combs, Born Again features vocal contributions from Tupac’s Death
Row brothers Snoop Dogg and Ice Cube. 
The murders of Tupac Shakur and The Notorious B.I.G. obviously
mark an important episode in contemporary youth culture. Of course,
the murders themselves were merely the ﬁnal twist in an already complex
and hateful plot. Regardless of whether the supporters of either man had
any involvement in the death of the other, the so-called East versus West
feud in the hip hop community sent powerful messages about hatred and
violence to America’s youth. We simply cannot overlook the signiﬁcance
of role models who may have committed murder. Whether Tupac, Big-
gie, or their associates actually harmed each other or not, it seems to have
been accepted by most of the MTV generation that they certainly could
hate is cool 59

have done it, that they had the potential to have done it, that they even
may likely have done it. Fans did not rise up outraged to deny the allega-
tions that the murders were prompted by the East-West feud and were tied
to gang activities. Neither did adults, parents in particular, express out-
rage that such real-world violence seemed to be becoming a hallmark of
the youth-market music and video industries. Rather, while the rap mur-
ders earned lots of press coverage, almost no notice was given to the
underlying fact that these days role models for a good portion of America’s
youth are men whose reputations for violence and gang involvement are
serious enough that allegations of murder against them carry plausibility
and, in turn, secure their credibility as popular icons. 
the devil himself
Ironically, while Americans seem to have had little reaction to the real
violence that invaded the hip hop community in the mid-1990s, they
have launched a full frontal assault on the theatrical aggression and anti-
social posturing of Marilyn Manson. A writer for Rolling Stone says,
“imagine Alice Cooper times 10. Picture KISS on an acid and whiskey
bender. Marry the gross-out hilarity of G. G. Allin with the ubiquity of
Howard Stern. Combine the ‘search and destroy’ frenzy of Iggy Pop with
the godless zeal of Ozzy Osbourne. Take two cups of the devil and throw
in a pinch of P. T. Barnum and you still can’t fathom all that is . . . Mar-
ilyn Manson.”10
Marilyn Manson, which is the name of the band as well as the stage
name of the group’s lead singer, Brian Warner, ﬁrst rose to national
prominence in the mid-1990s when taken under the wing of Trent
Reznor, an avant-garde producer and performer well established in the
music world.11 Under Reznor’s tutelage, Manson produced AntiChrist
Superstar, which debuted at number three on the charts in 1996. Man-
son’s follow-up effort, Mechanical Animals, earned great success in
1998.
But it is not Marilyn Manson music per se for which the group is
famous. Marilyn Manson is the music and at the same time more than
the music. Marilyn Manson is throngs of fans in ghoulish attire, stage
sets born of Satanic symbolism and Nazi nightmare, and, at the core of
it all, lead singer “Marilyn Manson’s” consistently outrageous perform-
ances and sometimes creepy responses in interviews. 
60 Our Love-Hate Relationship with Hatred

The whole package that is Marilyn Manson has inspired signiﬁcant
public backlash. Around the United States, Manson concerts have been
canceled (or simply not booked in the ﬁrst place) even though Manson
tickets are among the top sellers of the past decade. When concerts have
been allowed, fundamentalist religious groups have protested on site. In
some cases municipalities have acted to keep Marilyn Manson out, cit-
ing fears for public safety as their motivation.12
Yet for all the brouhaha over the Marilyn Manson phenomenon and
that phenomenon’s supposed threat to our society’s moral standing, the
members of Marilyn Manson apparently never have been implicated in
serious criminal violence. Nor, quite frankly, would such an allegation
seem particularly credible because it seems quite obvious, at least to the
group’s youthful fans, that Marilyn Manson is an act and nothing more.
Middle-class, middle-aged fundamentalists don’t seem to get that about
Marilyn Manson. It certainly seems odd, however, that these same peo-
ple who literally take to the streets to protest Manson said not a word in
response to the rap murders. Here again is evidence of our tendency to
send mixed messages about hatred and violence to our children: Man-
son’s overtly theatrical performances of antisocial behavior draw public
outrage from adults, but very real bloodshed within the rap community
goes largely unnoticed. Is it really any wonder that today’s youth some-
times seem confused about the values of the adults who surround them?
the devil’s kid brother
While Marilyn Manson’s neosatanic ghoul routine has been haunting
fundamentalist Christians since the mid-1990s, the late 1990s witnessed
the rise of an impish-looking boy-next-door whose complex raps seem to
have offended nearly every adult constituency in America at some time
or another. Described by one of his former producers as “the Marilyn
Manson of rap,” Eminem’s pared-down stage persona makes him seem,
simultaneously, less and more threatening than shock-rockers such as
Manson.13
Born Marshall Mathers, Eminem exploded onto the national music
charts in 1999 with the multiplatinum The Slim Shady LP. He
cemented his dominance of the rap and pop charts a year later when
The Marshall Mathers LP sold ﬁve million copies within a month of its
release. In 2001, the rapper racked up three Grammies for the intensely
hate is cool 61

cutting rhymes that have catapulted him to the very center of America’s
most recent controversy about popular music. When the accused homo-
phobe took the stage to perform a duet with Elton John for the Grammy
show ﬁnale, a small cadre of protesters marched in front of the audito-
rium. Advocates for tolerance—including Judy Shepard, mother of
murdered gay college student, Matthew Shepard—spoke poignantly in
public service announcements asking everyone to consider the conse-
quences of words such as “faggot,” a favorite of Eminem.14 And, of
course, tens of millions of Americans glued themselves to their televi-
sions to see what all the fuss was about.
So who is Eminem? Here is the root of the controversy surrounding
him and also the grounds on which some supporters base their defense
of him. Eminem is, at any given moment, the characters “Eminem,”
“Slim Shady,” and “Marshall Mathers,” as well as a real guy from Detroit
named Marshall Mathers. He is also the voice of “Stan,” a deranged fan
who kills his girlfriend, and a host of other ﬁrst-person narrators who
spew the hatred and violence that have made Eminem not just famous
but infamous. Whereas Brian Warner consistently dons the stage per-
sona of “Marilyn Manson,” Eminem changes characters almost con-
stantly without ever changing costumes to help his audience follow
along. Thus even close observers are confounded when asked to draw
the line between Eminem and Slim Shady, between “Marshall Math-
ers” and Marshall Mathers.
But most observers, whether close or casual, have been quick to draw
a line in the sand about Eminem: people either love him or they hate
him. Apathy is not a reaction Eminem inspires. Writer Eric Boehlert
describes Eminem as “blatantly hateful, vengeful, and violent,” known
for “rapid-ﬁre tales about rape, faggots, bitches, drug overdoses, and
throat cuttings.”15 The Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation
(GLAAD) contends that The Marshall Mathers LP “contains the most
blatantly offensive homophobic lyrics we have ever heard. Ever.”16 Yet,
music critics, in particular, applaud Eminem as the ﬁrst genius of the
new millennium. VH-1.com declares The Marshall Mathers LP to be “a
bona ﬁde masterpiece.”17 The London Guardian argues the song “Stan”
has “all the depth and texture of the greatest examples of English
verse.”18 Clearly, the Grammy voters agreed.
Although Eminem slips in and out of ostensibly ﬁctional characters in
his songs, his consistently violent lyrical themes seem to parallel his real
life. Press coverage of allegations of criminal physical assaults and gun
62 Our Love-Hate Relationship with Hatred

brandishing by the real Marshall Mathers encourage deeper reading of
lyrics in which one of his personae fantasizes about killing his then real-
life wife, Kim Scott.19 Eminem, in all his incarnations, blurs the line
between ﬁction and reality so deftly that even the most astute critics of
music and popular culture seem unsure of what to make of him.
In his music, Eminem relies heavily on absolutism, stereotyping,
scapegoating, and dehumanization, the very thought patterns that
underlie both ﬁctional and real hatred and violence in our society. In
fact, he elevates the thought patterns of hatred to outrageously obvious
levels rarely seen anywhere else in popular culture. Often comic and
ironic in his approach, though, Eminem leaves listeners guessing about
his real meanings: is he advocating violence or is he its most sarcastic
critic? As such, the very ambiguity of his intentions embodies our fasci-
nation with hatred. Just like the potentially lethal inﬂuence of gangsta
rappers who celebrate violence in their lyrics whether or not they actu-
ally embrace the harsh reality of gang violence in their private lives, the
irony of Eminem’s inﬁnitely complicated, character-driven raps may
well be lost on young people eager to emulate the latest icon of cool to
dominate the youth music scene.
it’s not just “them,” it’s us
It is time to consider our reactions, as a society, to icons of cool such as
Tupac Shakur, The Notorious B.I.G., Marilyn Manson, and Eminem.
Ruben Navarette Jr. maintains that children are not nearly as likely to be
inﬂuenced by pop culture role models as most of us fear they are. He
states, “If your kids are raised properly, they are no more likely to bash gays
or assault women after listening to Eminem than they would be to engage
in cannibalism after seeing Hannibal.”20 I agree, if children have been
raised not only just to deplore violence and embrace diversity but also to
recognize the inherent fallacies behind hatred and to be active, critical
consumers of popular culture instead of passive receptacles willing to
accept any message that ﬂashes across the screen. Unfortunately, I do not
think that is true of most kids today and thus I question the wisdom of dis-
missing the power of popular culture icons to inﬂuence behavior.
However, there is a second issue implied by Navarette’s commentary,
an issue most of us would prefer to sidestep. Namely, Navarette suggests
that we, the real, adult, day-in-day-out role models for our children, have
hate is cool 63

greater sway over them than rock and rap stars. I wholly agree with this
claim. And this is what terriﬁes me about the cases of Tupac, Biggie, Man-
son, and Eminem. For if we take a moment to examine the messages that
we are sending to children through our reactions to these controversial
icons, we will ﬁnd that we are glorifying our obsession with hatred and vio-
lence far more insidiously—and more profoundly—than the icons them-
selves are. I want to approach this from several different angles.
First, when we directly blame these icons for our children’s attitudes
toward hatred and violence, we ourselves are role-modeling for children
one of the fundamental thought processes of hatred—that of scapegoat-
ing. I am not suggesting these icons are blameless. Rather, I am sug-
gesting that we are at least equally culpable for reinforcing America’s
fascination with hatred when we casually toss all blame onto popular
culture and thus reentrench by our example that scapegoating is accept-
able. Tupac Shakur and The Notorious B.I.G. did not perpetuate gang
violence in America alone. Marilyn Manson did not cause the
Columbine massacre. And, Eminem has not been behind every
instance of gay-bashing since he started topping the charts. To lay all
blame on popular culture icons is not just irresponsible, it is dangerous.
As I pointed out in chapter 1, scapegoating prevents us from seeing the
real, complex lines of causality that actually shape our world. We cannot
change our own attitudes toward hatred and violence until we ﬁnally,
fully admit that we are as responsible for their existence as “they” are.
Second, we can ﬁnd another great example of our tendency to rein-
force our obsession with hatred in the words we use, or passively toler-
ate, when talking about controversial icons. By scanning editorials and
even critical reviews of recent stars or simply recalling conversations
about them, it is easy to ﬁnd that people often label gangsta rappers
“thugs.” The members of Marilyn Manson—not their stage persona—
are written off as “freaks.” Eminem seems to be referred to as “trailer
trash” at least as often as he is referred to as a rapper. But I have yet to
ﬁnd an article condemning the stereotyping, dehumanizing, classist
attacks on Eminem intrinsic to phrases such as “trailer trash.” Those
who casually call him “trailer trash” usually denounce him for his use
of pejoratives such as “faggot” and “bitch.” As I discussed in chapter 2,
“faggot” and “bitch” can be dangerous words when they are used with-
out thought to their implications. “Thug,” “freak,” and “trailer trash” are
equally dangerous, but we seem content to accept them if they are
aimed at people we do not like.
64 Our Love-Hate Relationship with Hatred

Third, if we actually hope to make our children’s future more com-
passionate than our own past, we ultimately have to be willing to face the
most subtle and, in my opinion, ugliest truth about our society’s reactions
to icons such as Tupac Shakur, The Notorious B.I.G., Marilyn Manson,
and Eminem. Speciﬁcally, if we recall the various scandals surrounding
each of these icons, we have to admit that press coverage and, for most of
us, our attention focused longer and more closely on Manson and
Eminem than on Tupac and Biggie. Tupac and Biggie were actually
murdered. Their stories ultimately unfolded in real criminal violence.
They both took center stage in the kind of violent narrative we tend to
relish. Yet their stories barely crossed most adult Americans’ radar
screens. No doubt there are many reasons for this, but one seems both
too painful to mention and too painfully obvious to continue to ignore.
Tupac and Biggie were black; Manson and Eminem are white. Just as
the death of a suburban white teenager typically draws more media
attention than the death of an inner-city minority teenager, so too does
the potential inﬂuence of white icons draw more attention in America
than the potential inﬂuence of black icons. When adult Americans,
regardless of their own racial or ethnic heritage, pay only scant attention
to icons who happen to be minorities, we tell our children more about
hatred in our silence than we ever could with our words.
Finally, when we allow ourselves to stall out in dehumanizing our
children’s icons and scapegoating violence onto inﬂuences from popu-
lar culture, we risk overlooking a truly critical fact: these “dangerous”
icons are not part of some foreign invasion of our culture—they are
products of our culture. Tupac, Biggie, Manson, and Eminem were
born and raised in America within the confusing cauldron of messages
that long has resulted from our obsession with hatred and violence.
Thus, while we must concern ourselves with the messages they now
send to youth, if we really ﬁnd those messages disturbing we also must
remember that they did not arise out of a vacuum: today’s icons of cool
are simply singing new versions of the songs our generations sang to
them when they were children. 
another kind of glass ceiling
For years feminists have argued that American women struggle to break
through a glass ceiling, a nearly invisible layer of chauvinism that per-
hate is cool 65

sists in preventing talented women from achieving the highest levels of
leadership in business, academia, and politics. While some debate the
reality of the glass ceiling in career contexts these days, a glass ceiling for
women does seem to exist in the arena of violence, both real and iconic.
In an editorial published shortly after the Columbine shootings, Jackson
Katz and Sut Jhally pointed out an obvious fact that we all seem rather
content to overlook: “This is not a case of kids killing kids. This is boys
killing boys and boys killing girls.”21
Virtually all acts of extreme violence in America are perpetrated by
males. Although girls have shot and killed individual girls—and boys—
all the mass murders that have occurred in American schools since the
late 1990s have been committed by boys. Likewise, the overwhelming
majority of serial killers are male, as are the hate group members who
attack minorities.
While some innate factors may lie at the root of this striking differ-
ence between the sexes, cultural differences are also at play. Katz and
Jhally are among a growing group of scholars who contend that Ameri-
can culture constructs the very notion of masculinity in terms of vio-
lence.22 We tell boys not simply that hate is cool but that violent behav-
ior is a requisite component of manhood. Although this particular argu-
ment remains outside the scope of Love to Hate, I agree with Katz and
Jhally that future research into extreme crimes such as shooting sprees
must consider speciﬁcally the relationship between gender and violent
behavior.
I have already pointed out in this chapter, though, that traditional
American icons of cool such as the biker and the cowboy intertwine
masculinity with hatred and violence. At both subtle and obvious levels,
some of today’s male pop culture icons send the same message. But
what messages are today’s female icons sending, in particular to young
women?
I follow popular culture and especially youth culture very closely.
When I began the process of laying out Love to Hate, I rapidly checked
through a long list in my mind of accessible examples I could use for
each chapter. The biggest challenge I faced for most chapters was decid-
ing which of too many good examples to eliminate. But in preparing this
chapter, speciﬁcally a section addressing female icons, I struggled for
months to come up with even a short list of possible case studies. Iden-
tifying female icons of cool from today’s popular music scene is easy:
Gwen Stefani, Alanis Morissette, Eve, Janet Jackson, and Madonna are
66 Our Love-Hate Relationship with Hatred

just a few of many obvious choices. However, these women do not wal-
low in our obsession with hatred and violence in their lyrics or, from
what we know from the press, in their private lives. In fact, they some-
times take powerful, public stands against hatred and violence. It would
therefore appear that the pop music scene is in line with today’s youth
culture, wherein both the overt gloriﬁcation and actual commission of
extreme acts of violence are overwhelmingly perpetrated by males.
Clearly many Americans of all ages still are blessed with strong, real role
models. Mothers, fathers, teachers, and local community leaders con-
tinue to provide examples for children as well as for other adults. Yet for
virtually all children today, ﬁgures from the media also serve as models
for behavior, in particular as guides to what is cool. For those children
who encounter few real role models in their daily lives, such media
models no doubt play an even more prominent role. As the media
becomes more central to all our lives and we become more and more
detached from our communities, we can expect that cultural icons will
exert even greater inﬂuence over all of us in the future.
Some of our icons of cool from popular culture are rather complex
characters. The enduring icon of the cowboy hero, for example, has
long been regarded as one of the more purely good characters in Amer-
ican lore. And while the cowboy in many ways is a very positive charac-
ter with traits worthy of emulation, the cowboy nevertheless also con-
veys such messages as “cool guys are detached from society” and “cool
guys don’t treat people who are different equally.” In the same way, the
biker icon embodies the notion that detachment from society is cool
and overtly rejects values such as cooperation and consideration that are
intrinsic to life within a community. Today, our preoccupation with
hatred expresses itself not just in the real and theatrical violence played
out in popular culture by cool celebrities but also in our sometimes con-
tradictory reactions to those celebrities.
As we enter the next millennium we do so without two talented
young men who chose to make their fame in the world of gangsta rap
music. Tupac Shakur and The Notorious B.I.G. now lie in cold graves
after too short lives lived in a world where hate is cool. 
Thousands of other young men and women, many of whom mod-
elled their lives on icons of cool from popular culture, have lost their
lives to street violence in recent years. Their names, however, never
made the national news.
hate is cool 67


part 2
Hate, American Style


He called himself Super Steven. The rest of us just called him Stevie.1
Stevie was about four years old when he moved in across the street from
my family. Even though I myself was only seven at the time, I under-
stood that Stevie’s life and my life were separated by much more than
just a road. Stevie’s mother ran through men almost as quickly as she
ran through cases of beer. Some of the men ignored Stevie, some tol-
erated him, some even treated him nicely. Some did not. When his life
became intolerable, Stevie disappeared under a beach towel and, in
his place, Super Steven appeared looking quite dashing in his beach-
towel cape. Super Steven felt no pain, at least that’s what Stevie told me
once.
At any age, when we face problems we feel we cannot bear, we often
seek a way to escape. Efforts to escape from the struggles of life some-
times result in drug and alcohol abuse and even in severe emotional
and mental breakdowns. Yet while extreme urges to escape can result in
such debilitating conditions, more mundane desires for a moment or
two away from the stresses and boredoms of our daily routines often lead
us to popular forms of entertainment as means of escape. Our minds
wander freely as our favorite songs form the soundtrack for our day
chapter 4
Youthful Hatred:
Are We Tough Enough?

dreams. Or, we vacation for half an hour inside the comfortable world
inhabited by our favorite television characters.
Occasionally the line blurs between the reality of daily life and the “real-
ity” of the mass-mediated world. For most of us, such blurring is itself a
rather mundane occurrence as we literally get lost inside the plotline of a
good movie and temporarily give ourselves over to the story on the screen.
Yet, for a very few of us, the blurring of the line between reality and the arti-
ﬁcial world of the mass media carries great consequences. If such confu-
sion involved only positive messages such as “sharing is good” or “eat your
vegetables,” we could safely leave concerns about the blurring of reality to
academic researchers. However, when complex images of violence are
pervasive in contemporary media, we all must become concerned.
Amidst the mixed messages we send and receive about hatred, some
people cross the line that separates the tough posturing of coolness I dis-
cussed in the previous chapter from the dangerous reality of violence. In
this chapter, I demonstrate when simply acting tough seems no longer to
be enough by looking at two disturbing trends in American culture at the
end of the twentieth century. First, I examine the rise of violent street
gangs. I explore the irony of our society’s condemnation of such gangs
when popular music styles celebrate the so-called gangsta lifestyle. Sec-
ond, I look at the disturbing phenomenon of school shootings and eval-
uate not only some of the media images alleged to have provoked the
attacks but also the ambiguous messages sent about the attacks them-
selves in the news media’s subsequent coverage of the stories.
gangs, gangbangers, and the gangsta mystique
Gangs are nothing new in American society. As far back as the 1830s,
groups we would label gangs by today’s standards roamed the streets of
most cities on the East Coast. Inspired by the general social movement
against Catholic immigrants, some Protestant young men organized
themselves into gangs with names such as the Blood Tubs and the Wide
Awakes. The anti-Catholic gangs terrorized newly immigrated Irish
who, in turn, formed their own gangs for both protection and retalia-
tion. Anti-Catholic and Irish Catholic street gangs battled each other
locally for dominance of neighborhoods and even participated in some
of the legendary election day rioting of the early 1840s.2 For more than
170 years, gangs have existed in America.
72 Hate, American Style

Yet while today’s gangs may resemble the gangs of a bygone era in
structure, they differ dramatically when we consider their propensity for
violence. Gangs of the nineteenth century, even gangs of the ﬁrst half of
the twentieth century, did engage in violence; however, their violence
most often involved only ﬁsts and was very rarely fatal. Today, disputes
between rival gangs and even between members of the same gang are
too often resolved with automatic weapons.
If gang membership today carries such high risks, we must ask our-
selves what it is that continues to entice young people to join gangs.
Clearly, some youth join because they feel they have no choice: in some
inner-city neighborhoods gang membership is felt to be safer than walk-
ing the streets alone, thus being a potential target for all gangs. For oth-
ers, gang membership is a must because older family members belong
to the same gang and have created an expectation that the next genera-
tion will join too. Other young people join gangs to ﬁnd a sense of
belonging in a time and, in some cases, a place where community and
family ties have raveled away. Still others join gangs as a “career” move,
for gangs that trafﬁc in drugs can offer an impoverished teenager a far
more lucrative source of immediate income than any job in fast food or
retail sales. Finally, some teens join gangs as an expression of their polit-
ical opinions or as a statement of their racial identiﬁcation. 
But how do young people learn that gangs can serve these needs?
Obviously, those children who grow up in gang-infested neighborhoods
learn about gangs in the same way that other children learn about dairy
cows or playgrounds: they simply absorb their surroundings. It is more
complex to explain the rise of a gang in an area that previously had no
gangs. Suddenly two or three teens simply seem to gather and begin
behaving in ways that characterize gang activity. That we all can look in
from the outside and warn “gang!” suggests the coherence of their
behaviors. And, of course, the three kids who are worrying a small town
learned the gang behaviors from exactly the same source that taught us
how to distinguish a “gang” of three kids from three kids hanging
around together. That source is the media.
As I have shown earlier in Love to Hate, today’s complex media unite
all of us by allowing us to share in the experience not only of the make-
believe world of sitcoms and music videos but also the edited views of
reality we see on the nightly news and in documentaries. The media
allows the young boy in a small Arkansas town to study behaviors alleged
to typify gang members’ actions and then adopt those behaviors in his
youthful hatred 73

own life. As he modiﬁes his style of dress, mannerisms, and use of slang,
his parents worry that their son has joined a gang because they also rec-
ognize his behaviors from the media. Images of gang members and
gangs in popular culture thus become something of a textbook for youth
seeking actually to join a gang or for youth simply seeking to gain atten-
tion—from parents or from peers—by donning the image of a gang
member made cool in some avenues of the media. Even those youth
who have been raised around active gangs can ﬁnd in the media rein-
forcement of the image of gang members as cool and tough.
As we begin the twenty-ﬁrst century, America is still sending and
receiving extremely mixed messages about gangs. On the one hand, we
claim we detest gangs. We do not want our children involved or our
neighborhoods infested. On the other hand, we turn a blind eye to the
countless glorifying images of the so-called gangsta lifestyle on television
programs and networks that target our children as audience members.
I want to explore this rather ironic situation in more detail.
First, we must take into account the reality of gangs and youth vio-
lence in America today. In 1995, 809 people lost their lives to gang-
related violence in Los Angeles alone. Gang membership in Los Ange-
les is believed to be in the range of 200,000. Some progress is being
made though. Drive-by shootings in Los Angeles are down from a high
of 3,400 in 1992; in 1995 fewer than 2,000 drive-bys threatened lives. In
the past ﬁve years, between 36,000 and 39,000 crimes committed in Los
Angeles have been attributed to gangs.3 While Los Angeles may be the
most notorious city for gangs and gang violence, it is not the only city to
be plagued by gangs. Ninety-ﬁve percent of large cities and eighty-eight
percent of small cities suffer from gang-related violence.4 Across the
United States, gang membership is believed to exceed 800,000.5
Of course, gangs inherently promote the types of thought patterns
that characterize hatred. By deﬁning the world in terms of such con-
cepts as turf, colors, and alliances, gangs embody us versus them think-
ing in an overt form rarely seen elsewhere in our society. Gang mem-
bers operate largely on stereotypes when they deﬁne rival gang mem-
bers, and even members of their own gang, solely and superﬁcially by
their gang membership and rank. Such stereotypes, of course, promote
absolutist thinking: for a “Blood,” for instance, a “Crip” is completely
evil by virtue of his gang membership. By dividing the world so sharply
based on stereotypes, gangs also enable scapegoating because their
stereotyped notion of their rivals provides a ready source of blame when
74 Hate, American Style

things go wrong. Drive-by shootings and other instances of anonymous
violence are automatically attributed to rival gang members, regardless
of evidence. As a result of such scapegoating, the gang promises
vengeance upon the rival gang. In order to carry out acts of directed vio-
lence, the gang ultimately utilizes techniques of dehumanization so
that the gang members entrench a concept of themselves as good by vio-
lently attacking the rivals.
With this understanding of some of the realities of gang activity
clearly in mind, I want to reconsider some of the images of gangsta
lifestyle embedded in popular culture in recent years. Gangsta rap
music, of course, provides the most logical starting place. In addition to
Tupac Shakur and The Notorious B.I.G., some of the most famous rap
stars seem to celebrate gang life in their music and videos. Take for an
example Dr. Dre, the West Coast producer of rap legends Tupac,
Eminem, and Snoop Dogg, and a renowned rapper in his own right. On
Dr. Dre’s 1999 album, Dr. Dre 2001, the artist reconﬁrms his allegiance
to the street life he lived before earning fame and wealth.6 In the video
for “Still DRE,” he and Snoop Dogg drive around what appears to be an
inner-city scene slapping hands with young men on the streets and, in
some cases, directing hand signals toward them. Normally, MTV blurs
hand signals that are gang afﬁliated. That the signals in the Dr. Dre video
are not blurred suggests that they are not of known signiﬁcance to any
particular gang. However, the use of hand signaling is a well-established
means of intra- and intergang communication. While Dr. Dre and the
cast of the video are probably not sending actual gang signals, the hand
signals seem, at the least, to be a tribute to gang lifestyle in general.
Snoop himself bears discussion as I consider how media images may
be glorifying behaviors associated with gangs. Born Calvin Broadus in
Long Beach, California, the boy nicknamed “Snoop” by his mother
learned early the realities of life on gang-ridden streets.7 In and out of
trouble as a teen, Snoop was arrested shortly after graduating high
school and imprisoned for three years for selling cocaine. After his
release from prison, Snoop began collaborating with rapper Warren G.,
who in time brought Snoop together with Dr. Dre. Snoop’s frequent
vocals on Dre’s critically acclaimed album, The Chronic, earned Snoop
a following before he had released music under his own name. When
he did, his success was immediate: Doggystyle debuted at number one
on the Billboard charts in 1993, no small feat for a solo debut album.
Yet beneath all Snoop’s musical success in the 1990s was a consistent
youthful hatred 75

undercurrent of criminal allegations and gangsta posturing. In 1993
Snoop was arrested for murder. Although he was later acquitted, the
shadow of criminal violence cast a pall over his public appearances.
Snoop became perhaps the ﬁrst person awaiting trial for murder to
appear on a nationally televised award show. In fact, police attempted to
apprehend Snoop at the function. Snoop managed to evade them dur-
ing the show but later turned himself in at the police station. As a side
note, Snoop was the ﬁrst but not the only gangsta rapper to be sought by
police during a nationally televised program. A member of the gangsta
rap ensemble Bone Thugs-N-Harmony suffered a similar fate.8
Whether or not Snoop has actually ever been involved with a gang,
his stage persona is based on the gangsta lifestyle.9 In the 1990s Snoop
normally arrived at public appearances wearing the extremely baggy
pants, athletic team sweaters, and bandanas that typify the gangsta sect
within the more general hip hop music scene. In his videos Snoop often
ﬂashes cryptic hand signals toward other cast members or directly
toward the camera. And, of course, the lyrics of his music cannot be
overlooked; as a self-deﬁned gangsta rapper, Snoop overtly discusses
gang life in America in his songs.
Because of his level of fame, whether he intends it or not, Snoop’s
choices about clothing, symbols, slang, and attitude in general serve as
a model for behavior for those youth who look up to him. By donning a
generic gangsta uniform in public, Snoop in effect signals approval of
the gangsta lifestyle. I am not suggesting that Snoop is intentionally cul-
tivating styles or symbols associated with gangs in general, let alone with
a particular gang. His primary purpose no doubt is to lyrically depict the
reality of inner-city life, a reality that features gangs. Yet, unless we all
desire this reality to continue to plague our nation, we must be wary of
the unintentional effects of gangsta rap. As a by-product of their fame,
gangsta rappers’ gang-inﬂuenced stage personae do function as cues for
fans about what those young fans “should” do: a rapper’s ethos as a
celebrity compels his audience, especially his young audience, to emu-
late his style and behaviors. Regardless of whether artists such as Snoop
say directly that “gangs are good,” their public posturing as gangsta rap-
pers still sends that message to fans, including the many young fans who
are simply not intellectually mature enough to understand that descrip-
tions and enactments of reality are not necessarily intended to encour-
age the perpetuation of that reality.
Lest I give the impression that a connection between rap music and
76 Hate, American Style

gangs is a phenomenon found only among African Americans, let me
assure you it is not. There are also Hispanic and Asian rappers who are
equally guilty of gang posturing; these artists, however, receive almost
no air time on major music networks such as MTV or VH-1. Due to the
heavy rotation of African American rap artists on MTV, in particular,
gang posturing by African American rappers has no doubt had the
widest impact. Yet perhaps the most dangerous connection between
gangs and music is a brand of music known as “Oi!,” which is the pre-
ferred musical style of racist skinhead gang members. Whereas some
African American rappers are alleged to be members of gangs, virtually
all hard-core Oi! band members publicly announce their afﬁliation
with gangs such as Hammerskin Nation. Because these bands are part
of the larger arena of organized hate group activity in America, I will dis-
cuss them in much greater detail in chapter 6 of Love to Hate.
Clearly, a wide variety of musical performers now appear to be cele-
brating gang culture in their lyrics, their videos, and their public appear-
ances. From sources as polarized as major African American rap artists
such as Dr. Dre and Snoop Dogg to underground label skinhead Oi!
bands, audiences of contemporary music are being told that the gangsta
attitude and, in some cases, the lifestyle of actual gang members, is
appropriate in our society. When we juxtapose such messages with the
tragic reality of gang violence, we reveal yet another layer of our com-
plex relationship with hatred.
Even more telling of the complexity of our attitudes toward hatred
and violence, of course, is our seeming nonchalance in response to gang
posturing as a relatively common feature in the mainstream music
media. As a poor ex-convict in his early twenties, Calvin Broadus was in
no position to demand a mass audience for his rhymes about gang life
in the inner city. Music industry executives gave him his voice. Televi-
sion and radio executives gave him his forum. And we gave him our
ears. Or perhaps more to the point, we allowed him to speak to our sons
and daughters without question while we left them alone in our own
homes with MTV.
reading, writing, and riﬂes
That the phrase “school shooting” even has meaning to us as we begin
the twenty-ﬁrst century is a terribly sad commentary on life at the end of
youthful hatred 77

the twentieth century. “School shooting” now is a commonly recog-
nized term. “School shooting” will produce immediate results in a vari-
ety of databases and can be used as the framework for a productive
search of the World Wide Web. When I say “school shooting” to the col-
lege students in my classes, I am assured that they understand my mean-
ing. School shootings have become a cultural phenomenon, a societal
tornado that, with apparently no warning, rips through the heart of a
community. 
Although high proﬁle school shooting cases in recent years would
lead us to believe that school shootings are on the rise, in fact the num-
bers have been pretty consistent throughout the 1990s according to a
study conducted by the Justice Policy Institute. What has changed is the
frequency of multiple victim shootings. During the 1997–1998 school
year, forty people were killed by gunﬁre in American schools. Of those
forty, eleven died as a result of the well-publicized shooting cases in
West Paducah, Kentucky, Pearl, Mississippi, Jonesboro, Arkansas, Edin-
boro, Pennsylvania, and Springﬁeld, Oregon.10
Much attention has been given by the media itself, by scholars, and
by teachers and parents across the nation to what is causing these mass
killings in our schools. Reasons seem almost as numerous as those offer-
ing them. Blame is being placed on television, on inadequate school
security systems, on the parents of the killers, on video games, on a gen-
eral cultural tolerance for violence, on inherent ﬂaws in the brains of
the killers, on particular movies, on genres of music, on peer pressure,
on bullies, and on the status of gun control to name only a few. Realis-
tically, of course, there is no single cause of such incidents but, rather,
complex chains of causal factors. I do not pretend to know what caused
any particular shooter to attack his schoolmates. What I want to consider
in this section, though, are the ways in which our culture’s obsession
with hatred, expressed in such areas as news coverage, movies, music,
and video games, provides a fertile ground for the types of thought pat-
terns that are precursors to extreme acts of violence.
Without any doubt, the case that has exerted the most profound
impact on our national consciousness is the April 20, 1999, school shoot-
ing in Littleton, Colorado. When the terror ﬁnally ended, twelve stu-
dents and one teacher lay dead inside Columbine High School. More
than twenty other students were injured, several very seriously. The two
shooters were also found dead, from self-inﬂicted gunshot wounds.11
While the sheer volume of victims in the Columbine case helped drive
78 Hate, American Style

the story to the center of national attention, it must be remembered that
when the story broke we did not know the scope of the tragedy. What we
knew about Columbine that made it drastically different from the other
cases was that the shooting was in progress. The Columbine killers took
their time. The media arrived swiftly. The result: while students, teach-
ers, and staff members inside Columbine High School endured hours
under siege, the rest of the world, thanks to live coverage, watched the
outside of the building for any signs of life. Within moments of the cam-
era crews’ arrival, networks labelled their coverage with such titles as
“Massacre in Littleton” and “Crisis at Columbine.” Almost immedi-
ately, Columbine was not simply a tragedy but a spectacle. And while
we all mourned the tragedy, almost all of us also took part in the spec-
tacle by watching the coverage on the edge of our seats in the same way
we might watch a thriller movie.
The way the media covers crises allows us to view the stories as we
would view a movie. Titling the coverage and adding a powerful theme
song and logolike graphics give the story the same feel we normally asso-
ciate with movies or serial television ﬁction: quickly, we recognize the
package; we hear the ﬁrst chords of the theme song and await the graph-
ics formally announcing that it is time for our favorite soap opera, the
feature presentation, or the latest news about the crisis we have been fol-
lowing. 
More recently, of course, Americans witnessed and participated in
this phenomenon on September 11, 2001. Within less than three hours
of the ﬁrst hijacked plane crashing into the World Trade Center, NBC,
for example, had titled their live coverage “Attack on America” and had
added stylized graphics and music to their broadcast. Shortly after Pres-
ident Bush vowed to bring the terrorists to justice, the major networks
shifted from “Attack on America” to variations on “America Strikes
Back” as the title for and unifying theme of the surrealistic, unrelenting
coverage of the onset of war. Clearly, the magnitude of the events of
September 11, 2001, made the events themselves seem unreal, much like
the horror of the Columbine shootings seemed unreal. Yet the inherent
nature of such events is compounded by media coverage that mimics
the look and sound of cinematic features.
Additionally, the ways in which some news media outlets edit
footage and insert ﬁle footage and voice-overs artiﬁcially dramatize
events. Intercutting rather uneventful live coverage of people waiting
outside Columbine High School with ﬁle footage of bloody victims
youthful hatred 79

from earlier shootings or running audio of the president lamenting
national violence over video of crying children adds a cinematic ﬂair to
an already emotional story. Thus the format and editing techniques sur-
rounding the news media’s coverage of crises such as school shootings
tends to blur the line between fact and ﬁction. The horrible irony, of
course, is that such a confusion between reality and fantasy is exactly
what many people accuse the school shooters of enacting.
When school shootings occur, the media coverage itself tends to
embody several of the thought patterns underlying hatred. First, the
media normally portray the killer or killers as evil and other than “us.”
Especially in the early days of the story when little is known of the killer,
the media reduce the person only to the act of the killing and to traits
that seem to be related to the violence—a love of violent games or ﬁlms,
for example. Granted, the killing is the heart of the news event. But it
must be remembered that the media ultimately have the power to shape
the story. By relying on absolutism and techniques of dehumanization,
the media very often paint the killer as somehow other than the rest of
us, as a demon living amongst us. 
Yet, in doing so, the media fail to encourage us to see how very
human and like us the killer may have been. I would suggest that it is
only in seeing how “of us” school shooters are that we ever will discover
the secret of preventing troubled youth from acting out in such horrible
bursts of violence. This is because years or months or even moments
before turning violent and becoming a monster in our eyes, a window
of opportunity for intervention in the life of a young person exists. When
in our outrage we focus only on the act of a monster killing one of “us,”
we sacriﬁce the potential to understand better the warning signs the next
time one of “us” is becoming a monster.
In the time that has passed since the Columbine massacre, we have
learned that Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold fully understood that their
crime would inspire a media frenzy. In mid-December 1999, several
media outlets revealed details of videotapes Harris and Klebold made in
the days, even moments, before attacking Columbine High School.
Eight months after America saw yearbook photos of the killers and won-
dered who they were, the courts that released the tapes and the media
that aired them provided a source for answers: Harris and Klebold in
their own words on their own terms. Harris jokingly asks, “Isn’t it fun to
get the respect we deserve?” as national and even international audi-
ences watch a troubled high-school boy speaking into a videocamcorder
80 Hate, American Style

in his bedroom. Klebold portends, “Hollywood will want to do this
story,” as we all watch yet another scene in the media movie that now is
Columbine.12 None of the thirteen people Harris and Klebold slaugh-
tered at Columbine High School had the opportunity to make a video-
tape before being murdered. Even if they had, they are not the stars of
this particular show anyhow: Harris and Klebold are the lead characters
in Columbine. And from the evidence on the tapes they themselves
made, Harris and Klebold knew we all would watch them if they did
something really horriﬁc and, therefore, really newsworthy.
Finally, media coverage of acts of extreme violence does have the
potential to make heroes of the killers in the eyes of some, it is to be
hoped very small, audience sectors. Of course, this is not something
over which the media can exert any control. Nevertheless, we should
not ignore the real potential for copycat crimes and martyrdom as a
result of media coverage. All across the United States in the days fol-
lowing the Columbine shootings, other students threatened their
schools, donned black trench coats similar to those made notorious in
Littleton and, in a few cases, actually attempted new acts of violence. If
movies about school shootings are thought to be blueprints for disturbed
youth, undoubtedly media coverage of actual school shootings can be
blueprints for the next wave of child shooters.
In doing some of my research for this book, I was shocked by the
number of sites on the Internet that can best be described as shrines to
Colombine killers Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold. One young woman
who calls herself a “Trenchcoatchic” writes on her personal Web page,
“Right now, my biggest hero is Eric Harris. I love Eric Harris. I respect
him. . . . As soon as the story came out, I fell deep into the dramatic story
of Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold. Everyone thinks they were screwed
up and twisted, I think they were only troubled. I really wish people
would leave them the hell alone.”13 The teens who have erected such
cyberspace monuments to Harris and Klebold seem to embrace the
killers as soul mates because, as the Trenchcoatchic puts it, “I have seen
the problems they had for 10 years.” But how does she know what prob-
lems Harris and Klebold faced? From media coverage about them as the
stars of Columbine of course. 
Almost immediately as news of the Columbine shooting broke, alle-
gations surfaced that the killers had been motivated by dark forces
within popular culture. Teens who knew Harris and Klebold reported
that both young men had been particularly interested in violent movies
youthful hatred 81

and video games. As details of the crime became known, the similarity
of the killers’ plan of attack with a scene from the movie The Basketball
Diaries led some people to point the ﬁnger of blame at the ﬁlm itself. As
I have said before, crimes such as school shootings are far too complex
to allow the neat identiﬁcation of causes. Nevertheless, that Harris and
Klebold were known to be fans of a ﬁlm that contains a scene very sim-
ilar to their crime does warrant some consideration of the ﬁlm not as
motivation for committing the crime but perhaps as a model for the
nature of the crime.
Scott Kalvert directed the 1995 ﬁlm The Basketball Diaries.14
Although the ﬁlm itself was written by Bryan Goluboff, it is based rather
closely on the semi-autobiographical novel of the same name published
by Jim Carroll in 1978. Carroll himself stars in the ﬁlm, with critically
acclaimed actor Leonardo DiCaprio playing the lead role of Carroll as
a teen. The ﬁlm traces Carroll’s descent from high-school athletic star-
dom into heroin addiction, prostitution, and emotional despair. 
The scene of the ﬁlm that has been the target of great critique as a
result of the Columbine shooting, however, is one in which DiCaprio’s
character fantasizes a violent assault of his schoolmates. In the scene,
DiCaprio is seen entering a classroom. He is wearing a long, black coat
that, we quickly learn, conceals a large gun. Standing before the class,
a chalkboard his backdrop, DiCaprio raises the gun from the folds of the
coat and opens ﬁre on the students. 
The similarity of this scene to eyewitness accounts of Harris and Kle-
bold’s assault on the students and staff of Columbine High School is
striking. But what does the scene actually tell its audiences about hatred
and violence? On some levels, the scene and the entire movie seem to
legitimize hatred. In the fantasy scene, as the young Jim Carroll attacks
the class, he is a mid-1990s version of the cowboy hero, committing vio-
lence for the larger good of ridding the world of undesirables. His
actions may be despised, but his motives are moral: the ends justify the
means. 
More generally, director Scott Kalvert met with a fundamental prob-
lem of morality tales when creating The Basketball Diaries: how does
one show the horrors of the life of a heroin addict without showing the
life of a heroin addict; how does one show the horror of a sick mind with-
out exposing the audience to that mind? The Basketball Diaries graphi-
cally portrays the street life Carroll fell into as his addiction took control
of his life. That is the subject of the ﬁlm. Signiﬁcantly, the overall mes-
82 Hate, American Style

sage of the ﬁlm is that drugs, and the violence and degradation sur-
rounding drug abuse, are bad. Nevertheless, to make this point Kalvert
must showcase the very subjects the movie deplores. Of course, Kalvert
is not alone in facing this dilemma. Directors, lyricists, gangsta rappers,
and authors (myself included) face it daily. So do teachers and parents
who wrestle with questions about how to talk to their children about
such topics as drugs and sex so as to inform them about realities and risks
without tempting them with taboos. 
While some elements of The Basketball Diaries embody mixed mes-
sages about hatred and violence, a couple of features of this movie actu-
ally seem designed to dethrone as a hero a person who is in fact violent.
First, the school shooting fantasy scene itself is ﬁlmed much of the time
from the perspective of a person conceivably in the line of ﬁre of
DiCaprio’s character. The audience thus does not always look through
the killer’s eyes but, rather, often at the killer. We see him. We see the
gun emerge. We see him train it at his victims. We ask ourselves if we
will be one of them? This choice of camera angle discourages the audi-
ence from sympathizing with the killer’s actions. Second, the scene
clearly is portrayed as a dream sequence—speciﬁcally as a drug-induced
fantasy—within the movie. To the extent that the movie centers on the
character of the young Jim Carroll as the sympathetic lead, The Basket-
ball Diaries lets us share his fantasies as fantasies. We understand him
better for having seen the fantasy sequence, but because we understand
him and sympathize with him, we recognize that he is not a killer. The
Basketball Diaries does show an act of extreme violence, but it does not
overtly glorify the act as so many movies do these days. If anything, the
tale of Jim Carroll, fantasies and all, is presented as a morality tale argu-
ing against a life of drugs, violence, and sexual promiscuity.
By all accounts, Harris and Klebold were fascinated by The Basket-
ball Diaries. The way they staged their attack on Columbine High
School certainly does resemble the school shooting fantasized by the
character of Jim Carroll in that movie. A closer look at the movie itself
indicates that The Basketball Diaries seems to send two contradictory
messages about hatred and violence. On the one hand, the movie sets
Carroll up within the fantasy sequence in a role similar to that of the
cowboy hero icon of old. In this role his use of any means necessary,
including extreme violence, is justiﬁed because he is the hero of his
own fantasies; if he kills someone, they “deserved” to be killed. On the
other hand, the movie is constructed to discourage sympathy with
youthful hatred 83

someone who actually commits such violence. If Harris and Klebold
did imitate the school shooting scene from The Basketball Diaries, they
missed the larger point of the life of Jim Carroll told in the ﬁlm. Of
course, it is no solace to the victims of Columbine to know that Harris
and Klebold apparently misunderstood the movie on which they seem-
ingly based their attack.
Music is another area of popular culture identiﬁed by many as a
likely inspiration for the Columbine massacre. Speciﬁc allegations have
been leveled against Marilyn Manson, middle America’s favorite source
of “evil” in the late 1990s, and the German bands Rammstein and
KMFDM, both of which appear to have been popular with Harris and
Klebold. As I mentioned in the previous chapter, Marilyn Manson
proves rather problematic for detractors because the band is so overtly
theatrical; teenagers seem to understand that Manson is an act even if
adults do not. Additionally, while the entire Gothic scene surrounding
Manson surely is one of doom and gloom, it is such a self-consciously
glamorized version of tragedy that it seems to reverse on itself and
become fun, in some cases fully comedic, for teens who are into being
goth. The images Manson attaches to their music in videos certainly are
dismal and, perhaps most accurately, creepy, but they are not violent
per se. The lead singer cavorts about in leather and rubber outﬁts that
probably feel more tortuous even than they look. His painted face gri-
maces as he sings “shocking” lyrics that attack traditional American
social structures and religious ideals. But he does not physically attack
other people.
To be sure, the sight and sound of Marilyn Manson is something to
behold. Frankly, even though I myself forayed into punkdom as a teen,
if I ran into the Manson band members in a dark alley these days I
would probably faint! But just for a second. Because I think I’d almost
immediately notice that they are an act and a very obvious and self-
aware act at that. Do Marilyn Manson music and videos contribute to
our culture of death? Without a doubt, because the group revels in
imagery derived from sadomasochism, vampirism, and Nazism, among
other sources. But in sharp contrast to many other musical groups, as
well as ﬁlms and video games, Marilyn Manson invites teen fans to dress
up and play at spooky for an evening or even for the duration of a rebel-
lious phase, not necessarily to embrace hatred and violence as a normal
part of everyday life. 
In contrast to Manson, however, are the German industrial rock
84 Hate, American Style

bands Harris and Klebold apparently favored. Unlike Manson’s version
of extreme shock-rock, both Rammstein and KMFDM present a more
“normal” front. Thus while it is possible that they are every bit as much
a piece of theater as Marilyn Manson, they are not so easily identiﬁed
(by teens especially) as “just an act.” Rammstein, in particular, portray
themselves in their visual imagery with a gritty realism. The video for
“Du Hast” (“You Hate”), which marked their breakthrough with Amer-
ican audiences, resembles a Quentin Tarantino movie.15 The video fol-
lows a group of ordinary looking men and a rather typical looking
female cohort through a variety of scenes. Staged in a relatively bleak
semirural setting the characters ultimately converge in a horriﬁc shoot-
out. Yet while we see the shoot-out and falling victims, we are not really
invited to witness the victims’ pain. As in so many videos, television
shows, and ﬁlms these days, the video for “Du Hast” portrays the com-
mission of violence as a typical part of life but does not honestly tell us
the story of the victims.
There are two important differences between Rammstein and ﬁlm-
makers such as Tarantino. First, Tarantino shows both sides of violence.
One of the most striking qualities of his ﬁlms is the focus on the after-
math of violence. Whereas other video and ﬁlm directors show shoot-
ing, Tarantino also makes us see being shot. I suspect I am not alone in
how vividly I can recall the image of the man who lay dying, completely
soaked in his own blood, for virtually the entire duration of the ﬁlm
Reservoir Dogs.16 Tarantino does not let us pretend that being shot does
not hurt. He makes us see the pain of violence. Media images of vio-
lence too often do not follow the action-packed excitement of a gun bat-
tle through to the reality of physical agony for the victim and emotional
heartache for the victim’s family and friends. Stories that fail to tell us
the results of violence can encourage us to forget the results of violence.
For adults, this pattern can cause desensitization as we lose sight of the
victims’ suffering. For children, however, this pattern can actually pro-
mote a deadly ﬂaw in their cause-effect thinking: if children rarely see a
gun shot cause pain, suffering, death, grief, they begin to lose sight of the
very real dangers of gun violence.17 The second great difference
between Tarantino’s work and the gritty reality of the Rammstein video,
of course, is that Tarantino’s movies carry R ratings, while Rammstein’s
“Du Hast” ran in regular rotation on MTV. 
In the wake of the Columbine High School shootings, much atten-
tion was paid by the media to violent video games as another possible
youthful hatred 85

causal factor in Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold’s decision to kill. Specif-
ically, games such as Doom and Duke Nukem were criticized for their
extreme levels of graphic violence. In the videotapes made by the
Columbine killers prior to the shootings, Harris predicts, “It’ll be like
fucking Doom.”18 Of course, graphic portrayals of violence have been a
part of popular culture in varying degrees for centuries. The Roman’s
threw real Christians to the lions. The Puritans burned real women
accused of witchcraft. Duke Nukem does not kill anyone—both he and
his victims are nothing more than computer-generated images. So in
some sense such games mark great progress for humanity in that most
of us now perform our violence inside the safety of virtual reality instead
of actually committing it upon others.19
However, even if we do not actually kill when engaging in such play,
we are still engaging in some of the emotional processes of killing. Pop-
ular games such as Doom and Duke Nukem transport the player into a
ﬁrst-person perspective as the killer. Unlike old arcade favorites in
which players watched all the characters, including the one they con-
trolled with the joystick, most violent video games today require players
to see through the killer’s eyes. This new wave of ﬁrst-person video
games allows or, if you prefer, demands players to rehearse the emo-
tional stages of killing. If not, if the games truly are not emotionally
intense performances of violence, then why do players become angry
and nervous when being pursued and experience feelings of power and
pride when destroying the enemy? It is clear that violent video games
are enjoyable because they allow their players to act out such emotions
and, by acting them out, purge themselves of pent-up feelings of rage in
a safe and socially accepted manner. 
But the only way we can act out the emotional highs and lows of vio-
lence is also in some way to engage in the thought patterns of dehu-
manization. Video-game villains thus come in one of two general forms:
they are either generic bad guys who have no humanity because they
have no individual character traits or mythic opponents whose traits are
so inﬂated as to be superhuman and therefore not really human. When
we play video games, then, we are invited to kill bad guys, which is
morally acceptable. The problem is that in such games everyone other
than the player’s character is a bad guy worthy of death. Unlike military
uses of dehumanization tactics in which “us” and “them” are deﬁned
by the sides of war, today’s violent video games tend to dehumanize
everyone else—instead of us versus them, ﬁrst-person video games trans-
86 Hate, American Style

port players into the world of me versus them. In such a world only the
player retains humanity.
The horror of Columbine was its reality—the way in which it
appeared to take the images from a computer game and enact them in
real life. We will never know exactly what went through the minds of
Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold as they prowled the hallways of
Columbine High School terrorizing students, teachers, and staff mem-
bers. But I think we can safely make a couple of assumptions about their
thoughts. They did not look into the eyes of those they killed and rec-
ognize “us.” They did not identify with the humanity they shared with
their victims. 
So too we no longer can identify with the humanity we shared with
them. Harris and Klebold now are monsters—evil, savage, inhuman.
By virtue of their crimes, they are no longer of “us.” We wish they were
alive only so that we as a society could kill them for having killed so
many of us. 
Dehumanizing thought patterns aren’t just something “they” do.
They are deep inside all of “us.”
As a society, we publicly attest that we deplore hatred and violence. Yet
hatred and violence seem to be a central theme in virtually all avenues
of American popular culture as we begin the twenty-ﬁrst century. We
tell our children that gangs are bad, but we pay no attention as they
become fans of gangsta rap. We tell our children that killers such as Har-
ris and Klebold are monsters, but we buy our children games like Doom
for a birthday present. Is it really any wonder that some children
become confused when all of us are receiving and sending such con-
tradictory messages? 
In the wake of horrible crimes such as the Columbine school shoot-
ing, we gather as a nation in front of our television screens and mourn
not only the loss of more children but also the loss of our own comfort-
able faith that something like that can’t happen to someone like us.
Columbine and all the other school shootings have made most of us
realize that it can happen to us.
And thus we mourn together through the media when tragedy
strikes. We pray that there never will be another Columbine.
And I share in this prayer. Yet I wonder why it is that it takes thirteen
victims at Columbine to make us outraged when ﬁfty-six children die
from gunﬁre in this country every single week.20 I wonder why we mourn
youthful hatred 87

as a nation the eleven children who died in Pearl and West Paducah and
Edinboro and Springﬁeld and Jonesboro, when we do not mourn the
eleven children who die every forty-eight hours in America as a result of
family violence.21
What does it take to get our attention and hold it? How tough do we
all have to become before we say, “Enough!”?
88 Hate, American Style

The atmosphere of old-fashioned serenity and security drew me to the
small town in which I reside. Yet only a few weeks after I ﬁrst moved
here in the early 1990s, news spread that a young girl was missing. Ten
year-old Ronnie Eichstedt disappeared while riding her bicycle on an
autumn Sunday afternoon. Immediately police and hundreds of volun-
teers combed the countryside in search of the little girl. As the days wore
on and we all resigned ourselves to the reality that Ronnie had been
abducted, one of my teaching colleagues commented, “Sometimes I
am embarrassed to be human.” That line—“sometimes I am embar-
rassed to be human”—echoed through my mind months later when I
heard the local radio announcer report that Ronnie’s body had been
found. 
No crimes inspire our rage and our terror like the patterned murder
sprees known as serial killings. Like animals in the wild, serial killers
stalk their victims. Like demons, serial killers subject their victims to
hellish ritual torments. Yet serial killers are neither animals nor demons:
they are humans. Serial killers are of “us” no matter how rigorously we
deny them. Serial killers are of “us” no matter if we lock them away for
life or put them to death. Serial killers are of “us” and that intimate and
chapter 5
Glamorized Hatred:
Our Obsession with Serial Killers

undeniable fact is what lends such tragic profundity to the remark
“sometimes I am embarrassed to be human.”
Although we humans have killed each other since the dawn of our
existence, the public apparently only became aware of serial killings
quite recently. London’s notorious Jack the Ripper case in the late nine-
teenth century marked the ﬁrst serial killing spree to receive widespread
notice. As mass media technologies advanced in the twentieth century,
news of outrageous crimes spread quickly and often took on a sensa-
tionalistic air. Americans, in particular, developed a fascination with
both real and imagined stories about serial killers. 
Yet in some ways any form of media coverage of serial killers gloriﬁes
hatred and violence in their most extreme forms. In this chapter I
explore America’s fascination with serial killers and how that fascination
is served by the media. First, I consider just how prominent the image
of the serial killer has become in popular culture. I then consider the
case of Ed Gein, one of the ﬁrst American serial killers to be the focus
of national media attention. Finally, I examine in detail the case of Jef-
frey Dahmer, the Milwaukee killer who captivated America’s attention
in the early 1990s. Speciﬁcally, I hope to demonstrate how particular
styles of media story-telling encourage us to perceive killers like Dahmer
to be celebrities. To do this I need to walk readers through the gruesome
details of these cases. I ask readers to understand that my purpose here
is not to sensationalize violence but rather to unmask how violence is
sensationalized in our popular culture.
serial killers in popular culture 
Perhaps it is no coincidence that the nation with the most elaborate
mass media has also produced the most serial killers of any nation in the
world. Images of serial killers are a mainstay of American popular cul-
ture. Beyond news coverage of actual serial killings, movies, books, tel-
evision programs, songs, and video games feature serial killers as stock
characters. What follows is a quick survey of some of the most well-
known images of serial killers in American popular culture.
Since Charles Manson’s followers committed the Tate/LaBianca
murders in 1969, Manson himself has come to deﬁne our idea of the
serial murderer.1 The crimes themselves, of course, were heinous.
Actress Sharon Tate was eight months pregnant when the Manson fam-
90 Hate, American Style

ily stabbed her to death and left four other victims strewn haphazardly
about the Tate residence. The next night, the Manson family attacked
Leon and Rosemary LaBianca as they lay sleeping in their bed. At both
scenes the murderers smeared bloody grafﬁti on the walls. One of the
ghastly messages, “Helter Skelter,” is now synonymous with acts of out-
rageous violence.
When Charles Manson stood trial for ﬁrst-degree murder and con-
spiracy to commit murder in June 1970, media coverage of the high pro-
ﬁle case introduced Manson to the world. Manson’s courtroom antics
confounded observers. He carved an X into his forehead. He taunted
jurors, witnesses, even observers. He often disrupted the proceedings in
what many felt were attempts to draw media attention away from evi-
dence against him. At one point, an incensed Manson actually lunged
for the judge screaming, “someone should cut your head off!”2 Manson
and the female members of the family standing trial with him shaved
their heads for the reading of the verdict. More than nine and a half
months after the trial started, the jury found all defendants guilty and
sentenced them to death. Because the California Supreme Court abol-
ished the death penalty in 1972, however, the Manson family defendants
are now serving life sentences.
Although Manson has been behind bars since 1970, he remains a
prominent ﬁgure in popular culture. The infotainment media continue
to air interviews with Manson in which he continues to fascinate us with
his bizarre mannerisms and theories and, of course, those haunting
eyes. Today he sports a swastika on his forehead. Several fortunes no
doubt have been made over the years from sales of books such as Helter
Skelter and the many other accounts of life within the Manson family.3
One of the most controversial rock acts of recent years, Marilyn Man-
son, created their ear-catching name by marrying two icons of the twen-
tieth century, the glamorous Marilyn Monroe and the glamorized
Charles Manson.
Yet aside from continued coverage of Charles Manson and allusions
to “Manson” as a symbol, the enduring legacy of the Manson family is
the central role images of serial murder now play in our mass con-
sciousness. The sensationalized Manson trial proved to the media, and
more critically to advertisers, that we will tune in to see real horror sto-
ries. The Manson family demonstrated the wide market for serial killing
in America. Apparently Charles Manson is more intriguing to us than
other “real” news characters such as presidents and members of Con-
glamorized hatred 91

gress. And ﬁctional stories about serial killers are more terrifying than
old-style horror stories such as The Blob and Godzilla.
Since the days of helter skelter in 1969, Hollywood has served up a
buffet of movies and television programs featuring serial killings. In the
1990s, two such ﬁlms drew extensive public notice. The critical acclaim
surrounding the 1991 release of Silence of the Lambs had all of America
talking about Hannibal Lecter and all of Hollywood talking about Oscar
potential.4 Directed by Jonathan Demme, Silence of the Lambs traces
agents of the FBI’s Behavioral Science Unit as they attempt to locate a
young woman being held prisoner by a serial killer code-named Buffalo
Bill because he skins his victims. Agent Starling, played by Jodie Foster,
seeks assistance on the case from incarcerated serial killer and psychia-
trist Hannibal Lecter, played by Anthony Hopkins. Starling learns from
Lecter that she will only be able to catch the killer by learning to think
as he thinks. In the case of Buffalo Bill, not until Starling understands
why he skins his victims is she able to save the woman held hostage in a
pit in his basement.
Whereas Silence of the Lambs invites viewers into the mind of the
serial killer as read by FBI agents, Natural Born Killers invites viewers
to witness America’s reaction to a killing spree.5 In 1994 controversy
swirled around director Oliver Stone’s ﬁlm, which some argued was
too graphically violent for general release and others argued glamor-
ized serial killing for young viewers. Signiﬁcantly though, Natural Born
Killers itself does not glamorize violence; rather, the ﬁlm centers
around how violence is already glamorized in our society. Stone forces
us really to see our own obsession with criminal celebrity when he dis-
plays before our eyes a story of the media’s pursuit of ﬁctional serial
killers Mickey and Mallory Knox. In Natural Born Killers, the media,
and with it the public, stalk Mickey and Mallory just as serial killers
stalk their victims.
Of course, no discussion of images of serial killers in American pop-
ular culture would be complete without Psycho.6 Alfred Hitchcock’s
1960 thriller remains the standard against which all ﬁlms of the genre
are judged. Unlike more recent fare such as Silence of the Lambs and
Natural Born Killers, Hitchcock’s movie did not need to ﬁnd an angle
on the serial killing phenomenon: simply telling the story of a serial
killer was itself a revolutionary new twist in ﬁlm-making that left an
indelible mark on the American psyche. The infamous motel shower
scene, in which the as yet unseen killer slays the female traveler por-
92 Hate, American Style

trayed by actress Janet Leigh, still inhabits the nightmares of millions of
American moviegoers. 
Psycho tells the story of Norman Bates, a lonely and apparently naïve
young man who operates the Bates Motel, a roadside hostel in a rather
deserted area. Products of Norman’s hobby, taxidermy, decorate the
motel lobby. Although we do not see her face, we learn that Norman’s
domineering mother seems to dictate nearly all of his actions. As sec-
ondary characters in the ﬁlm are murdered, we become suspicious of
Norman. Ultimately, Hitchcock reveals Norman’s secret: he long ago
killed his mother and now kills others as “directed” to him by her
corpse, which he had stuffed as his ultimate taxidermy project.
For nearly half a century, images of serial killers have ﬁgured promi-
nently in American popular culture. From the legendary Psycho in 1960
to contemporary classics such as Silence of the Lambs and Natural Born
Killers, tales of serial killings have become an entertainment mainstay
not just with B-caliber horror ﬂick buffs but with the general audience.
If Psycho remains the standard for ﬁlms about serial killers, the sensa-
tionalism surrounding Charles Manson and the Manson family
remains the standard for media coverage of serial killers. Whether ﬁc-
tional or real, these most extreme and grotesque acts of violence have
been fascinating American audiences for years.
the real thing: meet eddie gein
It would be comforting to think that movie madmen like Psycho’s Nor-
man Bates and Silence of the Lambs’s Buffalo Bill were born in the
imaginations of Hollywood directors. Unfortunately, Hitchcock and
Demme modeled both Norman Bates and Buffalo Bill on Eddie Gein,
the ﬁrst American serial killer to captivate the world audience.7
Until police approached the Gein farmstead on November 17, 1957,
the people who lived in and around Plainﬁeld, Wisconsin, knew Eddie
Gein as a quiet and slightly peculiar neighbor. Born in the larger city of
LaCrosse, Wisconsin, in 1906, Gein moved to Plainﬁeld as a boy with
his parents, George and Augusta, and his older brother, Henry. Augusta
Gein ruled her family with an iron ﬁst, tolerating no dissension from
either of her sons or from her mealy-mouthed, alcoholic husband.
Augusta practiced her own stark brand of religion and indoctrinated her
sons early on with her puritanical views about sin. 
glamorized hatred 93

Augusta Gein was determined that her sons would not condemn
themselves to hell by falling prey to worldly temptations. In fact, it was
Augusta’s concern that her boys would be corrupted by inﬂuences in
LaCrosse that led her to relocate the family to an isolated farm outside
the small town of Plainﬁeld. Augusta taught her boys that all sexual
activity was sinful. She endeavored to shield them from contact with all
women other than herself and forbade them ever to date or to marry.
Henry and Eddie had almost no contact with neighbors as children,
and because they worshipped at the altar of Augusta Gein did not even
socialize with others at church. 
School provided Henry and Eddie their only opportunity to interact
with people outside their immediate family. Eddie was an average student
but terribly shy and awkward. He enjoyed reading and rarely associated
with other children when at school. When he did, his efforts to reach out
were thwarted. His classmates teased the quiet and oddly effeminate boy.
Augusta dashed any hopes he had of making lasting friends by barring
him from spending time with his peers beyond the hours in school
required by law. Eddie found his only escape from his loneliness and his
mother’s constant verbal abuse in pulp adventure tales.
When George Gein died in 1940, Augusta allowed Henry and Eddie
to venture off the farm to supplement the family’s meager income.
Eddie took on odd jobs as a handyman and became one of Plainﬁeld’s
most sought-after baby-sitters. No doubt because of his peculiar
upbringing, Eddie remained childlike in many ways and had an instant
rapport with the children he tended. As the brothers Gein appeared in
town more frequently, they earned a reputation as polite and responsi-
ble workers. 
As the years wore on after George’s death, Henry apparently began to
challenge Augusta’s authority. Torn between his love for his brother and
only friend and his idolization of his mother, Eddie began his pilgrim-
age into the annals of American crime. In the spring of 1944, a brush ﬁre
threatened the Gein farm. Henry and Eddie labored feverishly to extin-
guish the ﬂames and, according to Eddie, separated from each other to
attack the ﬁre more efﬁciently. Hours later Eddie called local police to
report that he could not ﬁnd his brother and feared Henry had been
consumed by the ﬁre. Yet when police arrived at the farm, Eddie imme-
diately led them to his brother’s body. Henry Gein lay dead on ground
untouched by the brush ﬁre. His head was severely bruised. At the time,
police never seriously considered that Henry may have been the victim
94 Hate, American Style

of foul play; such a thought seemed ludicrous in a small town like Plain-
ﬁeld in the innocent era of the 1940s. 
As Eddie grieved the loss of his brother and, most now suspect, his
own role in his brother’s death, Augusta suffered a series of strokes and
died on December 29, 1945. Gein’s primary biographer, Harold
Schechter, notes in Deviant, that from that day forward Eddie Gein
“was absolutely alone in the world.”8 Gein withdrew from all but two
rooms of the farmhouse, living only in the kitchen and a small side room
he used for sleeping. The rest of the house remained exactly as it had
been at the moment of Augusta’s death, a shrine to Eddie’s love for her. 
Few of us can conceive, thankfully, the depths of loneliness Eddie
Gein must have felt following his mother’s death. He never ventured
out to make new friends. Never in his life did he approach a woman
romantically or sexually. With all members of his family gone, Eddie’s
only companions were his books and magazines. He lost himself in
adventure tales. He developed a particular fondness for stories of South
Seas pirates and a particular fascination with reports of tribal customs in
the area. Eddie studied anatomy books to better understand how some
South Seas islanders shrunk the heads of their enemies and how others
exhumed cadavers as part of elaborate death rituals.
Somehow, in some way we will never really understand, Eddie’s
twisted upbringing and his interests in death rituals converged on his
loneliness: he sought solace at the local cemetery. For years, Eddie fol-
lowed the obituary column in the local newspaper. Late in the night,
under cover of darkness, Eddie would dig up the remains of newly
deceased women. At ﬁrst, Eddie simply would sit with a corpse in the
silence of the graveyard, then gently replace the body and recover the
casket. In time, he began to remove souvenirs from the bodies.
Not until after Gein became a household name across America did
anyone in Plainﬁeld know local graves ever had been disturbed. Neither
did anyone suspect Eddie Gein’s ghoulish late-night hobby. A neighbor
boy was the ﬁrst to notice something odd was going on in Eddie Gein’s
house. Yet when he told people he’d seen real shrunken heads in Gein’s
kitchen, they laughed at him and assured him Gein must have been
teasing him with novelty items. As talk of the shrunken heads spread
around the town, Eddie himself talked about his morbid collection at
the town store. The people of Plainﬁeld, of course, assumed their nor-
mally quiet neighbor must have been joking with them.
But the people of Plainﬁeld and of the entire world soon realized that
glamorized hatred 95

Eddie Gein was not joking when he mentioned his collection. On
November 17, 1957, local police arrived at the Gein farm to question
Eddie about the disappearance of Bernice Worden and the robbery of
her hardware store. Although no one had ever accused Eddie of a crime
in his life, he was the last person seen entering the store; a receipt in his
name was found near the cash register.
On arriving at the farm, Sheriff Arthur Schley visually surveyed the
now dilapidated exterior of the house. Antique equipment, tools, furni-
ture, and boxes lay about the yard and porch. Amid the unusual level of
clutter, the Sheriff spied a typical sight during the peak of Wisconsin’s
deer hunting season: a headless carcass was drawn up by the feet, gut-
ted, and hanging from the rafters of the porch to drain. When Sheriff
Schley drew closer, he realized that the carcass was not that of a deer but
of Bernice Worden. 
Inside, police dug through years of accumulated ﬁlth in the two
rooms Gein inhabited. They found cereal in a bowl fashioned from a
human skull, lamp shades and wastebaskets formed from stretched
human skin, and even an armchair upholstered in human ﬂesh. As they
continued their search, they uncovered four noses, a human heart, a
head, a shoe box ﬁlled with vaginas, and a belt made of nipples. Finally,
they made the most startling discovery of all, the one that deﬁned the
screen character Buffalo Bill: Eddie Gein had made himself a “woman
suit.” Gein later would explain to authorities that he would attire him-
self in the suit to feel as if he had breasts and female genitalia. Wearing
nothing but the suit, he would wander about outside in the night.
Police found remains of ten people in the Gein house. Initially,
Eddie admitted only to killing Bernice Worden, but he soon also con-
fessed to having abducted and murdered Mary Hogan, a bartender from
the nearby town of Wild Rose who had been missing for some time.
Police were hesitant to believe Gein’s claim that he actually had
removed all the other bodies from their graves. After much controversy
surrounding the ethics of the plan, police followed Eddie to the Plain-
ﬁeld cemetery where he pointed out which graves he had violated.
Clear evidence of tampering was revealed on each cofﬁn workers
uncovered. 
To this day, no one really understands how Eddie Gein managed to
exhume eight bodies without raising suspicions. Some people believe
he may have been assisted by a mentally handicapped man who worked
at the cemetery, but no hard proof of that claim ever materialized. Gein
96 Hate, American Style

himself claimed that he simply entered the cemetery after dark, dug qui-
etly with a small spade and his hands, used various tools to open the
cofﬁns, removed the bodies to his truck, then quickly reﬁlled the hole.
Because he only desired fresh corpses, the ground covering the graves
still was loose and bare; therefore, no one detected the graves had been
violated.
In the end, prosecutors charged Eddie Gein with two counts of ﬁrst-
degree murder in the cases of Bernice Worden and Mary Hogan. The
state of Wisconsin crime lab proved that remains of eight other victims
found at his home belonged to bodies originally buried in the cemetery
and thus that Gein could not have murdered the women. An eleventh
body found buried on Gein’s property was never identiﬁed. Police sus-
pect Gein probably murdered several people who vanished in that area
of Wisconsin in the 1940s and 1950s but have never been able to ﬁnd
their bodies. Gein himself stuck by his claim only to have murdered
Worden and Hogan.
Not surprisingly, when police announced what they had uncovered
in Eddie Gein’s house, a media frenzy ensued. Reporters from all over
the world descended on the tiny town of Plainﬁeld. Although most local
residents at ﬁrst seemed hostile to the intrusion into their grief and dis-
may, many gradually warmed to the press and offered interviews. News-
papers and magazines worldwide told the story of Eddie Gein, the quiet
little man who baby-sat for his neighbors yet was really a monster.
While his former neighbors talked about Eddie with the press, Eddie
himself talked to psychiatrists at the Central State Hospital for the
Criminally Insane. Gein was declared mentally unﬁt to stand trial. Doc-
tors diagnosed Gein as a sexual psychopath, noting that his peculiar
upbringing in general and his mother’s near constant berating of him to
avoid sexuality combusted in adulthood when he found himself alone
on the farm. Eddie’s need to create and wear his “woman suit” resulted
from unchecked impulses toward transvestitism and fetishism as well as
his limitless devotion to the mother who had abused him so horribly and
polluted his thinking. Had he not been caught, it is unknown if Eddie
would have killed again. The murders of Worden and Hogan may sim-
ply have been a means for him to acquire more materials for his woman
suit when fresh graves were not available.
Eddie still was under care of the doctors at the Central State Hospi-
tal when his property went up for auction. Not since the case itself had
broken had so many people traveled to Plainﬁeld. The auctioneering
glamorized hatred 97

company charged ﬁfty cents admission of anyone who wanted to view
the contents of the house. Outraged, the families of Gein’s victims
attempted to stop the sale. Although the auctioneer stopped charging
the browser’s fee, the sale itself went on as planned. The 1949 Ford truck
Gein used to haul bodies to the farm sold for more than seven hundred
dollars. For years, the truck toured America on the carnival circuit
under the heading “Gein’s Ghoul Car.” Very early on the morning of
March 20, 1958, the Plainﬁeld Volunteer Fire Department was sum-
moned to the Gein farm: the now empty house was ablaze. The ﬁre-
ﬁghters and local townspeople watched quietly as Gein’s house fell into
ashes, an impromptu ﬁnal eulogy for his victims.
In the late 1960s, Eddie Gein was ﬁnally declared ﬁt to stand trial for
the murder of Bernice Worden. After about a week of testimony, the
judge found Gein guilty. However, Gein was soon acquitted on grounds
that he had been insane at the time the murder itself took place. The
court remanded Gein to the custody of doctors at the Central State
Hospital for the Criminally Insane where he lived out his life. 
Gein apparently was happier during his years at the hospital than he
ever had been in his life. He remained largely to himself but was no
longer alone. He chatted with his doctors, read books, and performed
the various chores to which he was assigned. Never once did he cause
any disruptions or require sedation. However, for the remainder of his
years he did stare at female nurses in a peculiar manner and attempt to
avoid most contact with them. Eddie Gein died of cancer on July 26,
1984. He was buried next to his mother, Augusta, in the Plainﬁeld ceme-
tery, a few paces away from the graves he had desecrated. 
The Eddie Gein case riveted audiences in the 1950s and, through
cinematic interpretations, continues to rivet audiences as we begin the
twenty-ﬁrst century. Yet what was it about Eddie Gein that made the
whole world take notice? At the most basic level, we follow coverage of
horrible crimes for the same reason we slow down to look as we pass the
scene of a trafﬁc accident: we humans seem to have an innate curiosity
about the morbid. Perhaps because death is both inevitable and, largely,
uncontrollable, we compulsively explore graphic displays of death. 
On another level, cases such as that of Eddie Gein draw us in
because they offer us a chance not simply to confront but to emasculate
our fears. Just as little children fear invisible monsters lurking beneath
their beds, we adults fear monsters living invisibly among us. Serial
killers spark a particular fear in us not simply because of their horren-
98 Hate, American Style

dous acts of violence but because their ingenuity and stealth enable
them to live in our midst, to prey on us without raising our suspicions.
Serial killers only become serial killers because they successfully elude
notice. Thus we fear a serial killer may be in our midst at any moment,
just as a child fears a monster always could be hiding under the bed. On
those rare occasions when police offer up an actual serial killer to pub-
lic scrutiny, we are able to see the reality of the man instead of our night-
marish image of the monster. No matter how horriﬁc the crimes, the
serial killer once apprehended is a man, just a man, a beaten man,
shackled and locked safely away from us forever. 
Fictionalized accounts of serial killers in books and movies advance
this process one step farther by allowing us not simply to see the killer but
to control him. News media coverage of Eddie Gein in the 1950s exposed
the monster; Psycho put him in a cage. Although movies such as Psycho
terrify us, they also allow us safely to explore our greatest fears because
they invite us, for a couple of hours, to encounter a serial killer in a way
only his doomed victims normally do. Whether Norman Bates or Buffalo
Bill is ready to stop his killing binge does not matter, because the director
calls the shots. Movies about serial killers offer us a sense of control over
the killers and, as a result, a sense of control over our own lives.
america’s nightmare: the jeffrey dahmer case
Thirty years after police in Plainﬁeld, Wisconsin, discovered Bernice
Worden’s butchered body hanging on Eddie Gein’s porch, two ofﬁcers
patrolling Milwaukee’s south side happened upon a young man ﬂeeing
down a darkened street with a handcuff dangling from one wrist. Terri-
ﬁed and barely able to explain the nightmare from which he had man-
aged to escape, Tracy Edwards led the ofﬁcers to the apartment of the
“weird dude” who had held him captive and attempted to murder him.
When the ofﬁcers knocked on the door of apartment 213, Jeffrey Dah-
mer calmly invited them inside.9
Dahmer denied Edwards’s allegations, instead claiming the two had
been involved in mutually consensual sexual activities. He then politely
offered to retrieve the handcuff key from his bedroom. But because
Edwards warned the police that Dahmer had a knife in the bedroom,
one of the ofﬁcers entered the room himself in search of the key.
Polaroid photos of corpses in various stages of evisceration and dis-
glamorized hatred 99

memberment lay scattered across a table and taped to the walls. The
ofﬁcer called to his partner to handcuff Dahmer immediately.
Suddenly, the calm and cooperative resident of apartment 213 trans-
formed into the raging animal seen before only by the eighteen men he
had killed. After a struggle, the ofﬁcers managed to restrain Dahmer
and began a preliminary search of the premises. They quickly realized
that apartment 213 had been the scene of a hellish but tragically real
nightmare. Human penises preserved in jars of formaldehyde lined a
shelf. Filleted strips of human ﬂesh nestled in the freezer. Human skulls
formed a shrine in the living room. Decomposing body parts stewed in
an acid bath in a ﬁfty-ﬁve-gallon drum. A recently decapitated head
stared out at investigators from a shelf in the refrigerator.
When America awoke to the Dahmer nightmare on July 22, 1991, no
one imagined that the most inhuman elements of Dahmer’s crimes had
yet to be revealed. Neither could anyone conceive how Jeffrey Dahmer
had managed to kill so many men for so many years without raising sus-
picions that a serial killer was active in the greater Milwaukee area.
There are no satisfying answers to explain why Dahmer preyed on his
fellow humans or why authorities allowed him to slip through their ﬁn-
gers so many times. But it is possible to ﬁnd the key to understanding
how media coverage of cases of extreme violence tend to make celebri-
ties of the most repulsive members of our society.
Jeffrey Dahmer was born in Milwaukee on May 21, 1960, to Lionel
and Joyce Dahmer. Joyce suffered from a variety of physical and emo-
tional problems that often caused tension in the home. A chemist,
Lionel used his work as an excuse to avoid his depressed and agitated
wife and, as a result, his young son. Regardless of the tensions between
his parents, Jeff seemed a normal and happy boy. When the family
moved to Iowa so that Lionel could work toward his Ph.D., Jeff occu-
pied himself with typical childhood pursuits like swimming and ﬁshing.
He loved spending time with the family pets and took great pride in hav-
ing nursed an injured bird back to health.
Yet Lionel Dahmer believes, in hindsight, that evidence of Jeff’s
bizarre obsession with death surfaced very early. He recalls an occasion
when he cleaned remains of some small animals from under the fam-
ily’s house. Four-year-old Jeff seemed transﬁxed by the bones. In A
Father’s Story, Lionel asks a question to which neither he nor the world
ever will know the answer: was that the moment a future serial killer was
born within the mind of a child?
100 Hate, American Style

Two years later Jeff was diagnosed with a double hernia that required
surgery and a long recovery period. The ordeal changed the boy. The
happy, rather outgoing lad began to withdraw into himself. When the
family moved to Akron, Ohio, later the same year, the now shy Jeff failed
to adjust to his new environment. He not only failed to make friends, he
seemed reluctant even to approach other children.
Jeff ﬁnally started to come out of his shell in 1967 when the Dahmers
moved to the suburb of Bath, Ohio. He quickly became friends with a
boy named Lee and also developed a special attachment to his teacher.
On one occasion Jeff presented his teacher with a bowlful of tadpoles, a
heartfelt gift from a seven-year-old. Jeff was dismayed later to learn that
the teacher in turn had given the tadpoles to his friend Lee. Jeff imme-
diately visited Lee’s house and killed the tadpoles. Perceiving the entire
incident as a betrayal of his affections, Jeff reverted to his formerly reclu-
sive ways.
After his arrest, Dahmer explained to investigators that it was around
this time that he began to act on his fascination with death. Armed with
plastic bags, he scoured the roads of Bath on his bicycle until he found
the remains of dead animals. He enjoyed stripping ﬂesh from the skele-
tons. He created his own secret animal cemetery in the woods behind
his home. At one point he impaled the head of a dog on a stake and left
it standing an ominous guard in the woods. In addition to his experi-
ments on dead animals, Dahmer began to have sexual fantasies that
troubled him deeply about committing a variety of sexual acts with
other boys and with corpses.
Jeff became at once more lonely and more disturbed during his high-
school years. An average student, Jeff had no real interest in school activ-
ities or his classmates. Unbeknownst to his parents, he began to con-
sume enormous amounts of alcohol. His classmates considered him an
alcoholic. Jeff binge drank frequently and even sneaked alcohol into
school to guzzle during classes when his teachers were not looking.
During Jeff’s senior year his already tumultuous life turned upside
down when Lionel and Joyce divorced. The two engaged in an ugly cus-
tody battle over their younger son, David. Because Jeff had recently
turned eighteen, he was not the subject of a legal contest. Yet as Joyce
and Lionel avoided each other outside of court and concentrated their
efforts on the ﬁght for David, they seem almost to have forgotten Jeff.
For weeks, Jeff lived alone in the family home with almost no money to
buy food while Lionel resided with his new ﬁancée and Joyce took
glamorized hatred 101

David out of state. Truly alone for the ﬁrst time, Jeff lost control of his
dark impulses.
Shortly after he graduated from high school in the early summer of
1978, Jeffrey Dahmer killed for the ﬁrst time. He had been out driving
when he happened upon Steven Hicks, a hitchhiker close to his own
age. He and Hicks returned to the Dahmer home where they drank
heavily and had sex. However, when the hour grew late and Hicks pre-
pared to leave, Dahmer ﬂew into a rage, crashing a barbell down over
Hicks’s head. After his arrest in 1991, Dahmer explained that he had
attacked Hicks to keep him from leaving; Dahmer simply could not
bear being left alone in the house. No one knew Dahmer had killed
Steven Hicks until he confessed to the crime in 1991. The night of the
murder, Dahmer calmly dismembered the body and placed the pieces
inside plastic bags, which he then sealed and buried in the woods
behind the house. Steven Hicks’s remains joined those of the many
animals Dahmer had scavenged then buried in the yard as a child.
Dahmer lacked focus following the Hicks murder. He spent a semes-
ter at Ohio State University but ﬂunked out. The few students who
knew him later reported that he drank to the point of passing out virtu-
ally every day. He next tried the United States Army. Although he sur-
vived basic training with no major infractions, once stationed in Ger-
many Dahmer became a problem for his fellow soldiers. Dahmer drank
often and heavily. After a couple of years the Army discharged him
because his alcoholism kept him from doing his job. Dahmer spent a
brief period living in Florida following his discharge then returned to
the house in Bath, Ohio. There he exhumed the already dismembered
remains of Steven Hicks, pulverized the bones, then scattered the frag-
ments in the woods.
When local police arrested Jeff on charges of drunk and disorderly
conduct in the autumn of 1981, Lionel Dahmer lost patience with his
listless and trouble-making son. Lionel arranged for Jeff to move in with
his grandmother in the Milwaukee suburb of West Allis. Because Jeff
had always been particularly close to his grandmother, Lionel hoped
she could inﬂuence the young man to give up his drinking and settle
into a more productive life. On the surface, it appeared the plan was
working: Jeff found a job, spent many hours talking with his grand-
mother, and seemed to rein in his drinking. For several years the Dah-
mer family believed Jeff was ﬁnally turning his life around.
Then, in September of 1986, Jeffrey Dahmer had his ﬁrst encounter
102 Hate, American Style

with the Milwaukee police: he was arrested for masturbating in front of
two young boys in a park. Because he had only the drunk and disorderly
conduct charge on his record, the court only sentenced him to one year
of probation. Within that year, Dahmer killed his second victim.
Dahmer met Steven Toumi in a gay bar in downtown Milwaukee.
The two men talked and drank for many hours before checking into a
hotel. Although Dahmer willingly confessed the most graphic details of
his other murders, he told investigators in 1991 that he had no memory
of murdering Toumi. According to Dahmer, when he awoke the next
morning he discovered Toumi’s bruised and bloody body next to him in
the bed. He left the hotel, purchased a very large suitcase at a nearby
store, returned to the hotel, and stuffed Toumi’s body into the bag. He
then checked out of the hotel with luggage in tow. Dahmer returned to
his quarters in the basement of his grandmother’s house where he had
sex with Toumi’s corpse and masturbated on the body. He then dis-
membered the remains and threw the pieces, sealed in plastic garbage
bags, into the trash.
While nine years separated Dahmer’s ﬁrst and second murders, only
a few months separated the second from the third. Dahmer’s third vic-
tim, Jamie Doxtator, was only fourteen years old. Doxtator was well-
known among regular patrons of Milwaukee’s gay bars. The youth loi-
tered in front of the bars hoping to forge relationships with the older
men as they entered and exited. Doxtator made an easy target for Dah-
mer, who offered the boy money to pose for some photographs. Once
he had Doxtator in his lair, Dahmer drugged the fourteen-year-old then
strangled him to death. He sexually violated Doxtator’s corpse before
dismembering and disposing of the remains. By this time, the essential
elements of Dahmer’s pattern as a serial killer had become ﬁxed.
By the summer of 1988, Jeffrey Dahmer had killed four people.
Although his grandmother had no knowledge of his heinous crimes, she
had become frustrated with his increasingly more frequent late-night
carousing. As summer turned to fall, she asked Jeff to ﬁnd another place
to live. Dahmer moved into his own apartment in Milwaukee on Sep-
tember 25. On September 26 he offered a thirteen-year-old Laotian boy
in his new neighborhood ﬁfty dollars to pose for photographs. Soon after
getting the boy into his new apartment Dahmer drugged and fondled
him. When the boy returned home in an altered state of mind, his par-
ents rushed him to the hospital where lab tests conﬁrmed their suspi-
cion that their son had been drugged. Milwaukee police arrested Dah-
glamorized hatred 103

mer while he was at work at the Ambrosia Chocolate Factory. Although
he claimed he had no idea how young the boy was, Dahmer pled guilty
to second-degree sexual assault.
Dahmer returned to his grandmother’s house while awaiting sen-
tencing. In the brief time he was there he killed again. Dahmer added
a morbid new twist to his pattern with the murder of Anthony Sears: he
began his collection of souvenirs. He ﬁrst decapitated Sears and then
boiled the head to remove all ﬂesh from the skull. Fearing detection, he
meticulously painted the skull gray so that anyone who saw it would
assume it to be a plastic model. Yet he displayed the skull openly in his
room. When alone he masturbated in front of the skull, which he appar-
ently regarded as a sexual shrine. 
Dahmer appeared before the judge on the second-degree sexual
assault charge in May 1989. He argued that the crime resulted directly
from his abuse of alcohol and vowed to control his drinking. Persuaded
by Dahmer’s rational appeals, the judge sentenced him to ﬁve years’
probation beginning with one year in a work-release half-way house.
Ten months later, having received no treatment for his alcoholism or
counseling for his second sexual attack on young boys, Dahmer was
released. Lionel wrote to the judge begging him to keep Jeff in custody
until he had received some form of treatment. Lionel’s plea fell on deaf
ears.
Dahmer lived brieﬂy again with his grandmother until moving into
the now infamous apartment 213 on Milwaukee’s south side. Finally
completely on his own, Dahmer indulged all his impulses. From May
1990 to July 1991, he slaughtered twelve men inside his small apartment.
With each murder, his rituals grew more elaborate. He used a Polaroid
camera to document each stage of his crimes—from the seduction pre-
ceding the drugging to the dismemberment. No longer concerned his
grandmother might walk in on him, he took his time with the bodies.
He dissected many of the victims and later claimed he became sexually
aroused by the heat given off by internal organs removed from a freshly
killed corpse. Dahmer began experimenting with new disposal meth-
ods. He ﬁlled a ﬁfty-ﬁve-gallon drum with acids that reduced the
remains of his victims to a viscous liquid he could pour down the drain.
He expanded his collection of sick souvenirs to include male genitalia,
most of which he preserved in formaldehyde. He ﬁlleted the biceps of
some victims and took sexual pleasure from eating their ﬂesh.
Yet it was Dahmer’s obsessive attempts to create what he called a
104 Hate, American Style

“zombie” that ﬁnally caused at least a few of his neighbors to take
notice. Dahmer believed he could keep his victims alive, but unable to
leave him, by drilling holes in their skulls then pouring muriatic acid
into their brains. His early zombie experiments failed horribly, resulting
in the near instant death of the young men he tortured. On May 27,
1991, Dahmer lured fourteen-year-old Konerak Sinthasomphone to
apartment 213 and drugged him. He took pictures of the boy, then pre-
occupied himself with preparations for the zombie procedure. When
he returned to the living room, Dahmer realized Konerak had escaped.
On the street outside Dahmer’s apartment building, a naked Kon-
erak wandered aimlessly, bleeding from the anus. Two young women
from the neighborhood realized something was terribly wrong and
called the police. By the time ofﬁcers arrived, Dahmer too was on the
street. He claimed Konerak was over eighteen and had simply had too
much to drink. He casually explained that the two were lovers and
assured police he was in control of the situation. The police asked for
Dahmer’s identiﬁcation but did not check it out for warrants. If they
had, they would have discovered Dahmer’s history of sexual molesta-
tion of young boys. If they had, they would have discovered that Dah-
mer then was on probation for having drugged and molested another
Laotian child, Konerak Sinthasomphone’s brother. But rather than
doing so, the ofﬁcers on the scene followed Dahmer and Konerak back
to apartment 213. Still so drugged he was incapable of telling his side of
the story, Konerak sat silently on the couch. The ofﬁcers later explained
that when Dahmer produced photographs of Konerak in sexually com-
promising positions, they believed Dahmer’s claim that the two were
lovers. The photographs, of course, had been taken within hours of the
ofﬁcers’ arrival during the ﬁrst stage of Dahmer’s documentation of one
of his crimes. Nevertheless, satisﬁed with Dahmer’s story, the ofﬁcers
left the apartment where Tony Hughes’s three-day-old corpse lay rotting
on Dahmer’s bed just off the living room. Dahmer then slaughtered
Konerak Sinthasomphone almost immediately.
Following Dahmer’s arrest two months later, the Milwaukee police
came under ﬁre for their handling of the Konerak Sinthasomphone
incident. The media discovered that Glenda Cleveland, the mother of
one of the girls who had called the police on Konerak’s behalf, had fol-
lowed up on the case when she heard news reports that a Laotian
teenager was missing by calling law enforcement authorities to report
what she and her daughter had seen. No ofﬁcer ever returned her calls.
glamorized hatred 105

Investigations into the police department’s handling of the incident also
unearthed tapes of the radio call the two ofﬁcers on the scene made the
night they let Dahmer slip through their ﬁngers. They joked that they
had been dragged into the middle of a ﬁght between two male lovers;
one ofﬁcer laughingly noted that as a result of having contact with Dah-
mer and Sinthasomphone he would need to return to the station to be
deloused. Based on the time line Dahmer confessed to police a few
months later, it became clear that Konerak Sinthasomphone lost his life
within moments of the ofﬁcers making that joke.
Dahmer’s close call with the authorities did little to dampen his thirst
for blood. If anything, his successful manipulation of the situation
seemed to embolden him. He killed four more men in quick succession.
Then, on July 22, Dahmer enticed Tracy Edwards back to apartment 213.
Unlike Konerak Sinthasomphone, Edwards managed to escape before
Dahmer had drugged him and was thus able rationally to counter Dah-
mer’s cover story that the two were simply lovers having an argument.
Police arrested Jeffrey Dahmer around midnight on July 22, 1991. 
The next morning, America awoke to breaking news of the Dahmer
case. The major networks broadcast video footage of investigators in
HazMat suits wheeling the ﬁfty-ﬁve-gallon acid bath down the steps of
the apartment building. Cameras trailed another investigator carrying a
large cardboard ﬁling box: a close-up made possible by a zoom lens
revealed a slight tuft of hair protruding through a small hole. Jeffrey
Dahmer had killed eighteen men between 1978 and 1991. As viewers
watched police cart evidence of the carnage out of apartment 213, they
once again realized a monster had been living silently among them, this
time for thirteen years.
Coverage of the Dahmer case dominated the world news media for
several weeks then cooled slightly until the trial commenced on July 13,
1992. Because Dahmer had willingly confessed his crimes to authorities
following his capture, he entered a guilty plea but also claimed that he
was insane. The highly publicized trial invited onlookers into the life of
a serial killer as Dahmer himself retraced his crimes in painstaking
detail and psychiatrists and criminologists dissected his mind before the
watchful eyes of the media audience. After listening to unbelievably
graphic testimony and examining the horriﬁc physical evidence in the
long and complicated case, jurors deliberated for only ﬁve hours before
returning a verdict: guilty and sane. Dahmer was sentenced to ﬁfteen
consecutive life sentences, or 957 years in prison.
106 Hate, American Style

The Wisconsin state prison authorities conﬁned Dahmer in the
Columbia Correctional Institute in Portage. He apparently adjusted
rather well to prison life. He claimed to have been born again as a Chris-
tian. In interviews he gave to popular television programs like Inside
Edition and Dateline, he professed to regret having committed his
crimes, though many doubted, based on his manner in the interviews,
that he felt true remorse. He admitted to interviewers that he still felt
drawn by the impulses to kill and violate others and thus understood
why he must live the remainder of his life in prison.
On November 28, 1994, Dahmer was placed on a cleaning detail
with two other prisoners: Jesse Anderson, who had murdered his own
wife, and Christopher Scarver, a delusional schizophrenic who believed
himself to be Jesus Christ. For reasons no one seems to be able to
explain, the detail guard left the men alone for a few minutes. Scarver
attacked Anderson and Dahmer. When the guard returned, he found
Anderson lying on the ﬂoor, fatally wounded. Jeffrey Dahmer was
already dead. Scarver had crushed his skull, just as Dahmer had
crushed Steven Hicks’s skull sixteen years earlier.
telling dahmer’s story
From the moment news crews set up camp outside Dahmer’s apartment
building to the time the trial ended more than a year later, the Jeffrey
Dahmer story dominated American news media. If you turned on your
television or radio or opened a newspaper, you simply could not avoid
the story. So for most people, the story I just told is nothing new. All of
us know about the murders. All of us remember the revelations about
cannibalism. All of us recall seeing the investigators wheel the ﬁfty-ﬁve-
gallon drum down the stairs. All of us know Jeffrey Dahmer.
Yet what did we ever really know about his victims? At most, we
remember Hicks as the ﬁrst, Konerak as the one who nearly survived,
and Edwards as the one who brought a halt to Dahmer’s killing spree.
But that is virtually all we know about them, and even that is tenfold
more than we know of the other ﬁfteen lives Dahmer brutally cut short
by feeding his insatiable hunger for perverse sexual fulﬁllment.
Many people have pointed to our obsession with killings as one of the
deﬁning elements of our so-called culture of death. I think that notion
is too simplistic. You see, it is not simply our obsession with killings, but
glamorized hatred 107

rather the way we spin stories about killings that entrenches our ambiva-
lence toward hatred. My recounting of the Jeffrey Dahmer story is not
unique. In fact, I intentionally laid out the story as it has been told hun-
dreds of times before in news reports and biographical and true crimes
features about Dahmer. Now that the standard-issue narrative of the
Dahmer story is fresh in our minds, let’s examine very closely the ways
in which the structure of the story itself reveals our love affair with
hatred and violence.
While stories come in a variety of forms and encompass seemingly
limitless themes and topics, all stories contain the same essential ele-
ments: plot, characters, setting, and motivation. When we tell stories,
we manipulate those four elements to create our own unique telling of
an event. A change in any one element can potentially effect the way
the other three will develop. For example, if the plot of a story centers
around a car crash, carefully describing the setting to include a dense
fog and icy roads will shape listeners’ understandings of the cause of the
crash even if driver error was in fact to blame. 
Because no story can tell all sides or perspectives of an event—the
story would be so long and convoluted as to be unmanageable and also
very boring—all stories are the by-product of choices made by the story-
tellers. Great novelists consciously and carefully make choices about
how to structure their stories in order to achieve the best literary effect
for their readers. But novelists are not the only storytellers in our society;
they are simply the most aware storytellers. We are all storytellers. We all
make choices about the structure of every story we tell, from how we
explain to our friends how we got a fantastic bargain from the local car
dealer to how we explain to a prospective employer how we accom-
plished a major goal in our career. By adjusting the way in which we
develop a story, we can make ourselves appear as the hero or the villain,
the witless victim of circumstances beyond our control or the king or
queen of our own tightly controlled universe.
As we begin the twenty-ﬁrst century, the mass media serves as a cen-
tral storyteller for our society. Movies, sitcoms, and serial dramas ﬂow
through our television sets offering us instant access to complex narra-
tives. While we all know that such ﬁctional stories are crafted by writers
and directors, we sometimes forget that the stories we see on the news
are also the ﬁnal product of a process of choices made by writers, direc-
tors, reporters, and editors. The nightly news, as well as CNN Headline
News, absent commercials, runs only about twenty-two minutes. Rarely
108 Hate, American Style

is any one story given more than three or four minutes coverage. Each
day members of the news media must decide ﬁrst which events even
will be covered and then how the story of each event will be developed
within the strict time limits of broadcast news or the strict column lim-
its of print news. The stories we receive from the news media have thus
been ﬁltered through a decision-making process that, while absolutely
necessary, also necessarily shapes the way we in turn come to think
about events and people in our world. 
When we take the time to stop and consciously consider that fact,
most of us have the intellectual horsepower to take that process into
account when reacting to news stories. However, most of us do not nor-
mally have our guard up and our critical thinking caps on when we sit
down in front of the television after a long, long day tending to our fam-
ilies and jobs. As products of a media-driven culture ourselves, we com-
fortably accept all but the most glaringly obvious instances of bias in
news reports. Yet I contend we are far more profoundly inﬂuenced by
the most subtle manipulations of the elements of stories.
The media’s development of stories about actual serial killing sprees
offers an excellent example of this phenomenon. All major media
accounts of serial killings overtly deplore the killers’ actions. Because
the act of serial murder so deeply assaults our values, the media is able
and even expected to throw aside their normal objectivity: we viewers do
not want to hear a news anchor being fair or unbiased toward a known
serial killer. We want to hear the killer described as a “monster,” as
“sick,” as “deviant.” Yet while the media normally obliges our prefer-
ence and appears to condemn the killer, many choices made by the
media about how to tell the story of serial killings actually seem to glo-
rify the killers. Although manipulation of any of the four narrative ele-
ments can impact a story’s development, I will focus here only on plot
and characters in order to understand how the standard-issue telling of
the Jeffrey Dahmer story reveals another troubling example of our obses-
sion with hatred and violence.
We are an action-loving people. From the warrior epics of the ancient
Greek poets to the action-adventure blockbusters of today, Americans
seem almost innately drawn to popular tales involving lots of plot move-
ment. So it is not surprising that our news media too present stories to us
with a premium on plot action: several thousand years of history prove
human beings like our stories told in such a fashion and, of course, what
we like, we watch and what we watch determines advertising prices. As
glamorized hatred 109

I’ve cautioned before in Love to Hate, we cannot allow ourselves off the
hook by blaming the media because the media, as a business, is simply
responding to our behavior as consumers. What impact then does the
media’s decision to feed our hunger for action-heavy plots have on our
perceptions about a case such as the Dahmer killing spree?
First, action-heavy plots dictate how at least one character in a story
must be developed. Narrative theorists distinguish between active and
reactive characters: active characters drive the plot, literally causing the
plot events to happen, whereas reactive characters respond to the plot.
It follows then that for an action-heavy plot to develop in a way that
makes sense to story-savvy audience members like us, at least one active
character must be central to the telling of the story.
We need only to glance at the standard spin on the Dahmer story to
realize that Jeffrey Dahmer himself is cast in the role of active charac-
ter. Dahmer stalks. Dahmer drugs. Dahmer violates. Dahmer dismem-
bers. Dahmer kills. Jeffrey Dahmer controls the plot. He acts on oth-
ers—his victims, his family, the police. 
This of course is, after all, the story of Jeffrey Dahmer. But what we
all tend to lose sight of is that that is a choice made by the storytellers
and expected by us as an action-loving audience. The standard telling
of the Jeffrey Dahmer story casts Dahmer in the central role of active
character in order to facilitate our preference for action-heavy plots.
The Dahmer story with which we all are so familiar is the standard
telling of the Milwaukee murders, but it is not the only possible way to
tell the story. The story could begin with the birth of a precious Laotian
boy. The story could trace his childhood, introducing us to his family
and friends, his interests and his goals. The story could explore the pain
he and his family suffered when a neighbor molested his brother. The
story could help us imagine the terror he felt as he realized an evil man
was trying to hurt him, the courage and strength he mustered up in
order to escape from the man, the despair he felt as he sat on the couch,
unable to speak, as two police ofﬁcers left him alone with a killer. The
story could be the Konerak Sinthasomphone story. Or the Tracy
Edwards story. Or the Anthony Hughes story. Or the Jamie Doxtator
Story. Or any of fourteen other stories of young men actively pursuing
their lives for years until the one moment in which they encountered a
killer. But those stories just do not seem to appeal to action-lovers like
us. Those stories just do not pull in viewers, like us, in the same way The
Jeffrey Dahmer Story does.
110 Hate, American Style

Because the standard telling of the Dahmer story is action-heavy and
casts Dahmer himself in the active role, it also necessarily places him in
the lead role. Normally, lead characters receive the most attention. In
contrast, lesser characters, known in narrative theory as satellites, are
explored only to the extent necessary for the story to make sense. Story-
tellers tend to develop lead characters as both dynamic and round,
meaning that we learn enough about them to witness their growth over
time (dynamic) and we learn enough about them so that they are mul-
tifaceted (round). Satellite characters are usually left static; we do not
know enough about them to notice when or how they change. Story-
tellers also usually portray satellite characters as ﬂat, reducing them only
to the characteristics essential for fulﬁllment of their role in the plot.
In the standard telling of the Jeffrey Dahmer story, Dahmer is the only
fully dynamic and round character. Because the story traces his life in
search of clues to his madness, we all know Dahmer as a dynamic char-
acter: we have seen him grow from a lonely little boy into a disturbed
teenager into a ﬁrst-time killer into a serial killer. We also know Dahmer
as a round character. Of course, we have intimate knowledge of his actual
crimes—the rituals, the zombie experiments, the disposal methods, the
cannibalism, and so on. But we know so much more about Dahmer. We
know his parents, his brother, and his grandmother. We know what he
liked to do as a child. We know that he ﬂunked out of college, was kicked
out of the Army, and ultimately held down a stable job in a chocolate fac-
tory. We know he liked to go to gay bars and bathhouses. We know he was
an alcoholic. We know he enjoyed photography. We know he preferred
his apartment to be very neat. We know he dabbled with satanism. We
know he loved his childhood pets. We know he once loved a little boy
named Lee. We know his sexual fantasies. We know Jeffrey Dahmer.
We know almost nothing about Dahmer’s victims. All remain static
and ﬂat to us. Over the years, the media has given the most attention to
Konerak Sinthasomphone, yet we know almost nothing of the boy. We
know he was Laotian. We know he was one of the youngest of Dahmer’s
victims. We know he nearly escaped. We know he had a brother. Yet we
know these things only because they are critical to the story of Dahmer
not because they are essential to Konerak’s own story. We know nothing
about Konerak separate from his relationship to Dahmer. We know
nothing about any of the eighteen men separate from their relationship
to Dahmer.
When an action-hungry audience demands to be fed the story of a
glamorized hatred 111

killing spree, storytellers reduce victims to satellite status and thus sen-
tence them to an eternity of being nothing more than the victim of their
killer. Jeffrey Dahmer took the lives of eighteen men between 1978 and
1991. Since then, we all have condemned those men to an eternity as
“Dahmer’s victims” because we have not bothered to remember any-
thing else about them. In the case of most of them, we have not even
bothered to remember their names.
Since the Eddie Gein story broke in 1957, the American audience has
greedily devoured stories about serial killers. From classic movie villains
such as Norman Bates and Buffalo Bill to real-life monsters such as
Charles Manson and Jeffrey Dahmer, we have elevated the image of the
serial killer to iconic status in our popular culture.
Our response to serial killers provides telling evidence of our obses-
sion with hatred and violence. On the one hand, we publicly deplore
serial killers, ostracize them, and, in some states, even kill them. On the
other hand, we eagerly listen to their stories. We purport to despise serial
killers and their extreme sprees of violence and depravity. Yet we offer
serial killers one of our most valuable cultural commodities: celebrity.
Unlike serial killers who stalk their victims one by one, mass mur-
derer Timothy McVeigh killed 168 people in a matter of a few moments
when he blew up the Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City in
1996. The site of the bombing now stands as a chilling shrine to the
memory of each life lost. Yet from the moment he was apprehended in
1996 until and even after his execution in 2001, we focused our atten-
tion on McVeigh and not on his victims. Kathleen Treanor, who lost
three family members, including her ﬁve-year-old daughter, Ashley, in
the blast, spoke directly and poignantly to the consequences of our fas-
cination with hatred and violence in a press conference immediately
following McVeigh’s execution.10 She implored the media to remember
that the Oklahoma City bombing was not McVeigh’s story but the story
of the 168 people who died, of the hundreds of others who were injured,
and of the thousands of people who lost friends and family members.
We consumers of media also need to heed her words.
Pope John Paul II has called our culture a “culture of death.” Cen-
tral to our culture of death is a cult of celebrity. We no longer distin-
guish much between the famous and the infamous. Too frequently we
only distinguish between those who are known and those who are invis-
ible. In America at the beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst century, simply
112 Hate, American Style

being known is a critical component of status within society. Jeffrey
Dahmer has been dead for more than six years. We still know him. We
never will forget him.
We can’t forget the eighteen men he killed either. We can’t forget
people we never took the time to know in the ﬁrst place.
glamorized hatred 113

I was seven when I joined The Avengers. The secret club convened in
near total darkness on a hot summer evening inside my dad’s tool shed.
After much secretive planning we formalized our eternal bond by read-
ing a verse from the Bible while drinking blood (okay, so it was cherry
Kool Aid). We vowed to tell no one of our covert activities. Then we all
went home. It’s hard to sustain lifelong loyalty on a Dixie Cup of Kool
Aid, especially when you have an 8:30 curfew.
Joining a secret club is a childhood ritual almost all of us have expe-
rienced. But for some people, the lure of membership in a covert organ-
ization continues into adulthood where it often takes on a sinister pur-
pose. For example, members of the Supreme Order of the Star-Span-
gled Banner, one of America’s ﬁrst organized hate groups, solemnly
vowed to reply “I know nothing” to any questions about their clandes-
tine activities and also to despise newly arrived Catholic immigrants.
Likewise, members of groups such as the Ku Klux Klan (KKK) and the
Knights of the White Camellia originally wore elaborate robes and
hoods not only to shroud the identity of members but also to look like
terrifying ghosts as they rode through African American neighborhoods
in the dead of night.
chapter 6
Organized Hatred:
Supremacy Movements

While hate groups of the past carefully hid their membership and
most of their activities from the rest of society, today some hate groups
seek out publicity as a way to further their cause. Members of some Ku
Klux Klan klaverns and certain skinhead gangs cavort about on talk-
show stages offering audiences glimpses of hatred in its most sensation-
alistic forms. 
We reassure ourselves when we assume that the sometimes inane
characters we see on television are no threat to us. Of course, in doing
so we make one critical—and potentially lethal—mistake: we assume
that the goofy guests on a talk show represent the reality of organized
hatred in America. The hate groups that pose serious threats to our soci-
ety are not those whose members agree to make fools of themselves on
syndicated talk shows. By treating hate groups like sideshow attractions,
we display a ﬂirtatious attitude toward hatred that, in this case, threat-
ens the safety of each and every one of us.
In this chapter I explore the reality of organized hatred in America as
we begin the twenty-ﬁrst century. Once I have discussed the beliefs, his-
tory, and plans (revealed on the public Web sites) of some of the key hate
groups currently active in the United States, I will explore the compli-
cated challenges hate groups pose to our principles. First, I consider how
the hate groups’ persuasive tactics rely on the destructive thinking pat-
terns I ﬁrst mentioned in chapter 1: absolutism, stereotyping, scapegoat-
ing, and dehumanization. I then look at seemingly contradictory
responses to media coverage of hate groups. Finally, I unpack the partic-
ular tensions between our hatred of hate groups and our love of freedom.
the american hate scene: the curtain opens
Ironically, in a nation built on a foundation of tolerance, intolerance
itself must be tolerated. As a result, when a group of people determine
that they “hate” some other group, the American system of liberty
secures their right to form an organization that celebrates their hatred.
American history is littered with a succession of organized hate groups
that have targeted Catholics, African Americans, Jews, Hispanics, gays,
and many other minorities. Sadly, members of organized hate groups
have killed thousands of people in America over the years and have seri-
ously impaired the social and economic well-being of millions of others.
Ultimately, two historical lines produced the current hate group
organized hatred 115

scene in America: the domestic line of nineteenth-century white Protes-
tant supremacy groups and the inﬂuential line of German Nazism in
the ﬁrst part of the twentieth century. Because most hate groups main-
tain some level of secrecy, only by understanding their lineage is it pos-
sible to begin to understand what they are plotting today behind closed
doors. 
Because the Ku Klux Klan has received so much media attention
(and self-promoted so efﬁciently), many people believe it to be the ﬁrst
signiﬁcant hate group. However, hate groups existed in the world long
before the Klan formed in 1866.1 In fact, the history of hate groups in
Europe inﬂuenced early hate group activity in America. Although the
European colonists who settled America were often ﬂeeing religious
oppression, they themselves arrived on American soil with centuries-old
religious prejudices. Speciﬁcally, many of the Protestant colonists clung
to the anti-Catholic and anti-Semitic beliefs with which they had been
raised in Europe. The early history of the American colonies and, later,
the United States is a history of substantial religious intolerance.
This religious intolerance crystallized into a vast and fully organized
social movement in the 1830s in response to rapid changes in immigra-
tion patterns.2 Throughout the 1830s and 1840s what had been a small
stream of Irish Catholic immigrants became a raging river due to the
Irish potato famine and political and religious conﬂicts in Britain. By the
mid-1840s, nearly a million poverty-stricken victims of the famine were
landing on United States soil every year. Because immigrants could
become naturalized American citizens after only ﬁve years, the rapid
change in the ﬂow of immigration rapidly changed the face of the
American political, social, and economic scene. Native-born Ameri-
cans—some displaced from their jobs by Irish who would work for lower
wages, some watching politicians cater to the so-called Catholic vote—
began to view the Irish Americans not as newly naturalized countrymen
but as enemies within the borders of the United States.
In the mid-1830s propagandists added fuel to the smoldering ﬁres of
anti-Catholic sentiment. Although remembered today as the inventor of
the telegraph, in his own time Samuel F. B. Morse was hailed as the
intellectual leader of the anti-Catholic movement. In Foreign Conspir-
acy Against the Liberties of the United States, he claimed to reveal
details of a Vatican-based plot to overthrow American liberty.3 Accord-
ing to Morse, the plot involved using the votes of newly naturalized Irish
Catholic Americans to vote democracy out of the American system. A
116 Hate, American Style

puppet government representing the alliance between the Pope and the
Emperor of Austria would then rule America.
Around the same time a young woman calling herself Maria Monk
appeared in New York City hawking her tale, Awful Disclosures of the
Hotel Dieu Nunnery at Montreal.4 Monk claimed to be a nun who had
escaped the Hotel Dieu Convent in order to save the life of her unborn
child, a child fathered by one of several priests who routinely raped the
nuns in the convent. Monk ﬂed because, she alleged, the many chil-
dren born of the priests and nuns were murdered within moments of
their birth to hide the evidence of sexual promiscuity behind convent
doors. Monk also told of sadistic, even deadly, punishments practiced
on the nuns and elaborate secret rituals within the Catholic Church
that no doubt appeared pagan to most of her readers. Monk warned
American Protestants that the Catholic Church was a corruption of all
things moral, Christian, and democratic. Signiﬁcantly, Monk’s Awful
Disclosures was one of the top selling books of the mid-nineteenth cen-
tury, even though it was most probably a hoax.
The conspiratorial rantings of Morse, Monk, and hundreds of other
anti-Catholic propagandists stirred many American Protestants to
action. By the early 1840s, several national religious missionary unions
formed to save Catholic immigrants from the Pope and protect Ameri-
can liberty in the process. Groups such as the Order of United Ameri-
cans, which drew many members from the merchant class, organized
efforts to protect Protestant jobs and, in turn, deny immigrant Catholics
opportunities to earn a living. Perhaps most important, the Native
American Party (NAP) formed around a platform of denying immi-
grants the right to naturalize for twenty-one years. Later called the
American Republican Party and then simply the American Party, the
NAP also demanded the use of overtly Protestant readings—such as the
King James Bible and writings by Martin Luther—as standard texts in
public schools. By the mid-1850s, anti-Catholic politicians had won con-
trol of the government of Massachusetts and held a substantial sway vote
in the United States Congress. 
While thousands of American Protestants used such legitimate chan-
nels to argue their case against Catholics, others adopted a more dra-
matic—and more dangerous—approach. In the early 1840s, some
Protestants formed what today would be called gangs that defended turf
against immigrant Catholics. Gangs such as the Wide Awakes, the
Blood Tubs, and the Dead Rabbits also attacked Catholics who tried to
organized hatred 117

vote. In the early 1840s, violence attended virtually every election in
major East Coast cities. A three-day riot in Philadelphia’s Kensington
District left thirteen dead, hundreds injured, and razed an entire sector
of the town.
Yet it was not until the late 1840s that anti-Catholicism took on its
darkest form. In 1849 James Barker took over leadership of a group
called the Sons of the Sires of ’76. Barker renamed the group the
Supreme Order of the Star-Spangled Banner (SSSB) and thus ordained
one of the most hateful groups in American history. Members of the
SSSB vowed to work against Catholics at all levels—to deny them jobs,
to strip them of their vote, and, if the need arose, to use violence to
ensure Protestant dominance in America. Reportedly 1.3 million mem-
bers strong at its peak in the early 1850s, the SSSB operated in near-total
secrecy. Members used elaborate codes to identify each other in public
and to plot their attacks on Catholics. 
The anti-Catholic movement died out in the late 1850s as the North-
South tensions leading to the onset of the Civil War demanded all
Americans’ primary attention. Yet in the three decades of anti-Catholic
agitation that had passed, much damage had been done. Arsonists so fre-
quently targeted Catholic churches, seminaries, convents, and schools
that no American insurance company would sell policies on Catholic-
owned structures. At the hands of anti-Catholic school board members,
many American public school districts became so overtly anti-Catholic
that the Catholic Church had no recourse but to establish parochial
schools in which Catholic children could study without being attacked.
And, tragically, several hundred lives were lost in violence motivated by
religious intolerance.
While the Civil War distracted American anti-Catholics, it did not
destroy the anti-Catholic sentiment among some Americans. Rather,
when the smoke cleared, anti-Catholics found new allies among whites
who feared that the recently freed black population of America posed a
serious threat to the American way of life. Hate groups formed through-
out what had been the Confederate states in the years immediately fol-
lowing the Union’s victory. Organizations such as the Knights of the
White Camellia, the Citizens Council, and the Ku Klux Klan promised
to protect white Protestant dominance at all costs and labeled blacks,
Catholics, and Jews their primary targets for intimidation.
The Ku Klux Klan, the most notorious of the nineteenth-century
supremacy groups, traces its origin to Pulaski, Tennessee, in the year
118 Hate, American Style

1866.5 Bored and disillusioned by life in their small town, six former
Confederate soldiers decided to form a club that could provide them a
social and intellectual outlet. Initially the young men devoted them-
selves to the study and discussion of history. Having all been college stu-
dents before the war, they enjoyed delving into research as a means of
entertainment.
Soon after forming the club, the men moved their meetings from the
rather staid ofﬁces of a local judge to an abandoned house outside
Pulaski that was rumored to be haunted. There the men devised elabo-
rate initiation rituals and crafted costumes for themselves to wear while
meeting. They even developed a coded language to describe the hier-
archy of their organization. The group gradually adopted a policy of
near total secrecy about both its membership and its activities. As local
interest in the club grew, the ﬁrst Ku Klux Klan den sent emissaries to
neighboring areas to help establish new chapters.
The Ku Klux Klan staged its ﬁrst night ride on July 4, 1867, through
the area of Pulaski that was inhabited primarily by blacks. Knowing most
of the former slaves clung to superstitions about ghosts, the Klansmen
outﬁtted themselves in white masks, pointed hats, and ﬂowing robes
before galloping silently through the neighborhood. In time, the Klan
expanded its repertoire of terror to include pulling “bloody” artiﬁcial
limbs or heads from their bodies as they rode past frightened blacks. 
While such early Klan activities no doubt terriﬁed blacks in the area,
the Pulaski den of the Klan apparently did not cross the line into vio-
lence. Rather, the second den, based in Athens, Alabama, moved the
Klan farther in the direction of a full-ﬂedged hate group when its mem-
bers lashed out in reaction to the opening of a new school for black chil-
dren. The Athens Klansmen tracked down one of the male students late
one night and tossed him into an icy creek for being too friendly with
the white female teacher at the school. 
As word of this event spread throughout the South, the Ku Klux Klan
gained a reputation for, as it was called in those days, “keeping the
Negroes in their place.” The Klan’s active racism quickly lured new
members from the thousands of former Confederate soldiers struggling
with the new social, economic, and political climate being forced on the
southern states by the postwar reconstruction policies of the federal gov-
ernment. Local newspapers hailed the Klan as the savior of the Old
South. Soon, Klan dens were forming throughout the eleven former
Confederate States.
organized hatred 119

The Ku Klux Klan reorganized itself to better meet the needs of its
rapidly growing membership. The group established a more complex
hierarchy to facilitate the spread of the Klan throughout the nation.
Ofﬁces with names such as Grand Dragon and Imperial Wizard—
names now familiar to the general public—entered Klan protocol. The
Klan also standardized their key icons, such as the ﬂying dragon, and
formally color-coded their robes and hoods to reﬂect members’ status
within the leadership system. Capping this critical period in the Klan’s
development, Confederate hero General Nathan Bedford Forrest
vowed allegiance to the Nashville klavern, the newly agreed upon code
word for a local den.
The Ku Klux Klan divides its history into eras. The First era of the
Klan’s presence in America extends from the formative years immedi-
ately following the Civil War to the end of the nineteenth century. Dur-
ing this time Klansmen preoccupied themselves with blocking the
effects of the passage of the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth
Amendments to the United States Constitution that, taken together,
enfranchised blacks as American citizens. The Klan seems to have been
resigned to the fact of the amendments; instead of focusing on repealing
the amendments, the Klan instead launched a concerted effort to cir-
cumvent them. The Klan played a critical role in passing and enforcing
the so-called Jim Crow laws that had the effect of denying blacks the
right to vote without discriminating on the grounds of race per se. In
addition to the passage of Jim Crow legislation, the Klan stepped up its
regimen of intimidation, burning crosses in the yards of those blacks
who could not be legally shunned from the polls as a warning that
Klansmen would seek vengeance on any black who challenged the sys-
tem. Publicity surrounding lynchings served as a chilling reminder to all
that the Klan of the First era followed through on its threats of violence.
The Ku Klux Klan and other hate groups began to spread across the
nation during this period. As racial tensions in the South mounted,
thousands of blacks migrated north. The second great wave of Catholic
immigration into America, this time from Italy and other Southern
European countries, occurred in the last decades of the nineteenth cen-
tury. The combination of black migration and Catholic immigration
created new social, economic, and political pressures in most northern
cities. Confused and frustrated by the changes, some northern white
Protestants allied themselves with supremacy groups. 
Yet even though organized hatred was spreading around the nation
120 Hate, American Style

by the end of the nineteenth century, the frequency and intensity of its
activities—both political and physical—seem to have tapered off. Were
it not for two critical events, the Klan and its kin may never have evolved
past the First era and survived into the twentieth century. In 1905
Thomas Dixon published The Clansman, a sympathetic account of the
Klan and the Confederacy that brought renewed public attention to the
group.6 Then, in 1915, ﬁlmmaker D. W. Grifﬁth transformed The Clans-
man into Birth of a Nation, the ﬁrst feature-length ﬁlm in American cin-
ema history.7 Birth of a Nation drew huge public audiences, grossing
over eighteen million dollars in admissions at theaters. Although most
audience members no doubt attended simply to experience a motion
picture, all who viewed the ﬁlm also experienced the powerful emo-
tions of the epic tale that gloriﬁed the Ku Klux Klan.
Claiming he was inspired by the ﬁlm, the Reverend William Joseph
Simmons sponsored a cross-burning atop Stone Mountain in Georgia on
the eve of Thanksgiving in 1915. In the wake of the Stone Mountain
rebirth of the Klan, the group intensiﬁed recruiting efforts as it moved
into the period now deﬁned as the Second era. By the early 1920s, more
than two million Americans called themselves Klansmen. And many
Klansmen held key leadership positions in society: around this time the
governors of Georgia, Alabama, California, and Indiana were exposed as
Klansmen, as was multiterm United States Senator Earl Mayﬁeld from
Texas. In 1925, forty thousand members of the Ku Klux Klan donned full
ceremonial robes and hoods and marched in front of the White House
as a show of strength and unity. However, with the onset of the Great
Depression in 1929 the Klan all but disappeared from public view.
The Third era of the Ku Klux Klan began on May 17, 1954, when the
United States Supreme Court handed down its decision in the case
Brown v. Board of Education, thus mandating desegregation of Ameri-
can public schools. The Court’s decision marked the beginning of the
end for the Jim Crow laws that had upheld systematic racism for more
than eighty years. As the Civil Rights movement gained strength and
racked up more and more victories in the late 1950s and early 1960s, the
Klan reemerged from the shadows of history. From 1954 to 1964, the
United States federal government investigated more than one hundred
and ﬁfty bombings, as well as several hundred cases of arson and mur-
der, with particular Klan klaverns as primary suspect groups. No doubt
due to the Klan’s extremely covert nature during its brutally violent
Third era, very few Klansmen were ever prosecuted successfully by the
organized hatred 121

government. Yet even though they largely succeeded in escaping crim-
inal prosecution, the Klan suffered defeat after defeat as the Civil Rights
movement gradually chipped away the entire system of Jim Crow laws
the First-era Klansmen had worked to pass.
In the 1970s, white supremacy entered the Fourth era when it
assumed a new public image largely as a result of one man’s rise to
prominence within the Ku Klux Klan. Young, college-educated, and
very media-savvy, David Duke publicly proclaimed the dawn of a “new”
Klan, a Klan that was prowhite, not antiblack. Duke coined the term
“racialist” as a reference to the supposed new-Klan mentality of preserv-
ing and celebrating white heritage. But while Duke publicly claimed
the Klan had changed, United States Federal Bureau of Investigation
agents who inﬁltrated the Klan revealed that, in private, Duke not only
maintained the old racist attitudes but even elevated those ideas to lev-
els more akin to Nazism than to nineteenth-century Klan ideology. 
It was at this moment in history that America’s home-grown hatred
intersected with a style of supremacy that some leaders had been
importing from Europe for several decades. As Duke moved the Klan
more into alignment with Nazism, he also moved the Klan into alliance
with the followers of Adolf Hitler. Although America and the Allied
forces had defeated Hitler’s Third Reich in World War II, Nazism not
only survived but found a small group of loyalists on American soil.
Ironically, the ﬁrst and most legendary American Nazi served as a
pilot in the United States Navy during World War II.8 George Lincoln
Rockwell spent the years following World War II developing himself as
a commercial artist and advertising executive on the East Coast. When
United States troops engaged in the Korean War, Rockwell again vol-
unteered for service, rising to the rank of Commander. Following his
return stateside in the early 1950s, Rockwell engrossed himself in the
conspiracy theories of the McCarthy era. He quickly became not only
an ardent anti-Communist but also an anti-Semite. Rockwell came to
believe that the Jewish people were responsible for the spread of com-
munism and what he perceived to be the impending downfall of West-
ern civilization. Although Rockwell found himself persuaded by theo-
ries of communist/Jewish plots, he remained dissatisﬁed with the vague
solutions touted by other conspiracy howlers. Then he opened a copy of
Mein Kampf, Adolf Hitler’s autobiographical statement of Nazism.
Rockwell’s conversion to Nazism was almost immediate. Later in life,
the former Navy pilot would explain that he founded the American
122 Hate, American Style

Nazi Party in order to repair the damage he felt he personally had done
to Hitler’s forces during World War II. For George Lincoln Rockwell,
Nazi activism in American was not simply political but deeply personal.
In 1954 Rockwell moved to Washington, D.C., and insinuated him-
self into right-wing political circles. He frequently delivered speeches
and circulated pamphlets that fell just short of publicly embracing the
National Socialist philosophies of Hitler’s Third Reich. While Rockwell
was able to draw audiences for his ideas, he failed to ﬁnd any right-wing
groups willing to take action. Thus, with ﬁnancial backing from the very
wealthy and controversial Harold N. Arrowsmith Jr., Rockwell inaugu-
rated the National Committee to Free America from Jewish Control.
The National Committee embodied many principles of Nazism but,
initially, was not devoted fully to the National Socialist agenda. 
Nevertheless, Rockwell and his National Committee rapidly drew
media attention and government scrutiny. On July 29, 1958, Rockwell
and his followers led their ﬁrst public demonstration at the White House
against alleged Jewish control of the United States. In October of the
same year Rockwell and Arrowsmith were identiﬁed as prime suspects
when a bomb destroyed an Atlanta synagogue. Although neither man
was ultimately charged, the pressure was more than Arrowsmith could
bear: he withdrew his ﬁnancial support of the National Committee.
In the aftermath of the Atlanta bombing, Rockwell claimed to have
had a mystical experience. Like Hitler before him, Rockwell believed
that a supernatural force instructed him in the truth of Nazism. This
religiopolitical awakening steeled Rockwell’s resolve: no longer would
he try to mask his faith in National Socialism. As Rockwell prepared to
salvage what was left of his organization after Arrowsmith’s departure, he
did so with a ﬁrm and public commitment to a Nazi agenda.
By March 1959, Rockwell had retooled the National Committee at
all levels. The former advertising executive applied his knowledge of
mass persuasive campaigns to his own cause. The National Committee
to Free America from Jewish Control became the American Nazi Party,
a named changed again in 1967 to the National Socialist White People’s
Party (NSWPP). Members were dubbed “storm troopers” and costumed
for public appearances. Rockwell himself began regularly delivering
pro-Nazi speeches on the Mall in Washington, D.C. Joined by his
stormtroopers, Rockwell often scheduled counterdemonstrations in
areas where he knew Martin Luther King Jr. would be rallying members
of the Civil Rights movement.
organized hatred 123

No doubt drawing on Rockwell’s experiences in the advertising and
publishing ﬁelds, the American Nazi Party developed a variety of com-
munication media. Early in 1960, the group released the ﬁrst edition of
National Socialist Bulletin. Rockwell’s autobiography, This Time the
World, hit the market later that year. In the fall of 1961 he published the
ﬁrst Rockwell Report, a periodical update of the actions of the alleged
Jewish conspiracy and the American Nazi Party’s response.
Although he founded the Nazi Party in America, Rockwell did not
view the rebirth of National Socialism as a uniquely American phe-
nomenon. In August 1962 he traveled to Europe to meet with represen-
tatives of the ﬂedgling Nazi parties then organizing on that continent.
The representatives signed what is known as the Cotswold Agreement,
committing themselves and their followers to the goal of Pax Aryana, or
the Aryan Peace. Rockwell and the other Nazi leaders argued that only
when all Aryans (whites of Northern European descent) united could
they focus their collective efforts on the annihilation of other races, the
ultimate goal of National Socialism since the mid-1960s. An NSWPP
legend maintains that Rockwell himself once bluntly stated, “I will kill
every Jew, Catholic, and Negro.”
George Lincoln Rockwell deﬁned one form of hatred in the middle
of the twentieth century and shaped the development of the white
supremacy movement for decades to come. Although followed by a rel-
atively small group of devotees, Rockwell provoked most other Ameri-
cans. Supposedly under pressure from some Jewish groups, the United
States Navy forced Rockwell to accept a formal discharge in 1960
because his ideas were considered so incendiary. Even among the ranks
of supremacists Rockwell inspired anger as often as he inspired loyalty.
Ultimately, neither the Civil Rights movement nor the federal govern-
ment silenced George Lincoln Rockwell; a former member of the
American Nazi Party assassinated him on August 25, 1967.
the contemporary american hate scene
Since the 1970s, both the tradition of American white Protestant
supremacy groups and the inﬂuence of European and American Nazi
leaders have colored the hate scene in America. While a few groups
seem particularly loyal to one branch of the hateful history over the
other, most contemporary hate groups reﬂect aspects of both traditions.
124 Hate, American Style

According to watchdog groups such as the Southern Poverty Law Cen-
ter and the Anti-Defamation League of B’nai B’rith, the number of
organized hate groups grew rapidly in the late 1980s and throughout the
1990s. It is not possible to know with certainty how many Americans
belong to hate groups because so many of the groups operate covertly.
We do know, though, that, in 2000, hate groups operated in forty-nine
of the ﬁfty states.9 Several thousand United States citizens now hold ofﬁ-
cial membership in hate groups. Thousands of others are being targeted
as recruits by the sophisticated propaganda machines of twenty-ﬁrst-
century American hate groups. In this section I want to look at the basic
structure of a few of the most signiﬁcant hate groups currently active in
America.
Although the National Socialist White People’s Party ﬂoundered in
the years immediately following Rockwell’s death, another group
quickly arose to ﬁll the void. William Pierce, a former comrade of Rock-
well’s, established the National Alliance in 1974.10 Drawing most of its
members from the National Youth Alliance, the National Alliance
admitted members of all ages and thus expanded to reach a wider audi-
ence.
The National Alliance today serves a critical role as a communica-
tions hub for the supremacy movement. The organization has pub-
lished National Vanguard, perhaps the premier hate-group periodical in
the United States, since 1975. National Vanguard Books, the publishing
arm of the group, is one of the largest suppliers of supremacist books,
videos, and paraphernalia. Recently, Pierce purchased Resistance
Records, America’s top producer and distributor of skinhead music. The
National Alliance/National Vanguard Books/Resistance Records Web
site provides to all visitors a vast, comprehensive catalogue of thousands
of resources.
Yet the National Alliance’s greatest claim to fame and National Van-
guard Book’s all-time best seller remains founder William Pierce’s
novel, The Turner Diaries.11 First published serially in National Van-
guard, The Turner Diaries traces the development and activities of a
small cadre of white Protestant men who lash out at minorities and the
government. The climax of the book sees its hateful heroes make a
gigantic bomb using ammonium nitrate fertilizer and a rented moving
truck as their tools. They detonate the truck in front of a federal build-
ing in a midwestern city shortly after nine on a workday morning. 
Sound familiar? When police apprehended real-life Oklahoma City
organized hatred 125

bomber Timothy McVeigh, copies of pages from The Turner Diaries
were found in his car.12 The literature popular among members of hate
groups may not be something most people encounter at their local
bookstore. It may seem far-fetched, silly, or offensive to most Americans.
But while it is taken seriously only by a very small audience, it never-
theless has a quality most Pulitzer prize-winning novels do not have: it
provides the inspiration and the instructions for the commission of mass
murder.
If William Pierce is the “mind” of the contemporary hate scene in
America, Richard Butler is the “soul.” Butler is the self-ordained high
priest of the Church of Jesus Christ Christian, the primary pulpit for a
theology called Identity.13 In the nineteenth century, Anglo-Israelism,
which claimed Anglo-Saxons were the chosen people (Israel) of God,
became popular for a time in Britain. Shortly after World War II, Dr.
Wesley Swift revived and expanded Anglo-Israelism theories into what
now is called Identity theology. Swift, a virulent anti-Catholic and anti-
Semitic Klansman, argued that non-Aryans are “mudpeople,” born
without souls. Satan, not God, creates mudpeople who are on earth to
test Aryans. In Identity teachings, then, non-Aryans are not human and
not of God. According to Swift’s interpretation of the biblical book of
Revelations, Aryans must prove themselves to God by eradicating the
mudpeople, the children of Satan, in order to bring about the apoca-
lypse and eternal salvation. Clearly, such a belief system has the poten-
tial to create extremely violent crusaders for the cause.
When Swift died in 1970, Richard Butler assumed leadership of the
crusade. A former Klansman himself, Butler apparently sought a more
focused philosophy on which to center his ideas about white
supremacy. In the past thirty years, Butler has emerged as one of the
most important leaders of the white supremacy movement. Those
drawn to the movement quickly discover his Identity-driven sermons
and pamphlets in the catalogues and on the Web sites of almost all
supremacy groups. Most signiﬁcantly though, Butler has managed to
wed his religion to a political vision. Butler’s greatest impact on the
supremacy movement is this marriage of divine inspiration with mili-
tant activism: a combination thousands of years of world history warn us
is almost always deadly.
In addition to the Church of Jesus Christ Christian, Richard Butler
also heads up Aryan Nations, one of the largest and most notorious
white supremacy groups active in America today. Aryan Nations per se
126 Hate, American Style

is the paramilitary core unit of adult male followers of Butler. Politically,
Aryan Nationalists envision the formation of an actual Aryan national
state, modeled on the Third Reich, in America. The Aryan Nationalists
are not alone: Butler also sponsors several other groups allegiant both to
Identity theology and a goal of Aryan political dominance. Aryan Youth
Action serves all young people interested in the supremacy movement,
though it caters particularly to the interests of skinheads. Aryan Youth
Action regularly sponsors concerts by skinhead bands, education and
physical training programs, and festivals such as the Aryan Olympics
and the Adolf Hitler Youth Camp. Female followers of Butler unite
under the banner of Aryan Women’s League to discuss their role as
mothers in preserving the purity of the Aryan bloodline and to function
as something of a women’s auxiliary for the Aryan Nationalists. Finally,
Aryan Brotherhood, Butler’s Identity outreach program in the United
States prison system, is considered by police and prison authorities to be
one of the most vicious gangs operating in the United States at this time.
Because Butler’s followers tend to be among the most ardent and
extreme white supremacists, they have received signiﬁcant press cover-
age in the wake of major incidents. In the mid-1980s, the contemporary
supremacy movement attracted national media attention for the ﬁrst
time when Bob Matthews and The Order pulled a multimillion dollar
bank robbery to fund the Aryan Nationalist cause. Matthews and The
Order assassinated Alan Berg, a well-known Jewish talk radio personal-
ity. Matthews himself was ﬁnally killed by law enforcement agents in a
bloody shoot-out. Almost all known surviving members of The Order
remain in federal maximum security prisons.
More recently, Aryan Nationalist Randy Weaver hunkered down in
his cabin near Butler’s Idaho compound during a standoff with agents
of the Federal Bureau of Alcohol Tobacco and Firearms (ATF). The
incident, which came on the heels of the ATF’s disastrous encounter
with David Koresh and the Branch Davidians in Waco, Texas, drew
extended media attention. Ultimately, federal agents shot Weaver’s wife
and young son before they apprehended Weaver himself. 
Although not known to be members of Aryan Nations, Oklahoma
City bombers Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols were known to be
supporters of Aryan Nationalist beliefs. Shortly before the bombing, for
example, McVeigh visited Elohim City, a paramilitary training camp in
the south whose leaders preach Identity theology. 
In the summer of 1999, Aryan Nationalist afﬁliate Buford Furrow
organized hatred 127

attacked a Jewish community center in California. Furrow’s undiscrim-
inating rage left three kindergarten students, a teenage helper, and a
teacher bleeding in the hallway as he prowled farther into the building.
Later the same day Furrow fatally shot a postal worker before being cap-
tured. Not long after Furrow’s arrest the media uncovered an interesting
twist of history: Furrow’s wife is the widow of Aryan Nation’s martyr, Bob
Matthews. 
Most recently, Aryan Nations topped the nightly news when the
courts effectively bankrupted the group by ordering it to pay more than
six million dollars in damages to Victoria Keenan and her son, Jason.
Aryan Nations security guards had shot at and ultimately beaten the two
up for driving along a road near the group’s twenty-acre compound in
1998. The settlement forced Butler to turn the entire compound over to
the Keenans who, in turn, sold it to Greg Carr, a millionaire who plans
to transform the longtime headquarters of hatred into a center devoted
to the promotion of antihate/antiviolence initiatives. But Reverend But-
ler and the Aryan Nationalists have not disbanded. In fact, they have
redoubled their focus on the Internet and will soon debut two new white
supremacist shows on public access television. One of Butler’s wealthi-
est supporters donated a house for Butler to use as an interim base of
operations as he rebuilds the infrastructure of Aryan Nations with an
eye toward cyberspace as the compound of the future.14
While supremacists afﬁliated with Aryan Nations and Identity theol-
ogy have garnered the most media attention in recent years, the media’s
favorite supremacist of the late 1980s and early 1990s remains every bit
as active today as he used to be. Tom Metzger, a television repairman
from a suburb of San Diego, California, is the founder and undisputed
leader of White Aryan Resistance, or WAR. Metzger’s son, John, runs
Aryan Youth Movement (AYM), an organizational and communication
hub for skinhead gangs from around the nation.15
The Metzgers seem to have an afﬁnity for media attention of all sorts.
They themselves intermittently operate a cable talk show catering to the
interests of white racialists. They also publish a detailed periodical,
manage a telephone hotline, offer a variety of items for sale through
their own catalogue business, and maintain one of the most up-to-date
and complex Web sites of all the hate groups. 
But ultimately, the Metzger’s claim to fame derives from their appear-
ances on other people’s talk shows, appearances that seem to have set the
standard for over-the-top behavior by supremacists for a decade now. Tom
128 Hate, American Style

and John Metzger, joined by several followers, led the onstage riot in
which a chair hurled by one of the WAR members broke the nose of syn-
dicated talk show host Geraldo Rivera. Around the same time, Tom Met-
zger appeared on Oprah Winfrey’s show, demanding the creation of
whites-only regions in the United States. Accused by an audience member
of masterminding violence against minorities, Metzger sidetracked the
issue and challenged anyone to prove he’d ever had a hand in violence.16
The courts took Metzger up on his challenge a few years later. The Met-
zgers drew serious media attention in the early 1990s when they took cen-
ter stage in a Portland, Oregon, courtroom in an action for wrongful death
and racial intimidation.17 Tom and John Metzger stood accused of inspir-
ing members of the skinhead gang East Side White Pride to murder
Mulugeta Seraw, an Ethiopian immigrant. The skinheads bludgeoned
Seraw so severely with a baseball bat that members of his own family were
not able immediately to identify his remains. Ultimately, the court found
against the Metzgers, assessing nine million dollars of punitive damages
against Tom Metzger, John Metzger, and the WAR organization plus an
additional $2.5 million in damages for Seraw’s unrealized future income
and the pain and suffering he experienced during the attack. Tom Metzger
lost his home and most of his personal property as a result of the lawsuit,
although by all accounts he and WAR have since recovered ﬁnancially.
While Tom and John Metzger’s brush with the law in Portland
seemed a high-proﬁle victory for antihate group activists, the case did
little to quiet their skinhead followers. If anything, most supremacists—
skinheads included—came to view the Metzgers as martyrs: the Port-
land case became a reason to evangelize. 
Although the Metzgers gave skinheads their ﬁrst real publicity in the
United States, skinhead gangs have existed in America for several
decades.18 The skinhead movement traces its roots to Britain in the 1960s
where a split occurred within the Mod subculture associated with main-
stream rock groups such as the Rolling Stones. A splinter group called
“hard mods” formed around their shared lower-economic background
and penchant for drinking and rowdiness. The hard mods cropped their
hair very, very short and wore a uniform of sorts: work shirts, cuffed
denim jeans, suspenders, and heavy black Dr. Marten boots. The hard-
mod hairstyle, of course, later gave rise to the term “skinhead,” while
their attire remains the standard for members of most skinhead gangs.
The British skinheads quickly earned a wide-reaching reputation.
Organized into crews, or gangs, the skinheads supported local soccer
organized hatred 129

teams. When rival teams played, rival crews met up in the stands. Much
of the legendary violence surrounding British soccer games can be
attributed to the skinheads’ legendary propensity for violence. More
often than not, British skinhead violence was fueled by a liberal supply
of alcohol, another central feature of the skinheads’ reputation. 
Beyond their rowdy support of soccer teams, most British skinheads
involved themselves in local music scenes. The punk revolution of the
1970s appealed to the renegade spirit of the skinheads. Yet even though
bands such as The Sex Pistols, The Clash, and Generation X bellowed
rage into their microphones, they were not prepared for the very real rage
their music could unleash in a club packed full of skinheads. Almost as
quickly as the skinheads discovered punk music, they found themselves
banned from entering most nightclubs. Left outside the scene, some
skinheads formed their own bands, which tended to fuse punk music
with heavy metal and ska inﬂuences. The resulting genre, called oi!, has
been described by one skinhead source as “music to riot by.”19
The ﬁrst organized skinhead group appeared in America in 1984.
Calling themselves Romantic Violence, the group, which still exists,
more closely resembles a traditional American inner-city street gang
than a British hard-mod skinhead crew. Like most American gangs,
Romantic Violence uses grafﬁti to mark their territory: the gang’s iden-
tifying tag is a swastika.
In 2000 Romantic Violence was only one of thirty-nine known skinhead
gangs operating in the United States.20 The largest group, Hammerskin
Nation, which formed in Dallas in the early 1990s, now claims members
not just across the nation but across the globe. As organized skinhead asso-
ciations continue to move into more and more areas of the United States,
the movement is likely to grow even more rapidly in the ﬁrst years of the
twenty-ﬁrst century than it did in the last years of the twentieth.
Still, many people seem to dismiss the threat of skinheads because
the members are so young. Some write the entire skinhead phenome-
non off as nothing more than a phase, a temporary rebellion. While that
undoubtedly may be true for some skinheads, it does not make even
temporary skinheads any less dangerous while they are committed to
racist violence. The skinheads’ commitment to violence is so intense
that they brazenly document their crimes on their bodies: a skinhead’s
spiderweb tattoo symbolizes his or her participation in the serious
assault or murder of a member of a targeted group; each inky creature
entangled in the web represents additional attacks. Joining the gang
130 Hate, American Style

means earning the right to wear a web tattoo. Today, several thousand
young Americans, both male and female, wear the web. 
Perhaps more signiﬁcant in the long run, though, is the new crop of
leaders emerging from the skinhead fold. Not long ago a street-level
gang member himself, Eric Hawthorne (a.k.a. George Burdi), then lead
singer of the skinhead band Rahowa, founded Resistance Records, the
largest importer, producer, and distributor of racist music in America.21
Matt Hale began his association with neo-Nazi skinheads as an eighth
grader; now a law school graduate approaching age thirty, he operates
the racist World Church of the Creator, one of the more popular spiri-
tual associations among white supremacists.22 National Alliance
founder William Pierce’s likely successor is Bruce Alan Breeding, the
charismatic Florida Alliance leader who has yet to turn thirty-ﬁve.23
And, of course, we must not forget the heirs to a couple of the hate-
group thrones: Tom Metzger has for years been grooming his son to
move from leadership of AYM to leadership of White Aryan Resistance;
likewise, Knights of the Ku Klux Klan national director Tom Robb
appears ready to vest leadership in his daughter.
Those who dismiss the skinhead threat are right about one thing: not
all skinheads stay in the movement. For many it truly is a youthful rebel-
lion that ends almost as quickly as it begins. Yet for the few weeks or
months or years a young person is involved with a skinhead gang, they
open themselves up wholly to theories about Jewish plots, black and His-
panic inferiority, and mudpeople. They learn that racially targeted vio-
lence is not just a viable but a preferred solution to social tensions and
personal fears. How long do remnants of these ideas remain in the minds
of a former skinhead? Do skinheads have to stay in the movement to pose
a danger? Not according to Tom Metzger. Having just learned the ver-
dict in the Portland case, he said, “The movement will not be stopped in
the puny town of Portland. We’re too deep. We’re imbedded now. Don’t
you understand? We’re in your colleges, we’re in your armies, we’re in
your police forces, we’re in your technical areas, we’re in your banks.
Where do you think a lot of these skinheads disappeared to?”24
bringing in the sheaves . . . and the shaven 
Smart recruiting strategies employed by the larger white supremacy
groups account for much of their growth in recent years. New tech-
organized hatred 131

nologies—speciﬁcally the Internet, desk-top publishing, and computer
databases used for direct mailings—allow hate groups affordable and
sophisticated access to potential members. Yet while contemporary hate
groups are moving into new avenues for conveying their messages, the
messages themselves remain virtually identical to the messages hate
groups have spread for centuries. 
What must be of greater concern to us, though, is that the hate
groups’ sales pitches rely on some of the same faulty reasoning that we
allow ourselves to use all too frequently. In chapter 1 I explored four
potentially dangerous thinking patterns: absolutism, stereotyping,
scapegoating, and dehumanization. In what follows, I demonstrate how
hate groups use these as tactics to attract new members. 
Absolutism
Absolutists see the world only in stark black and white. White suprema-
cists are the ultimate absolutists: they literally view the world as a con-
test between black and white—that is, black and white people.
Supremacists who believe the teachings of Identity theology elevate the
contest to a supernatural level, dividing the world not simply by human
races but, rather, into the categories of human (Aryan children of God)
and mudpeople (non-Aryan children of Satan.) Even those suprema-
cists who do not follow Identity read world history as the story of racial
conﬂict in which the purity of the Aryan bloodline is the Holy Grail.
As I showed in chapter 1, absolutist thinking patterns make compro-
mise impossible. The extremely polarized worldview of hate group mem-
bers simply will not allow them to consider compromise as a possibility.
Especially for those who practice Identity, efforts to ﬁnd common
ground with Jews and blacks would be seen as bargaining with the devil’s
children: compromise itself would violate what they feel is God’s plan. 
With compromise ruled out, only two courses of action remain for
those in the grips of absolutist thinking patterns. First, they may simply
give up. No evidence indicates that such a concession should be
expected from the white supremacy movement. Now well into the
Fourth era, by Ku Klux Klan calculations, adherents to the movement
are as devoted to the cause today as their forefathers were following the
Civil War. Hate group activity has waned occasionally over the past
hundred years; but each time it appears that the movement has lost
momentum another groundswell of interest crosses the United States.
132 Hate, American Style

The rather rapid increases recently in both the number of active and
organized hate groups and the size of their membership rosters suggest
that today’s white supremacists are unlikely to give up their cause any
time soon.
Which leaves us with the only other option for those who fall into
absolutist thinking patterns: a trend of escalating attacks on those they
perceive to be evil. Tragically, the bloody history of American and Euro-
pean hate groups supports this claim. From anti-Catholic SSSB con-
vent burnings, to early KKK lynchings, to the Holocaust itself, hate
groups have demonstrated their willingness to lash out violently at those
they target. 
Most of the hate groups active in America today admit in publicly
accessible documents that they will take whatever means they feel are
necessary to protect the Aryan bloodline.25 Skinhead gangs enact this
creed directly and somewhat randomly by attacking minorities they
encounter in public. Other groups, including many branches of the Ku
Klux Klan, claim they will not rest until the United States of America
returns to a state of segregation, even if that means another civil war to
divide the country. The most extreme incarnations of hate group plan-
ning come from leaders such as Richard Butler, who insists that only a
genocidal race war can satisfy the biblical prophesies of the God of Iden-
tity. Butler’s Aryan Nationalists have discussed on their publicly accessi-
ble Web site their belief that by instigating race riots in major urban areas
they will be able to justify the escalation of violence against minorities.
Stereotyping
Stereotyping occurs when we prejudge people based on biases or on
inadequate or inaccurate information. The prejudging involved in
stereotyping is the root of prejudice. Not surprisingly, stereotyping is
common among groups whose members unite around their shared
hatred of other groups in a society.
The major contemporary hate groups particularly stereotype Jews
and blacks as part of their ideas about a conspiracy to destroy what they
believe is the pure Aryan bloodline. The theory casts Jews as the sinister
leaders of the secret plot. The Jewish conspirators control blacks who
mongrelize the Aryan bloodline through interracial relationships and
who generally destabilize the traditional American (read that as “white
Protestant American”) way of life.
organized hatred 133

The stereotypes white supremacists hold about Jews and blacks thus
derive from the theory of a conspiracy and also feed the theory of a con-
spiracy.26 Jews are described in supremacist literature as tricky, secretive,
and cunning. To the extent that the Aryan bloodline is believed superior,
only a highly intelligent opponent could pose a true threat: as a result,
the stereotype of Jews credits the Jewish people with great minds but
alleges those great minds are working toward an evil goal. In contrast,
blacks are portrayed as dupes of the Jewish conspirators. Blacks are
described as ignorant and primitive in hate group documents. Blacks
also are accused of being highly sexual: black women seek to seduce
white men; black men rape white women who cannot be seduced. Sig-
niﬁcantly, these same stereotypes about black people were used as justi-
ﬁcation for the institution of slavery in the nineteenth century when
southern slave owners claimed that blacks were too wild to be free and
posed a safety risk to whites.
Yet while it is no surprise that white supremacists stereotype the
groups they hate, it must be remembered that they also stereotype
whites. A closer look at the overt racism in the literature the groups dis-
tribute and on the Web sites they open to the public reveals that the ulti-
mate stereotype in supremacist thinking is “Aryan.” As I noted in chap-
ter 1, stereotyping is dangerous not only because it is based on inade-
quate or inaccurate information but also because it reduces those
stereotyped to nothing more than the content of the stereotype. Even
though the Aryan stereotype is supremely positive among members of
hate groups, it nevertheless prompts them to reduce their understand-
ing of themselves and each other to nothing more than their racial iden-
tity. More subtle issues of character, intelligence, personality, and
morality disappear under the all-encompassing cloak of the label
“Aryan.”
Clearly, members of targeted minority groups are at the greater
immediate risk due to hate groups’ stereotypes of them. However, the
hate groups’ implicit stereotyping of Aryans also carries a risk—one that
is almost never discussed in popular media: if simply being Aryan is the
ultimate good, then being an Aryan who in any way betrays the cause no
doubt would be the ultimate evil. According to Identity teachings and
even historical theories of conspiracy, Jews and blacks are destined at
birth to ﬁll their roles in the grand drama between absolute good and
absolute evil. Whites, on the other hand, are free agents. Only whites
have the power to choose to raise the banner of Aryan pride and work
134 Hate, American Style

toward the cause of Aryan supremacy. Conversely, only whites have the
power to choose not to embrace the white supremacy movement.
Whites who involve themselves in interraccial relationships, whites who
work on behalf of civil rights for all, whites who try to silence the hate
groups, and even whites who simply do not care are the most profound
enemies of true Aryan loyalists. 
Scapegoating
Scapegoating, or falsely assigning blame for our problems onto others,
lies at the very center of hate group recruiting tactics. Even a cursory
examination of hate group Web sites and pamphlets reveals that hate
group writers fully understand the power of scapegoating as a lure for
potential members. 
To understand how today’s white Protestant supremacy groups target
particular audiences through scapegoating, it is necessary to under-
stand the “logic” of the theory of the Zionist Occupational Government
(ZOG), the most popular explanation of an anti-Aryan conspiracy cir-
culating among white supremacists in recent years.27 According to most
contemporary supremacists, the United States is now controlled by a
powerful but covert group of Jewish masterminds. The group, referred
to by supremacists as the ZOG, now controls all aspects of the Ameri-
can political and economic system, directing social policy, determining
spending and taxing decisions, etc. Those who believe in the ZOG feel
that American democracy is a sham and that, in fact, the majority of
American politicians and judges answer to this powerful cabal. 
Because they accuse Jews of manipulating both politics and the
economy, the hate groups set the Jewish community up as responsible
for all problems now facing whites. Other minorities, especially blacks,
emerge from the conspiracy theory as puppets of the Jewish plot and
beneﬁciaries of Jewish efforts to destroy Aryan dominance. Thus, from
the perspective of hate group thinking, social programs such as afﬁrma-
tive action help blacks and Hispanics in order to hurt whites—it’s all part
of the master plot of the Jewish conspirators. Everything is part of the
master plot of the Jewish conspirators.
The ZOG. theory allows hate group members to scapegoat all of
their problems onto the Jewish conspirators and their supposed allies in
other minority communities. If a white man cannot ﬁnd employment to
support his family, it is because Jewish corporate executives have given
organized hatred 135

all the good jobs in the area to Hispanic workers; it is not because he
lacks appropriate job skills or because he has not actually applied for any
jobs. If a white women cannot win a scholarship to college, it is because
Jewish academics have earmarked all the good scholarships for blacks;
it is not because she chose not to take college prep courses in high
school or because her family has no ﬁnancial need. In placing the
blame on someone else, the thought patterns of scapegoating also
absolve those who buy into them of blame for their own lot in life. 
Contemporary white supremacists make brilliant strategic use of
scapegoating thought patterns in their recruiting efforts. The groups
carefully target potential recruits based on their likely ﬁt with the scape-
goating patterns implied by the ZOG theory. On college campuses, ﬂy-
ers disseminated by hate groups usually speak directly to students’ fears
about securing employment after graduation. They also invite white
male students, in particular, to unleash their frustration at skyrocketing
tuition bills by suggesting that all the minority students on the campus
attend school virtually for free even though they are not as intelligent or
as hardworking as the white male students no doubt are. Likewise, hate
groups often move into a town to begin recruiting during times of major
economic turmoil such as the closing of a factory that had employed a
large portion of the community. The groups’ representatives plant the
seed of ZOG theory in the minds of the recently unemployed: “It’s not
your fault your family is ﬁnancially strapped. It’s not a coincidence
either. Someone is doing this to you.” The scapegoating thought process
turns confusion and fear into a focused hatred and, in the process, efﬁ-
ciently produces a new member for the hate group rosters.
Clearly, some people are more susceptible to such appeals than oth-
ers. People who are, in general, content and happy are not likely sud-
denly and unexpectedly to fall for appeals to join any kind of intense
group, whether the group is a hate group or cult or whether the group
is a mainstream church or a branch of the military. Normally people
join groups that will demand substantial amounts of their time,
thoughts, and emotions only when they feel a compelling need. Many
young people join the military to meet their need to move away from
home with the security of a guaranteed job, shelter, clothing, and food.
Likewise, the decision suddenly to join a church after years of religious
inactivity is most often is prompted by a life-altering event: the birth of
a child or the death of a loved one can create new mental and emo-
tional needs for spiritual fulﬁllment. 
136 Hate, American Style

Hate groups pick up where such mainstream organizations usually
stop: they offer potential members not only a safe place and a new faith
but also an explanation for the failures in their life. By using scapegoat-
ing techniques, hate groups are able to convince potential members
that the conditions of their lives are not their fault. For a person who
feels powerless in the face of personal, social, or economic difﬁculties,
the reassurance that “it’s not my fault” ﬁlls a deep emotional need.
Dehumanization
Dehumanization, or reducing other people to a status somehow less
than human, marks the ﬁnal step in the classic thinking patterns associ-
ated with hatred. Dehumanization also marks the pinnacle of white
supremacist ideology today as well as in days gone by. While absolutism,
stereotyping, and scapegoating pose serious dangers alone and in com-
bination, only when they build to the crescendo of dehumanization
does the risk of violence become imminent.
White Protestant supremacists have dehumanized people of other
races, religions, and ethnicities for centuries. Early nineteenth-century
anti-Catholics labeled members of the Catholic clergy “demonic.”
Slave owners and the Klansmen who succeeded them referred to blacks
as “animals” to be owned and managed in the same manner as cattle. In
the twentieth century the rise of Identity theology within the supremacy
movement dehumanizes all non-Aryans into the category “mud.” 
As I have pointed out in chapter 1, a process of dehumanization must
precede violence. When otherwise sane people lash out violently they
do so not at another “person” but at a being they have dehumanized to
the status of monster, animal, devil, or “mud.” Killing such a creature is
not murder, for murder implies that the victim was human. Inﬂicting
pain on such a creature is not cruel, for cruelty implies that the victim
was innocent. According to the elaborate theories of the ZOG conspir-
acy and Identity theology, acts of violence against non-Aryans are a mat-
ter of self-defense, a matter of the survival of the pure Aryan bloodline. 
At no time in the past two hundred years have American white
Protestant supremacists been so forthcoming about their plans for using
violence against minority groups as they are today. The public Web sites
of established groups such as Aryan Nations and White Aryan Resis-
tance envision a bloody race war in America that will result in the anni-
hilation of all non-Aryans.28 Aryan Nations and many other hate groups
organized hatred 137

openly rehearse paramilitary maneuvers in preparation for the coming
war. White Aryan Resistance and the National Alliance now work
closely with a variety of skinhead gangs to disseminate literature, music,
and Internet links that encourage the skins to unleash their rage. Over
the next few years we will measure the effectiveness of the hate groups’
mastery of dehumanization techniques in the only way it can be meas-
ured: by the death toll.
a ﬁnal note about the thought patterns of hatred
It is very easy to condemn hate group members for their ﬂawed think-
ing. For those of us who do not buy into ideas like the ZOG conspiracy
theory or Identity theology, the fallacies of absolutism, stereotyping,
scapegoating, and dehumanization shine clearly through the some-
times convoluted rantings of hate group activists. 
Yet if we look a bit more closely a bit closer to home we may ﬁnd that
we use the exact same thought patterns in reaction to hate groups. We
cannot understand how supremacists can hold the beliefs they hold
when their ideas are so obviously wrong and immoral and our ideas so
obviously are right and good. We ﬁnd it easy to recognize hate group
members for what we assume they really are: ignorant little bullies who
lack self-esteem. We want our communities to be rid of hate groups
because we do not want our children corrupted by their kind. Let’s face
it, we know hate group members are scum; they do not deserve the
attention, let alone the sympathy, of Americans like us who are com-
mitted to principles of freedom and justice.
Perhaps the only thing easier than seeing the fallacies inherent in
hate group thinking is to fall into exactly the same patterns of ﬂawed
thinking ourselves when we react to these groups. Certainly, we could
write the whole problem off quite easily with an ends-justify-the-means
argument such as “it’s okay to use absolutism, stereotyping, scapegoat-
ing, and dehumanization so long as I use them against people who
really are bad.” Of course, that is exactly how hate group members jus-
tify their arguments to themselves. 
When we rely on the thought patterns of hatred to react to hate
groups, we really are no different from such groups. We are simply
shooting the same gun at a different target. We all need to remember
that the next time we unload our loathing for hate groups in front of our
138 Hate, American Style

children. Regardless of who is the good guy and who is the bad guy,
regardless of how convinced we are that the ends justify the means on
this issue, at the heart of our diatribes against hate groups is one very
clear message to our kids: hate is okay, so long as you hate the right peo-
ple. Same gun, different target.
we are what we watch
Americans love to watch PBS. Just ask us. When queried face-to-face by
a pollster, most of us claim we devote most of our television viewing
hours to PBS, CSPAN, CNN, and other news and educational chan-
nels. It’s a wonder the likes of NBC, ABC, CBS, ESPN, and MTV can
stay in business with such an intellectually demanding national audi-
ence. Although we do not like to admit it, most of us are watching pop-
ular television—and not just in our choice of channels but, within
channels, in our choice of shows. The ratings clearly prove that a great
many of us favor “real” crime shows such as COPS, infotainment mag-
azines such as Inside Edition, and talk shows such as Jerry Springer.
Whereas all hate groups once carefully concealed the identity of
their members, some now regularly appear on popular national televi-
sion programs. Members of certain Ku Klux Klan klaverns and some
skinhead gangs show up on television quite frequently. Talk shows pit
white supremacists in face-to-face debates with minorities and garner
huge audiences with the free-for-all brawls that ensue. Both infotain-
ment and news magazine programs produce feature stories with titles
such as “Women of the Klan” and “Children of Hatred.” 
We need to regard the increasing media coverage of hate groups as a
double-edged sword. On the one side, media coverage undoubtedly
raises general public awareness of the existence and growth of the
supremacy movement. But on the other side, the nature of much of the
coverage of hate groups is itself dangerous. 
Even though the ratings indicate that many of us watch infotain-
ment programs and talk shows, we do not necessarily take seriously the
stories and guests featured on them. When Jerry Springer, for example,
hosts “women who are leaving their lesbian lovers for their father’s gay
boyfriend’s uncle’s boss’s ex-wife,” we watch it as a contemporary farce.
The exaggerated uses of regional dialects and urban slang and the ﬂam-
boyant physical posing and posturing—not to mention the now pre-
organized hatred 139

dictable chair throwing, hair pulling, and face slapping—display the
participants not as real characters but, rather, as caricatures. On the
basis of past encounters with such shows, American audiences now
expect such shenanigans when they sit down to watch such programs.
We also presume, based on those same past encounters and expecta-
tions, that the guests are somehow artiﬁcial.
When we encounter hate group members on talk shows, those same
expectations kick in and inﬂuence our thinking. We read their behav-
iors, their speech patterns, and their uniforms as part of an elaborate per-
formance for the cameras. The caricatures are so extreme that we
assume—for our own peace of mind—that the people themselves can-
not be real. Whether the few who actually appear on television are real
or not misses the more important point: they are not typical. The hate
group members who appear on television do not represent the norms of
behavior and attitudes within the contemporary white supremacy
movement. 
I usually show a documentary ﬁlm called The California Reich in a
class I teach about social movements in American history.29 Produced
in the 1970s, The California Reich traces the activities of members of a
neo-Nazi organization in preparation for a rally. The ﬁlmmakers intro-
duce not only the group’s leader but also some of the members and their
families. Men wearing SS-styled uniforms dance the polka with women
in traditional German dresses in a meeting hall adorned with pictures
of Adolf Hitler. A rather typical-looking middle-aged man leads the cam-
era on a tour through his rather typical middle-class house, culminating
in the arsenal in the basement. A boy about nine years old wearing
swastika arm patches complains about how much time Nazi meetings
take away from playing sports, then breaks into singing a racist song.
Prompted by his mother, a much younger boy, perhaps three or four
years old, declares he wants to be a police ofﬁcer when he grows up so
he can kill “niggers.”
My classes fall silent while watching The California Reich. In dis-
cussion following the ﬁlm, two reactions always emerge. First, college
students are shocked at how deeply engrained prejudices are in the chil-
dren shown in The California Reich; they wonder where the little boys
are now; they wonder if the little three year old, who now would be in
his mid-thirties, actually has become a police ofﬁcer. Second, and in
many ways even more troubling, the college students admit they are sur-
prised at how “normal” the Nazis seem in the ﬁlm. One of my students
140 Hate, American Style

recently expressed it this way: “I thought they would be stupid. They
aren’t like the guys you see on television.”30
The mass media is giving us exactly what we want by showing us
goofy hate group members: such caricatures allow us to feel safe by
encouraging us to dismiss all hate group members as nothing more than
sideshow attractions in today’s media circus. The televised supremacists’
exaggerated displays of prejudice seem too outrageous to be a real
threat. Their ﬂamboyant hatred just does not ring true to the reality of
our daily lives. As a result, we conclude that if these guys are what hate
groups are all about then no one in their right mind would listen seri-
ously to such inane characters. 
And we would be right to draw such a conclusion if the hate group
members shown on television were in fact typical of the reality of the
white supremacy movement today. But of course they are not. Except
for a few publicly known leaders and spokesmen, serious supremacists
guard their identity for the good of the cause. They hold down jobs, own
homes, and raise children. They may live in our towns, even in our
neighborhoods. They cruise supremacist Web sites and read suprema-
cist literature, raise their children with racist attitudes, contribute sub-
stantial amounts of money to organized hate groups, attend out-of-town
rallies clad in swastikas or white robes, and, possibly, commit acts of vio-
lence against those they hate. But we do not suspect them. Thanks to
the appearances of “crazy” Klansmen and skinheads on shows such as
Jerry Springer, we know “normal” people like our neighbors—like us—
never would be involved with a hate group. The false assumption that
hate group members all must be talk-show freaks is the most funda-
mental danger of our mass-mediated ﬂirtation with the contemporary
white supremacy movement.
A different kind of danger lurks in the media coverage given to hate
groups by serious programs, including high-caliber talk shows such as
Oprah and newsmagazines such as 60 Minutes, Dateline, and 20/20.
These shows are often able to secure interviews with the ofﬁcial spokes-
people of major supremacy organizations. White Aryan Resistance’s
Tom Metzger, for example, has made notorious appearances on shows
hosted by both Geraldo Rivera and Oprah Winfrey. Metzger has also
given interviews to most of the major network newsmagazines and to
documentaries produced by cable networks. Various newsmagazines
have also aired interviews with Aryan Nations’ leader Richard Butler,
the National Alliance’s William Pierce, and Tom Robb, national direc-
organized hatred 141

tor of the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan. David Duke, of course, secured
substantial network airtime on both magazine programs and the nightly
news during his runs for political ofﬁce.
Although mass media portrayals of white supremacist leaders are
always slanted against racism and hate group activity, they nevertheless
serve as a forum from which the leaders may spread their messages. Tom
Metzger won no points with Geraldo and Oprah fans as a result of his
antics on their nationally televised programs, but he earned something
few other Americans ever had: several minutes of free airtime during
which he could preach his ideas before an audience of millions. Dur-
ing his appearance on the Oprah Winfrey Show, he even managed to
advertise the mailing address for White Aryan Resistance. No matter
how overtly the media displays its bias against hate groups, covering
them at all gives them free access to the American public.
Television is not the only medium that provides free publicity for
hate groups. You have another example of it in your hands at this
moment. Hate groups draw not only viewers but also readers. Thanks to
our fascination with hatred, hate sells. And to the extent that I write
about that phenomenon, I too am selling it. While my intent is to dis-
sect the seductive appeal of hatred—whether in music videos or on the
publicly accessible Web sites of hate groups—my effect, nevertheless, is
once again to parade hatred and violence before the public eye.
handling hate groups
Where there are hate groups, there are opposition groups. Throughout
American history hate groups have encountered varying degrees of
resistance from the victims of hatred, from the government, from organ-
ized countermovement groups, and from the general public. That
white Protestant supremacists do not control the United States today
proves that resistance has been successful at some levels over the years.
Yet, that hate groups still exist and once again are growing in numbers
and strength tells us that opposition efforts ultimately have failed. 
The idea of handling hate groups is extremely complex in a free soci-
ety. In order to understand the special challenges involved, we need to
consider the tensions between freedom and tolerance in the American
system of rights. 
“Ambivalent” perhaps best describes America’s ofﬁcial reactions to
142 Hate, American Style

hate groups. Federal, state, and local governments rarely act directly to
quell hate group formation and propaganda. Usually hate groups must
cross the line of violence before a branch of the government takes action
against them. For many Americans, the government’s failure to suppress
hate group agitation before it proliferates to violence is a crime in itself.
Yet our system was designed to prevent the government from sup-
pressing the rights of those who hold different opinions. The same con-
stitutional guarantees that prevent a Democratic president from out-
lawing the Republican Party prevent Congress from outlawing groups
such as the Ku Klux Klan. In 1787 James Madison authored The Feder-
alist paper Number Ten in which he warned the citizens of the young
nation to beware the dangers of a tyranny of the majority.31 Although the
Revolutionary War had freed Americans from the rule of the British
monarchy, Madison believed that an unchecked majority of the public
could become equally oppressive. As a result of Madison’s warnings and
those of other political thinkers of the era, the framers of the United
States Constitution built checks on the power of the majority into our
systems, as well as protections for the rights of minority opinions. These
checks and protections are the very heart of liberty in America. 
When we strongly disagree with a particular minority position, we
ﬁnd it more difﬁcult to embrace wholeheartedly the constitutional
guarantees of that group’s right to publicize their controversial ideas.
However, if we fail to protect the rights of those with whom we disagree,
we erode the integrity of the system that protects our rights as well. Thus
if we deny white supremacist church leaders the right to preach the
teachings of Identity theology, we compromise the security of religious
freedom not only for Identity practitioners but for Christians, Jews,
Muslims, Buddhists, and followers of all other religions. Likewise, if we
silence Tom Metzger or William Pierce or Richard Butler or any white
supremacist, we risk our own ability freely to speak our opinions, includ-
ing our opinions about hate groups. We must always remember that the
price we pay for our own freedom is tolerance of the freedom of others.
Hate groups whose members hope to strip minorities of their rights are
able to exist in America because most Americans refuse to strip hate
group members of their rights. In this case, our ambivalence toward
hatred reﬂects our crystal-clear commitment to political freedom.
Since the ﬁrst Europeans settled on American soil, prejudices based on
religion, race, and ethnicity have characterized the so-called American
organized hatred 143

way of life. The history of America has been the history of the sometimes
hostile, sometimes cooperative, but always complex relationships
between and among the many groups that make up our great American
society. Yet even deciding which groups have been victims and which
have been guilty of championing hatred is itself a very complex task. For
as I have shown in this chapter, while hate groups may overtly employ
the thought patterns of hatred—absolutism, stereotyping, scapegoating,
and dehumanization—we too sometimes rely on exactly the same faulty
ways of thinking when we react to hate groups. Further, by continuing
our dangerous ﬂirtation with the caricatures of hatred we see on popu-
lar television shows, we risk underestimating the depth of hatred
embraced by most active hate group members and the height of vio-
lence they plan to unleash in the coming years.
Hate groups challenge our commitment to the principles of freedom
on which our nation was founded. To secure our own rights, including
our right to speak out against hate groups, we must ensure the rights of
hate group members to voice their ideas. We simply cannot draw a line
in the dirt and assert that some “good” opinions will be protected while
other “bad” opinions will not be allowed. 
As Americans, we draw a different kind of line. Protecting the rights
of all Americans to hold and express whatever opinions and beliefs they
choose does not mean protecting the rights of even one American to act
on his or her beliefs. Morris Dees, chief trial counsel for the Southern
Poverty Law Center, explains it simply: “In America we have the right to
hate, but we don’t have the right to hurt.”32 The problem, of course, is
that in the instant of time when hate turns to hurt, we lose yet another
innocent life.
144 Hate, American Style

Hatred and violence now infuse virtually every aspect of our culture.
The movies we watch, the games we play, the music we listen to, the tel-
evision programs we follow, and even the newscasts we rely on for infor-
mation provide us with daily exposure to levels of graphic violence
unthinkable only a few generations ago. While many critics blame the
sheer saturation of violent images for the reality of violence in American
life, I contend that the problem is far more subtle. As I have demon-
strated throughout Love to Hate, violence per se is merely a symptom of
a more fundamental issue: namely, our ongoing obsession with hatred. 
Violence does not arise spontaneously. Violence results from hatred.
And while we publicly profess to despise hatred, our behavior as a soci-
ety gives the lie to our claims of tolerance. From our fascination with
hate groups and serial killers to our casual reliance on the thought and
language structures that enable hatred and violence, we tolerate not
only intolerance in others but also the seeds of intolerance in ourselves.
I want now to take a look at the process of freeing ourselves from our
obsession with hatred and violence. First, I consider a case study of the
power we actually have to stand up against hatred and violence. The
movement against hatred inspired by the murder of Matthew Shepard
Conclusion: 
Freeing Ourselves of Our Obsession 
with Hatred and Violence

is a ray of hope and love in our dark and dangerous world. I caution
readers that my discussion of Matthew Shepard’s murder is graphic; the
reality of hate-motivated violence is graphic. Second, I offer a series of
speciﬁc changes you can incorporate into your own ways of thinking
and interacting with the world that will help us all become less vulner-
able to hatred’s seductive appeal.
ambivalent no longer: the legacy of matthew shepard
Matthew Wayne Shepard was born on December 1, 1976, in Caspar,
Wyoming.1 Matthew was a typical kid in many ways. He enjoyed out-
door pursuits like swimming, camping, ﬁshing, and skiing. He expressed
his artistic ﬂair in both dance and theater. He regularly attended St.
Mark’s Episcopal Church where he served as an acolyte. Matthew also
loved spending time with family and his many friends. The Reverend R.
W. Brown describes Matthew as “a really nice kid.”2 The Reverend
Anne Kitch adds, “What was important to Matt was to care, to help to
nurture, to bring joy to others in his quiet, gentle way.”3
As a teenager, he traveled to Switzerland to complete his junior and
senior years in high school. Like many recent graduates, Matthew had
a bit of trouble ﬁnding his path. He attended a few different colleges
before settling in as a political science major at the University of
Wyoming. Not one to limit his interests to the conﬁnes of books,
Matthew became actively involved in campus political organizations. A
gay man himself, Matthew took particular pride in his work with the
campus gay and lesbian rights group.
On the evening of October 6, 1998, Matthew Shepard went out for
dinner with friends from the University of Wyoming’s gay student group,
then headed to the Fireside Lounge. He was doing the same thing tens
of thousands of other college students do every night: he was hanging
out at a bar near his campus, enjoying a few drinks and socializing with
other young people. Matthew struck up a conversation with a couple of
guys who seemed friendly enough. Russell Henderson and Aaron McK-
inney told Matthew they too were gay. Shortly after midnight, they
invited him to leave the bar with them. Henderson and McKinney
drove Matthew Shepard to a remote area outside Laramie, Wyoming.
They tied Matthew to a split-rail fence. They pistol-whipped Matthew
with a .357 Magnum. They tortured Matthew. Matthew begged for his
146 conclusion

life as Henderson and McKinney savaged him. Only when his body
showed no signs of life did they leave him for dead, tied to a fence in the
middle of nowhere.
But Matthew was not dead. For eighteen hours he clung to life,
alone. Finally, a passing cyclist noticed the ﬁgure draped over the fence.
The cyclist initially mistook Matthew for a scarecrow, but upon closer
investigation realized that the seemingly lifeless, misshapen ﬁgure actu-
ally was a person, a person still clinging tenuously to life. Matthew’s
head and face were so bloody that his bruised skin was visible only in the
trails left by his tears.
Emergency medical teams transported Matthew to Poudre Valley
Hospital in Fort Collins, Colorado. Doctors determined his skull was
fractured from the middle back all the way to the front of his right ear.
He had suffered massive damage to his brain stem. Matthew’s injuries
were so severe the doctors concluded they could not operate. News of
the vicious attack hit the national media.
While Matthew Shepard’s family and friends maintained a vigil
around his bedside, a small group of students at nearby Colorado State
University entered an original ﬂoat in the homecoming parade. A scare-
crowlike ﬁgure hung loosely from a makeshift fence. A sign on the ﬁg-
ure’s chest proclaimed, “I’m gay.” An obscene remark decorated its
back. The students who constructed the ﬂoat later claimed they had not
meant to be insensitive: they were just making a joke.
With their dying son hanging in efﬁgy as a “joke” in a local parade
and national media swooping down on them, Dennis and Judy Shepard
watched helplessly as their beloved Matthew lay comatose in the hospi-
tal. On October 9, prosecutors formally charged McKinney and Hen-
derson with the attack. Three days later, in the early morning hours of
October 12, Matthew Shepard died without ever having regained con-
sciousness.
As media coverage of Matthew’s murder accelerated, outrage spread
across the nation. Gay and lesbian rights groups were among the ﬁrst to
rally. Parents groups, antihate crime lobbies, and political and religious
leaders soon joined in the call for an end to senseless violence. Vigils
were held in major cities and small towns to remember the gentle spirit
of Matthew Shepard, to remember yet another life cut short by hatred.
On October 14, a vigil in Washington, D.C., drew thousands of mourn-
ers. Of the many speakers that night, perhaps none spoke the feelings of
the crowd more eloquently than actress Ellen Degeneres who said sim-
conclusion 147

ply, “I can’t stop crying. I am so devastated by this.” In her nationally tel-
evised speech she implored “heterosexuals to see this as a wake-up call
to please stem the hate.”4
Sadly, members of at least one organization viewed Shepard’s death
as a rallying cry for hatred. Under the direction of Fred Phelps, mem-
bers of the Westboro Baptist Church staged a protest at Matthew’s
funeral. As Matthew’s family and friends grieved inside the church,
Phelps’s crew marched around outside with placards declaring God
Hates Fags and Matt Shepard Is in Hell. At one point, a group of
Matthew’s friends, dressed as angels, peacefully paraded down the street
and among the protesters. 
No matter how many accounts of the Matthew Shepard story I hear,
I cannot really conceive the pain Dennis and Judy Shepard must have
felt. To lose a child under any circumstance is any parent’s worst night-
mare. But to learn that your child was tortured simply for being who he
was. To sit helplessly by as your child lingers in a coma while an image
of his broken body hangs in efﬁgy as a “joke” on a homecoming ﬂoat.
To walk past a protest line to enter your own son’s funeral. To know that
as you try to say the impossible—to say good-bye—the national media is
airing footage of a poster announcing that your son is in hell. 
Anyone, especially anyone who is a parent, would understand if Judy
and Dennis Shepard harbored rage for the remainder of their lives. Rage
at the two men who savaged Matthew and left him hanging on a fence
to die. Rage at Phelps and others who have turned Matthew’s death into
a morbid grandstand for their hateful theories. Rage at a society that for
too long has tolerated open, violent hatred of people who are different. 
Yet the Shepards have not shown rage: they have shown compassion.
In November 1999 Dennis and Judy Shepard beseeched the court to
show mercy on Aaron McKinney. McKinney will not be put to death;
he will serve a life sentence, along with Russell Henderson, because his
victim’s family showed the mercy the killers themselves refused to show
Matthew as he begged for his life that fateful night. When asked recently
if she has forgiven Matthew’s killers, Judy Shepard explained, “Forgive-
ness hasn’t been an issue. To me, forgiveness follows rage. There never
was that.”5
Instead of giving themselves over to rage, the Shepards have set out
on a campaign against hatred. They realize—more profoundly than
most of us—that rage will only beget more rage. The killers’ rage cost
Matthew his life. The Shepard’s compassion saved the killers’ lives.
148 conclusion

Dennis and Judy broke the cycle of hatred. They refused to allow them-
selves to hate their son’s killers, even though that hatred may seem jus-
tiﬁable to us. The Shepards took a clear stand—No Hatred Is Justiﬁable.
In doing so, Dennis and Judy Shepard have paid the highest tribute
imaginable to their son: they have helped launch a movement against
the hatred that took Matthew’s life. As Judy says, “I just wasn’t going to
let Matt’s death be only an act of violence.”6
Shortly after Matthew’s murder, Judy and Dennis founded The
Matthew Shepard Foundation, a not-for-proﬁt organization designed to
support diversity programming in education and to establish places
where young people can feel safe being themselves. The Shepards now
travel the nation educating people about the very real consequences of
violence. They also advocate for the passage of hate-crimes legislation.
Through both their activism and the towering example of their com-
passion, Judy and Dennis Shepard have shown all of us that it is not just
possible but imperative to get rid of our obsession with hatred. They also
have secured for future generations the memory of Matthew Shepard, a
caring, loving, and beloved young man. The work of The Matthew
Shepard Foundation guarantees that Matthew will be neither forgotten
nor remembered only as just another victim of violence. The spirit of
Matthew Shepard survives because his parents refused to let it be killed.
The murder of Matthew Shepard and the living legacy of love carried
forth by his parents have inspired many people to join the drive to erad-
icate our obsession with hatred and violence. Brent Scarpo and Martin
Bedogne, both Hollywood ﬁlmmakers, had been discussing ideas for a
joint project about hatred for some time when news broke of the brutal
attack on Matthew Shepard.7 When the two men met up at a vigil for
Matthew in October 1998, they resolved to take action. As Scarpo
recalls, “The pain, anger, and disbelief were loud and clear in the faces
of the 3000 mourners on that powerful night. Each person was search-
ing for answers, and asking, ‘Why?’ We decided that we should be the
ones to provide the answer.”8
Scarpo and Bedogne’s answer has taken the form of a documentary
ﬁlm entitled Journey to a Hate Free Millennium and a not-for-proﬁt mul-
timedia company called New Light Media. Dennis and Judy Shepard
endorsed the project during its planning phase and provided the ﬁlm-
makers full access to their home, their memories, and their unique
understanding of the power of hatred. The family of James Byrd Jr., the
man who was dragged to death by racist extremists in Texas, also agreed
conclusion 149

to work on the project. Ironically, shortly after Bedogne and Scarpo set
up the New Light Media ofﬁces in Denver, Eric Harris and Dylan Kle-
bold opened ﬁre in nearby Columbine High School. Darrell Scott,
whose daughter, Rachel, died in the Columbine massacre, quickly
signed on to support the New Light Media project. Major celebrities,
including Elton John, Kathy Najimy, John Dye, and Olivia Newton
John, also contributed their support.
The ﬁlm itself is a gripping account of the aftermath of hatred. Inter-
views with the Shepard, Byrd, and Scott families accomplish what stan-
dard media coverage of murders normally does not: they bring the vic-
tims alive in the audience’s mind. As I described at length in chapter 5,
too often media coverage of killings focuses on the killers and reduces
victims to nothing more than convenient tags such as “gay student” or
“black male.” Journey to a Hate Free Millennium forces us to realize that
people are being killed by hatred. The ﬁlm also seeks solutions to the
hatred and violence now plaguing our society. The families and friends
of Shepard, Byrd, and Scott provide insights, as do several celebrities
and T. J. Leyden, a former neo-Nazi who now works to educate people
about hatred. Ultimately, though, Journey To a Hate Free Millennium
does not simply offer answers; rather, it invites viewers to ask themselves
the most critical questions of all: how does hate affect my life and what
can I do to overcome hatred?
Brent Scarpo, Judy Shepard, and other members of the New Light
Media and Matthew Shepard Foundation teams now travel the country
showing Journey to a Hate Free Millennium and leading discussion ses-
sions. They guide audiences to a better understanding of the nature of
hatred itself and help people feel the anguish and sorrow violence
always leaves in its wake. As more and more audiences watch the ﬁlm
and participate in follow-up discussions, more and more people are tak-
ing a stand against our society’s casual tolerance of hatred and violence.
I am one of those people. I ﬁrst saw Journey to a Hate Free Millen-
nium in September, 2000 when Brent Scarpo visited Ripon College. I
almost skipped the event; I was tired and just wanted to stay home with
my family that night. But I determined to go because several of my stu-
dents and co-workers who had planned the event were anxious for me
to attend. I also wanted to see the angle Scarpo and Bedogne took on the
topic of hatred. I had just ﬁnished writing the ﬁrst draft of the book you
now are reading and, to put it bluntly, I wanted to check out the com-
petition. 
150 conclusion

Brent Scarpo began his presentation by asking each of us in the audi-
ence to turn to the person sitting next to us and say, “You are here
tonight for a purpose.” Now, I am a professor of speech communication;
I’ve listened to thousands of speeches over the years. So I took Brent’s
request with a grain of salt, thinking, “Oh great, yet another speaker with
yet another cute attention-getting device.” Speech professors make
tough audiences! Nevertheless, I complied with his request. “You are
here tonight for a purpose” I said to the student on my right. “You are
here tonight for a purpose too” she replied with a giggle. 
As it turns out, I was there for a purpose. I will be forever thankful to
all the forces that conspired to seat me in Brent Scarpo’s audience that
night. I learned then that until that night I had understood the dynam-
ics of our love affair with hatred and violence, but I no longer really felt
very much about them. Somewhere along the line, over the many years
I had spent studying hate groups and killers, I had become emotionally
numb; to enable myself to analyze and evaluate the most graphic
accounts of extreme acts of violence, I had developed an immunity to
feeling. Brent’s ﬁlm hit me like a bolt of electricity—it shocked me into
feeling again. As I mentioned in the introduction to this book, the birth
of my daughter made me react to the Columbine shootings with more
emotion than I’d felt in myself in years. Yet my reaction to Columbine
was very selﬁsh—Please God never let this happen to my child. Journey
to a Hate Free Millennium forced me to move beyond my own emo-
tional self-interest and into a genuine state of outrage about the perva-
siveness of hatred and violence in America. Brent’s presentation
inspired me ﬁnally and fully to put my heart—not just my mind—into
Love to Hate. In the course of about two hours I was transformed from
a professor who writes about hatred as part of my job into a person who
writes about hatred because I am sick to death of living in a world where
reports of slayings, killing sprees, and school shootings still sadden us
but no longer shock us. 
I hope Love to Hate will help my readers to better understand the
dynamics of hatred in our society. And I hope Love to Hate will open my
readers’ eyes to the mixed messages we all send and receive about hatred
everyday. But, most fundamentally, I hope something I’ve written here
will give my readers what Brent Scarpo and Journey to a Hate Free Mil-
lennium gave me—the passion required actually to take the ﬁrst steps on
the journey to a hate-free millennium.
I now invite everyone who reads this book to consider some of the
conclusion 151

steps we all—individually and together—can take to make our world a
safer and saner place to live.
freeing ourselves from our obsession 
with hatred and violence: the critical steps
It is not possible to solve a problem without really understanding the prob-
lem. In the aftermath of tragedies like the Columbine shooting or the
Shepard murder, we too often allow our ﬁrst wave of emotions to cloud
our understanding of the nature of the problem and thus propose well-
intended but nevertheless ﬂawed solutions. For example, within days of
the Columbine shooting, voices around the nation called for enhanced
security systems in schools and stricter gun control laws. While these pro-
posals have merit, they don’t actually speak to the real problem: what is it
in our society that prompts two teenage boys to dehumanize their class-
mates, to scapegoat all their problems onto others, to know that by com-
mitting mass murder they instantly would become the most famous kids
in the world? School security systems and gun control laws may make the
next massacre more difﬁcult to plan, but they will not prevent it.
To prevent another Columbine, another Matthew Shepard murder,
or any other act of violence, we have to target solutions at the funda-
mental processes of hatred that ultimately give rise to violence. The
overwhelming majority of Americans are kind, loving, nonviolent peo-
ple. Our problem is not that we, as a society, are intrinsically violent.
Rather, our problem is that we, as a society, passively tolerate the
thought and language processes of hatred that lead some among us to
violence. And we passively tolerate popular culture icons, themes,
images, and story lines that entrench hatred and violence not simply as
norms but as values.
The problem is not that our society is violent but, rather, that we are
carrying on a twisted love affair with hatred and violence. Like a teenage
girl drawn to the neighborhood bad boy, we enjoy the thrill of ﬂirting
with danger. And like that dangerous boy, hatred and violence are very
seductive—they offer us easy ways to blame our problems on others
and, whether real or ﬁctional, they offer us exciting entertainment as a
break from our sometimes boring everyday lives. Our challenge then is
not to make ourselves loving and nonviolent—we already are—but,
rather, to make ourselves stop falling for the seductive appeal of hatred
152 conclusion

and violence. Getting rid of our fascination with hatred and violence
will not make hatred and violence go away completely, but it will make
it inﬁnitely harder for those who hate and behave violently to ﬁnd an
audience, to ﬁnd followers, and to ﬁnd defenders.
Clearly, changing our attitude toward hatred and violence will take
time and hard work. Our society took centuries to get where it is; we are
foolish if we believe we can ﬁx things overnight. But we can start right
now. The sooner we begin, the sooner we’ll see the onset of change. As
Brent Scarpo and Martin Bedogne remind their audiences, like any jour-
ney, the journey to a hate-free millennium must begin with a single step.
Without a doubt, the critical ﬁrst step we must take is to own up to the
role each of us plays in continuing to be obsessed with hatred. Second,
we must follow through on that awareness by becoming intolerant of our
own intolerance. Speciﬁcally, we must no longer allow ourselves casually
to use the ﬂawed thought and language processes that enable hatred and
passively to accept messages in popular culture that glorify violence.
Third, we must ﬁnd ways to help children avoid falling into an obsession
with hatred and violence in the ﬁrst place. And, ﬁnally, we need to lend
our support to some of the national and even international organizations
that are on the front line of the war against hatred and violence.
step 1: owning up to our obsession with hatred
Accepting responsibility for the problems we face is a tough pill to swal-
low. Taking blame hurts; it means admitting to ourselves that we were
wrong or lazy or closed-minded or, in some cases, just plain dumb in
how we handled a situation. When we take blame onto ourselves, we
feel embarrassed and our fear of embarrassment (even in our own eyes)
too often keeps us from admitting our culpability.
Yet, only by embracing our role in causing a problem do we
empower ourselves to solve it. Victims cannot solve problems. Fortu-
nately for all of us, we are not victims in this obsession with hatred and
violence. So long as we have ﬂipped on the television, purchased the
compact disc, played the video game, or followed news of a real-life
tragedy as if it were our favorite soap opera, we have been willing, even
eager parties to the affair. If the media has seduced us, we certainly have
been fully consenting adults in showing up again and again for subse-
quent trysts. We are not victims of the mass media and popular culture.
conclusion 153

We are their cohorts. We too hold responsibility for the dangerous ﬂirta-
tion with hatred that characterizes our society and gives rise to outra-
geous acts of violence. We are to blame.
Thank heavens we too are to blame. For in admitting our blame we
ﬁnd our power. If our obsession with hatred truly were forced upon us
by the media and other cultural inﬂuences, we really would be in dire
straits: we would be hapless and helpless victims. But we are not. Once
we admit to ourselves our own role, we can see the truth: the obsession
cannot continue unless we allow it to do so. The media will stop selling
violence if we stop buying it. Hateful icons will disappear if we stop
propping them up. It only takes one side to call off a two-party affair. We
are to blame and, therefore, we are powerful.
step 2: becoming intolerant of our own intolerance
Once we admit we hold at least half the blame, we have the power to call
off our obsession with hatred. But simply learning that we have the power
does not change anything. If we truly want to make our world a safer and
more tolerant place, we must determine to take action, and that action
absolutely must begin with changes in our own ways of thinking and
behaving. We don’t need anyone else’s support and we don’t need acts of
Congress to make substantial changes in our own hearts and minds. All
we need is knowledge and the determination to change. 
As I have demonstrated repeatedly in Love to Hate, all of us fall prey
too easily to the ﬂawed thought patterns that give rise to hatred. Too
often we fail to realize when we cross the line dividing normal compar-
ative thought (us and them) from the dangerous realm of “us versus
them” thinking. Too often we ourselves fall into the easy, but ultimately
false logic of absolutism, stereotyping, scapegoating, and dehumaniza-
tion. Even more often, we passively accept such ideas as they ﬂoat
around our popular culture. We also thoughtlessly misuse language in
ways that can demean and degrade others. Misuse of powerful language
structures such as naming, metaphors, diminutives, and reduction facil-
itates us versus them thinking. 
Our tolerance of these ﬂawed thought patterns and misused lan-
guage structures allows hatred to ﬂourish. We never will reject our
obsession with hatred and violence until we ﬁrst equip ourselves to ﬁght
against the underlying, unreasonable thought patterns of hatred. To do
154 conclusion

this, we must put our critical thinking skills to work for they are our ﬁrst
line of defense in this battle.
By critical thinking I mean the package of mental skills we use when
we evaluate and categorize information, draw reasonable conclusions,
formulate ideas, and analyze and solve problems. Critical thinking skills
allow us actively to navigate our world. Without actively using our crit-
ical thinking skills we ﬂoat aimlessly, passively through life, always react-
ing, never taking control. Critical thinking skills are our tools of survival
in the complex world of the information age.
Each one of us can make grand strides toward ending our personal
obsession with hatred and violence simply by learning about the ﬂawed
thought patterns behind hatred and then raising the standard we set for
our own thinking process. Having read this far in Love to Hate, you now
understand how some thought patterns can be misused to foster hatred.
You have also learned how common language structures can be abused
to divide us. You have developed an appreciation for the power of cul-
tural icons and narratives to shape our perceptions. You have become
more aware of the mechanics of our complex relationship with hatred
and violence.
Your task now is to marshal that awareness toward personal change
by refusing to participate any longer in this obsession with hatred. This
task does not require isolating yourself from popular culture and inter-
actions with other people; rather, it requires you actively and rationally
to engage popular culture and other people according to a new set of
standards you establish for yourself. I challenge you to become your
own toughest critic. No longer tolerate your own intolerance. Do not let
yourself get away with sloppy and dangerous mental leaps such as abso-
lutism and stereotyping. Make more rigorous demands on your own
mind-language connection: do not allow yourself casually to use lan-
guage structures such as diminutives or reduction without ﬁrst consid-
ering the weight of your words. Challenge yourself to critically assess
popular culture: reassess your own role models and heroes; think about
how a news story was shaped and edited not simply to ﬁt the time or
page limits but also to draw in an audience for advertisers; notice when
stories are told with the killer as the lead character, leaving the victims
all but unknown to the audience. Reﬂect on the messages you send to
others and to yourself through your choices in movies, music, games,
and reading materials.
I ask you honestly to assess what you now do. In the appendices you’ll
conclusion 155

ﬁnd some tools to help you get started. With your new awareness of our
national obsession with hatred, are you still comfortable with the way
you are living your life? Are you content with your reactions to popular
culture? Are you proud of the logic behind your words? If you are, then
I congratulate you. But if Love to Hate has made you uncertain about
your own relationship with hatred and violence, then you need to make
some changes. Your uncertainty is telling you something: you are ready
to raise the standards by which you measure your own thought patterns
and language usage and, in the process, to make an end to your personal
fascination with hatred.
You may by now be wondering when I’m going to start focusing in on
the “real” issue: what we need to do to stop the people who produce the
“big” messages about hatred and violence—the producers of graphi-
cally violent video games and movies, the hate groups, even the
teenagers who operate Web sites that glorify school shooters or gang
members. How do we change them? My answer is very simple: by
changing us. 
Remember, it only takes one party to call off a two-party affair. When
we change our ways of thinking, we fundamentally change the audi-
ence for messages about hatred and violence. In a mass-mediated infor-
mation society such as ours, the power of the audience is enormous. If
the national audience is content passively to accept messages steeped in
hatred, messages that glorify violence, then the people who produce
those messages have no motivation to make changes. To put it another
way, so long as we continue to buy the bill of goods they’re selling, why
should they change their products? But if we begin to behave differently
as an audience, the people creating messages full of hatred and violence
will have to react if they want to continue to get our attention and, in
most cases, our money.
I want to consider the media separately for a moment as a producer
of messages about hatred and violence. We cannot overlook the funda-
mental fact that media is a business. If a television program does not
draw a signiﬁcant audience share, the price of advertising during that
show drops. If the audience share drops far enough, the network drops
the show because it is no longer proﬁtable. Likewise, when a certain
type of movie fails to bring in sufﬁcient revenues, production companies
stop making that type of movie; they are businesses and are thus unwill-
ing to bet on a ﬁnancial loser. The same analysis applies to video games,
cartoons, many Internet sites, music, magazines, even books. The peo-
156 conclusion

ple who produce the content of today’s mass media are business people
seeking to make a proﬁt. They will stop producing items that do not
result in proﬁt. The best strategy we can adopt for changing the media,
therefore, is to change ourselves: when our behavior as consumers stops
making violence proﬁtable, we will see a sharp decline in violent
images in media. I realize that sounds simplistic. But it really is that
simple. We get exactly what we pay for—so long as we continue to pay
for violence, it only makes sense for proﬁt-motivated corporations to
continue to provide us with violent products.
In the face of giant media corporations, most of us feel a lot like
David facing off against Goliath. And, in truth, any one of us really is
dwarfed by a giant corporation. But all of us together are not. I recently
heard a broadcast journalist explain how his station views audience
feedback about programming: one letter is a letter, ten letters are a stack,
but a hundred letters are a serious problem. We need to let the media
know that more and more of us are becoming dissatisﬁed consumers.
We need to tell media executives that we are not going to buy any more
products that glorify hatred and violence. And, then, and this is the key,
we actually have to stop buying those products. 
Hate groups, as well as some individuals, pose a different kind of chal-
lenge. Unlike the media, these people are not normally motivated by
proﬁt but by a sincere belief that their theories are true and that violence
actually is the answer. I have no easy solution for dealing with these peo-
ple. I think what we must remember is that they currently represent a rel-
atively small minority of our population. Clearly, even with small num-
bers they have the potential to do great harm as we’ve learned painfully
through several recent incidents. However, we must concern ourselves
more with the threat they will pose in the future if they succeed in
recruiting new members. We can make that task inﬁnitely more difﬁcult
for them in a couple of ways. First, if we can succeed in using our power
as an audience of consumers to inﬂuence the content of media, we will
help create a more tolerant, less violent climate in society overall. While
this clearly is a long-term solution, we must remember that the small
steps we take now to change our society’s relationship with hatred and
violence will, in the long run, result in a society less prone to falling for
the ﬂawed thought patterns that almost always lie at the core of such
groups’ recruiting pitches. Second, those of us who are or plan someday
to be parents need to teach our children to recognize the holes in the the-
ories espoused by hate groups. Many hate groups target teens, in partic-
conclusion 157

ular, with their recruiting plans. By helping our children become resist-
ant to the rhetoric of hatred, we literally undercut the future of organized
hatred. The hate groups need to look to today’s children as recruiting tar-
gets in order to secure the existence of their organizations in the future.
We need to remember that our children are our future and raise them to
embrace the values of love and reject appeals rooted in hatred.
I disagree strongly with those who advocate censorship as a way to
combat hate groups. First and foremost, we have to hold the First
Amendment sacred because it can only protect our right to advocate for
tolerance if it also protects the rights of those who advocate for intoler-
ance. Second, I fear that censorship might actually backﬁre. When we
make something taboo, we imbue it with a sense of mystery and danger
that is especially appealing to young people. Think about alcohol for a
moment. Teens experiment with alcohol for a lot of reasons. That they
are not supposed to experiment with alcohol often tops the list. If we
censor hate groups, we may inadvertently make them more interesting
to our children. We also probably would make them more violent. Most
hate groups operating in America today believe a conspiracy is afoot to
strip them and the people they claim to represent of their rights. If we
actually strip them of their right to freedom of expression, we may be
throwing a match into an open tank of gasoline. 
Although they are very different in nature, ideas for censoring hate
groups, enhancing school security systems, and tightening gun control
laws all have one thing in common—they miss the root cause of the
problem. They are quick ﬁxes that may or may not work in the short
term but will not work over the long term. For real, lasting solutions to
the problem of hatred and violence in our society, we must always
return to the fundamental fact that until we rid ourselves of our obses-
sion, our society will not change. If we ever want to achieve a hate-free
millennium, we must prepare ourselves for a long and difﬁcult journey.
We must be brave enough to take that ﬁrst step and also determined
enough to take many, many more after it.
step 3: protecting our children
I hope you will decide to extend your crusade against hatred and vio-
lence beyond your own life. If you do, I encourage you to begin your
efforts with the children in your life. For a couple of reasons, children
158 conclusion

are particularly vulnerable to being caught up in our society’s fascina-
tion with hatred and violence. First, children learn by watching and
imitating. If the adults in their lives use or even tolerate the ﬂawed
thought and language patterns of hatred, children learn to use and tol-
erate the same ﬂawed patterns. This process carries the obsession with
hatred across generations. Second, today most children spend a lot of
their waking hours watching television, surﬁng the Internet, and play-
ing video games. They are heavy consumers of media who rarely have
been taught how to evaluate media messages. 
In the appendices you’ll ﬁnd a collection of speciﬁc strategies you
can employ to help children avoid repeating our own mistakes. I want
to consider here some of the key steps we can take for the sake of the
children in our lives. Obviously, the ﬁrst change we can and should
make on their behalf is to become role models of clear thought and lan-
guage. By minding our own ideas and how we express them, we embed
legitimate patterns of thought and word choice in the minds of the chil-
dren who hear us. If you’ve spent much time at all around small chil-
dren, you know that they are the world’s best mimics. Children learn
language by listening, then repeating. That’s why they pick up not only
words from their parents but also accents, speech styles, and the atti-
tudes toward others coded into adult language. The thought and lan-
guage patterns we use in front of children are the thought and language
patterns they will adopt. Thus when we change the ways we think and
the ways we express those thoughts, we literally are changing the way
children will understand the world as they grow up.
Further, when we refuse passively to accept others’ reliance on the
ﬂawed thought and language patterns of hatred, we model for children
the process of listening carefully and thinking critically. We demonstrate
that it is not okay blindly to accept all statements. We can use such situ-
ations to show children it is possible to compassionately question ﬂawed
ideas without attacking the speaker as a person. For example, we might
say to another adult in front of the child, “I usually agree with a lot of
your ideas, Bob, but I don’t agree with this one. You’re a very bright guy.
That’s why it surprises me to hear you suggesting that all minorities
behave in a certain way because of something one person did.” We then
can reinforce the lesson with our children later by talking with them
about why we disagreed with Bob. In such private interactions, age-
appropriate language and examples they can relate to will help the les-
son stick. For instance, you might explain to a preschooler that just
conclusion 159

because one of his stuffed bears has a crooked ear, that doesn’t mean all
stuffed animals, or even all stuffed bears, have crooked ears: people are a
lot like animals, what’s true about one person isn’t necessarily true about
all people, even about all people who look similar or live in the same
place. You might even turn the lesson into a fun game by having the
child gather all his stuffed animals and examine each one’s ears. He will
see that not all the animals, not even all the bears, have crooked ears.
Of course, in an age when television markets programs to children
below the age of two, we also need to equip the children in our lives to
understand as much as possible about what they see and hear via mass
media. To make our children media literate we must not simply dictate
what they can and cannot watch on television or what music they can or
cannot listen to on the stereo. If we really want to raise media-literate
children we have to make the time to watch television with them, listen
to music with them, play games with them, and explore cyberspace with
them.
Simply sitting alongside a child and enduring an episode of Barney
will not foster media literacy. You will need to engage the child. Think
of how you read to a child, the way you pause in following the story to
point out some interesting aspect of the illustration or to connect the
story to the child’s life. That is how adults prepare children to be liter-
ate. Engaging children in media along the same pattern will help them
become media literate. 
You can use the ideas I have introduced throughout Love to Hate in
age-appropriate ways to help children better navigate the mediated
world in which they live. For example, you can help even very young
children to understand that there are different kinds of stories—funny
stories, exciting stories, sad stories. As the child grows, you can begin to
explain that some stories are complicated, containing sad and funny and
exciting parts all at once. In time you can introduce the child to the
notion that the same series of events can be made to seem sad or funny
or exciting by how we choose to tell the story: let children try their own
hand by rewriting one of their own tales. By the time children reach the
late grade school years, they are ready, with your help, to question the
motivations behind the choices made in the telling of a particular story:
is it supposed to get me to watch the next episode? buy the action ﬁg-
ure? Draw middle-schoolers and high-schoolers into discussions about
the ways the kids in their school are inﬂuenced by media: do members
of some cliques all wear clothes of a particular brand? what image does
160 conclusion

that particular company promote in its advertisements? do students try
to conform to the images of people portrayed in music videos?
You do not need any special training to start to equip the children in
your life with media literacy. Your own critical thinking abilities and
awareness of some of the issues raised in Love to Hate should be plenty
of preparation at least to begin. Remember that the way you read to chil-
dren is a great model for how you should watch television, surf the Net,
play games, and listen to music with them. You do not need to hover
over children every time they approach the TV, computer, or stereo;
even a little bit of time devoted to active, engaged interaction with
media each week will help children become media savvy. Up to now we
have role-modeled passive ambivalence toward hatred and violence for
our children; from now on we must be their models for active, critical
intolerance of the seeds of intolerance in mass-mediated popular cul-
ture and in our own ideas as they are shaped by that culture.
Education is a lot like charity and, as the saying goes, it begins at
home. But if we really want to turn away from our society’s obsession
with hatred and violence, we also need to use our inﬂuence to make
changes beyond the walls of our own homes. Speciﬁcally, we need to
rally our power as involved citizens to encourage initiatives in schools
that will hasten the journey to a hate-free millennium. 
Let’s begin by exploring some of the educational initiatives we can
support that promise to make a real difference in America’s future. First,
any plan for education that increases the focus on developing critical
thinking skills will help future generations of Americans be less suscep-
tible to the seductive appeal of thought patterns such as stereotyping,
scapegoating, absolutism, and dehumanization. As I explained in chap-
ter 1, these patterns are easy to fall into under the best of circumstances.
The more reﬁned people’s critical thinking skills become, the more
resistant they will be to sliding into such careless and potentially dan-
gerous thought patterns. 
While virtually all educational initiatives hope to improve students’
critical thinking abilities, one idea deserves special consideration in our
mass-mediated world. The idea is generally called “media literacy,” for-
mal instruction in the schools to prepare our children for life in a world
now largely lived in mediated situations. Quite a few states now include
media literacy units at some level in K–12 education. Proposals for the
mandatory inclusion of media literacy in the curriculum are on the hori-
zon. You can help bring media literacy to schools in your area by raising
conclusion 161

the issue at school board meetings, in a letter to the editor of the local
newspaper, or in discussions with teachers and school administrators. 
Of course, we can improve our children’s overall education very sig-
niﬁcantly by adding special programs and events to the school calendar.
Unlike curricular reforms and initiatives, special events usually do not
require major resource commitments of time, money, training, and
stafﬁng. They can provide an immediate impact on children’s educa-
tion while larger, more comprehensive programs are being developed.
As you may recall from your own school days, the arrival of an outside
speaker is a big occasion for students because it is an exciting event in
their otherwise rather monotonous schedule. That fact alone makes
kids really tune in to guest speakers. In addition, an experienced special
program speaker knows how to excite and engage students. Many excel-
lent speakers are available to address students of various grade levels
about issues ranging from intolerance among children to school vio-
lence to violence in the media. In the appendices you’ll ﬁnd a list of
resources that includes information about organizations that sponsor
educational programs. I encourage you to share that information with
school ofﬁcials in your area.
Sadly, local public school board elections draw very few voters to the
polls even though they probably impact our lives more than elections
for most other ofﬁces. If you feel the schools in your area are doing a
good job of equipping students with critical thinking skills and the abil-
ity to survive in a mediated world, then by all means show your thanks
by turning out at the polls and keeping wise board members in ofﬁce.
But if you feel your local schools could be doing better, then do what-
ever you can do to improve things. Learn where candidates for the
school board stand on important initiatives and then be sure to show up
and vote in the next election. You might also consider organizing a
group of parents to work with administrators on bringing special pro-
grams and presentations into the schools. Too often we all assume some-
body else will take care of things. We have to remember that we are the
“somebody else” that everybody else is depending on. 
step 4: supporting those on the front line
When Dennis and Judy Shepard set up the Matthew Shepard Founda-
tion, they joined a long tradition of Americans who have organized to
162 conclusion

combat hatred in our society. For example, in the nineteenth century
people united to ﬁght prejudice against Catholics and, of course, to
lobby against the institution of slavery. In the twentieth century, groups
such as the National Association for the Advancement of Colored Peo-
ple (NAACP) and the Anti-Defamation League of B’nai B’rith (ADL)
have worked to challenge long-standing prejudices that lie at the very
heart of much hatred and violence. 
In addition to such large, national organizations, many smaller
organizations now provide services designed to combat hatred and vio-
lence in our society. At the back of this book you will ﬁnd a list of many
of these groups along with contact information. Because I now work
closely with New Light Media, The Matthew Shepard Foundation, and
a new organization called Students Talking About Respect (STAR), I’m
going to use them as examples of the ways new, relatively small organi-
zations are participating in the movement against hatred and violence.
Please understand that my focus on these three groups is based simply
on my access to information about them and in no way implies that
their work is more important than the work being accomplished by
other similar organizations.
The Matthew Shepard Foundation was created to “replace hate with
understanding, acceptance, and compassion.”9 Toward this end, the
Matthew Shepard Foundation sponsors public awareness and educa-
tional programs nationwide. Judy Shepard volunteers much of her time
to speaking on behalf of the organization. Her public appearances,
including appearances on national television, before Congress, and in
the documentary ﬁlm Journey to a Hate Free Millennium, have brought
the foundation’s message to millions of people. Additionally, the foun-
dation provides information to individuals and groups working toward
similar goals and sponsors the development of educational materials
and programs designed to combat hatred in our society. The Matthew
Shepard Foundation also raises money to support the establishment of
places, such as youth clubs and campus meeting areas, where people
can feel safe in our too often dangerous world. 
While New Light Media shares the goals of the Matthew Shepard
Foundation, it focuses speciﬁcally on developing multimedia works and
educational tools that enable people to resist the lure of hatred and vio-
lence. The production of the documentary ﬁlm, Journey to a Hate Free
Millennium, was the ﬁrst major project of New Light Media but clearly
not the last. Members of the New Light Media team travel around the
conclusion 163

nation talking about the dynamics of hatred and leading discussion ses-
sions about what each of us can do to combat hatred. New Light Media
has developed special age-appropriate presentations for students at the
elementary, middle-school, and high-school levels, as well as training
seminars for educators committed to making our world a safer and more
tolerant place in the future. Signiﬁcantly, New Light Media and The
Matthew Shepard Foundation collaborate on project development,
pooling their resources to bring programs such as Journey to a Hate Free
Millennium to schools that otherwise could not afford outside speakers.
As such, the two organizations role model for all of us the type of coop-
erative spirit we will need actually to usher in a hate-free millennium. 
Students Talking About Respect is a brand-new, extracurricular edu-
cational initiative that directly involves high school students in the ﬁght
against hatred and violence. Headquartered on the campus of Ripon
College, STAR invites high schools from all over the United States to
participate in an antihate initiative that also fosters the development of
students’ critical thinking and communication skills. STAR chapters in
the high schools provide opportunities for teenagers to openly discuss
their thoughts about hatred and violence in the media, in music, and
even in their schools. Through a variety of interactive training programs,
STAR also equips high school students with advanced communication
skills they then can use to bring presentations about compassion and
nonviolence to K–8 students in their community. 
If you would like to support the Matthew Shepard Foundation, New
Light Media, STAR, or any of the other organizations dedicated to driv-
ing hatred and violence out of our society, you have many options for
becoming involved. First, you can simply get on the Internet and learn
about some of these organizations (Web site addresses are provided in
the appendices of this book) and then spread the word to people you
know. A great way to do this, if you have a personal Web page, is by cre-
ating links so your friends and family members have an easy way to
check out the Internet sites of groups you support. You also can gather
brochures of some of the organizations who provide educational pro-
grams and make sure school administrators and teachers in your area
know about the services available. Along the same line, you can encour-
age groups or clubs in your area to consider sponsoring a visiting speaker
from a group such as New Light Media. Just by helping get the word out
you can become an important part of the public relations chain. 
Second, you can sign your name to the membership rosters of many
164 conclusion

of these organizations. Joining often requires nothing more than a sig-
nature or a click of the mouse. By signing on to the group’s mission, you
add your name to the growing list of names of people who are commit-
ted to change. The simple act of lending your name can help these
groups demonstrate to policy makers that many Americans want to see
change. 
Third, you can volunteer time with a group in your area. All organi-
zations need as many volunteers as they can get. By donating even an
hour on one occasion, you can help a group prepare for a fund-raiser or
get an important mailing ready to go. If you are willing to make a long-
term time commitment, you may be able to train to become a
spokesperson for the group, a discussion leader, a counselor, or program
developer. 
Finally, even if you choose not to work directly with a group, you can
facilitate their work with ﬁnancial support. Your monetary donation—
no matter how small—will join with other people’s donations to under-
write educational programs, the printing of teaching materials, and
even the construction of safe houses for the victims of all forms of vio-
lence. 
No matter how you choose to get involved, any support you give to
the organizations on the front line of the ﬁght against hatred and vio-
lence will make a difference. It doesn’t matter which organization you
choose either. I learned this lesson recently myself. As you may recall
one of my motivations for attending Brent Scarpo’s presentation of
Journey to a Hate Free Millennium was to “check out the competition.”
I showed up that night thinking I was in a race in which I was pitted
against all the other people who are writing books and producing ﬁlms
about hatred and violence. In a sense, I myself had fallen right into the
middle of “us versus them” thinking. I learned a lot that night about the
importance of working together to change our world. And the more I
work with others, including people from New Light Media and the
Matthew Shepard Foundation, the more profoundly I realize that coop-
eration, not competition is what we need now.
We are in a race, a race toward the hate-free millennium. It’s like a
relay race in which all of us who are committed to making our world a
better place constantly pass the baton back and forth to each other.
There is room on our team for anyone who’s ready to run in the same
direction. So long as they are ready to race. Because we are racing. But
we are not racing against each other; we are racing against time so that
conclusion 165

we can lay claim to the next millennium before it too is corrupted by
America’s love affair with hatred and violence. 
Western civilization has spent centuries becoming obsessed with hatred
and violence. We cannot expect to free ourselves of our obsession
abruptly. By becoming aware of our ambivalence we have taken the all
important ﬁrst step toward someday making our society a more tolerant
and safer place to live. By holding ourselves to high standards of critical
thought—especially when we interact with mass-mediated popular cul-
ture—we can declare our personal freedom from the seductive
embrace of hatred. By entrenching the development of critical thinking
skills and media literacy into our homes and our educational system, we
can prepare our children to resist hatred’s temptations. And, ﬁnally, by
supporting organizations dedicated to making our world better, we too
can be part of the team effort required ultimately to end this obsession.
But we cannot change our society overnight. When the Pope labeled
America a “culture of death,” most of us agreed. However, too many of
us immediately blamed the media, the schools, the government—the
other—for our society’s fall.
We cannot scapegoat this one. It is our problem. We have done this
to ourselves. Every one of us is to blame. And until we ﬁnally and pro-
foundly accept that fact, our obsession with hatred and violence will
persist.
So long as it does, I will not wonder if there will be another school
shooting or another multistate killing spree. Until we give up our obses-
sion with hatred, none of us need to wonder if, only when, where, and
how many more innocent lives will be lost.
166 conclusion

Appendix 1: The Five Most Critical Resolutions Each 
of Us Can Make to Free Ourselves from Our Obsession 
with Hatred and Violence
Resolution 1: I will own up when I lapse into one of the ﬂawed thought
processes or language patterns that underlie hatred. If I lapse in front
of other people, especially children, I will have the courage to call
myself on my error. 
Resolution 2: I will consume popular culture critically. I will refuse to
be a passive consumer of popular culture. I will think about what I
am seeing and hearing. I will make a conscious choice about what I
want to support as a consumer of media.
Resolution 3: I will not tolerate hatred silently. When someone in my
life stereotypes or dehumanizes others, I will speak up. I will remem-
ber that passive tolerance of intolerance is at the very heart of our
society’s love affair with hatred and violence.
Resolution 4: I will encourage media literacy, critical thinking, and anti-
hate initiatives in schools in my area. I will make the effort to ﬁnd out
how these issues are handled now and where school board members
(and candidates) stand on these issues. Then I will vote.
Resolution 5: I will donate some money or some time (and skills) to an
organization that works to rid our society of hatred and violence. I
know that even a small ﬁnancial contribution or an hour of volunteer
Appendixes

time can make a huge difference when combined with the dollars
and hours of many other people.
Appendix 2: Self-Assessment Tools 
The purpose of the following questions and exercises is to raise your
awareness of your own participation in America’s obsession with hatred
and violence. You may ﬁnd it useful to write down your answers. As you
begin the process of changing, you then will be able to revisit your ini-
tial responses to see how your ideas and actions have altered over time.
These self-assessment tools are designed for use by individuals but can
also be used in a small group setting so long as all members of the group
agree to open discussion and to respect each other’s privacy. Although
not suitable for younger children, many of the self-assessment tools are
appropriate for teenagers: parents and/or teachers should use their
knowledge of particular teens to determine which questions/exercises
might be useful.
One: What is your ﬁrst memory of feeling hatred toward another per-
son? In hindsight, what made you hate? Fear? Rejection? Etc.?
Two: What was your “clique” in high school? What were some of the
other cliques? How did your clique stereotype members of other
cliques? What cliques are you in now (socially, at work, in church,
etc.)? In what ways do you still stereotype members of other
cliques?
Three: What is your favorite “bad name” to say—or think—about some-
one when you are mad at them? What kind of language pattern do
you rely on when saying your pet bad name (i.e., “bitch” is a
metaphor). Take a moment to consider the implications of your use
of such language—does it dehumanize, encourage absolutism, etc.?
As you reﬂect on this now—not in the middle of a heated argu-
ment—are you comfortable standing behind the implications of the
words you sometimes spit out in anger?
Four: Have you ever crossed the line to violence, or even for a split sec-
ond fantasized about it? What in the situation brought you to that
point? What were you thinking about/feeling toward the other per-
168 appendix 1

son (your victim) at that moment? How did you feel, what emotions
did you experience other than rage? What emotions came immedi-
ately prior to the desire to lash out physically? How do you feel about
that moment now?
Five: Who were your icons for “cool” when you were growing up? What
did they subtly say about hatred and violence? Who are your icons as
an adult?
Six: For one week, watch your favorite television programs like a critic.
Do you see evidence of the thought processes of hatred? How are the
characters and plots developed to guide your reactions as a viewer?
What alternative character and plot developments could there be?
How would those alternatives change your reactions?
Seven: What celebrities fascinate you? Do you secretly scan the
tabloid headlines in the grocery store checkout to see the latest
scandals about certain stars? What are the public images (persona)
of celebrities you find fascinating? What do those images say (if
anything) about issues related to hatred and violence? How far do
you believe a particular celebrity’s image is from the reality of their
life?
Eight: What are your public images (personae) at work, at home, with
friends? Do your various personae react differently to fundamental
issues tied to hatred and violence? For example, do you laugh along,
uncomfortably, but audibly, when your boss tells a stereotyping joke,
but scold your children for doing the same thing?
Nine: What group in society (i.e., racists, sexists) do you “hate”? When
thinking of that group, how do you allow yourself to fall into the
ﬂawed thought patterns of hatred—absolutism, stereotyping, scape-
goating, dehumanization? No matter how “right” you are, take a
minute to consider how similar in pattern your thoughts about that
group are to the “wrongness” you detest in their thinking.
Ten: How much ﬁnancial incentive do you give to the corporations that
produce violent fare? Take a stroll through your home and count the
videos, CDs, games, and books that feature hatred and violence as
themes. How much money have you spent telling media corpora-
tions that violence sells? In a typical week, how many hours of tele-
vision do you and your family watch? How many of those hours sub-
tly or overtly condone hatred and violence? Multiply those hours by
sixteen, the minimum number of commercials in a typical hour of
television broadcasting. That’s how many times per week you are
appendix 2 169

reinforcing the media’s proﬁt-motive to produce programs that feed
into our obsession with hatred and violence.
Eleven: Who is your “us” at home, at work, socially, economically, polit-
ically? Who are your “thems” in each context? In each context, do
you live your life in an “us and them” or an “us versus them” mind-
set?
Twelve: What is your “hot button”? What issue makes you see the world
in absolutist terms of “I’m right; you are wrong!”? When you allow
yourself to view the other side as an enemy, as wholly “other,” what
actions do you leave open to yourself when encountering your oppo-
nents? In what ways might you be able actually to improve the situa-
tion if you did not allow yourself to perceive the other side as the
enemy but instead as misguided, misinformed, or even misunder-
stood?
Thirteen: Who are your scapegoats (boss, spouse, children, Internal
Revenue Service, etc.)? For a few minutes, take the blame onto your-
self for a problem you recently scapegoated onto someone else (even
if it really was their fault). By taking the blame onto yourself, what do
you then empower yourself to do in response to the situation? Do
your options open up or narrow?
Fourteen: Who uses you as a scapegoat? How do you feel when you are
blamed unfairly?
Fifteen: Make a list of ﬁve skills you use frequently at home or at work
(i.e., writing, ﬁling, cooking, operating a drill press). How could you
put each of those skills to work to assist an organization devoted to the
promotion of compassion and the prevention of violence?
Appendix 3: Twenty-Five Small Steps Toward Freeing Ourselves 
from Our Obsession with Hatred and Violence
The problem of hatred and violence in our society seems so vast that it
is tempting to believe we are incapable of solving it. Certainly, we can-
not rid our society of these phenomena overnight. And, frankly, we
never will completely drive hatred and violence out of human exis-
tence. But we can make our world more compassionate and less violent.
Every small step each one of us takes makes our world just a little bit less
170 appendix 2

hateful. While a world free of hatred and violence may be ideal, a world
even a little less hateful and violent would be a better world. The fol-
lowing list offers some ideas for relatively simple steps you can take to
make our world safer and more compassionate. If you commit to doing
even one thing on this list on one occasion, you will have made a dif-
ference, you will have moved us all one step closer to eradicating our
national obsession.
Fine yourself a dollar (or whatever you can afford) each time you fall
back into the dangerous thought and language patterns you’ve learned
about through reading Love to Hate that promote hatred and violence.
Then donate your ﬁnes to an organization that works to make our world
a safer place (see resource list in appendix 5).
The next time you see a news report of a hate crime, take the time to
learn at least one thing about the victim beyond their status as a victim.
Donate one copy of a book about ﬁghting hatred and violence to a
school in your area (see resource list in appendix 5).
Educate yourself on candidates’ positions on issues such as critical
thinking, media literacy, and antihate initiatives for schools, then vote
in the next school board election in your district.
Do not laugh at jokes based on stereotypes, no matter who tells them
and no matter what group is stereotyped. Remember, whether its deadly
serious or “all in fun,” whether aimed at racial minorities or “dumb
blondes,” the process of stereotyping always reinforces “us versus them”
thinking at some level.
Check out the Web site of an organization that promotes compassion
and antiviolence initiatives (see appendix 5). Then create a link to that
site on your personal or family Web page.
Take a child (or an adult) to an exhibit or play about the conse-
quences of hatred and violence.
The next time you’re faced with a gift-giving occasion, give a biogra-
phy of a person who devoted their life to ﬁghting hatred and violence.
Invite a local teacher out for coffee to discuss their thoughts on how
schools can help children resist hatred.
Finally forgive the bully you “hated” as a child.
Ask the children in your life to explain to you why they think a par-
ticular movie, song, or celebrity is “cool.” They may never have stopped
to ask themselves “why?” 
Through a program like Big Brothers/Big Sisters, become a real-life
role model of compassion and nonviolence for a child.
appendix 3 171

Include in your holiday card a suggested book or Web site about mak-
ing our world a more loving place—could any message be more appro-
priate during the holidays?
Resist the temptation to hate people who hate. Remember: same
gun, different target.
Refuse to participate in the cult of celebrity that too often surrounds
killers.
If you see signs of hate group activity in your area (racist or homo-
phobic leaﬂets are often a ﬁrst presence), alert the police. Do not
assume they already are aware an organized hate group is targeting your
area.
Expose yourself, your friends, and your family, to music, movies, and
foods from cultures other than your own.
Talk about what you see on television and in movies, about the mes-
sages narrative choices and editing techniques send about hatred and
violence.
Always report threats of violence to the appropriate authorities. In
this era of school shootings and hate crimes, never dismiss even a
rumor—let the authorities who are trained in investigation know what
you have heard.
Remember that at the heart of popular culture is media and that
media is a business. Your behavior as a consumer either challenges or
reinforces media corporations’ proﬁt motives.
Whenever you become angry with another person, get in the habit
of saying aloud (even if you are alone in the room) at least one good
thing about that other person. Absolutism and stereotyping are very dif-
ﬁcult to fall into if you force yourself to see even a tiny speck of good-
ness in other people.
Shed the tough skin we’ve all developed. Be outraged whenever even
one life is lost to violence. Don’t wait for another Columbine to demand
your attention—give your attention each day.
Actively seek evidence to debunk the stereotypes you were exposed
to as a child. Finally disprove to your own satisfaction the deep-seated
biases that you were socialized to believe.
Suggest that your employer make a corporate donation to an organi-
zation that takes antihate/antiviolence programs into schools.
Don’t take children’s compassion for granted. Reward them with lots
of positive attention when they behave with kindness, empathy, and
love toward others.
172 appendix 3

Appendix 4: Tips for Parents (and Teachers): 
Raising Hate-Free and Hate-Proof Kids
As you’ve learned by reading Love to Hate, American popular culture—
and each one of us—tends to send mixed messages about hatred and
violence. These mixed messages are especially confusing to children
who look to popular culture, adults, and also peers for cues about how
to think, feel, and act in all kinds of situations. The following activities
can help you help your children develop a better understanding of the
ﬂawed thought processes that allow hatred and violence to ﬂourish.
Some of the activities are designed speciﬁcally to make children more
critical consumers of media/popular culture messages about hatred and
violence. The activities are divided into two groups: Activities for
Younger Children and Activities for Teens. Use your own knowledge of
the children in your life to determine which particular activities might
best suit their needs for growth and their learning styles.
Activities for Younger Children
1. challenging absolutist thinking
Children tend to view the world in absolute terms—right or wrong,
happy or sad, nice or mean. Such concrete labelling is normal for chil-
dren. However, when we allow (or encourage by our own examples)
children to apply absolute labels to people, instead of to actions, we are
subtly guiding them toward acceptance of one of the ﬂawed thought
patterns of hatred. You can help children avoid absolute labeling of peo-
ple in a couple of ways. First, when speaking to children or even within
their earshot, avoid phrases such as “you are naughty.” Instead, explain
that “throwing things at your brother is naughty.” This subtle shift in lan-
guage deﬁnes the action absolutely but not the person. Second, help
children redirect their own language along the same pattern. When a
child proclaims “Jonny is mean!” ask “Is Jonny mean or is hitting mean?”
While these suggestions may seem like very small changes in the total
scope of a child’s life, they in fact introduce children to fundamental
principles of critical thinking that will help them detect ﬂawed thinking
(hateful or otherwise) as they grow older. 
appendix 4 173

Another way to combat absolutist thinking in young children
involves asking children to see a person, animal, or character in a
story from another angle. For example, if a child declares a snake at
the zoo to be scary, ask the child what else the snake is? Shiny, scaly,
sleeping, a mommy or a baby, etc. These questions draw the child’s
attention to other qualities of the snake (or person) and thus make
absolutist labeling far more difficult. You might also ask the child if
other animals would think the snake is scary? Would the elephant or
the zebra call the snake scary? Would a dinosaur be afraid of the
snake? Such questions encourage children to realize there are differ-
ent perspectives on everything and, of course, different perspectives
undercut the power of absolutist thinking. When applied to charac-
ters in a storybook or on a television program, the same kinds of ques-
tions can offer children an early lesson in the differences between
round and flat characters. 
2. challenging the tendency to stereotype
Use a child’s favorite toys to get them thinking about the inherent ﬂaws in
stereotypes. Gather up a group of stuffed bears or toy cars or whatever par-
ticular kind of toy your child loves. Ask them to pick one of the toys and
describe it in lots of detail. Then look to see if the other toys of that type
meet the same description. You can make this really fun for children by
exaggerating your reactions as you search and inspect the other toys.
“Your bear is brown. This thing is tan. This must not be a bear!!! You go
over there, you silly toy, you aren’t a bear!” Most children quickly will join
in the fun—either helping you banish bears or coming to the other bears’
defense. Either way, you are engaging your child in a relatively compli-
cated sorting game the point of which is to realize that bears (or toy cars
or people) all share some things in common and all have differences that
make them special. And, of course, what’s true of one bear isn’t true of all
bears. A fun variation on this game replaces the bear with a neighbor or
relative. Ask the child to describe Uncle Joe, then investigate the other
uncles in your family to see if they all ﬁt Uncle Joe’s description.
3. challenging scapegoating
Kids provide a wealth of opportunities for adults to talk about scape-
goating, but you can really stimulate them to think critically about
174 appendix 4

scapegoating if you yourself are the one doing the scapegoating. The
next time you cause a small spill in the kitchen, blame the dog or the
baby or even the toaster. Ham it up as much as you need to to inspire
your child to come to the defense of your scapegoat. Follow your child’s
lead and you’ll ﬁnd ample ground for discussing why it’s not fair to
blame somebody or something else for your own wrongdoings.
4. challenging dehumanization of others
Very young children rarely dehumanize; in fact, they are more likely to
humanize everything around them than to dehumanize anything. How-
ever, as children enter school they often partake in (or fall victim to)
name-calling and teasing that is an early form of dehumanization. Par-
ents have very little control over what transpires between seven year olds
during recess. However, you probably do know from casual observations
which children in your son or daughter’s class tend to be teased by oth-
ers. You can help insulate your child from the tendency to tease by
exposing them to more information about the children who are teased.
On a drive or walk, point out the other child’s house. Mention in the car
on the way to school that you thought the dress Mary wore yesterday was
really pretty. You might even ask your child to speculate on Mary’s
favorite color or if she likes cats. In other words, ﬁnd ways casually to
work Mary into your child’s thoughts. Every detail of Mary’s life you
plant in your child’s mind makes it that much harder for your child not
to empathize with her. And, of course, empathy makes dehumanization
impossible. If your child is the frequent target of teasing at school, I
encourage you to talk to your child’s teacher or school counselor for
suggestions on how to handle this most difﬁcult situation.
5. developing understanding of narratives
Whether in fairy tales, video games, television sitcoms, the evening
news, or a trip down memory lane with grandma, children encounter
thousands of narratives. You can help your children understand the
ways narratives shape how we think about people and events by mak-
ing them aware that stories are created, that choices are made by the
narrators. One of the most effective ways to teach this fundamental
principle involves rewriting stories. When children are very young, you
can rewrite stories for them by changing the ending when you read a
appendix 4 175

favorite bedtime story. As they grow a bit older, put their imaginations
to work on rewriting their favorite tales, adding other characters, twist-
ing the plot in a new direction, or changing the setting. You might even
have your child make their own storybooks, telling the same story from
two different perspectives (the cat’s version and the mouse’s version, for
instance). When teaching children about narratives, how you alter sto-
ries is irrelevant; any alteration demonstrates to the child that stories are
crafted, which is the key concept we need to teach our kids. As children
enter the middle elementary school years, you can transfer your work
on ﬁction to “real” stories. Ask kids to consider how a newspaper story
could be told from a different angle or how the video images accom-
panying a story on the evening news make them feel about the topic.
Invite children to speculate as to why a writer or editor decided to tell
a story in the way they did. While you can use some of the theories
about narratives introduced in Love to Hate to guide you through these
discussions with your children, you don’t need to worry about speciﬁc
terminology or coming up with the correct answers. So long as your
child is picking up on the notion that somewhere someone makes a
decision to tell a story in a certain way, you are preparing your child to
think critically about all the thousands of stories they are going to
encounter in their lifetime.
Activities and Discussion Topics for Teens
Before explaining speciﬁc activities and discussion topics you can use
with teenagers, let me add a few words of advice that I’m sure will ring
true to anyone who ever has been a parent to, or, for that matter, has
ever been a teenager. Unlike young children who still think their par-
ents are “cool” and eagerly participate in any activity that remotely
resembles a game with mom or dad, teens by their nature tend to resist
parental advances. As such, don’t try to preach the messages in Love to
Hate to the teenagers in your life. Instead, provide opportunities (in dis-
guise, if need be) that allow teens to explore these issues on their own
and come to their own conclusions. The goal is not to give them the
answers but to encourage them to ask the questions for themselves. Talk
about issues from Love to Hate with your teens if they’ll let you, of
course. If they won’t, talk about issues of hatred and violence with
someone else, but in earshot of your teen. They are listening even when
176 appendix 4

they don’t look like they are. Following are some ideas for how you can
directly and indirectly get teens thinking about America’s obsession
with hatred and violence, the ways it impacts their lives, and the ways
they want to react. Consider your teenager’s learning style, openness,
and interests when selecting activities and discussion topics that will be
most successful in your family.
1. check the main role models
As much as every teen wants to deny it, the adults in their lives—in par-
ticular their parents—are their primary role models. Your attitudes
toward hatred and violence have a direct inﬂuence on your teens’ atti-
tudes and actions. If not for your own sake, for your teen’s sake, honestly
self-assess where you stand on hatred and violence. Are you sending
mixed messages about hatred in your own home? How do you currently
respond to violence on television? Do you cringe, turn away, express sad-
ness or anger? Do you laugh, cheer for the star? Or do you simply watch
passively while also ﬂipping through a magazine or paying bills? Before
even considering changing your behaviors, watch your teen’s reactions
to your reactions to violence in the media. Do they seem to notice your
reactions at all? Is it possible they’ve stopped noticing your reactions
because you have stopped having obvious reactions? Are you role-mod-
eling passive consumption of hatred and violence? Have your children
learned this behavior at home? How could you change your viewing
behavior, your reactions in ways that would make your teen notice
issues of hatred and violence in media?
2. if you aren’t cool, who is?
While teens really do look to their parents as role models, they do not
think their parents are “cool.” Who does your teen think is cool? Start
decoding this one by looking at the walls in their room—the posters and
magazine clippings are ready evidence. Make the time to learn some-
thing about the public images of these celebrities. As a gift, buy your teen
a biography of their idol to help them see more of the person behind the
persona. If your teen thinks you’re at least a little bit cool, ask him or her
if you could read the bio too, then start a discussion about the things in
the bio that “surprised” you—speciﬁcally raise points about the person’s
history or opinions that seem out of sync with their public image.
appendix 4 177

3. to banish or not to banish
Most teens have at least one video game or CD that their parents would
like to banish from the house (or the planet). Of course, most parents of
teens also are shrewd enough to know that making something taboo
only makes it more tantalizing during the teenage years. Instead of sim-
ply banning a game or CD you ﬁnd offensive, ask your teen to introduce
you to it, explain why they enjoy or value it, and give their reactions to
your concerns. Whether you ultimately decide to allow your teen to
have the item is, of course, up to you. But by engaging them in explain-
ing it to you, you have already forced them to think critically about the
item, about the nature of their desire for it, and about their own behav-
ior as a consumer of media. In other words, you’ve already shaken them
out of passive consumption and thus drastically reduced the potential
for a game or CD to inﬂuence your teen in negative ways.
4. old enough to say it, old enough to own it
At some point in time, children are old enough to take responsibility for
their words and actions. There is no magic date on which this occurs,
but most parents know when their own child is mature enough to be
held accountable. For the most part, high-school-aged teenagers are old
enough to bear responsibility for their choice to use hateful language if
parents and/or teachers have explained to them how certain language
structures and thought patterns promote hatred. If you are not sure your
teen knows about the ﬂawed thought patterns and language structures
at the root of hatred, take the time to teach them. Then, when you catch
them carelessly (or intentionally) using such patterns, call them on it.
Point out the implications of their thoughts and words. Ask them if they
are willing to stand by those implications. Challenge them to defend
their positions. You are not telling your teenager what to think; rather,
you are demanding that your teenager be aware of and responsible for
the implications of his or her thoughts and language.
5. media literacy
Even if your child is lucky enough to attend a school where media liter-
acy is promoted, you can enhance your child’s media savvy by providing
opportunities for learning outside the classroom. Watch “the making of”
178 appendix 4

specials and videos with your teen. MTV regularly offers behind-the-
scenes specials on the production of popular music videos. Documen-
taries chronicle the making of feature ﬁlms. Educational television, and
even network news programs, sometimes explore how broadcast news sto-
ries are crafted. These behind-the-scenes glimpses at media help people
of all ages understand that even “real” images in popular culture are
enhanced and edited to convey particular themes and messages. You can
provide your teen with a hands-on encounter with media literacy by
attending the taping of a television program. Some teens may enjoy devot-
ing a week or two of their summer to a print or broadcast journalism camp
where they can explore media careers and also get a crash course in the
real ins-and-outs of media as a force in popular culture. You can provide
a home-based lesson about the impact of editing and story design by put-
ting your teen in charge of creating a family Web site or videotaping a
family function. To get your teen to think critically about media, ask that
they produce two Web sites or two videos: one based on a list of
criteria/outcomes you (the producer) demand; another to meet their own
standards. They will quickly realize the power of editorial decision-mak-
ing to shape how a “real” event appears on television or the Internet.
6. visit their world
I myself would not encourage anyone over the age of nineteen to dress
like Britney Spears, but parents need to realize that you don’t have to act
like a teen, or even enjoy what teens enjoy, in order to have some clue
about what teens are into watching, buying, listening to, and emulating.
Here’s the good news: you do not have to monitor MTV twenty-four
hours a day to know what kind of music may be inﬂuencing your teen.
Nor do you need to follow your teen around all the time (which would
no doubt drive both of you crazy). You can get a bird’s-eye view of youth
popular culture in a few minutes each week by checking out MTV Web
sites (www.mtv.com and www.mtvnews.com), ﬂipping through a maga-
zine such as Teen People or Seventeen, or tuning in to watch your teen’s
favorite television programs. There’s a great deal of truth in the old say-
ing “forewarned is forearmed.” By educating yourself about the domi-
nate themes, issues, and trends in youth popular culture, you provide
yourself with an arsenal of topics of interest to your teen that you can use
to initiate conversations about hatred and violence in our society, in
media targeted toward teens, and in your teen’s everyday life.
appendix 4 179

