PRAISE FOR PROFITS OF DOOM
‘The competition for the most depraved example of the predatory state capitalism of the Reagan-Thatcher neoliberal era is fierce. In this chilling study, based on careful and courageous reporting, and illuminated with perceptive analysis, Antony Loewenstein presents many competitors for the prize, while also helping us understand all too well the saying that man is a wolf to man.’ — NOAM CHOMSKY, Institute Professor at MIT and Professor of Linguistics and Philosophy, political activist and author
‘Profits of Doom nails the mad idea that the drive for profits will create global wellbeing. Antony Loewenstein delivers a spinechilling account of the post 9/11 world taken over by vulture capitalism and its political cronies. And this is what we are voting for.’ — BOB BROWN, former leader of the Australian Greens and director of Sea Shepherd
‘Antony Loewenstein’s Profits of Doom is a powerful indictment of the corporations and governments across the globe whose unquenchable thirst for resources and power threaten the stability—perhaps even the very existence—of the planet. Loewenstein is no armchair academic or cubicle journalist. The stories in this book are the product of years embedded, in military and economic warzones, with the disempowered of the world, the people from Pakistan to Papua New Guinea and beyond who have the audacity and bravery to fight back against all odds. Loewenstein’s keen sense of justice is evident on every page of this book as he gives voice to the voiceless and confronts the powerful. Profits of Doom is a devastating, incisive follow-up to Naomi Klein’s The Shock Doctrine.’ — JEREMY SCAHILL, international best-selling author of Dirty Wars and Blackwater
‘A great exercise in joining the dots, on essential terrain that too often is ignored. At a time when rapacious private interests campaign to destroy government— so they can cash in on its absence—Loewenstein reports from the frontline in an insidious war.’ — PAUL McGEOUGH, author of Kill Khalid and chief foreign correspondent for The Sydney Morning Herald
‘In Australia, so often bereft of voices of dissent and courage, Antony Loewenstein’s tenacious work stands out. Profits of Doom is a journey into a world of mutated economics and corrupt politics that we ignore at our peril.’ — JOHN PILGER, independent, investigative journalist, author and documentary film-maker







PROFITS OF DOOM















MELBOURNE UNIVERSITY PRESS
An imprint of Melbourne University Publishing Limited
11–15 Argyle Place South, Carlton, Victoria 3053, Australia
mup-info@unimelb.edu.au
www.mup.com.au
First published 2013
Text © Antony Loewenstein, 2013
This edition published 2014
Design and typography © Melbourne University Publishing Limited, 2013
This book is copyright. Apart from any use permitted under the Copyright Act 1968 and subsequent amendments, no part may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted by any means or process whatsoever without the prior written permission of the publisher.
Every attempt has been made to locate the copyright holders for material quoted in this book. Any person or organisation that may have been overlooked or misattributed may contact the publisher.
Text design by Megan Ellis
Cover design by Design by Committee
Typeset by Cannon Typesetting
Printed in Australia by McPherson’s Printing Group
National Library of Australia Cataloguing-in-Publication entry:
Loewenstein, Antony, author.
Profits of doom / Antony Loewenstein.
9780522866827 (pback.)
9780522867237 (ebook.)
Capitalism.
Contracting out.
Globalization.
Non-governmental organizations.
International business enterprises.
Mines and mineral resources.
330.9







To those who resist injustice







CONTENTS
Author’s Note, 2014
Introduction
1   Curtin Immigration Detention Centre—Cash for Care
2   Christmas Island—Incarceration in the Indian Ocean
3   James Price Point—Boom or Bust?
4   Papua New Guinea—The Resource Curse
5   Afghanistan and Pakistan—The War Economy
6   Haiti—Open for Business
Postscript
Acknowledgements
Bibliography
Notes
Index







AUTHOR’S NOTE, 2014
The Wall Street Journal was ecstatic. ‘Australia and New Zealand rank among the global leaders in privatisations this year [2013],’ journalist Gillian Tan gushed, ‘raising billions of dollars as lawmakers seek to cut debt and plug budget deficits.’1 The article continued with a quote from Marcus Fanning, head of Australian equities at Colonial First State Global Asset Management, who said, ‘The market is positively disposed to privatisations’.
The story, like so many others published in the last twelve months, positions privatisations as a necessary and healthy progression in society. No questions. No alternative opinions. No mention of the workers who lose their jobs in the process, nor the reduction in services for communities. No discussion of the human rights abuses, which result in systems that reward secrecy.
The market speaks and the market rules.
Except when it doesn’t. During the years I spent researching this book, first published in 2013, I aimed to investigate global and Australian cases where vulture capitalism had led to unaccountable deaths, security breaches, pollution, misplaced aid, destructive mining and assassinations. All this in the name of greater ‘efficiency’ and the apparent need for less state control of our lives. It’s a weird kind of freedom that enriches an ever-increasing elite at the expense of the majority.
It’s no wonder that the vast bulk of Americans said, in late 2013, according to the Pew Research Center, that there was a growing gulf between rich and poor.2 The figures are startling: an unprecedented 49.7 million US citizens live below the poverty line3 (with a general population of around 320 million people). The November 2013 report said current economic policies, pursued by leaders across the globe, were contributing to the unease and disillusionment felt by citizens. As the Occupy movement rightly claims, the 1 per cent of US power brokers are doing very nicely, indeed.
A key aim of this book is to raise awareness of the incestuous links between multinationals and states and the guaranteed loss of accountability that comes with those links. Immigration detention is big business in Australia, Britain, America and beyond, and the last twelve months has seen increasing public outrage at the ways in which successive Australian governments, of both the Labor and Liberal parties, outsource their responsibilities to corporations with no financial incentive to take good care of staff and detainees. It’s a phenomenon that I document here. It is a warning against this policy.
The election of conservative Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott in 2013 saw an acceleration of sending refugees to remote and inaccessible Pacific islands away from the glare of media scrutiny. Papua New Guinea’s (PNG) Manus Island and the country of Nauru have become prison camps for detainees: individuals are locked up for indefinite periods of time with poor conditions. At least five major companies are making huge profits in the process. Immigration Minister Scott Morrison initiated the Orwelliansounding Operation Sovereign Borders to ‘stop the boats’ from arriving on Australian shores. At the time of writing he had been successful in this mission but the human toll was high, including mental and physical trauma for the countless asylum seekers stuck in indefinite limbo in detention.
The worst example of this agony was when an Iranian asylum seeker, Reza Barati, was killed and dozens injured during unrest at the Manus camp in February 2014. The exact nature of his death is unclear but other refugees told an inquiry that he was thrown off a balcony and then beaten to death, possibly by a staff member from the British company G4S (contracted by the Australian Government to run the centre), or assaulted by the PNG police.
In May 2014 the Federal Government released an official report on the February Manus Island violence and death of Reza Berati but it largely exonerated the behaviour of G4S, partly blamed the Salvation Army and instructed the PNG legal system—a terribly flawed institution—to hold any perpetrators to account.
During a rare media tour of the facility in March 2014, ABC journalist Liam Fox detailed the horrific conditions: filthy and broken toilet and shower blocks, evidence of bullet holes, desperate refugees pleading for ‘freedom’ and shattered glass.4 Fox tweeted: ‘I’ve seen many shocking things as a journalist. The inside of the Manus detention centre is among the most confronting.’ Australian taxpayers fund these firms that provide the shoddiest services.
Instead of taking responsibility, Australia blamed PNG for the troubles, a classic tactic employed to deflect blame that is repeated in countless instances across the world. The buck never stops with those in charge. Vulture capitalism is a broken system that only works for those making a fortune.
Rare public outrage was voiced earlier this year when refugee activists and some artists exhibiting at the Biennale of Sydney protested at the organisation’s connection to Transfield, an Australian firm that received a $1.2 billion contract to run immigration centres on Manus and Nauru. The move generated media and political apoplexy with Federal Communications Minister Malcolm Turnbull, with connections to Transfield and key protagonists in the arts elite, condemning the ‘vicious ingratitude’ of the artists. But the protest led to a severing of Biennale ties to Transfield, an unexpected success that brought weeks of media coverage alerting the public to a key, corporate beneficiary of government money in warehousing asylum seekers.
As I document in this book, profits are opportunistic—soaring during moments of greatest trouble. G4S held a $244 million contract to run Manus (before Transfield took over) and yet paid no Australian tax in 2012, instead receiving a tax refund. It even paid no tax in Britain.5 This didn’t cause any serious media or political scandal, simply business as usual. Other companies, such as Serco and Toll, continued receiving billions of dollars in contracts to manage detention centres in remote locations. One example of this process, for reasons never explained, was the cost of $3.5 million by Toll Holdings to build kitchens on Manus and yet when the Abbott government wanted to upgrade the centre the old facilities were simply removed.6 The excessive cost of mandatory detention is an irrelevancy for governments and corporations that stand to benefit from a culture of secrecy and exclusion.
The trends I document in this book are on the march. I returned to Bougainville in Papua New Guinea in late 2013 to assess the state of the island since my visit two years before. I found heightened moves by mining multinational Rio Tinto to re-open the polluting mine there (with little serious engagement with affected communities). The local government, along with the PNG and Australian administrations, are aggressively advocating a resumption of copper mining but there’s been little proper discussion so far about cleaning up pollution. This could change, as in March 2014 the United Nations Environment Program announced it would assist the island in drawing up terms of reference for a clean-up, though Rio is legally responsible for the mess. A murky process of pushing through unaccountable mining laws is being advocated and funded by Canberra in a way guaranteed to instil resentment. The complicity of Rio, PNG and Canberra in war crimes during the civil war in the 1980s and 1990s over the mine still barely registers in the global press. It is a great, deliberate silence.
I spoke to countless men and women around the mine who said they wanted an independent future filled with thriving agriculture and tourism. A young woman, Bougainville-born and raised, Theonila Roka, told me as the sun set on the polluted Kavarong River, that mining isn’t necessary to bring Bougainville independence. ‘In many ways we’re already independent,’ she argued. ‘Most people are self-sufficient, growing their own food on their land.’
In Haiti the situation is little better. During a visit in early 2014 I saw a slight improvement since my last trip, including new roads and housing and a slick airport in the capital Port-au-Prince. But vast numbers of citizens remain mired in poverty, unable to find stable work and threatened by sexual violence. A major US-backed industrial park at Caracol, investigated in this book, was found by an NGO in late 2013 to have woefully under-paid staff.7 Cholera still kills far too many people, at least 9000 at the time of writing and spreading to neighbouring states, due to poor sanitation. The military is again expanding despite no known external threats. I listened to government rhetoric on placing the population still suffering after the 2010 earthquake into houses while witnessing expanding slums as far as the eye could see with desultory access to education, health and security.
Dissenting voices against the stifling and largely inefficient aid industry exists; the great, local Haitian graffiti artist, Jerry Rosembert Moïse, talks of the desire for a truly independent state away from Washington-instructed policies, but decades of viewing Haiti as a nation of cheap labour will take time to change.
The longest war in US history, in Afghanistan, continues to suck up lives and resources. Although the vast bulk of US forces will have departed by the end of 2014, their legacy is dark. The claims by Afghan ministers and many foreign powers that the nation’s vast mineral resources, including copper, gold and lithium, will sustain and stabilise the state after 2014 is delusional considering the record of other developing countries routinely cheated of their rights due to inadequate regulatory safeguards. Javed Noorani, researcher for the Kabul-based think-tank Integrity Watch Afghanistan, says that hundreds of millions of dollars of minerals are being shipped annually and illegally to Iran and Pakistan. He fears the worst: ‘We will be Congo.’8
Corruption is still rife. In late 2013 the US Special Inspector General for Afghanistan Reconstruction, in a letter to the Pentagon, documented how Afghan companies with ties to militant groups continued to receive US contracts. Shoddy workmanship and providing bomb-making material for insurgents was no impediment to ongoing US backing. ‘It’s like we’re subsidising the people who are shooting at our soldiers,’ said Senator Jeanne Shaheen, a Democrat from New Hampshire.9 The same US report found nearly US$100 billion in investment was likely to fail due to poor oversight and worsening security. Many of the American companies featured in this book were found to have overcharged, not completed work or provided unsafe hospitals and schools.
Despite these profound global challenges, I remain cautiously optimistic that change is possible. The 2013 revelations by former National Security Agency employee Edward Snowden, detailing the role of an out of control surveillance state outsourced to private contractors, caused public outrage and some reform, albeit minor, to stem the complete eradication of privacy in the modern age. Snowden made millions aware that his former employee, Booz Allen Hamilton, controlled huge amounts of personal information on us all and yet nobody gave them consent to do so.
Vulture capitalism thrives in both the light and dark yet it loathes public scrutiny. My book reveals a world that most people don’t know exists and shows many individuals fighting back against institutions that seem impenetrable. Some of the stories that you’ll read may hearten you while others will fill you with despair. Be outraged. Be empowered. Be sad. But most importantly recognise that a more equitable world is achievable.
We all need to get involved.
Antony Loewenstein
2014







INTRODUCTION
We can start by applying what I call ‘The Google Test’. If you can find a good or service on the internet, then the federal government probably doesn’t need to be doing it.
Tim Pawlenty, former Republican governor and business lobbyist, 20111
Today in the United States there are over six million people under some form of ‘correctional supervision’, including more black men than at the height of slavery in 1850. People of colour make up only 30 per cent of the American population, yet ethnic and racial minorities comprise 60 per cent of the prison population; one in three black men will end up behind bars in their lifetime. In 1936, the Gulag Archipelago under Joseph Stalin held fewer people in jail—five million—than currently exist in ‘correctional supervision’ in the US. Over five million Americans are denied the right to vote due to a criminal conviction in the country. Racial discrimination has not ended; it’s simply been refigured.2
There are a multitude of reasons for this, not least the ineffectual ‘war on drugs’ that disproportionally targets neighbourhoods and communities where people of colour predominantly reside. But possibly the key development has been the expansion of the prison– industrial complex. In the last three decades in the United States, six times more money has been spent on jailing citizens than on educating them.
There is a massive private industry that thrives on keeping prison beds occupied, and reflects how American for-profit companies lead the world in aggressively pursuing and achieving billion-dollar contracts. For example, the country’s largest private prison firm, the Corrections Corporation of America (CCA), recorded revenue in 2011 of US$1.7 billion. Such profits can be traced to the fact that between 1999 and 2010, the use of private prisons grew by 784 per cent in the US federal prison system and jumped by 40 per cent at the state level. Nearly half of all the prisons built between 2000 and 2005 were privately run, and nearly half of all immigrants detained by the US Government were sent to for-profit facilities.3
‘The interest of private prisons lies not in the obvious social good of having the minimum number of inmates’, writes staff writer Adam Gopnik in The New Yorker, ‘but in having as many as possible, housed as cheaply as possible’.4 He exposes a 2005 CCA annual report detailing the millions spent annually to lobby for more contracts, and warning investors of the commercial consequences of a reduction in the number of convicted prisoners:
 
Our growth is generally dependent upon our ability to obtain new contracts to develop and manage new correctional and detention facilities … The demand for our facilities and services could be adversely affected by the relaxation of enforcement efforts, leniency in conviction and sentencing practices or through the decriminalisation of certain activities that are currently proscribed by our criminal laws. For instance, any changes with respect to drugs and controlled substances or illegal immigration could affect the number of persons arrested, convicted, and sentenced, thereby potentially reducing demand for correctional facilities to house them.5
The CCA’s long-term priorities were underlined in a letter it sent to the governments of 48 US states offering to buy their prisons, conditional on a 20-year management contract and a guarantee that 90 per cent of inmate beds would remain occupied.6
America has the dubious honour of leading a global push towards privatised prisons. Its corporations spin a web of influence to keep citizens incarcerated, including campaign contributions to political candidates, the lobbying of government, and relationships with former and current officials. This means that legislators pass tough-on-crime laws that guarantee the private prison operators large profits at US taxpayers’ expense. The extent to which private prisons have infiltrated all levels of American society was highlighted in 2013, when Florida Atlantic University renamed its football stadium after a for-profit prison firm, GEO Group. The university proudly announced that the corporation would also be funding scholarships.7
Louisiana, which has a population of around four and a half million people, is the world’s prison capital. One in 86 of its citizens is behind bars, an incarceration figure five times greater than Iran’s, thirteen times greater than China’s and twenty times greater than Germany’s. The last two decades have seen an explosion in local sheriffs running the state’s institutions on the cheap, seduced by the idea of more ‘efficient’ private institutions, while less money has been spent on social programs to stop people ending up in trouble with the law.8 ‘The good old boys [judges, prosecutors and sheriffs] are all linked together in the punishment network’, says criminologist Burk Foster,9 a reality assisted by an intense and lucrative lobbying network. The American Civil Liberties Union documented in 2011 how privatised prisons impede the campaign for sentencing reform, the most necessary remedy to the issue of the large number of inmates (over 9 per cent of America’s prison population) who live in private jails.10 It also found that ‘Ohio’s two private prison facilities offer fewer rehabilitation and training courses than their public counterparts’. It’s a similar situation in Arizona, where CCA was intimately involved in the drafting of punitive immigration legislation in 2010.
The commonly voiced argument is that private prisons save money, but this is a fallacy. Often, they only house the most healthy and therefore least expensive prisoners, leaving the more troubled inmates, or the individuals who need more care, to the public prison network.11
None of this would be possible without a political, economic and financial environment that encourages corporate vultures to swoop down upon the carcasses of weakened institutions and industries. It’s an unaccountable ideology that has taken root in America without most of the population even knowing about it. And it’s a cancer that is spreading, this systematic dismantling of transparent government in the name of ‘efficiency’ and a hefty bottom line. One city in America, California’s Maywood, has outsourced every public service to the private sector.12 ‘Austerity’ is the catchword of the times, though in reality this often means cuts to government services that end up being run by the private sector.13 ‘It’s about using deficit panic as an excuse to dismantle social programs’, writes the economist Paul Krugman.14 The International Monetary Fund and the World Bank specialise in pushing this toxic agenda globally.
Why does any of this matter? Because there’s no evidence that selling off these assets brings either greater efficiency or service. ‘As more and more government functions get privatised’, argues Krugman, ‘states become pay-to-play paradises, in which both political contributions and contracts for friends and relatives become a quid pro quo for getting government business’.15
But it also goes to the heart of the question of what kind of community we all want to live in: one run by an unaccountable private sector whose primary aim is to make a profit, or one made up of individuals and groups striving to serve the common good.
Crowded, privately run prisons are a classic example of a manmade social disaster promoted as good public policy, and CCA, and companies like it, are the main beneficiaries of this ideology. So rarely challenged by major party politicians and mainstream journalists, it’s sold as inevitable and necessary progress in a capitalist society.
‹   ›
The term ‘disaster capitalism’ was coined by Canadian journalist Naomi Klein in her best-selling 2007 book The Shock Doctrine: The Rise of Disaster Capitalism. She observes that privatisation, government deregulation and deep cuts to social spending are often imposed after megadisasters, man-made or natural, ‘all before victims of war or natural disaster [are] able to regroup and stake their claims to what [is] theirs’.
The aim of privatising government itself has existed for decades, but the attacks of 11 September 2001 accelerated the process in the United States because the Bush administration saw its ‘war on terror’ as a boon for the private sector. ‘Now wars and disaster responses are so fully privatised’, Klein argues, ‘that they are themselves the new market: there is no need to wait until after the war for the boom—the medium is the message’.16 These forced changes are implemented despite populations across the world routinely opposing them—if they know about the policies at all, that is. Resistance occurs because inefficiency, abuse, corruption and death cloud the sunny rhetoric offered by privatisation’s loudest defenders.17 Still, all too often, corporate power wins. The social and environmental costs of this are what I document in these pages.
Predatory capitalism goes way beyond exploiting disaster. Many ongoing crises seem to have been sustained by businesses to fuel industries in which they have a financial stake. These corporations are like vultures feeding on the body of a weakened govern ment that must increasingly rely on the private sector to provide public services. It’s surely inarguable that the corporation is now fundamentally more powerful than the nation state, and that it is often the former that dictates terms to the latter—a profound shifting of authority that has taken place over the last half-century.
I’ve been reading Klein since her 1999 breakthrough book No Logo, which challenged the idea of uncontrolled global capitalism and documented the growing resistance to it. Klein spoke in Melbourne in the early 2000s, and her arguments resonated with me. She exposed global injustices, but instead of just attacking the individual or group at fault, she took her critique far deeper, into the economic system itself. Follow the money, she argued.
In the aftermath of Hurricane Sandy, which wreaked havoc in New York state in 2012, Klein wrote how the rich ‘would protect themselves from the less savoury effects of the economic model that made them so wealthy’.18 The ‘shock doctors’, she lamented, ‘are readying to exploit the climate crisis’. After Sandy ground up America’s east coast, The New York Times referred to the ‘Mad Max Economy, a multibillion-dollar a year collection of industries that thrive when things get really, really bad’.19
Calling out the corporations that are causing global environmental damage is vital, as I explore in this book, as is accepting leading American environmentalist Bill McKibben’s assertion that ‘we need to view the fossil fuel industry in a new light. It has become a rogue industry, reckless like no other force on Earth’.20 However, I have expanded Klein’s thesis to focus not just on environmental catastrophe, war and the hidden costs of foreign aid, but also what happens when the resources sector and detention centres are privatised. These two industries are thriving in the twenty-first century and operate with an alarming disregard for human rights. Nothing less is required, in the words of Guardian columnist George Monbiot, than a ‘democratic mobilisation against plutocracy’.21
My definition of ‘disaster’ has been expanded to include companies that entrench a crisis and then sell themselves as the only ones who can resolve it. Resources and detention centres are just the latest in a long line of assets and institutions that are vulnerable to unaccountable private power. Whether we call this disaster capitalism or just a product of the unavoidable excesses and inequalities of capitalism itself, the end result is still a world ruled by markets.
It is not too fanciful to imagine the end point being the privatisation of the natural world itself. No good can come of all this.
‹   ›
The last ten years have found me in some of the more challenging places on earth, and the evidence before my eyes convinced me to undertake this project—to visit a range of countries and sites of rampant privatisation. I am proud to be an activist and a journalist. I believe that bearing witness to what I saw, and giving unequal players the right of reply, contributes balance to the privatisation debate, rather than the construct of ‘balance’. A constant theme in my previous books, My Israel Question and The Blogging Revolution, is uncovering the untold stories in the 24-hour news agenda. In this book, I scrutinise an economic system that thrives on ordered chaos and autocracy.
Far too few reporters demand transparency or challenge capitalism, preferring instead to operate comfortably within it. But so-called embedded journalism makes having insights close to impossible, and I’ve always opposed the concept. Heavily pushed by governments and the military after 9/11, it has led to a media that views business and political leaders as far more important than the individuals and societies affected by them. This work is an antidote to such thinking. It is my contribution to the ongoing fight against silence and complicity in our post-9/11 world. For beyond the shocking stories of torture, rendition, war, drone attacks and disappearances that occasionally flicker in the mainstream media, before disappearing to make room for news about the latest reality TV show, lie narratives that are routinely ignored. The effects of policies crafted in Western capitals have clear ramifications for citizens all around the world, but only if we care to look. This book considers the view from below, the experiences of people who are all-too-often invisible in the daily media cycle.
John Pilger writes in the introduction to his book Heroes that citizens in the developing world are mostly framed in the West as ‘demons or victims’, a characterisation that automatically excludes perhaps the dirtiest word in modern English: imperialism. There isn’t a country I visit in the context of this book where this legacy hasn’t scarred the landscape and its people, and the offence is worsened by its omission from Western media reportage. It’s comforting to imagine that this ideology disappeared along with the age of sepia-tinged film, but that’s not the case. The propaganda has simply become more sophisticated and its proponents more brazen.
Predatory capitalism doesn’t just infect the developing world. Far too often, policies that have been tried and failed in poor nations are equally applied in wealthier nations in a time of profound weakness. In the wake of the 2011 earthquake and tsunami in Japan, it didn’t take long for commentators to call for ‘reform’, code for mass privatisation that would allow big business a free hand in redeveloping the devastated areas using generous tax breaks. Murray McLean, Australia’s former ambassador to Japan, argued that trade liberalisation was one viable solution, but he was worried that leaders would remain ‘bogged down in policymaking malaise’.22 His suggestions sounded benign, but they were remarkably similar to the prescriptions described by Klein in The Shock Doctrine in relation to the Boxing Day 2004 tsunami in Sri Lanka. These included ‘public–private partnerships’, ‘flexible labour laws’ and the opening up of the economy to privatisation.23 It should not be revolutionary to include moral calculations when discussing economic models.
For this book, I visited places that provide unique insights into the cashed-up world of disaster profiteers, resource hunters, war contractors and aid leeches. The narrative of supposed progress is seemingly unstoppable and beyond critique. After all, who doesn’t want to help the people of Papua New Guinea (PNG) become independent through mining if this is the path to nirvana? But the facts on the ground tell a different story.
Australia has privatised all of its detention centres for asylum seekers, which are now run by multinational companies. Few other countries have so comprehensively outsourced such facilities to so few companies and with so little government oversight and media scrutiny. I visited two of the more remote facilities, to investigate the reality of this privatised world and how it affects refugees and the staff who work there.
The struggle for valuable resources is happening not just in devel oping countries but much closer to my home. The Kimberley in Western Australia is experiencing a monumental fight over a proposed Woodside-managed liquefied natural gas (LNG) plant at James Price Point. The area could become one of the world’s major providers of gas in the coming decade, and I delve into the con flict taking place between environmentalists, the state and federal governments, and the local Indigenous community. This is a proxy battle in the coming war against catastrophic climate change amid conflicting ways of achieving a cooler earth.
I travel to PNG, the recipient of the greatest amount of Australian aid annually, to see whether its mining boom has helped or hindered the country. Like so many other poor nations blessed with abundant resources, PNG is plagued by multinationals that have operated there for decades, investing billions of dollars in exploiting what lies beneath the ground while residents recoup few tangible benefits and see little effect on their standard of living. The environmental costs have been massive. Corruption is rife. The so-called resource curse is alive and well.
The role of privatised militaries and intelligence gatherers since the attacks on New York and Washington on 11 September 2001 prompt me to visit Pakistan and Afghanistan, the heart of the West’s war on terror. It’s a murky world, far away from the slick rhetoric voiced in London, Washington and Canberra. There, I meet muscled contractors making a packet in the pursuit of profit ideals that have nothing to do with democracy or freedom.
Finally, in Haiti, the poorest country in the Western Hemisphere, which is still recovering from the devastating earthquake of January 2010, I see the collusion between multinationals, NGOs, government officials, armed UN troops, aid groups and donors, all of whom regard the outsourcing of essential tasks to for-profit companies as progress.
These are stark examples of capitalism that has gone off the rails, though sadly they are not exclusive ones. I could have visited Equatorial Guinea, an oil-rich country beset by corruption and violence. Or I could have gone to Iraq and researched the Western firms that made a fortune after signing resource deals with the brutal former Baghdad regime, and the current one. Then there are the Western food and drink multinationals that are forging new markets in developing countries, which is leading to increased rates of diabetes, obesity and heart disease.24 Or what about Mongolia, the fastest-growing state in the world due to its copper and gold deposits? When I was there in 2000, the boom hadn’t yet happened and all I saw was a resilient people desperate to emerge from decades of oppressive policies dictated by Beijing and Moscow. Today, US lobbyists see Mongolia as experiencing a resource rush, but really it is just open season for vulture capitalists who can once again plunder a new frontier while leaving the vast majority of the locals with little.25
Every place I investigate is culturally, politically and socially different, but what connects them all is that they are subjected to the predatory ideology of corporations aiming to make money on a global scale. To understand why this is happening in the twenty-first century requires the challenging of cherished beliefs concerning aid and development, war and democracy, and in particular the modern, borderless nature of capitalism. Capitalism and the part ner concept of privatisation are feverishly pursued by their most dedicated followers, who institute logical market principles in disaster zones, impoverished nations and developed countries with a refugee ‘problem’. Yet time and time again, they fail to enrich anybody other than the handful of individuals clever enough to jump on board the well-stocked gravy train.
Advocates of privatisation tend to make wildly inaccurate claims about its benefits. Scottish historian Niall Ferguson, an enthusiastic supporter of the rehabilitation of the supposed benefits of American and British colonialism, articulates the thoughts of the privatising, deregulating, capitalist mind. ‘The mystery is why freedom-loving Americans are so averse to privatisation’, he laments, ‘a policy that has been a huge success nearly everywhere it’s been tried’.26 This is the mainstream consensus, echoed by the media and major political parties—that privatisation is essential to continued growth.27 But Ferguson is fundamentally wrong. He cites Britain, from Margaret Thatcher onwards, as an ideal model, conveniently ignoring the fact that the gap in wages between the highest and lower earners in the UK has widened in the last quarter-century,28 and that the number of working people living in poverty has never been higher.29
Presumably, Ferguson would suggest that selling off more public assets is the answer, a ‘sale of the twenty-first century’. Of course, this didn’t help Greece in 2011, when it announced what turned out to be a futile 50-billion-euro fire sale to privatise even more assets in the country. Regardless, The New York Times has encouraged more of the same failed policies, an outsourcing mantra that is endlessly repeated despite intelligent and legitimate public opposition. ‘While we sympathise with Greek protests against excessive austerity’, the paper lectured, ‘we have no patience with politicians who continue to drag their feet over pro-growth reforms and privatisations’.30 A counterview comes from Rolling Stone journalist Matt Taibbi, who argues that capitalism has become little more than a ‘tendency to marry the near-limitless power of the federal govern ment with increasingly concentrated, increasingly unaccountable private financial interests’.31
The extent of collusion between private interests and the state has never been stronger, and thought being given to sustainability never rarer. Documents uncovered in 2012 by American legal organisation The Partnership for Civil Justice Fund (PCJF) revealed a web of connections between the FBI, state and federal governments, and the big US banks concerning a plan to disrupt violently the burgeoning Occupy movement, a global protest against economic and social inequality. ‘Federal agencies functioned as a de facto intelligence arm of Wall Street and Corporate America’, argued PCJF executive director Mara Verheyden-Hilliard, who further claimed that peaceful activists were labelled a ‘terrorist threat’.32 This is because contractors are keen to expand their markets into domestic heartlands instead of just operating in overseas theatres.33 Certainly, some are keen to practise local damage control. After BP and Halliburton caused a massive oil spill on the US Gulf Coast in 2010, BP hired Blackwater (a private military company, now called Academi) to stop reporters from venturing onto public beaches, so that an accurate view of the environmental damage could not be determined.34 This happened in allegedly democratic America, though it is what occurs in remote locations, far away from prying NGOs and journalists,35 that I document in this book.
Britain has allowed predatory capitalists more access to public assets than most other democratic countries. The British multinational G4S is at the forefront of securing government business, having already benefited from the privatising of everything from probation services to police tasks such as criminal investigations and the detaining of suspects. The firm’s record in abusing the human rights of the most vulnerable in its care, including asylum seekers and those forcibly deported, has not adversely affected its ability to obtain more state contracts. Another British company, Serco, continues to thrive at a time when public service austerity is a political catchcry; in 2013, Serco announced a 27 per cent rise in profits. Such corporations are transglobal, operating across jurisdictions in the pursuit of profit making.
There is corporate logic in outsourcing, but that seemed to go missing when G4S botched its delivery of 10,000 security guards for the 2012 London Olympics. Interestingly, the ensuing controversy largely focused on the company’s cock-up rather than the inherent problem of relying on a corporation that bills itself as the ‘world’s leading international security solutions group’. British columnist Laurie Penny rightly wondered why ‘the state still has a legal monopoly on violence but it is now prepared to auction that monopoly to anyone with a turnover of billions and a jolly branding strategy’.36 The multinational’s theme song, set to cheesy synths, should have rung alarm bells: ‘The enemy prowls, wanting to attack, but we’re on the wall, we’ve got your back’.
Resistance to outsourcing in Britain grew after the London Olympics. However, in response, a government home affairs committee delivered a report into the debacle merely recommending that the government institute a register of ‘high-risk’ corporations that fail to deliver effectively public services. This occurred despite the fact that the outsourcing business model sells itself as an essential replacement for government, not as complementary to it. The democratic control of essential services is lost, and wages and conditions lowered for workers, when privatisation is pursued.37
This political synergy and belief in privatisation within a two-party, neoliberal system has another spin-off: a revolving door between government and private industry.38 Former British defence secretary John Reid went from privatising government services to becoming a G4S director. Countless Ministry of Defence officials move seamlessly between arms manufacturers and government jobs.
Disaster capitalism is sustained when the lines between the public and private realms are rendered invisible. Indeed, it hasn’t escaped the attention of millions of British public service workers, who are often in the redundancy firing line when privatisation occurs, that the bulk of the profits gained by outsourcers come from the taxpayer. And those profits can be enormous. The Channel 4 program Dispatches revealed that the salary of G4S head Nick Buckles in 2009 was nearly £4 million; Serco boss Chris Hyman earned more than £5 million in the same year.
It’s vital for citizens to understand the neoliberal economic model. This is not to idealise the public sector, which can also be filled with inefficiency, corruption and abuse. But clearly a greater level of accountability is needed from commercial-in-confidence agreements.
‹   ›
This book is a product of the post-9/11 environment. The mass expansion of the privatised surveillance state was in the realm of science fiction before that fateful September day in 2001. Today, there are close to one million Americans who hold top-security clearance.39 Robert Greiner, who was the CIA station chief in Islamabad, Pakistan, on 9/11, claimed in 2010 that he believed at least half of the staff working at the CIA’s counterterrorism centre were private contractors.40
‘The world is a battlefield’ is a military ideology pursued by both Democrat and Republican administrations and detailed by investigative journalist Jeremy Scahill. This view is only bolstered by WikiLeaks documents, released in 2010, which uncovered a glut of previously unreported murders committed by privatised security and intelligence forces in the Afghan and Iraq conflict zones.41 These ghost figures operate in the shadows in dozens of countries, kidnapping, interrogating and killing suspects without oversight.42 Modern-day mercenary companies, justified by the state as essential to fighting terrorism, have been completely integrated into America’s endless war.
The war on terror has brought untold riches to corporations keen to profiteer from fear. These include the world’s largest aerospace company, Boeing, which was complicit in ‘extraordinary rendition’ flights, delivering suspects for torture.43 Lloyds Banking Group was also found to have invested in a company that flew individuals to global ‘black sites’.44 Often, the corporate state is brazen about such exploitation, as are its government associates. British Defence Secretary Philip Hammond told companies to ‘pack their suitcases’ to gain construction contracts at the tail end of the NATO campaign against Libya’s Muammar Gaddafi in 2011.45
It’s hard to escape the conclusion that wars are often fought for the key reason of liberating new and willing markets. And with the war on terror likely to continue for decades, there will not be a shortage of new business to secure. Even the United Nations is increasingly relying on unaccountable mercenary firms such as DynCorp and G4S, two companies with dubious records.46
This erosion of democracy is being met with barely a whimper from the political and media establishments. The selling of valuable assets occurs because public resistance to it is so minimal, though it’s far stronger in countries where people’s lives are literally at risk. This book aims to shock and provoke and reveal a world that has developed by stealth.
A different planet is possible.







1
CURTIN IMMIGRATION DETENTIONCENTRE—CASH FOR CARE
Let me make it very clear. There are people out there who are intent on demonising the [immigration] system itself and seek to portray it as inhumane, as if we’re involved in breaching people’s fundamental human rights.
Australian immigration minister Philip Ruddock, 20031
Our drive begins at Cable Beach, alongside a deep blue sea. Heading inland, the road is mostly straight, with sinewy trees on either side of the smooth asphalt. Cows wander the parched landscape and a searing sun beats down on our car in the hypnotic desert setting. Low clouds sit perfectly formed in the sky.
I’m travelling with Caroline Fleay, a lecturer at Curtin University’s Centre for Human Rights Education and a tireless advocate for asylum seekers. We’re on the long road that leads east from Broome across Western Australia’s Kimberley region to the small town of Derby. To the south of Derby lies our ultimate destination—the Curtin Immigration Detention Centre, which sits on a remote Royal Australian Air Force base.
Eventually we arrive at the Willare Bridge Roadhouse, a service centre on the Great Northern Highway. It feels as if it is in the middle of nowhere. Two wooden signs hang out front, telling visitors how far it is to somewhere better: 2240 kilometres to Perth and two hours by car back to Broome. There is no mobile phone reception at the café. We can only get bad instant coffee and food that looks like it’s been sitting in a bain-marie for years. There’s a rough motel with few facilities apart from a BBQ and a pool. Flies swarm around exhausted humans and animals. The dusty air is occasionally broken by the whoosh of a giant truck speeding past.
This is where the Australian Government and the British multi national Serco, which has run all of Australia’s detention centres since 2009, house up to 100 migration agents, translators and security guards. They claim they can’t find appropriate accommodation in Derby, 45 kilometres to the north. But the truth is that this isolated place is a cheap and easy alternative. Neither Serco nor the federal government has invested in lasting infrastructure for their employees or the locals. It isn’t in their interests to construct anything permanent because policy set in Canberra rarely lasts for more than a few years.
The hotels and bars in Derby, which has a population of just over 3000 permanent residents, are regularly filled with Serco and Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) staff. Some locals tell me that they welcome the business the detention centre brings to the town. But the presence of Curtin also breeds strong resentment because it makes local prices artificially high, especially for housing and food. A spin-off sentiment is that the refugees in Curtin are seen as well fed and living in air-conditioned comfort while some locals can’t even find a decent room.
There’s an expression that’s used across Australia in relation to temporary workers: ‘Fly In, Fly Out’ (FIFO). But in Derby, an alternative has been adopted: ‘Fit In or Fuck Off’. This refers to the Serco staff who only live here temporarily, making good money before going home to Perth or further afield. They usually work on relatively short contracts, around six weeks on and three weeks off.
The bitterness is not confined to Derby. Steve Austin, chief executive of the tiny Aboriginal settlement of Mowanjum, 10 kilometres from town, told The Age in April 2012 that his community resented the state government ignoring his people’s plight while Canberra invested huge amounts in maintaining the detention centre.2 Of the twenty-five Indigenous suicides recorded in the Kimberley in the twelve months from April 2011 to April 2012, twenty-one occurred in Derby and Mowanjum.3
As storm clouds gather, Caroline and I drive around Derby to get a sense of the place. It’s quiet and beautiful in parts. The sun sets over the town’s long wharf on King Sound, its red entrails hovering in the distance. Fishermen sit and stand around while crazed mosquitoes use kamikaze tactics to attack ferociously. Despite this, the moment is peaceful.
‹   ›
It’s a 30-minute drive through the desert from Derby to the Curtin Air Base. A number of signs warn us to turn back because it is ‘Private Property’. We approach the first checkpoint, where a logo on a fence with a forward arrow reads ‘Serco’. Even here in the Kimberley, Serco branding is slapped on infrastructure.
A dark-skinned man asks us for ID and the Serco entry forms that we faxed to Curtin a few days earlier—we were asked to list our professions and the names of the detainees we want to visit. I open my window and feel a rush of hot air. It is close to 40 degrees Celsius. We are allowed to proceed.
Curtin is surrounded by scrubby desert as far as the eye can see. I can’t imagine a more isolated place to be detained. Demountables are scattered beside the road near the car park and high barbed-wire fences surround the detention compound. We can see new houses being constructed nearby, and a freshly laid concrete pathway leads to the main entrance. The last years have seen the construction at the centre of gymnasiums, religious rooms and classrooms.
The Serco sign hanging over the reception area reads, ‘Wel come to Curtin IDC’. Staff, including a subcontractor from MSS Security, smile as we enter the heavily air-conditioned room. They ask to see our faxed Serco forms so they can confirm they received the documents at least 24 hours before the visit. Caroline says that, uncharacteristically, a Serco manager from Curtin rang her a few days ago and said they were looking forward to welcoming us. It was an unprecedented move, without any discernible reason behind it. ‘It’s impossible to understand how this system truly works’, Caroline routinely tells me during our time together.
Serco posters and signs advertising the company are ubiquitous in the reception area. They display the smiling faces of happy staff and multicultural imagery that includes a Muslim imam. A colour brochure emblazoned with four grinning faces from various racial backgrounds sits on a small table near some lockers. ‘Bringing service to life’ is the company’s motto. The pamphlet says that Serco ‘promotes the inherent dignity of people in detention in line with the Australian government’s new immigration detention values’.
A number of other pieces of Serco literature are scattered around reception. ‘Visitor Conditions of Entry’ states that there are three visiting periods every day, including between 6 p.m. and 8 p.m., but also says that arrival after 5 p.m. will not be permitted. There are dozens of rules and regulations on the sheet, including: ‘Respect the privacy and dignity of all people in the centre’. It’s a noble goal, but one that staff routinely breach, detainees later tell me.
We are given keys for a locker in which to store our personal items. I am not allowed to carry a camera or a mobile phone, but I can bring a pen and notepad. I am surprised. I have been told it’s common for journalists to be denied even these basics here. Usually a cap and bottled water suffice.
The site’s operation manager, who is decked out in the Serco uniform of shirt, shorts and black shoes, says he’ll take us to a holding area to wait for the refugees we’ve asked to see. Normally, Caroline, who has been to Curtin many times before, meets detainees under a large tree inside the compound, but we’re informed that this isn’t possible today. No reason is given.
We enter the centre and walk near the perimeter fence. We come to a large metal gate, 4 metres high, and stand there silently in the soaring heat. The gate slowly opens to reveal a narrow noman’s-land—150 metres of earth bookended by fences. There’s an eerie silence in the compound. It’s mid-afternoon and it’s simply too hot for anyone to be outside at this time of the day.
We walk along dusty paths for five minutes, moving through locked gates that require authorisation via walkie-talkie to open. There are a few male asylum seekers behind a nearby fence, defying the heat, but we aren’t allowed to go near them. They wave and we reciprocate.
The banality of the process is dehumanising. This is no different to a high-security prison in a remote area where escape is close to impossible. The aim is clearly to make detainees feel isolated, cut off from the millions of Australians who have no idea, or who don’t care, about what is being done in their name.
We finally enter the holding area. The Serco guard accom panying us points out the TV and DVD player in the room and says to ‘use it if you like’. A DVD case for the Jackie Chan movie Rush Hour 3 sits on a low cabinet. Tea, coffee and hot water are available, and there are fridges with ‘Staff Only’ signs. The air-conditioning is so effective I start to feel a chill. The room is anodyne, resembling a claustrophobic airport holding cell.
While a few male Serco staff sit nearby, looking bored, a number of refugees from Sri Lanka and Afghanistan warmly welcome us. They are all men in their twenties and they include a few Hazara from Afghanistan who have recently achieved refugee status and shortly will be released into the Australian community. As Caroline and I start talking to them, I see a young Serco guard washing his hands with disinfectant—he had just shaken the hands of the detainees.
Two Tamil men, Agilan and Ajinth, both of whom speak good English, have been in detention for 19 months and 22 months, respectively. They both wear silver studs in their ears and one has a trendy haircut, with a partly shaved head. Agilan has some family in Germany, where his father lives, but a sister and his daughter remain in Colombo. Detention centre food soon comes up as an issue. Both men find the food very bland and they desperately want to be able to cook their own ingredients with spices, but it’s something they can only do covertly.
I ask Agilan and Ajinth about their treatment by Serco staff. Some are very kind, they say, while others tell them to go back to their home countries. They tell me that Serco has organised a cricket series with the Derby cricket team. Their outings include the old Derby jail, which we all think is strange because the men are already in detention. They also tell us that Serco staff learn swear words from refugees and curse each other in various languages.
We talk about the reasons they left Sri Lanka, mainly because Tamils still face widespread discrimination there, and why they can’t go back—they would face imprisonment, interrogation and possibly torture if they did. We also discuss the stultifying boredom of doing nothing day after day.
Caroline and I chat to the refugees for two hours, with Serco staff constantly looking at us. The detainees seemed to like the distraction of different company, and there was some flirty playfulness with Caroline. There are 1000 men in detention here and only a few female guards. In 2013, the federal government brought refugee children and families to Curtin into a section called ‘Alternative Place of Detention’. In a further Orwellian move in May 2013, the Federal Parliament legislated to remove the Australian mainland from its migration zone, meaning that any asylum seekers arriving on the mainland could be sent to offshore facilities in Nauru or Papua New Guinea.
When we leave the compound, the refugees come as far as they can with us, down to the locked gate, before taking a dusty road to their cabins while we backtrack to the detention centre entrance. As we walk slowly with our Serco guard, who looks about thirty, I ask about his life. He says he has a child in Perth and misses home. He’s on the six-weeks-on, three-weeks-off shift, living in Derby. ‘It’s good money’, he says, and admits that ‘this job is alright’, but he avoids sharing his views about the refugees.
We pass a small oval around which a few bearded men in tracksuit tops and shorts are running. The weather is cooler than when we arrived, but it’s still humid. On another small field alongside our path, twenty or so men play soccer. Without the high fences, guards and the desert, the scene could be taking place anywhere in suburban Australia.
As we prepare to leave, the magic sunset hour arrives and the sun drapes its last blistering light over the detention centre.
The next day we return and go through the same ritual to enter the centre. A Serco staff member, Brian, will guide Caroline and me to where we’ll meet the detainees. Brian looks to be in his fifties and carries a pot belly. He lives in Perth and has been working in immigration detention for a decade. Serco staff are moved around the country to different facilities, and Brian says he’s arrived in Curtin for a six-week stint. ‘It’s good money to support my family’, he says. Many Serco staff earn more than $100,000 annually.
Brian tells us of the severity of the conditions at Curtin during the years of Prime Minister John Howard, especially just before its closure in 2002 (the centre would remain closed for eight years). He says he has no sympathy for refugees who ‘go around burning down buildings and rioting. We treat them better than many people on the outside. We feed them and give them lawyers. It’s us, the staff, who have it tough, having to sometimes be abused and assaulted’. He’s clearly keen to talk.
Brian says that during the riots at the Christmas Island detention centre in March 2011, when hundreds of detainees protested against their living conditions and length of incarceration, ‘we had nowhere to go, as the refugees burnt down our compound. It was scary. I am a good judge of character and would allow some people into the country, but many others I would not. I can’t understand how people who burn down places can still become refugees’. As we walk in the heat, Brian refers to a particular Tamil man, saying he is ‘lovely and he speaks English fairly fluently’, and that he’d give him refugee status immediately.
Despite being told when we arrived that Caroline and I would be placed in the same visiting area as yesterday, Brian directs us to a different area. It’s a large Serco mess hall with plain surroundings. There are some tables, a hot water system that doesn’t work, plastic chairs and an effective air-conditioning unit. A faulty smoke detector continually beeps because it needs a new battery.
Detainees can request visitors by name, and during our various visits, different asylum seekers wander in of their own volition for a chat. We are told these men want the chance to tell us their stories in the hope we’ll be able to give them advice on how to expedite their refugee claims. Every day we come to the centre, our aim is to see as many refugees as possible. This time, four Hazara Afghans and one Iranian man meet us, as well as the two Tamil men, Agilan and Ajinth, whom we met yesterday. As requested during yesterday’s meeting, we bring lamingtons, fruit and chocolate cakes. An Afghan man offers us apple juice and Coke.
Ajinth says he loves the Australian film about Arnhem Land 10 Canoes, and Jared Diamond’s book Guns, Germs and Steel. When he first arrived at Christmas Island on a boat, volunteers organised by Serco taught him about modern Aboriginal history, including the Stolen Generations, the White Australia policy, Prime Minister Kevin Rudd’s 2008 apology, and the fact that Australia Day was considered Invasion Day by many Indigenous groups. ‘I felt the Tamil … and your Indigenous peoples had a similar struggle, treated equally badly by majority populations’, he tells me. When he was transferred to a detention centre in Perth several months later, he worried about whether Aboriginal people wanted refugees on ‘their land’.
The other Tamil detainee, Agilan, says that most refugees come to Australia to escape war and find a better life, but that the extensive time spent in detention sucks away their hope. He tells me that many people in Curtin self-harm and cry each day because they’re frustrated with the lack of progress on their claims, left in limbo seemingly indefinitely. Immigration minister Brendan O’Connor stated in 2013 that standards at the facility were ‘as good as anywhere in the world’.
We emerge from the mess hall two and a half hours later under a menacing sky. Lightning can be seen in the distance, and clouds bunch into amorphous patterns. Rain starts to fall and a cool breeze blows across the dusty ground. The ten-minute walk back to reception allows us to see more of the detention centre amid a strange silence. The compounds where the refugees live sit perched atop the red dirt. Everywhere there are men sitting behind fences, looking forlorn. We wave and they return the gesture. The same men we saw running around an oval the day before are running again.
Serco and MSS staff are stationed all over and often use walkietalkies to ask their superiors for permission to open a gate or door: ‘Bravo 643, please advise’. It is militarised language.
Having conferred with the detainees, we give Serco a list of around seventy asylum seekers we want to meet the next day. It takes a while to gather their names and security numbers. A Serco official tells us we need to give more warning if we want to see seventy ‘clients’. ‘Security just can’t approve that many people overnight’, he says, then shrugs and walks away.
The next morning we are back inside Curtin. A visit to the well-maintained toilets makes me reflect on the nature of the place. Serco maintains a basic standard of institutional care. Food is given to all detainees daily, and the facility is kept clean. But the fact is that the company benefits financially if more refugees arrive and need to be housed, and it is not in Serco’s interests for applications to be processed quickly. Curtin isn’t anything like a gulag, but the inability of asylum seekers to receive clear answers to their questions about the process, or understand how long they may have to stay inside, is psychologically damaging. Agilan, for instance, has spent nearly two years in detention and there is still no end in sight, with different officials giving conflicting news about his application. His family in Sri Lanka doesn’t understand why he’s housed behind barbed wire in Australia. His uncle in Sydney is willing to have him stay, but he’s waiting to hear about a bridging visa application. (Later, I will be happy to learn that both he and Ajinth were granted refugee status and left Curtin to live in major Australian cities.)
We talk to more refugees for three hours. Again, a Serco staff member sits quietly in a corner of the room, after telling Caroline and me it is to ‘protect our safety’. This is our last opportunity to spend time with the detainees—we have been denied the opportunity to talk to any more asylum seekers. Once we are back outside, we ask one of Serco’s managers why this is the case. He says that such visits take time to organise and we should apply earlier, adding that ‘our priority is the welfare of the clients’. He also defends Serco’s policies, saying that when some Hazara men ‘recently wanted to protest their situation, they asked and applied for permission and we helped facilitate it. It was really satisfying’. (That may have been the case, but the protest apparently involved the men simply gathering in a group in the detention centre, and it seems strange that such a routine act required the permission of management.)
The manager is friendly enough, but ultimately he is just one of hundreds of Serco staff employed in an endless cycle of monitoring, sitting and watching. In the end, the work is little more than processing numbers.
As we walk away from the reception centre, I take out my iPhone and quickly shoot some photos of Curtin’s large electrified fences. Serco forbids any photography on or near the site, but I break the silly rule to capture the architecture of Curtin so I can remember the aesthetic of the place—I am careful to make sure that no asylum seekers are photographed. I hear a loud voice from inside reception say, ‘Excuse me! Excuse me!’, but I keep on clicking and walk towards our car. As we leave, a Serco staff member appears and jots down our car’s registration.
‹   ›
The economic logic of Serco managing Australia’s detention network was explained to me by a businessman who was employed by DIAC in 2006 to find a new contractor to run the system. This task continued until after the 2007 election of Labor Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, despite his party being officially opposed to privatised detention. My source, Clive, unsurprisingly is a supporter of Serco— after all, he was involved in the company’s successful tender. But he attributes this partly to DIAC being ‘filled with incom petence and no accountability’. His search started with 400 firms who could possibly run the system, but it was soon a choice between the British multinationals Serco and Global Solutions Limited (GSL); no other corporations could handle the scope of the work.
DIAC believed that privatising detention centres was one solution to the refugee issue, a way of processing asylum seekers away from the public gaze and that also pleased politicians looking to isolate the new arrivals. But it knew that GSL—which was bought by G4S in 2008—had a troubled record of dealing with asylum seekers. In 2006, the Howard government announced that it would not extend the GSL contract beyond 2007. It argued that the system needed to be retendered principally because countless reports had found that health and psychological services had been bungled by the private firm, especially the illegal detention and deportation of Cornelia Rau and Vivian Alvarez. Immigration minister Amanda Vanstone announced that these services would be controlled by her department, and financial penalties were paid by GSL to dozens of asylum seekers for inhumane behaviour by its guards. But despite all this, when elected, the Labor administration kept GSL and G4S in charge until 2009.
The history of privatised detention centres in Australia is a dark one. In the 1990s and early 2000s, a number of different companies were in charge, including Australasian Correctional Manage ment (ACM) and Group 4. All of the firms had records of mismanagement and abuse, but seemingly this had no impact on them winning contracts. In 2003, after the Copenhagen-based Group 4 took over ‘the world’s most lucrative prison contract, worth $110 million a year’, human rights campaigner Charandev Singh told the Australian Financial Review that the multinational was hoping that ‘human rights won’t matter so much to the Australian community. They’re hiding behind the Australian Government and its determination to persevere with mandatory detention’.4 Nothing has changed in the years since.
The process of selecting a detention centre contractor has long been flawed. The National Audit Office released a report in 2006 that questioned the awarding of a multimillion-dollar contract to GSL instead of incumbent firm ACM when its services were inferior and cost more. When Clive was given the job of finding a new contractor, his mission was less about fundamentally changing the system and more about selecting a company with a less troubled image in Australia.
Serco was always going to be near the top of the pile due to its extensive work with asylum seekers in Britain. But Clive says it won so easily because G4S was a ‘disastrous contractor’ for six years during the Howard and Rudd years. He also says that DIAC ‘knew it but kept on outsourcing more jobs to them’. This is the ultimate definition of vulture capitalism, rewarding failure because the alternatives, such as investing in publicly run services, are politically unpalatable.
Labor’s immigration spokesman in 2005, Tony Burke, articulated the party’s then principled position regarding privatisation:
 
There’s been a undue emphasis on containment and not enough concern about care. You can only get those clear lines of responsibility if you have Government-run centres. You shouldn’t have a situation where the level of supervision and the standard of care has anything to do with the private profits of an offshore company.5
Labor, then in Opposition, pledged to put the country’s detention centres back into the public’s hands if it won government. It was part of the party’s electoral platform during the 2007 election. But it reneged on this promise in 2009, with Prime Minister Kevin Rudd awarding a massive $370 million contract to Serco to run all seven detention centres in Australia. Then, there were only a few hundred refugees in detention. Today, the company runs more than twenty facilities across Australia that, at the time of writing, house 10 000 detainees (though other companies also manage aspects of the prisoners’ incarceration).
Clive tells me about how he once met Serco chief executive Christopher Hyman when he visited Australia. Hyman was ‘treated like royalty’ and he ‘made it clear that profit was king’.
Welcome to the world of cash for care.
Clive believes that Serco ‘should run all levels of immigration detention because they’re more efficient than the department’. He thinks that private companies like Serco are keen to maintain their contracts with the government and so are more responsive to demands for change if problems arise. He also says that privatisation brings more transparency, ‘as does Serco’, but adds that the company ‘is wary of speaking out about problems due to possible government fines’. This, he argues, guarantees cover-ups, something I hear about during my visits to Curtin and Christmas Island.
Nonetheless, Clive believes that Serco is doing ‘a terrific job under very difficult circumstances’. He chastises me for suggesting that Serco staff often mistreat refugees in their care, and that remote centres guarantee abuses because of the lack of necessary resources. ‘You seem to ignore the fact that decisions regarding where people in detention go [are] entirely the government’s’, he says. ‘A feature in the contract, which is very tightly controlled and was drawn up by the government, is the gag on public comment by Serco.’
Clive says ‘no other organisation, be it public or private, is better placed nor more capable of providing these services’. He continues: ‘That Serco continues in good faith to provide services under extremely difficult circumstances that have been forced upon it by the government, speaks volumes for the organisation’s integrity and commitment. Yes, they are making money on this service delivery, but the last time I checked they competed in an open market economy for the contract through a process designed by the Commonwealth, won it on merit, and are having to comply with some of the most onerous abatement regimes in place anywhere in the world. I know this because, as you know, I ran the early part of the tendering process and designed the service penalties regime!’
Clive says that Serco should be held accountable for any breaches, including the alleged abuse of detainees and treating vulnerable asylum seekers as if they are being warehoused in a high-security prison. However, he blames the government for mismanaging the large influx of asylum seekers that has put undue pressure on Serco. The company, he says, ‘would never back out of its contract because it would affect its global reputation’.
Clive concludes with an insight gained from countless conversations with DIAC: ‘The department would not, under any circumstances, want a return to delivery by public servants’. Government officials believe that Serco, with all its faults, is far preferable to an underfunded public service that would have to be more responsive to daily challenges, mainly because a private operator is a convenient scapegoat for systemic failures.
‹   ›
Understanding the inner workings of the notoriously secretive Serco has been one of the great challenges of this project. But I was given an opportunity to learn more when, close to publication, a Serco source leaked me a cache of internal documents that detailed massive price gouging of the federal government by the multinational, extreme rates of self-harm among detained refugees across the country, the non-reporting of mistakes to avoid government abatements, and a work culture designed to ignore the rights of asylum seekers in order to maximise profit.
My contact, Sean, has worked within senior Serco management in Canberra for a number of years. He tells me that when Serco won the detention centre contract in 2009, it was a relatively well-managed arrangement with the Immigration Department. The situation was ‘positive values driven’ and public servants mostly seemed keen to assist asylum seekers and visa overstayers. The then policy of the Labor government was that as few individuals as possible would spend significant time in detention. Sean confirms that Clive, whom I’d spoken to about the Serco tender and who now works for Serco, convinced the company to lower its desired fee to match that of G4S. The multinational duly complied and Canberra secured its preferred provider.
However, the relationship between Serco and DIAC quickly deteriorated when the number of refugee boats began surging in 2010. Sean recalls being given only two days notice to open a new centre—the company received the order on a Friday and was expected to prepare an existing but as-yet-unused facility by the Sunday. The work was completed, for a hefty fee. Sean also reveals that Serco was given less than three months notice by Canberra that the Curtin detention centre was to be reopened. He says such short-term planning became commonplace because successive federal immigration ministers were petrified of making decisions due to ‘complex politics around the issue … [they] didn’t want to announce new centres until the last minute’. The result was policy made on the run and refugees’ living conditions were not major factors in government considerations.
Serco is occasionally asked by the federal government if it can manage the increasing number of detainees in its system. It always says yes, Sean tells me, ‘because we’re in the human warehousing business’. (When he complains about the ways in which asylum seekers are being treated, senior management informs him that he isn’t ‘taking a corporate enough view’.) A senior official in the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet told Sean that the government regretted giving Serco a monopoly in the detention centre business, but that once more boats started arriving, Canberra decided it had no choice but to rely on Serco to manage the huge influx of people, regardless of the fact that the existing system had been designed for far fewer individuals. A similar change of heart occurred in regards to the employment of ex-G4S employees after the serious problems with the company that came to light during the Howard years. Despite an initial lack of desire to rehire these people, Sean says that Serco and the Immigration Department contracted them again after the 2011 Christmas Island riots, and that the culture within the detention centres where they worked and within Serco itself became far ‘tougher’ and less humane as a result.
The most serious charge made against Serco by Sean is that the company is ‘rorting the system’ and ‘making a killing’. He explains that the company ‘won’t spend money on anything that they’re not being paid for, such as assessing the relationship between the company and clients. There’s little to no oversight of this aspect. Serco has no desire to do so’.
Documents obtained exclusively from inside Serco by Sean detail the extent of the alleged rorting. He says that Canberra and Serco agreed that the company’s profit margin would be 7.5 per cent. But Serco’s financial statements reveal a profit margin far greater than this, a discrepancy that Sean says the federal government is either unaware of or is turning a blind eye to. The breakdown of these figures has not been publicly published before. The company normally releases an annual report with the barest of financial information, an approach that was criticised by Fairfax Media’s Michael West in mid-2013. Serco’s net profits in 2012 rose from $49 million to $128 million, but, wrote West, ‘its financial statements are so inadequate as to warrant suspicion’. He argued that Serco and its accounting firm Deloitte have consistently failed to release the appropriate documents required of a ‘reporting entity’ under the Corporations Act.6 It’s not surprising that more transparency has not been demanded, considering how reliant Canberra has become on the multinational for the services it provides. Moreover, the Immigration Department doesn’t have to publicly list ‘small’ contracts worth less than $100 000, allowing countless contractors to remain beyond scrutiny even though they are being paid with public money.
One of the documents provided to me by Sean, Serco’s income statement for January 2012, shows abatements or fines of $879 900 accrued in that month. The forecast, written by Serco months earlier, was zero dollars. Sean explains that the company always expects to be able to avoid abatements, although sometimes it is unable to do so. Also in January 2012, Serco’s revenue for ‘people in detention’ services totalled $26 185 000 across its detention network, while management overheads were $1 513 500 and income raised from the shops inside the detention centres was $1 243 300. The forecasts were mostly way less than what was earned, sometimes by more than 40 per cent, allowing the company to charge the federal government more. Sean says that Serco deliberately underestimates the amount of income likely to be generated by what appears to be a never-ending supply of new refugees.
A more specific breakdown of the figures from the various detention centres details how ‘alternative places of detention’, which include Curtin, Villawood in Sydney, Northern in the Northern Territory and Pontville in Tasmania, cost $9 691 400 to run in January 2012. Serco now runs so many detention centres and hotel lodges for refugees under guard, some for single men and others for families, that the money being made is growing on some services every month. For example, a document titled ‘Management accounts’ shows that the profit made from detention centres and related services in the north of Australia in January 2012 was $2 334 200, more than three times the expected amount.
The biggest earners for Serco are transport and escort services. According to the documents, in January 2012 Serco’s revenue from these was $4 484 200. The private plane company Adagold Aviation, for example, is chartered to fly refugees off Christmas Island to various mainland sites, but Serco staffs the flights and the company’s financial records prove how lucrative this is. Sean says that the company regularly makes at least a 40 per cent profit on such services—in January 2012, this amounted to $2 114 100. When it comes to other companies, however, revenue is not a priority. Sean tells me the corporation is notorious for paying contractors very late, to the extent that a number of companies now simply refuse to deal with them. At one point, Sean explains, Hertz, the car rental company, would not work with Serco in the Northern Territory because it feared it would not get paid in a timely manner.
The documents detail some of the key expenses Serco successfully demanded payment for from DIAC in 2012, including $800 000 for translating and interpreting services and more than $5 million for new structures and ‘perimeter security’ at Curtin. The Northern Territory’s Wickham Point centre needed over $1 million for ‘ramp up’ costs, which included recruiting staff, setting up a gym and purchasing DVDs, and the Serco-run shops selling goods to detainees were owed more than $500 000. Serco received all of this income because the multinational has been given control of the vast majority of detention centre services. It’s no wonder that it is desperate to maintain the ever-expanding contract, Sean says.
Serco has gamed the system so well that it’s able to exploit the federal government’s mismanagement of immigration detention while providing the bare minimum of trained staff to manage asylum seekers. An internal Serco document reveals how, across the country, in every centre, the rise in revenue was not met with an increase in hiring. Staff numbers remained relatively constant in 2011—less than the bare minimum required for decent care, Sean argues—despite boat arrivals increasing to over 4500 people.
Adding to Serco’s bottom line is the money that the company has mostly spent and is chasing from the Immigration Department (and always receives, Sean confirms). This is set out in a monthly financial statement headlined ‘Unbilled sales’. For early 2012, the report lists amounts due over the previous months that total $51 641 800, including $5 million of ‘abatement recovery’. Sean says that ‘Serco will always challenge abatements’ and routinely believes that it does not deserve to be fined. It’s possible, as Serco sometimes claims, that the abatements have been miscalculated. But, says Sean, while the Immigration Department can charge Serco over a range of breaches, all too often Serco doesn’t acknowledge its mistakes and DIAC is happy to overlook them.
In the last months of 2011, Sean tells me, Serco management was upset that the fines imposed on it had soared. On Christmas Island, these amounted to at least $1 million a month, while at Villawood it was at least $500 000. The manager at Villawood was consequently sacked. The breaches there included no security assessment of sites and few, if any, activities or education for refugees. Sean says that while such months aren’t unique, Serco managers often are under ‘significant pressure’ to not get government fines. ‘They’re told if they get abatements, they’ll be fired’, Sean explains. As a result, cover-ups of breaches are routine and both tolerated and implicitly supported by the highest echelons of the Serco hierarchy.
To try and stem the loss of revenue that occurred at the end of 2011, Sean says that Serco spent up to $8 million on a ‘review’ and ‘transition team’ to stop the abatements. Serco staff were brought over from the parent company in Britain ‘to reform the local Serco. They were paid high salaries, which upset local employees’. Sean also says that because Serco has a ‘colonial attitude’ towards Australia, little effort was made to understand the local conditions. At one point, contingency plans were lifted from Serco’s UK centres, but ‘it wasn’t all relevant, such as procedures to manage snow. Serco wants to cut corners’. Some of these challenges are overcome by the company utilising the Australian 457 visa program for skilled overseas workers. The internal corporate logic, Sean reveals, is that Serco ‘uses surplus UK Serco staff, allowing the company to give some UK Serco employees no redundancy packages and instead sending them to Australia’. Sean knows of countless examples where, against the legal requirements of the 457 visa, Serco has brought people over from the UK without even trying to find or train locals.
The tactic seems to be working, as money is pouring into the company. Internal Serco documents from January 2012 show that a 15 per cent profit, or $898 000, was made at Curtin, well above the ‘best estimate’ profit forecast of 10 per cent. Throughout 2011, the number of contracted staff stayed relatively stable—under 100 people were on duty at any one time. The numbers of local and FIFO workers ebbed and flowed over the year, from eighty-one people in July to seventy-five by early 2012, but the profits continued to rise. Most revealingly, the financial records show that the company paid no abatements for Curtin in January. However, Sean says it is impossible that no breaches of the contract occurred during this period because he has regularly seen problems at the various sites, such as a lack of cleanliness and other poor conditions for refugees. Clearly, these were never reported.
Meanwhile, at Christmas Island’s North West Point, the figures are even more startling. In January 2012, the profit made there was at 65 per cent, or $2 542 000. Again, no abatements were recorded for the month. In a report section headlined ‘Overall business overview’, Serco’s John Couttie, a manager on Christmas Island, wrote that ‘a number of roles within management and support remain vacant’. Sean says that it’s normal for many senior positions to never be filled. ‘Who wants to work long-term on Christmas Island, even with good pay?’ he asks. Also in January 2012, at the island’s Phosphate Hill and Construction Camp sites, the profit was 11 per cent, or $99 000. Again, no abatements were cited. Profits from the Leonora site in Western Australia, meanwhile, were above 40 per cent at more than $1 million—again, no abatements were mentioned.
At Pontville in Tasmania, fines for breaches were noted, but they were relatively minor. There, the profits were just under 37 per cent, or $1 255 000, while the abatements were $185 000. A federal government body called the Joint Facility Audit Team revealed ‘failures in eight metrics’, which were weighted according to their seriousness. Incident reporting failed 100 per cent of the time, as did post-incident review and the updating of individual management plans. Timely data entry had a failure rate of 50 per cent, followed by timely response to complaints at 41 per cent, facility cleanliness at 25 per cent, the timely resolution of issues at 24 per cent, security risk assessments at 19 per cent, and the transfer of people-indetention records at 4 per cent. Sean says he doesn’t know why this particular month in January 2012 in Pontville recorded so many breaches, but he claims that if Serco managers were honest, they would be paying fines across the country every month.
The maximum amount that Serco’s fees can be abated is 5 per cent of the detention services charge for every facility monthly. These figures are commercial-in-confidence, as per the contract, and neither Serco nor DIAC ever release them to the media (Sean says that Serco is paranoid about negative media coverage and regularly coordinates media ‘talking points’ with DIAC). The way in which the Australian Govern ment fines Serco has also long been a mystery. When in 2011 I published with two journalist colleagues the 2009 contract between Serco and Canberra, the section on abatement was redacted. However, I have recently seen the ‘Abatement indicator definition’, all forty-nine pages of it, and can now detail its contents. Oddly enough, it was released through freedom of information requests in 2012, though no other journalist, as far as I know, has reported on it.
The abatement definition is a complex set of metrics that uses mathematical formulas to determine how the fines are set. Some of the ‘key performance indicators’, along with their weightings out of 100 per cent, are ‘compliance with health and food safety regulations’ (5 per cent), ‘security risk assessments’ (5 per cent), ‘incident reporting’ (4 per cent), ‘feedback from people in detention’ (3.5 per cent) and ‘escapes during transport and escort’ (4 per cent). Then there’s the issue of ‘property of people in detention’, which gauges whether goods, valuables or cash are somehow misplaced, lost or stolen; its metric weighting is 3 per cent. The abatement scale says that one event equals 25 per cent, two to three events equals 50 per cent, four events equals 75 per cent and five or more events equals 100 per cent—the percentages relate to the maximum possible monthly fine for the breaches.
The inherent problem with this system, as Sean confirms, is that the adequate monitoring of detention centres never happens. One of the few publicly accessible records that outlines some basic abatement details, which was released through a freedom of information request by Sydney journalist Paul Farrell, concerns the Northern centre in March 2010. The weightings of any fines have been redacted, but the Joint Facility Audit Team comments that ‘in general there is a reasonable level of compliance with the Key Performance Indicators. A significant area of concern for the centre is that while it appears that processes and procedures are being followed, there is not a lot of written documentation and checks available to ensure proper compliance’. The 33-page document also contains curious and incomplete information, such as that ‘newspapers and periodicals are supplied twice weekly, although this does not meet required materials as outlined in the contract’.
The culture of Serco’s management encourages obfuscation, Sean explains. He says that the active dehumanisation of detainees comes from the top, such as when they talk about ‘moving products around’ while discussing asylum seekers. Sean adds that when senior management visit Christmas Island, ‘there is no care about conditions, such as people sitting or lying in shit in tents, but it’s all about whether the right forms are filled in’.
Sean confirms what I detail in this book, namely that Serco training is minimal, and cultural training within the detention centres is ‘almost non-existent’. Racism among junior staff is common. He recalls an incident in 2010 when a number of refugees staged a protest on the roof of the Villawood centre. Serco had no negotiation experts on staff and no idea how to respond, so the situation escalated. To address this deficiency, the company brought in hostage negotiators from the UK to train local staff for all of one month. Another incident in 2012 saw Villawood staff using axes to try and get refugees down from the roof, but in the process they allowed the asylum seekers to get hold of the potential weapons.
The mental health of detainees is another hugely significant issue. A DIAC document, specifically a section titled ‘Self-harm risk assessment interview’, provides only the most basic of instructions to staff, such as asking how detainees are feeling. Sean says his company’s staff are mostly untrained and ill-prepared to manage such tasks. ‘If you have a pulse, you have a job at Serco’, Sean tells me.
Accurate figures of self-harm are rarely officially released to the public but I have obtained detailed Serco information about these incidents from 2009 until early in 2012. Although it is impossible to state that the figures are completely accurate, as a staff member must note down an incident for it to be recorded, the numbers are shocking. From January 2011 to January 2012, when the number of detainees in detention fluctuated between 3994 and 6520, there were 2974 ‘network incidents’, including what Serco calls ‘actual’, ‘attempted’ or ‘threatened’ events—according to the documents I have seen, the vast majority of these incidents were only threatened.
From October 2009 to January 2012, the rate of self-harm incidents skyrocketed. While it is true that the number of people in detention also rose during that time, it seems reasonable to say that the conditions experienced by those behind bars contributed to the trauma. For example, in August 2011, there were over 100 actual instances of self-harm, a number of self-harm attempts and hundreds of threats to do so. In the same month, according to the figures, the total number of self-harm incidents was nearly eighty among 1000 refugees. In the second half of 2011, when the number of people in Serco’s care was decreasing, the corporation recorded an escalation of ‘actual self-harms’. Sean claims that Serco management regularly rejects relatively inexpensive ideas from some senior managers to improve the mental health of asylum seekers in detention, such as allowing more excursions outside the centres.
It is unsurprising that the centres with the highest rates of self-harm are the most remote. Throughout 2011 and early 2012, Curtin recorded 123 incidents, Christmas Island’s North West Point 290 and Northern 198. Other facilities, such as Villawood, Darwin Lodge, Melbourne Immigration Transit Accommodation, RAAF Scherger in Queensland, Perth and Maribyrnong in Melbourne listed between thirteen and thirty incidents. It speaks to the lack of proper care that there were more than sixty self-harm incidents among the 1000 clients at the Northern facility in the same time period. From November 2011 through to January 2012, Northern saw countless acts of actual or threatened self-harm by asphyxiation, banging (someone hitting their head on a hard surface), cutting, drug use (abuse of medication or poisonous liquids) and lip sewing.
On Christmas Island, Serco briefly instituted in late 2011 a separate section for so-called ‘bad people’, but there was no oversight to determine how people entered or left the area. Sean says that the contractor International Medical Health Services refused to be involved in the administration of this section, questioning its legality and the ethics involved, though it still provided psychiatric assessments of refugees. The policy was abandoned in early 2012.
Serco is preparing for the future. Its contract with the Australian Government expires in 2014, with an option for Canberra to extend it for another two years before renegotiation, but Sean says that the company is now looking to move into other areas of profitable growth, including community detention. The ‘integrated service model’ will allow a contractor, most obviously Serco or G4S, to manage any number of NGOs, including the Red Cross, who care for asylum seekers out of detention with certain restrictions in work and living conditions.
At the time of writing, the rate of refugee boat arrivals was swamping a system that could not cope with the load. By mid-2013, over 5000 asylum seekers had arrived by sea since the start of the year. But Sean says that Serco predicts the coming years will see a reduction in the number of refugees landing on Australian shores, due to a variety of strategies that will be employed by the more conservative political forces. The result, he says, is that detention centres will slowly but gradually empty, except for several facilities, especially Curtin, Wickham Point and Yongah Hill in Western Australia, which will be maintained as high-security centres, holding places for asylum seekers who can’t be released. The privatisation of detention will continue regardless, whether it involves Serco, G4S or other providers.
An internal Serco memo from July 2012 written by then chief executive officer David Campbell (in April 2013, he would be appointed CEO of the Serco division covering Australasia, the Middle East, Asia and Africa) told staff that ‘Serco’s reputation has been built on delivering operational excellence … We are moving ever closer to achieving our vision of becoming the world’s greatest service company’.
‹   ›
‘Curtin was easily the most remote and the most primitive [detention centre] in terms of accommodation’, commented former federal immigration minister Philip Ruddock when Curtin reopened on 18 April 2010 under a Labor government.7 It had been closed in 2002 by the Liberal government after a string of riots, self-harm by detainees, and a mental health crisis encompassing both staff and asylum seekers. At the time, it was run by the private contractor ACM, then owned by American security company Wackenhut, which controlled many of America’s private prisons. Nobody expected that it would ever reopen.
When announcing the reopening of Curtin, immigration minister Chris Evans said nothing about Serco running the place and pledged to ‘not leave people isolated’, an impossibility due to the remoteness of the centre.8 But a mere 18 months into the Western Australian outpost’s reuse, Evans’ successor, Chris Bowen, acknowledged the severe conditions of the place. He told ABC TV’s Four Corners in October 2011 that ‘I would consider Curtin as a centre to close before I close other centres which are perhaps less confronting and less harsh. I do think Curtin is a harsh environment for that particular group of people’.
The activists, former refugees and staff who remembered the troubles at Curtin under the Howard government reacted with horror when the centre reopened. But DIAC worked hard to promote a new image for the centre. ‘You are in the desert, you are in the outback, there’s no denying that’, said department spokesman Sandi Logan. ‘Fortunately, compared to 10 years ago, there’s a degree of shade. It compares favourably with all of our other detention centres.’9
In an article in The Australian, Curtin’s new manager, identified only as ‘Bruce’, said, ‘We have learnt an awful lot of lessons about how we conduct our business’. He was determined to explain that the bad old days of riots and self-harm were long past and that Serco would be giving ‘clients’ a much better service.10
A few months after the reopening, Opposition legal affairs spokesman George Brandis chimed in, challenging the supposedly inferior quality of asylum seeker accommodation. ‘I think it’s a fact’, he told ABC TV’s Q&A, ‘that some of the accommodation that asylum seekers are housed in [in] mainland Australia today, places like Inverbrackie [in South Australia], have better amenities than a lot of Australians enjoy, particularly Aboriginal people’.11 Brandis made no direct comment about Curtin, however.
The reason for the Rudd government’s backflip on Curtin was explained in May 2010 by an anonymous government official who told the Sydney Morning Herald that Rudd had ‘panicked’ when a surge of boat people arrived from Sri Lanka and Afghanistan and there was no obvious place to house them. Curtin was seen as relatively easy to administer. ‘Rudd decided to send a message in the hope that the flow of boats would stop [in an election year]’, the source said.12 Curtin was reopened at the same time that Rudd instituted a six-month freeze on processing Afghan and Sri Lankan refugees. It was supposed to be a symbol of repression that would scare off asylum seekers who came looking for protection, but it had zero effect on boat arrivals.
It was a political solution to a perceived problem that only put more pressure on detention centres, and on Serco. The Australian reported in August 2010 that detention facilities were ‘all in surge mode’, meaning they were operating above capacity. The paper revealed that then finance minister Lindsay Tanner ‘had waived public works committee processing for funds spent extending detention facilities, meaning whatever funding was allocated would not be scrutinised by the committee’.13 Serco was a great beneficiary of Canberra’s financial largesse and received ever-increasing contracts despite consistently failing to comply faithfully with the government’s requirements.
The original 2009 contract between Serco and the federal government provided $370 million over five years, but an increase in boat arrivals forced Canberra to renegotiate with the multinational. By 2011, the figure had ballooned to $756 million—which confirmed DIAC’s December 2009 pledge to have Serco provide ‘immigration transit accommodation across Australia’—but the exact details of the arrangement remained commercial-inconfidence. By 2012, a $1 billion contract had been signed. During a freedom of information investigation with independent publication New Matilda and journalists Marni Cordell and Paul Farrell in 2011, I obtained and published the original contract between Canberra and Serco. It detailed a litany of requirements of the multinational but, crucially, no independent audit was required to ensure they were completed.14 By 2013, Serco had contracts with the government of $1.86 billion that included immigration detention, transit services and residential housing.
Philip Ruddock argued in 2010 that Labor, desperate for a quick fix, ‘saw that Curtin was closer to Christmas Island and more out of the way … There is less scrutiny in a place like Curtin’.15 This view was echoed by the authors of Human Rights Overboard: Seeking Asylum in Australia, Professor Linda Briskman, Susie Latham and Professor Chris Goddard, who wrote that ‘Curtin detention centre was the worst of Australia’s hell-holes. It was the most secret, most isolated and most brutal’.16
Farshid Kheirollahpoor, an Iranian who was an inmate at Curtin from mid-2000 until the end of 2001 and is now an Australian citizen, told me in 2010 that the centre was ‘out of sight and out of mind’ and that he feared for the mental health of any asylum seekers who were sent there. He had seen evidence of what ACM had done after the large riots at the facility in 2000. ‘ACM realised that they could take financial advantage of the emotional distress in the centre’, he said. ‘I heard that ACM could ask for more guards and deliberately not manage the problem. The Howard government would then offer more funds for support. ACM … [preferred] to demonise refugees and almost force them to act in a way that would make Australian people hate asylum seekers. It was so obvious that ACM guards were forcing mismanagement at Curtin.’
Kheirollahpoor said there were ACM guards who were often drunk, and that they would beat and abuse detainees and each other. ‘They swore at us all the time’, he recalled. ‘It was clear that they couldn’t cope with the isolation, and that the lack of media, scrutiny and oversight guaranteed abuses.’ He was worried that ‘long-term detention would bring mental distress to both refugees and longterm officers’.17
Similar issues were evident at the detention centre at Woomera in South Australia, which operated under the Howard government. The facility was run like a private prison and staff behaved accordingly. Vulnerable men, women and children experienced a harsh reality and staff were often incapable of managing the volatile situation. Staff training, according to an organiser with the Liquor, Hospitality and Miscellaneous Workers Union, Rick Reid, was focused on restraint, and there was little understanding of the cultures and needs of inmates.18
In June 2000, when Woomera housed around 1600 people, then Labor immigration spokeswoman Julia Gillard, disgusted by images of self-harm and hunger strikes, described the facility as ‘the public face of the worst of our detention system’.19
Her outrage could have been equally directed at the Port Hedland detention centre, another ACM-run facility, in remote Western Australia. The allegations made against staff during the Howard years were grim, with detainees accusing ACM guards of serious physical abuse and of treating asylum seekers like criminals instead of vulnerable people fleeing persecution. When asylum seekers protested their long incarceration periods in late January 2001, ACM handcuffed the supposed ringleaders.20
The first person to die in Australia’s mandatory detention system was Mohammed Saleh, who was being held at Port Hedland.21 He was assaulted by ACM staff, kept in solitary confinement with the lights off, forced to defecate and urinate in his cell, and was refused medical treatment while guards ignored his cries for help. He died in a Perth hospital on 23 June 2001. Then immigration minister Philip Ruddock defensively told SBS TV’s Dateline that the detainees weren’t ‘angels’ and dismissed the allegations by arguing that ‘these sorts of claims are made by people who try to camouflage their own activity which was designed to put us under pressure … I think they’re greatly exaggerated’.22 But despite Ruddock’s attitude, the evidence pointed to a failed privatised system in which Saleh’s depression and physical condition was exacerbated by a lack of ACM care.23
Australia has learned little from its experience of privatised detention centres. The problems encountered today under Serco’s management are little different from those that occurred under ACM and G4S. The record of abuse and mismanagement that existed under a Liberal government has been replicated by Labor. Or perhaps the federal government still gives contracts to companies such as Serco because it’s one less level of accountability that it needs to manage, and there’s little political, media or public demand for change. Regardless, it still amounts to different companies, same problems.24
Reports of the mental stress suffered by Serco staff were acknowledged by the company in July 2011, when a former guard, Kieran Webb, a casual employee of subcontractor MSS, died soon after cutting down a 19-year-old Afghan detainee who had hanged himself in his room. Webb had worked at Curtin for six months. In a memo sent to all staff, Serco managing director Chris Manning wrote, ‘If you feel the need for emotional support arising from the work you do, please consider speaking to someone. It is important we acknowledge that our line of work can at times place us in difficult and traumatic situations as we manage vulnerable people in our care’.25 Serco employs one full-time psychologist in Curtin to assist guards who, on a regular basis, see refugees slashing themselves and attempting suicide.
Clare, a detention officer and supervisor at Curtin during the Howard government years, contacted me in May 2011. She still felt traumatised by the experience and had negative feelings towards the refugees who had been under her supervision. Clare claimed that she was supervising on the night of 11 September 2001 and had stood ‘in the high-risk compound and watched as every detainee cheered and hugged each other and the ringleader said to me that this is a great night. This detainee got a permanent protection visa a short time after’. Clare told me that her friends who were still at Curtin remain frustrated that the ‘Immigration Department and only Immigration call the shots’. The privatised system intimidates staff and prevents them from speaking out.26 There are few avenues for people to register—safely and responsibly—complaints within a system that financially penalises corporate stuff-ups. This blurring of responsibility and accountability is a fundamental flaw of exploitative capitalism—the profit motive is sacred.
Nine months after the reopening of Curtin, detainees conducted a mass hunger strike to protest excessive delays in processing refugee claims. Self-harm was soon on the rise again—two detainees have died at the centre in the past three years—so much so that some human rights lawyers pledged to seek payment for refugees who suffer trauma while in detention. In response to this threat, in May 2010, a spokesman for immigration minister Chris Evans said there was no reason to sue: ‘People in immigration detention are treated fairly and humanely, with dignity and respect. They are provided with appropriate services, including support and counselling services, while detained’.27 The government managed the sharp rise in mental health issues by outsourcing services to a company called International Health and Medical Services. It was a contract worth nearly $1 billion.28 Meanwhile, Serco claimed that they were trying to reduce detainee stress by engaging them in barramundi farming, vegetable gardening and sewing.29
The reality at Curtin is masked. There are reports that accuse Serco guards of brutalising refugees, including the use of batons and prison-like punishment. ‘Instruments of restraint’ were used more than 100 times in 2009, with some refugees complaining of cruel treatment. A former employee who spoke to The West Australian in August 2011 claimed that Serco had ‘no perceived intention to provide any welfare’ to detainees.30 A refugee inside the centre alleged in October 2011 that a senior Serco staff member threatened him for daring to tell the media that asylum seekers were self-harming and trying to kill themselves on a weekly basis.31 Yet this is something that refugees confirmed when I was inside Curtin, along with allegations of sexual relations between Serco guards and detainees.32
Further accounts of wrongdoing were presented by Caroline Fleay, my companion during the Curtin visits, and Linda Briskman in a report called The Hidden Men, which was released in November 2011 by Curtin University’s Centre for Human Rights Education. Their research made the disturbing claim that Serco managers bully staff below them, ‘and that even staff imbued with kindness are limited in their ability to enact kind deeds for fear of retribution’. The authors found that Serco staff had a ‘clear lack of understanding and expertise’ when handling ‘traumatised detainees’, and detailed reports of verbal and physical abuse by Serco staff against asylum seekers. Understaffing by Serco also resulted in multiple allegations of mistreatment of vulnerable asylum seekers. Detainees told the authors how ‘staff would become “very bored” and “talk badly with us”’ after ‘sustained periods of working at Curtin’.
It would be inaccurate, however, to paint a solely negative picture of the Serco staff who work at Curtin. A friend living in Derby tells me she was deeply moved when attending Christmas celebrations at the detention centre in December 2011. She says that ‘some kind Serco officers had brought in things for them to assist the project’, and that a refugee dressed up as a ‘jolly Father Christmas, whose costume had been tailor-made in the centre’, conducted a Catholic mass in a room decorated for the occasion. My friend says that ‘the coming together of young men who were not all Christians, celebrating the message of Christmas together on a very hot, steamy afternoon in Curtin, far away from family and friends and facing a very uncertain future, was affecting’. Unfortunately, Monash University professor and Detention Health Advisory Group chair Louise Newman, whose group consults for DIAC despite being a prominent critic of the government’s mandatory, privatised detention regime, argues that it is precisely at such festive times that the mental health problems of refugees are worsened. ‘Their risk of self-harm and even suicide will increase’, she told Perth Now in December 2011. ‘Christmas is a high-risk period.’33
Australia exports this privatised culture to overseas detention centres through the so-called Pacific solution. Beginning in 2012, facilities were reopened on Nauru, on Manus Island in PNG and in the Cocos Islands, and reports quickly emerged from the first two locations that poor living conditions and uncertainty about incarceration times were exacerbating tensions between detainees and staff. The agency contracted to provide services to asylum seekers on Manus Island, Save the Children, said in 2013 that building a permanent facility would be a mistake because of the prolonged and arbitrary detention of children. Serco has managed some facilities on the Cocos Islands and G4S was given the contract to manage the site on Manus Island. Nauruans have been paid $4 per hour by the contractor Transfield Services to work at the centre there, ten times less than the Australian citizens employed in the same facility.34 Australian contractors have been enjoying Canberra’s decision to build permanent structures on Nauru to the tune of more than $70 million35, though a visit by a journalist from The Australian in 2013 found very basic conditions.
In 2004, I interviewed a Kuwait-born Palestinian, Aladdin Sisalem, when he was the sole detainee on Manus Island. He was clearly mentally traumatised by the experience. After Manus had been reopened, he condemned it as an island of lawlessness. ‘When you are there, you are worth nothing’, he said. ‘You are not protected by law.’36
Australia’s record in outsourcing all of its detention centres is globally unique. However, the last two decades have seen many nations outsource asylum services, especially Britain. Serco and G4S operate widely there, running prisons, detention centres, hospitals, police and justice services, transport and schools, and even over seeing nuclear weapons. The contracting out of traditional public service duties to the market has been widely accepted and implemented by the major political parties in Britain, and elsewhere around the world; it has rarely been challenged in any substantive way.
Frances Cook, the director of Britain’s Howard League for Prison Reform, has explained that training levels and standards inevitably decline when the profit motive is paramount. ‘There is no incentive by these private companies to provide services that are not contractually obliged by the Home Office’, she says. ‘There is no evidence of private prisons reducing reoffending, or self-injury or violence.’37 Her words equally apply to detention centres in Australia, where only the bare minimum of training is required for staff, rather than any formal security qualifications. According to the contract between Canberra and Serco, guards are only required to ‘obtain a Certificate Level II in Security Operations within six months of commencement’.38 Asylum seekers are treated like prisoners in a system that thrives on secrecy.
‹ ›
Sadly, history is repeating itself. Mike Grewcock, a lecturer in the Faculty of Law at the University of New South Wales and author of a book about ‘Australia’s war on illicit migrants’, Border Crimes, explains to me that ‘the reopening of Curtin Immigration Deten tion Centre signals a return to the most dismal and abusive practices of the Howard era. This remote, ramshackle facility was characterised by its damaging and punitive regime’.
He continues: ‘In 2001, the then Inspector of Custodial Services for Western Australia described detainees as living “in gulag conditions” and argued that if it had been an ordinary jail, the prisoners would not have tolerated such conditions. The fact that Curtin was privately operated raised serious issues of accountability for what went on there. “Accountability”, according to the inspector, “consisted of little more than tick-a-box checks of documentation”. Although the contractual parties have changed, the fundamental relationship between DIAC and the private operators remains the same. The department locks up refugees in circumstances it knows will cause extensive anguish and harm and pays multinational security corporations to make sure the centres operate “efficiently”. It is a morally indefensible arrangement’.39
And of course, it’s not just refugees who suffer under this arrangement.
The nature of Serco’s subcontractors’ work at the Villawood Immigration Detention Centre in suburban Sydney was highlighted when I was contacted by a number of MSS guards in early 2011. I had written some articles about asylum seekers without considering the pain and suffering of the staff working in extremely stressful situations among traumatised detainees. The guards’ stories were illuminating. I was moved by what I was told, despite the toxic language often used to describe refugees. Racism wasn’t unusual. These men and women were thrown into a volatile detention centre with only the barest minimum of training—a constant complaint was that no cultural training was undertaken and as a result, anger towards asylum seekers was exacerbated. They felt abandoned and believed the asylum seekers were being treated better than them.
Take John, for example. He was a 53-year-old former Scientologist who had worked for MSS Security for nearly 15 years. He spoke in a soft drawl and seemed desperate to share his stories with me, stories that were later corroborated by other MSS guards. He revealed a litany of Serco failures during his time at Villawood, including inadequacies that remained after Wilson Security acquired the contract for the centre in 2011. (Wilson also won the contract to manage security for the Australian detention facility on Nauru, where evidence emerged in 2013 that several asylum seekers had attempted to hang themselves.40)
John said that his first job was monitoring the outside fence. He alleged that Serco routinely saved costs by not properly doing an assessment of the facility, which meant that people escaped. John told me, ‘I had said there should be a risk analysis of the place, but nobody wanted to do so because you need to spend this much more to adhere to safety regulations’.
John reported mess-ups that were committed by Serco, but each time the blame was shifted to MSS: ‘Whenever there was a bungle on their part, they blamed us’. He claimed that during a protest at Villawood, ‘Serco didn’t respond for five hours, by which time eleven had got onto the roof. Serco just didn’t want to confront the situation, therefore there was inaction for so long’.
Work conditions at Villawood were grim. There was plenty of evidence of asbestos at the site, and Liberal and Labor governments, ACM, Serco and MSS all pledged to clean it up. But John said he was disturbed at constantly seeing signs that read, ‘Danger: Asbestos’. In 2002, Villawood was declared safe from asbestos, but in 2006 the toxic substance was rediscovered, only for the site to soon be declared safe again. ‘Why were there still signs telling us about asbestos if there’s no danger?’ John asked.
I asked DIAC about these serious allegations and they claimed that ‘extensive monitoring over a number of years has consistently found contaminants are well below the accepted levels for asbestos set out under the NSW Occupational Health and Safety Act 2000. The redevelopment of Villawood detention facility requires further remediation to ensure the redeveloped site is suitable for a combination of residential, commercial and open space for recreational uses’.41 This did nothing to allay John’s health concerns. By 2013, there was still evidence that asbestos was contaminating areas of Villawood detention centre but neither Serco nor the Immigration Department were transparent about managing the problem.42
The MSS guard’s attitude towards asylum seekers was negative. ‘I don’t know any refugees complaining about the conditions at Villawood’, he told me. ‘Many in maximum security aren’t refugees—they’re visa overstayers. Some come back to detention because they can’t afford life on the outside. Inside, they get three meals and free internet access’. In his opinion, the Australian Army should manage detainees because companies like ‘Serco baulk at a problem and remain eternally paranoid about losing the contract with the government, hence always blaming MSS’. He said this resulted in an aggressive culture, and one in which ‘MSS managers are paranoid’ and ‘don’t really protest’.
John was appalled, for instance, when an MSS colleague was sacked at the end of a 40-degree day for complaining about the heat and for not working to his full capacity. ‘He had been in that heat for four hours’, he said. ‘I’ve been calling for more breaks in summer because we can’t get out of the sun at all. It’s often twelve hours in the open with no shade. People looked sunburnt when coming off a shift. WorkCover has said it’s a disgrace but nobody is doing anything about it.’ John concluded by saying, ‘One day I was keeling over from the heat and my supervisor said, “Where’s your tie?”’
Other MSS guards contacted me after John told them I would guarantee their anonymity; they feared retribution from their employer if they spoke out. Sharon said that she resented all the benefits given to asylum seekers at Villawood: ‘They get free English classes, computer classes, hairstylist, dental, glasses, mental health, doctors and hospitalisation or operations as soon as required. Clients have internet access with no-one looking at what is being accessed’. Sharon repeated a key complaint I’d heard from other MSS workers: ‘Serco staff treat clients more as a buddy than inmates or detainees. Because of our legal system, it takes a long time to verify truth or lies … so if the clients do not like you they will make it very hard for you to work there. Clients have more rights and they know their rights and play them to a T’.
After I had interviewed a number of MSS employees, I again approached DIAC and also Serco to get some answers—MSS didn’t respond to multiple requests for comment. But once more I encountered the meagreness of responsibility of a privatised system. A DIAC spokesman refused to email any responses and would only say that ‘Serco remain responsible for the subcontracted staff as they are for their own employees. It is a commercial decision for Serco on whether to engage a subcontractor to take up certain security tasks’.
Serco spokeswoman Emma Needham emailed me what was clearly a proforma response: ‘We have a zero-harm policy in place to ensure every employee returns to their home unharmed. If there was evidence of a subcontractor failing to meet these required standards, they risk penalties or termination’. She did not answer my questions about the company’s responsibility towards MSS and its employees. So much for the examples I had presented.
‹   ›
The systematic failures of privatised mandatory detention had frequently come to light by the time Rupert Murdoch’s The Australian editorialised on the suicide of Fijian Josefa Rauluni in Villawood in 2010. It asserted that the federal Labor government had to provide far better ‘counselling services … for those suffering distress in custody’. It did not argue for an end to mandatory detention because it had been ‘bipartisan policy … for almost 20 years and was introduced by Paul Keating’s Labor government’.43 The consensus position was restated—outsourced detention centres were viewed as an inevitability. But desert prison camps are not normal.
Australia is a first-world nation and should not be blind to the reality of the current detention centre system. There is no evidence showing that privatisation improves transparency or saves money. A study in Canada found that refugees living in the community cost the government around C$10–12 per day; the cost of keeping an individual in privatised detention in Australia is at least $179 per day.44 The Community Assistance Program in Australia, which assists vulnerable asylum seekers, costs around $38 per day; an equivalent program in mandatory detention costs $125.45 Imprisoning refugees behind bars has nothing to do with saving money and everything to do with keeping the problem hidden from the eyes and minds of urban Australians. Responsibility is kept at arm’s length to allow plausible deniability by governments, officials and corporations. The result is the punishing of asylum seekers by governments who believe their electorates want them to be tough on boat arrivals.
It is a real challenge for the media and politicians to investigate and monitor any corporation looking to turn a profit from man aging vulnerable asylum seekers, a challenge that neither group has risen to. Serco and the federal government work together with virtual impunity, and there are few consequences of their shared unaccountability because placing the control of detention facilities back into the public’s hands is rarely raised as an alternative, except by the federal Greens.
After nearly two decades of successive Australian administrations wanting the perceived problem of refugees to be managed away by private companies, it’s time the country established a more open system that puts the care of asylum seekers above profit.







2
CHRISTMAS ISLAND—INCARCERATION IN THE INDIAN OCEAN
We’ll have an invasion of people who’ll turn the Christmas Island economy from a mining and tourism economy into a prison-type economy.
Gordon Thomson, Christmas Island councillor, 20021
It’s a strange feeling to leave the Australian mainland by plane without needing a passport or visa and land on an Australian island three and a half hours later.
There is a diverse range of people who board the plane in Perth: Pacific Islanders, burly white men, Asian Muslims and hijab-wearing women. I see two Serco staff sitting next to a refugee with a bushy goatee, and who is probably from Iran or Iraq. He’s reading a Where’s Wally? book and wears a T-shirt with ‘No Prisoners’ written on the back. We make eye contact; I smile and he smiles back.
The expensive flight is a beautiful trip over blue sea with occasional atolls ringed by perfectly white sand. Flying across the Indian Ocean, I half-expect to see an asylum-seeker boat powering its way to Christmas Island being intercepted by the Australian Navy. My first glimpse of the island is of steep hills and a striking coastline. Its small airport turns out to be more of a large room, a shop that sells duty-free alcohol and cigarettes.
The humidity is high as I leave the tiny terminal; outside, a sign welcoming me to the island stands alongside a tall pole flying an Australian flag. At the desk of a rental car company, a young Chinese Australian man gives me a photocopy of a hand-drawn map of the island and says, ‘You can’t get lost here, mate. It’s basically just one big circle’.
The drive from the airport into Flying Fish Cove, the island’s main town, reveals luscious greenery and washed-out 1960s-style low-level apartment blocks with clothes strung across their windows and doors. Near the water there’s a mosque with a small minaret and more grubby apartment buildings, tightly packed together; rust infests the structures. An Australian Navy ship is docked at the waterfront and its officers dive into the glistening water from the short pier. A sign on the pier states: ‘Warning: This is a Customs Controlled Area. Persons Must Not Enter Without Appropriate Identification’.
Arriving on CI, which is what the locals affectionately call the island, feels like stepping into a time warp, as there are no noticeably contemporary buildings. The place looks a little tired and unloved, and its remoteness reminds me of the Curtin detention centre. It can’t be any coincidence that these are the locations at which the government has chosen to house asylum seekers.
I check into a hotel overlooking the ocean, less than 50 metres from the site of the tragic accident that occurred on 10 December 2010, when an asylum seeker boat struck the coast in bad weather and forty-eight people were killed. Residents could only stand by helplessly and watch as refugees died in the rough waters below. Another tragic accident occurred offshore in March 2013, with at least two asylum seekers dying when their boat capsized.
I eat lunch at the Barracks Café on the main shopping strip. One of the owners, a 76-year-old man who came to Australia from Britain in the early 1960s, starts up a conversation after I tell him I’m visiting as a journalist. He supports the recently announced permanent presence of the US military in Darwin because ‘Australia has so many resources, from uranium to bauxite to oil and gas, and Indonesia is very close. There are more people in Jakarta than the whole of Australia’. He also supports the CI detention centre: ‘I think the government has handled the situation very sensitively’. Despite his apparent fear of invasion by resource seekers, he tells me that he loves ‘the multicultural nature of CI’.
There are approximately 1500 permanent residents on the island and about 500 Serco and DIAC staff who come and go. One of the latter’s facilities, the ‘Construction Camp’, sits opposite the sports centre where the workers who built the first CI detention facility lived. At the time of writing there were 700 people, many refugee families, despite a surge in capacity allowing up to 400, in very basic accommodation such as dongas and rusting shipping containers; single men are placed in the much larger detention centre, which is a short drive from town. The site is eerily quiet, though I can hear a few voices in the distance. There’s low-level security, and the green shrubbery behind the prefabricated structures is the only sign of colour in the area.
As with the Curtin detention centre, the process for gaining access to the CI asylum seekers began before I landed on the island. Before leaving Perth, I spoke to a DIAC employee on CI who said I needed to get ‘security approval’ from Serco. This is a major complaint of journalists seeking to enter Australia’s detention centres: that the lines of authority between Serco and the federal government are deliberately blurred. The woman told me she’d find out who I needed to speak to and would call me back.
A few hours later, I got a call from a DIAC spokesperson based in Adelaide, Bill Power, who said he’d been told I wanted to access detainees on CI, and that ‘I know you’re a freelance journalist’. I didn’t deny it but said I had the right to go as a private citizen— any Australian citizen can apply for access to CI as long as they list the refugees who are willing to see them. Power explained that the detainees had first to agree to my visit, and that they might refuse. I said this was highly unlikely as they’d already agreed to meet with me. We spoke heatedly for around ten minutes, me telling him that I’d never been prevented from entering a detention centre, him saying that ‘we have certain protocols for handling media visits to see clients’ and that I had to abide by them. He finally said he’d call CI and determine the situation. I wasn’t optimistic.
An hour later, a different DIAC spokesperson called me (without giving his name) and said that for ‘operational reasons’ it would not be possible to grant me access to the CI detainees. It was all about respecting the privacy of the clients, he told me. I told him we both knew that was bullshit, but he persisted, as if reading from a script: ‘The detainees can call you as a journalist if they want, but at this time, and I can’t explain why because of privacy reasons … your application has been refused’. I told him he was lying about the reasons for the refusal, and said that DIAC and Serco simply didn’t want independent people, such as journalists, to examine what they were doing.
I left Perth for CI without approved access to the centre, but I was hopeful that I could talk my way in once I arrived.
‹   ›
In August 2001, the Tampa, a Norwegian ship carrying 438 people, predominantly Hazara Afghans, who had been rescued from a troubled fishing vessel in international waters, was refused entry into Australian waters by the military and was eventually steered to the Pacific island of Nauru. This prompted the Howard government, in the days before the attacks of 11 September 2001, to announce its Pacific solution, whereby it would establish detention facilities on CI, Nauru and PNG’s Manus Island—offshore locations that would house refugees well away from the Australian mainland and thereby away from the prying eyes of the public and the media.
This regime existed from 2001 to 2007. A new Labor government then reopened the CI facility in late 2008 and the whole Pacific solution began again in 2012. The plan, which received bipartisan support in the Australian Parliament, involved excluding countless islands from Australia’s migration zone and using the Australian Defence Force to stop refugee-carrying boats. Asylum seekers were removed and processed in other countries, often waiting for years in poor conditions for their refugee status to be determined. A temporary detention facility was established on CI in late 2001 in an attempt to send the message that asylum seekers arriving on the Australian mainland would be the only ones processed on it.2
It was a time of brutal politics and inhumane policies that were condemned by the United Nations and every reputable human rights group in the world, but the Pacific solution was not unpopular with the Australian public. After 9/11, boat arrivals were constantly framed as potential terrorists who needed to be treated with suspicion. Australians still nurture this prejudice, which is milked by many commentators and politicians.
It’s revealing to read Labor Party policy while it was in opposition prior to 2007 because it’s exactly the opposite of what it did once in government. Labor leader Kevin Rudd pledged to abandon the Pacific solution when he became prime minister: ‘In returning detention centre management to the public sector, Labor will ensure that the public sector body is adequately resourced and does not face the conflict of interest problems’. Labor condemned the Howard government for not releasing the details of payments to ACM and G4S—the companies that managed the increasing number of detainee contracts on the Australian mainland—or how ACM was fined for escapes.3 (At the time, the Pacific detention centres were run by the International Organisation for Migration and not forprofit corporations, but Labor accelerated the privatisation agenda soon after gaining office.)
Labor’s immigration spokesman, Tony Burke, even said this about G4S:
 
This is the private company that has people coming in the doors with no mental health problems and going out as broken human beings. There is one answer and one answer alone, and that is there have been enough breaches of this contract for the government to take action to terminate the privatisation of our detention centres. It was a bad idea from the start. It should not have taken place. It should not be continued.4
The Christmas Island Immigration Detention Centre began to take shape when the Howard government’s minister for territories, Wilson Tuckey, arrived on CI in March 2002 and delivered the following news: ‘You’re going to get a new detention centre and I’m not here to argue’. Regular environmental assessments were waived to get the project moving as fast as possible. Building commenced in 2006 and the facility was initiated with roughly 800 beds at a cost of $400 million. But the cost increased and private contractors still hadn’t completed all the work when John Howard was voted out of office in 2007. It finally opened in 2008 under Labor’s watch.
The relationship between the federal government, the private company awarded the contract to run the centre, and the citizens of the island has always been fraught. From the detention centre’s inception, locals have been worried about its impact on the economy; in particular, the ability of the island’s main employer, Phosphate Resources Limited, to continue phosphate mining—in fact, the centre was built on land that would have been mined.
Still, in early January 2009, immigration minister Chris Evans extended G4S’s contract for six months, though he then announced a tender process to find a new contractor, arguing that ‘we will impose higher standards on the detention services contractors and the department will be monitoring the contract more closely than before. It is a question of the values that apply rather than who applies them’.5 Greens senator Sarah Hanson-Young questioned why Labor had continued a relationship with G4S, saying, ‘we have seen enough buck-passing between the Department [DIAC] and G4S to suggest something isn’t working’.6 DIAC then announced that Serco had won the new deal, heralding the company’s ‘strong alignment with the department’s values and the government’s directions in detention’. But really, nothing had changed except the name of the firm running the prison.
The only major party advocating a publicly run detention system is The Greens.7 Hanson-Young told ABC TV’s Lateline in April 2011 that ‘transparency’ is the key reason why a private company shouldn’t control these facilities: ‘There’s no regular auditing … I think that really does raise questions about how these facilities are being run at taxpayers’ [expense] and who is to blame’.8
‹   ›
Despite the transformation of CI from mining outpost to detention facility, there remains a unique multicultural mix on the island. One evening I attend a Buddhist ceremony—an event held annually—at a hilltop temple near the detention centre. Flags are fluttering in the wind, and stretching to the horizon is a gorgeous view of the sparkling Indian Ocean. The sun sets with a brilliant red flourish. There’s mainly a Chinese Malay crowd in attendance; it’s this community that raises the funds each year to bring two shamans over from Malaysia for the occasion. But there are also representatives of the island’s other ethnic communities, as well as some Serco staff.
The temple is packed with Buddhists, many of whom are taking photographs of one shaman in a red smock who is rocking back and forth, in a trance. He writes prayers on small pieces of paper while keeping his eyes closed. Many candles are burning and incense is in the air. A local man drums hypnotically throughout the afternoon and evening. Outside the temple, a banquet that has been prepared for the ceremony’s 100 participants is on a long trestle table—noodles, rice, chicken and other meats, huge quantities of everything. We all line up and help ourselves.
The final part of the ceremony sees one of the shamans leading a procession across a small bridge that has been constructed in front of the temple. People pay money to hold some incense sticks and then remove their shoes to receive a blessing.
I speak to Charlie, who works for the CI shire and liaises with DIAC. His job mainly involves trying to communicate the cultural and social issues of this isolated island to a federal immigration bureaucracy that too rarely engages with the local community. He tells me that when he first started in the job, in 2010, CI residents would come to him asking for information about the detention centre, or wanting to tell Serco and DIAC how they could better operate it. ‘These days, people don’t bother asking me about that’, he says to me, ‘because they know I have no power to really do anything. I think most people are just upset that prices for everything have gone up’.
I also talk to Simon, a tall and lanky Brit who teaches young children in detention. He arrived with high hopes of being able to change the system from within, and he says the kids undoubtedly benefit from the regular classes. But he also thinks that uncertainty over the length and outcome of detention has an adverse impact on the children’s mental health. Simon says that Serco staff are friendly enough to him, then shares a revealing anecdote. His school put together an induction manual and they gave it to Serco to examine. The company’s response was that some of its officials were unable to complete the task because they couldn’t read or write.
Also at the ceremony is Harry, an Australian who has been on CI for nearly two decades and rarely returns to the mainland; there was a gap of 18 years between his last two visits. He tells me that he opposes the detention centre because of the environmental degradation caused by the amount of resources, such as water and timber, required to run the place. He’s against having a privatised ‘prison’ on the island and thinks refugees should be put in community-based detention. ‘Politicians and the media whip up a fear of asylum seekers, but only a few thousand are coming over a year’, he laments. ‘Are we saying as a nation that we can’t handle this small number?’
The following day I meet Gordon Thomson, formerly a CI councillor and now general secretary of the Union of Christmas Island Workers (UCIW). He’s in his mid-fifties and has a cheeky grin and crazy white hair. He’s been on the island for more than 14 years, outstaying his wife and daughter, who left years ago. Gordon loves the place. A former communist, he is now an ALP member, but is highly critical of the current Labor government’s policy on asylum seekers: ‘We shouldn’t lock people [refugees] up; it’s like a prison here’. Gordon has always opposed the detention centre. He tells me that it divides the island’s residents into two groups: the few who are benefiting and the many who are not. He’s currently having a row with Serco over improving the conditions for detention centre workers. He says they’re a stingy bunch of managers.
Gordon drives me across the island. As we motor along the main shopping strip, where CI’s sole post office and bank are located, he explains the mix of Malay, Chinese, Thai and Anglo people who live here. Roughly 60 per cent of the population is Chinese, 20 per cent are Malay and the rest are mainly Caucasian. Buddhism is the predominant religion. Before the reopening of the detention centre in 2008, the island received around 2000 tourists annually. But in the years since, that number has declined to around 1500 people a year.
The annual migration of the red crab is taking place, and as we head out of town we see countless crabs, large and small, scurrying across the road. It can be so dangerous for drivers that Parks Australia closes some roads at this time of year. Most locals respect such directives, but a common complaint I hear during my visit is that Serco’s FIFO officials often ignore them and end up killing many crabs, fuelling resentment towards the multinational.9
Gordon takes me to a lookout. It is a stunning view. There are beautiful booby birds and mountains and ocean all around me. Sixty-three per cent of CI is designated national park. Another 14 per cent is under a phosphate mining lease, an industry established here in the 1890s. During my visit, mine workers are on strike over pay demands, causing tension in the community due to about 180 men not earning a wage. The miners are refusing to accept poor salaries at a time when two litres of milk cost $19.50, and while on-site DIAC officials each receive an allowance of around $30,000 per year to cover such expenses.10 From the lookout, I see signs of mining damage across CI’s pristine environment—large areas of excavated land and massive mounds of dirt.
Gordon next drives me down a road framed by lush forest to show me the detention centre, which is situated at North West Point, around 17 kilometres from Flying Fish Cove. He pulls over to point out a winding path that leads to a hilltop spot with a clear view of the detention centre; with help from Phosphate Resources, DIAC has tried to block the entrance to the path with large piles of gravel. From beside the road, we can glimpse the centre, which has a clinical look to it. Large satellite dishes dot the grounds and there are many signs reading ‘No Authorised People Past This Point’.
A few days later, I skirt the gravel mounds and hike for 15 minutes to the viewpoint. I am rewarded with a striking vision of the entire detention centre as it glistens in the late afternoon sun. Situated near the ocean, it is accessible by the one entry road. I can see a few people moving around inside the centre. Its massive size surprises me. At its peak, the place housed over 3000 detainees, though at the time of writing it has just over 1500. Camera crews used this exact position to film the large fires of the March 2011 riots and the excessive police response with which they were met. I guess this is why an attempt has been made to restrict access to the viewpoint, to keep out curious media and interested citizens.
One evening, Gordon invites me to attend an event organised by the CI Women’s Association and the island’s Thai community to raise money for the victims of recent flooding in Thailand. It is held at a large Chinese restaurant called Season’s Palace and attracts Malay, Chinese, Thai and Anglo participants. We all seat ourselves at tables of ten in a bright room decorated in red, while a video projects images of the floods. The night begins with a slightly awkward MC introducing a number of young student pianists who play Beethoven and other short classical pieces on an electric piano. Then, while we eat, young women perform traditional Thai dancing. Gordon and a few other Western men stand up and try to mimic the women’s dancing with funny hand and leg movements; they seem to be making fun of themselves. The evening has a real community feel, with constant shout-outs to the companies and individuals who have donated prizes for a raffle. It is an old-fashioned fundraiser.
I speak to Roland, a Malaysian who has been working at the local phosphate mine on and off since the 1970s. He tells me he was opposed to the detention centre from the start, but he wonders if this is a minority view on CI. He says that people have simply gotten used to the place, worn down over time to accept its existence, ‘though we were never consulted about its construction, how it worked, why it worked, what it was doing, who was there. Many people [were] worried after September 11 that terrorists were there. Media and politicians created this image’.
But the president of the Christmas Island Malay Association, Azmi Yon, is angry about the centre: ‘We’re taxpayers. There are many voices in the community asking why the asylum seekers get special treatment when we struggle in day-to-day living’.
The voices of CI residents are rarely recorded because so few reporters make the journey out to CI, but my trip gives me the opportunity to do so. When I attend a UCIW executive meeting, chaired by Gordon Thomson, I ask the attendees about their attitudes towards the detention centre and Serco. There are twelve people in the fluorescent-lit room—eleven Asian men aged from about twenty-five to fifty-five, and one Indian woman—and they express a confusing mix of emotions.
CI’s shopkeepers are happy with the detention centre, as food prices keep going up. Demand sometimes outstrips supply, but the FIFO workers have a lot of disposable income, so the shop owners can inflate prices accordingly. Everybody is also pleased that the new Serco roster has its employees staying for six- to twelve-month blocks on the island. ‘Short-term Serco staff have no sense of belonging on CI’, one man laments.
However, Serco employs less than 100 locals, and it pays them poorly. In 2011, contracted workers such as cleaners, gardeners and handymen went on strike, expressing disgust to their firm, Resolve FM, that they were being paid around $820 per week—only slightly more than the $795 allowance enjoyed by Serco guards. Food and utility prices have risen at least 300 per cent since Labor reopened the centre in 2008. Housing and rental prices have at least doubled in that time, and many local people can’t afford the higher costs.
The people at the meeting are mostly sympathetic to refugees. Their anger is directed more at the distant bureaucrats who are putting undue pressure on their island. They want more houses built for locals, for instance. They’re also upset about the millions of dollars spent on the inquiry into the boat disaster in December 2010, money they believe would have been better spent on infrastructure. A young man tells me that ‘when detention centres are built in remote areas, locals usually suffer, and hire cars, hotels and better food are only easily obtained by Fly In, Fly Out staff. The facility has killed off other industries for CI, like tourism, and CI’s image globally is of a prison’.11
But the attendees acknowledge that their perception of the whole situation may be skewed, that perhaps there are those in the community who resent the refugees being provided with good conditions that locals don’t enjoy. One man is especially agitated, exacerbated by the fact that he’s on strike from the phosphate mine and is struggling to support his family: ‘If detainees burn down centres and shout the loudest, the government will give them what they want. They should go to jail and not be given benefits, and sent home’.12
‹   ›
CI locals feel expendable, with little political or media capital on the mainland, Azmi Yon had told me at the Thailand floods fundraiser. He said they were told what would happen to them from far away. The distance cuts both ways.
The sites of the Curtin and CI detention centres are deliberately remote. There is no misunderstanding the Australian Government’s thinking: isolate asylum seekers in remote locations and thwart the public’s ability to empathise with, or ‘humanise’, the new arrivals. It’s the only way that refugees can be detained with barely any public complaint. The result is that each asylum seeker becomes a number, a privately controlled individual whose presence merely directly benefits the profits of certain corporations.
The Australian Human Rights Commission, in a report released in late 2012, argued that the CI centre was ‘not appropriate for asylum seekers’ and that it was ‘prison-like’.13 The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees regularly reports that detention achieves nothing more than trauma. In a 2011 report, it explained: ‘No empirical evidence is available to give credence to the assumption that the threat of being detained deters irregular migration, or more specifically, discourages persons from seeking asylum. Global migration statistics have been rising regardless of increasingly harsh governmental policies on detention’.14
And detention is costly for taxpayers. The figures contained in a DIAC brief for the federal government in 2010 revealed that offshore processing at CI was five times more expensive than holding refugees on the mainland. The $471.18 million earmarked for this task included $109.21 million for ‘service delivery’ and $357.8 million for ‘administration’. The brief showed that the government had arrived at these numbers by assuming that boat arrivals would slow down in the years after 2011. However, the opposite occurred. Sixty-nine boats came in 2011 and at least 205 boats arrived in 2012, compared with 134 boats in 2010. By the end of 2012, the number of asylum seekers who had arrived in Australia by boat since Labor assumed office in 2007 was over 13 000—just shy of the number who came during the entire twelve years of the Howard government. In May 2011, the Labor government publicly acknowledged that its previous costings were less than was needed, and that about $1 billion would need to be allocated in the approaching mid-year budget.15
Of course, this money was ‘found’ without additional public scrutiny. It seems that no amount is too much for the Australian Government to pay to process asylum seekers as far away from the mainland as possible. Journalist David Marr pithily wrote that undisguised racism lurks behind this willingness: ‘The budget for reassuring Australians is bottomless’.16
ACM, which previously managed at least six detention centres, revealed in 2000 that its annual turnover was $100 million, with an after-tax profit of $7.5 million.17 In 2010, Serco’s revenue was $369 million and its after-tax profit was $40.5 million. The following year, this jumped to $756 million of revenue and a $59-million profit.18 The scale of the growth of the private detention centre industry has been massive. Countless companies and individuals are reaping the rewards, including charter airlines, a pub on Cocos Island providing temporary accommodation for asylum seekers and construction firms.
It’s rare to find a mainstream commentator in the Australian media who challenges the profit motive behind privatised detention. Now and then there will be some brief outrage about Serco breaching its responsibilities. A Sydney Morning Herald article in January 2012, for example, highlighted comments made on Facebook by a Serco officer, who wrote that Muslim children didn’t deserve presents at Christmas, and that male asylum seekers were teaching children that it was acceptable to beat one’s wife.19 However, the ideology behind privatisation and the lack of accountability it brings remain largely unquestioned.
‘There’s nothing like a crisis to stimulate a bit of change’, said G4S head Nick Buckles in 2010. By ‘change’, he was referring to the privatisation of services under the guise of efficiency and cost savings for government. Buckles told an analysts meeting in March 2011 that losing a contract here or there wasn’t such a big deal because there are ‘a lot of outsourcing opportunities and not many competitors’.20 It’s an unhealthy power balance. Richard Harding, who was Western Australia’s chief prison inspector for a decade, told The New York Times what was at the heart of the problem. ‘These global companies [like Serco] … are more powerful than the governments they’re dealing with’.21
The mystery of these companies is enhanced by the almost complete absence of media appearances by their spokespeople, although they seem unwilling to admit this. In a rare interview in 2011, the chief executive of Serco Asia-Pacific, David Campbell, said that ‘to be described as a secretive organisation, I was completely gobsmacked’. He also told Perth Now that he was personally pained by the death of any asylum seekers, but that ‘we do everything in our power to look after these people. [referring to a recent Tamil death in detention] Is it in our power for no one ever to pass away under those circumstances? Actually no. It’s not in our power, we’re not God’.22
Matthew J Gibney, a political scientist at Oxford University, argues that the explosion of outsourced incarceration over the past 15 years is politically driven: ‘When something goes wrong—a death, an escape—the government can blame it on a kind of market failure instead of an accountability failure’.23
It may be that the outsourcing of prisons and detention centres in Australia also has been influenced by its relationship with the United States. In 1988, a successful meeting took place between various Australian government officials and America’s leading private prison company, CCA. ‘The decision to go private was not precipitated by problems such as overcrowding, litigation, or lack of public funds’, writes Australian Professor Eileen Baldry, but the ‘client state nature of Australia’s relationship with the US’, which encouraged outsourcing firms to find contracts in Australia.24
But what is the impact of these decisions on communities such as CI that accommodate one of the far-flung, privatised detention facilities?
‹   ›
It’s another hot and humid day on CI and I still haven’t gained access to the detention facility. But I am about to talk to some of the detainees.
A few days earlier I met Joan Kelleher, a sister who works with the Christian aid organisation Australian Mercy, and a resident of CI since March 2010. She is also a daily visitor to the refugees in detention. Sister Joan is a true humanitarian. She’s opposed to mandatory detention and takes asylum seekers with fragile mental states on brief excursions to do activities such as cooking and swimming. She told me that she oscillates between despair and inspiration, but unfortunately feels more of the former. Then she recalled a Tamil man who has been inside the CI detention centre for 26 months—he has been granted refugee status but is waiting to receive security clearance. ‘I’m inspired by those who survive what this system throws at them’, she said. ‘And those who stay strong.’
Sister Joan then told me that she would be taking four Afghan Hazara refugees to the beach for a BBQ in a few days time, and suggested I come along.
I arrive to find the sister and the quartet of men wading bare foot in shallow water—one man dips his entire body underwater, fully clothed. It’s a beautiful day and the colour of the water alternates between green and blue. There are a few fishermen, and some boats on the horizon, but little else. The men are aged in their thirties and forties. They’re all married with children, their families still in Afghanistan and Pakistan. They’ve all been rejected for refugee status twice by DIAC and remain in limbo in Australia, claiming they would be injured or killed if they were sent home (bombings in early 2013 that targeted the Hazara people in Quetta, Pakistan, where all the men have family, indicate the continuing threat). They appear pleased to see me, a new person to talk with.
The men collect different-coloured rocks to send to their children. One man, Abdul, can speak English and tells me that he has been in detention for 22 months, in Darwin and on CI. He takes six different antidepressants daily. His left eye is bloodshot, and he shows me injuries on his body that he claims were inflicted by the Taliban. He smiles as we talk, but says he is sad because he is unsure what will happen to him, and that he’s never given any definite information on his case, including a time line for when it will be resolved, from DIAC or Serco.
I talk to all the men but with varying degrees of success because of language difficulties. They say they want to be allowed to live in community detention, a policy implemented by Labor in 2012 that permits asylum seekers to live freely, but with minimal welfare payments and no work rights. It’s better than being in a highsecurity prison, but it still leaves them in a state of limbo. We discuss marriage, and they find it amusing that I am thirty-seven but still unmarried, with no children. They talk about the difficult existence of a detainee—the monotony of daily life, the lack of excursions or visitors, the humid weather.
Sister Joan has brought some sausages, rolls, onions and soft drinks. The men share the cooking duties, using the BBQs on the foreshore. It’s a change from the daily tedium, they say, clearly enjoying this brief excursion. They show gratitude towards the sister.
From our lunch spot, I can see the island’s one-time governor’s residence, which overlooks the harbour of Flying Fish Cove. Near the house is a small memorial to the SIEV X tragedy, commemorating a boat that sank on its way from Sumatra to Christmas Island in 2001, killing 353 people. The names of the children who died are written on small rocks.
‹   ›
Britain handed CI to Australia in 1957. Forty years later, CI and the Cocos Islands started being managed as the Australian Indian Ocean Territories, under the auspices of an administrator who lives on CI. After my excursion with Sister Joan, I go to a spacious office near the pier where asylum seekers are brought ashore, to interview the current Australian Government administrator of CI and the Cocos Islands, Brian Lacy.25
Lacy is a former industrial court judge from Melbourne who is serving a two-year appointment on CI. He’s affable, generally sympathetic to refugees and not an advocate of mandatory detention. But he does praise Serco for helping the CI community and being a good corporate citizen. He receives twice-weekly briefings from Canberra involving ‘intelligence’ related to asylum seekers on CI, and says he’s pleased that the numbers of detainees are down (though the figure wildly oscillates depending on boat arrivals). He appears to have been blindsided by the riots in 2011, but says he is committed to being better informed about the situation inside the detention centre. However, he’s only visited the CI centre once, on a guided tour, when he first arrived on the island.
Lacy’s role isn’t overly political and he constantly stresses that his aim is to bring benefits to CI and the Cocos Islands. He is concerned about the effects of the detention centre on CI, including the disparity in pay between local and temporary workers, and the impact of a high-security prison on a small island. He has asked Canberra for more resources to support the place, particularly more consultation and expanded facilities. It’s unclear how successful this will be—it is a common complaint from locals that the federal government is more interested in funding infrastructure that houses new boat arrivals rather than supports residents.
Lacy tells me he’s hired ‘consultants’ to find ways to promote CI as a tourist destination, as it’s now primarily known as a detention island, in Australia and internationally. His job is unenviable.26
I’m walking back to my hotel when something out at sea attracts my attention, and I stop at the exact spot from which CI residents watched helplessly in December 2010 as refugees drowned in heavy seas. I can see a visibly overcrowded boat on the horizon, and it’s heading towards shore. Two large Australian ships and a few smaller vessels shadow the boat. A few people gather, filming and photographing the boat. Those around me, a mix of tourists and locals, are largely unsympathetic towards the incoming refugees. One says, ‘I bet they’ll find wads of cash in their pockets’. Two older couples say they are sick of so many boats arriving in Australia.
This is a regular occurrence on CI but it’s the first time I’ve seen it. It’s difficult not to feel sympathy for people who have sailed across dangerous waters to get to someplace safe.
I go down to the jetty, where several dozen DIAC, Serco, police and Customs officials, as well as interpreters and ambulance staff, await the arrival of the refugees. A number of CI residents and tourists are there too, and are mostly middle-aged or older. The ones I talk to all express opposition to refugees. They are ‘illegals’ who might come and ‘take over’, like ‘what’s happening in parts of Europe’. One person says, ‘They should be pushed back to Indonesia, where they will be safe. Why are they coming to Australia? What if terrorists are on the boats? We have poverty here and people living in bad conditions on CI, but they come and are treated better than Australians’. I mention Serco and ask whether anyone cares that a private company is making money from greater numbers of refugee arrivals. One older man says he feels uncomfortable about it, while a tourist isn’t aware of the fact.
The refugee boat stops around 200 metres from the shore and a speedboat races out to meet it. After a short while, around fourteen refugees wearing life jackets are brought to the jetty, then more are brought ashore. I see a woman in a wheelchair (I’m later told she is pregnant), an exceptionally tall man, a young girl, a woman wearing a hijab, and a teenage boy. They are Middle Eastern in appearance. They’re frisked and their bags are collected.
Watching this piece of theatre, I’m moved. I don’t know the refugees or their stories, whether they are genuine or not, but after hearing little but demonisation of them for years, the first contact between asylum seekers and the government strikes me as a deeply human exchange. Sadly, the refugees are about to be politicised, privatised and silenced by bureaucracy.
The process on the jetty looks orderly and the various officials treat the asylum seekers with respect. I hear one woman near me say, ‘See how they always come with men and boys first, and then bring their families later?’ As I walk back to my car, I start talking to a local Chinese man who is watching the proceedings. ‘They people, all bad Muslims’, he tells me. I ask him how he knows they are Muslims. ‘I’ve heard they are, and they’re not like the others.’
Arriving back at my hotel, I see an Australian ship alongside the refugee boat. The latter is to be set on fire and destroyed. I’ve been told the oil from such fires often floats to shore, damaging the coastline.
I search online for an official government statement about the latest CI boat arrival. Home Affairs Minister Brendan O’Connor sent out a press release around the time the boat was sighted, referring to a ‘suspected irregular entry vessel’ with around 116 people onboard. The release stated that the ‘border protection command’ had taken the refugees to land and begun processing them. But the statement is wrong. The refugees were still being brought to shore when it was issued, as I had seen with my own eyes. The press release is a template—the writer only needs to change the number of sighted asylum seekers. It’s as predictable as kabuki theatre.
‹   ›
I have been hassling DIAC’s regional manager on CI, Scott Matheson, and he finally grants me access to the detention centre on my last day on this island. However, he tells me that only one of the detainees I’ve listed on my application form, Hayatullah Mozafari, will see me. ‘You can’t bring a video camera, camera or mobile phone, and because you’re a journalist not even a pen or paper’, Matheson adds.
As I pull up early in the morning in the detention centre car park, all that’s visible is a large satellite dish next to the main reception, high fences in front of compounds reminiscent of a prison, and a collection of automated lockers in which Serco staff and visitors can stow their belongings. Two bulky MSS Security staff work the reception desk and I show them my photo ID. Just as at Curtin, there are Serco brochures ‘welcoming’ visitors to the centre. I sign in and go through an automated revolving door to find Scott Matheson waiting for me. ‘I wanted to make sure you got in alright’, he says. Matheson talks to me about recent boat arrivals and how the Australian Navy always gives asylum seekers proper life jackets when they’re escorted to CI. I sense Matheson is giving me special treatment, wanting to show me that the system can be friendly and approachable.
We walk down a path lined with fences and are met by Sally, a senior DIAC case manager who supervises the twenty assessors on CI. She’s normally based in Canberra but regularly does stints in detention centres such as those at Villawood, Maribyrnong (in Melbourne), Curtin and CI; she arrived on the island just after the March 2011 riots. Sally and I walk through high security doors and into an area where the so-called clients have meetings with caseworkers and refugee assessors. The meeting room is clinically clean and furnished only with a single table and a few chairs. We sit down to talk.
I like Sally. She’s personable and sympathetic, and is willing to answer all my questions. I sense she is trying to do the best she can in tough circumstances. Sally says she understands why people travel to Australia by boat. She seems to care about refugees and speaks at length about trying to process people quickly. She states that things have greatly improved since the Howard years, that there’s ‘better care and less punishment’. I ask about Serco and she’s full of praise for the company, saying that they’re ‘essential partners’ because ‘the public service simply aren’t capable of handling security, intel gathering and other services’. She says Serco staff are well trained and much better than those of previous contractors G4S and ACM. Sally says DIAC has the power to sack any Serco staff who aren’t behaving properly, such as when they treat refugees with disrespect. ‘This happens very rarely’, she tells me.27
Sally argues that most people who pass through the system are genuine refugees, and that the processing times are getting quicker. I ask her how she can argue this when asylum seekers sometimes languish for two years behind bars. She remains adamant but concedes, ‘I wish it was faster, but the system simply can’t handle all the people here’. I ask if the arrival of more boats would strain the system even more. ‘Yes’, she says, ‘but we’re trying to keep less than 1000 people here on CI’. She states that the current number of asylum seekers is manageable and allows refugees to be given more personal treatment; she worries about what would happen if they had to reinstitute the use of tents to manage an excess number of arrivals.28 Sally also claims that DIAC and Serco offer refugees activities such as English classes, internet access, trips out of the centre and tailoring classes, though Sister Joan disputes that the authorities do much of this.
I ask Sally if she supports the privatisation of the detention system and she replies that although ‘it isn’t perfect, contractors have to control certain aspects the government simply cannot’. Cannot or will not, I wonder. The idea of Canberra hiring and training more detention centre staff doesn’t appear to be an option. Rather, it seems there will be an ever-increasing reliance on Serco. That said, Sally does give me the impression that DIAC and Serco are trying to address the negative public image of the system. She agrees with me, for instance, that when the media report the arrival of a boat, it simply fuels a paranoia about, and hatred of refugees in the wider community. ‘The media should be profiling the people in here’, she says, ‘and they’ll see that most of them are fleeing from persecution and coming [here] for a reason’.
Sally asks if I want to see Hayatullah in this meeting room or in the centre’s courtyard. When I suggest the courtyard, in the hope of chatting with other detainees, she remembers that ‘Thursday is visa day’ and that the space will be crowded with people wanting to come and talk with me. She also says that the man I am visiting ‘won’t be getting a visa today so it wouldn’t really be fair for him to see the others celebrating’.
Hayatullah, a Hazara man, finally arrives. He’s one of the men I saw on the beach with Sister Joan. He looks forlorn and barely makes eye contact with me. I’m told he is on antidepressants and has trouble getting out of bed—this even happened today, when he knew he had a visitor. Hayatullah’s teeth are crooked and yellowed from smoking, and he has a small hunch, which causes him to lean forward and look down when talking.
Through a translator, Hayatullah tells me he has been inside detention for 22 months and still has no idea when his situation will change; he’s awaiting a court date for a judicial review. I ask if he would consider returning to Afghanistan, or perhaps going to Pakistan, but he says there’s nothing for him there. He recounts matter-of-factly that his 15-year-old son was recently killed in Pakistan.
Hayatullah gives short answers, and I can tell that his despair is sensed by the translator, though he does thank me for visiting: ‘It gives me some comfort’. I ask if the Hazara community in Australia has reached out in any way, but he says no-one has made contact. He has become friends with other detainees inside CI, but tells me that ‘ultimately everybody is out for themselves and desperate to get refugee status’.
It’s a difficult conversation. I try to show empathy for his situation—I don’t know his exact story or its validity, but I can see he’s in a bad way. At one point, he says, ‘It won’t matter if I get out if I’ve gone crazy in here. It will make no difference on the outside’. Here is a man who has lost hope. He briefly smiles when I get up to leave, and I say I hope to see him soon on the outside.29
Sally walks with me to a fortified gate that leads to an oval that mostly comprises brown dirt; Sally says that it’s greener when the rain is more frequent, after the height of summer has passed. The detainees play cricket and soccer here later in the day, when it’s cooler, but at 10.30 a.m. it’s quiet. A refugee in a purple shirt sits silently beyond the gate, just watching. Meanwhile, Serco and DIAC staff greet each other as they pass near us.
Around the oval, Sally explains, lie various compounds painted in different colours, ‘the most secure’ daubed yellow or white. She says that if the men behave in the white compound, they’re gradually moved to less secure areas. She suddenly looks at me and says, unprompted, that the detention centre looks like a ‘maximum security prison, and it is’. She goes on: ‘If it was built more recently it would be different, softer, less like a jail’.
I say to Sally that DIAC and Serco do themselves no favours by not being more transparent about their activities. ‘We’ve been burnt too many times’ by the media, she responds, and mentions a recent 60 Minutes story that featured aerial shots of the centre obtained by a remote-controlled helicopter, and the testimony of disgruntled former staff, their voices muffled. It pissed everybody off and distorted the reality of the CI detention centre, she claims.
As Sally walks me towards the car park, I notice a number of Serco signs attached to walls that feature messages about dedication to care. I ask her again about the life of a refugee inside detention. Sally is comfortable with the current system, claiming that most people who arrive here are genuine refugees, but that ‘some aren’t and it’s up to the immigration minister of the day to work out what to do with them’.
‹   ›
The CI detention centre is run like a prison, similar to other Sercorun facilities in Britain. It’s a secure environment in which good behaviour is rewarded. Its gardens are well tended and manicured, and the staff are friendly to one another. But the bureaucratic complexity of the operation and DIAC’s inability to deal quickly with people’s claims makes a falsity of the normality and calm. The profit motive is the only thing that has been satisfied by successive Australian governments looking to companies like Serco to provide the solution to their asylum seeker ‘problem’. The welfare of detainees seems less important.
In a New Matilda piece I wrote with Paul Farrell and Marni Cordell, which revealed the 2009 contract between DIAC and Serco, unauthorised media access to detention centres is shown to be a ‘critical’ event, given the same status as a hostage situation, bomb threat or death, while detainees’ clinical depression and voluntary starvation of under 24 hours duration are ‘minor’ situations.30 Keep ing tabs on the media is clearly a priority—it’s noted in the November 2012 minutes of a CI Community Reference Group meeting that ‘no media is believed to be present on the island’.
I’ve also received countless messages from former and current Serco and DIAC staff telling me that a culture of brutality exists on CI. An official Serco document leaked in July 2011 even alleged that refugees had created a ‘self-harm culture’ to illicit sympathy from guards and DIAC officials.31
The minutes of the CI Community Reference Group meeting of November 2012 state that since the group’s October gathering, ‘7 clients have been transferred to the mainland for medical treat ment’. The notes do not describe the health issues involved, but history suggests that self-harm is the most likely factor. I have obtained 2011 Serco logs for CI and the number of documented self-harm incidents is shocking. In the space of a week in June 2011, forty-eight men either threatened self-harm or carried out the threat. The logs listed literally dozens of instances of men not eating, smashing up property, and self-harming by hanging themselves and sewing their lips. In July 2011 I spoke to a Serco officer from Perth who confirmed this information. Glen also disclosed that guards were discouraged from giving comfort to those in their care, and that some mocked asylum seekers who were displaying their trauma by saying things like, ‘Is that the best you can do?’ He told me that up to twenty detainees dug ‘mock graves as a form of protest … some in a fit of confused despair, as they felt dead’. He also said that the Serco management didn’t like suicides occurring inside the facility because it was bad for the company’s reputation.
This is vulture capitalism at work, and it affects the mental state of both refugees and detention centre staff. Asylum seeker Hayatullah Mozafari told me that he’s given decent medical attention, but the fact that so many asylum seekers require psychiatric care proves that the system is making people sick, compounding the suffering of already vulnerable minds and bodies.
It also encourages a culture of secrecy and denial.32 Prisoners’ rights advocate Charandev Singh told me in 2010 that the grim reality of the privatisation of detention centres was that it had happened because ‘governments don’t want to assume responsibility for immigration centres; they haven’t developed the skills to do so’.33
Serco aren’t facilitating the arrival of more boats, but their bottom line is helped if they come, and there is no incentive in the privatised system for the government to process claims quickly. These factors are compounded by a conservative political environment and media establishment—Rupert Murdoch’s News Limited owns 70 per cent of Australia’s print outlets—which ensures complacency and unaccountability. Challenging this ideology is the first step in rectifying the decades of damage wrought by detention centre privatisation.







3
JAMES PRICE POINT—BOOM OR BUST?
It might not be in Australia’s interest to take advice from energy multinationals, for we are developing these resources at an unsustainable rate.
Paul Cleary, Too Much Luck, 20111
The group I am in walks in silence towards a pristine white beach framed by low windswept red rocks. We hear only the noise of small waves gently lapping the sand and the wind brushing softly across the rough ground. It’s late morning and I’m already sweltering under a perfectly blue sky dotted with a few stray white clouds.
I leave the others to walk along the beach, absorbing the beauty. There’s nothing around me except my footprints, while offshore is an immaculate marine environment, its calm waters shielding precious coral and a huge range of rare wildlife. Then I see a large spray-painted sign in the distance. It reads: ‘No Gas’.
It is November 2011 and I am 60 kilometres north of the Western Australian town of Broome, near the site of energy multinational Woodside’s planned $40-billion LNG (liquified natural gas) plant at James Price Point (JPP); just offshore is the Browse basin, which contains massive amounts of shale gas. I’m visiting the area with representatives of The Wilderness Society, an Australian NGO dedicated to the environment, fighting climate change and maintaining clean air and water. The society opposes the Woodside gas project because it claims that building a commercial refinery on the shore of the Kimberley would be environmentally destructive and open up the region to further resource exploitation. Broome itself would be turned into an oil and gas town.
One of my companions is the Wilderness Society’s Kimberley campaign manager, Glen Klatovsky, a large and friendly man who describes himself as a right-winger with green beliefs. When I first met him in Sydney a few months earlier, he explained that the society’s campaign against the JPP development was the largest in Australia since the protests against Tasmania’s Franklin Dam project and the proposal to mine uranium at Jabiluka in the Northern Territory, both of which took place in the 1980s. He went on to say that natural gas is seen as a transition energy source: a way of tackling climate change by reducing society’s reliance on dirty fossil fuels. But one of the key arguments against extracting shale gas is the need for fracking (hydraulic fracturing), whereby fluid is pumped at high pressure into shale to break it open and release the gas inside. This fluid contains numerous chemicals, which puts local water supplies at risk. In addition, the oil in the shale may be exploited, despite having been labelled ‘economically unviable as well as a dirty business’.2
A few days after my first visit to JPP, early in the morning when it is not yet energy-sappingly hot, Klatovsky and I return to the area. We drive along a rocky red-dirt track towards the site of a blockade that was established in 2011 by organisations opposed to the LNG development, key among them a group called Save the Kimberley. On the way in we see a few police vehicles and a ‘border security’ van—we wonder if the latter is for tracking down foreigners at the camp who have overstayed their visas. We also come across a booze bus guarded by a lone policeman. (He stops us on our way back to town, but the breathalyser doesn’t work due to the extreme heat and he waves us on.)
The first protest camp we come to is basic: just simple tents, chickens and signs saying ‘No Gas’. It’s clean but unavoidably dusty. Three blockaders with dreadlocks play Monopoly in the shade. After driving for another fifteen minutes, we reach the main camp, Walmadan, named after the legendary Aboriginal warrior who also lent his name to the Indigenous country at JPP. It looks like a wellorganised mini-city, filled with activists from not just the local area but across the country.
Men, women and children walk around or sit under tarpaulins. There’s a neat communal space with a clean food bench, and a communications area with a telephone, internet access and walkie-talkies. A filing cabinet is filled with stickers carrying anti-multinational slogans, including ‘Hell in the Kimberley’ (Shell), ‘Hidden enemy of the Kimberley community’ (Chevron) and ‘Destroy ing the future of the Kimberley’ (BHP Billiton). An Aboriginal flag flies high above the site; an Indigenous elder called Phillip Roe has a significant presence here.
The list of ‘Camp Protocols’ includes ‘respecting culture’, ‘participate in breakfast and dinner circles’, ‘use water sparingly’ and ‘always speak and act non-violently towards others, yourself, creatures and the land’. And, of course, ‘Have fun!’ Klatovsky explains that ‘the blockade won’t win the campaign on its own, but it could be lost if there’s bad behaviour, violence or moles causing trouble’. Hence the importance of camp rules.
The conservative Western Australian Liberal government, which first came to power in 2008 and is led by Premier Colin Barnett, has pledged at least $250 million in taxpayer-funded grants over 30 years to assist Woodside in its plans, including $100 million to upgrade the JPP access road.3 It is a significant project for The Wilderness Society to challenge, as Klatovsky confirms: ‘Nowhere in the world have green groups ever won against a project of this size before’.
As it turns out, they will be more successful than they can imagine, although that is not yet apparent during my visit. What will also become evident is that winning a battle does not necessarily mean winning the war.
‹   ›
Corporate concerns over Woodside’s selection of JPP as the site of an LNG plant were detailed in cables released by WikiLeaks in 2011. They revealed that a number of American energy companies were worried that the federal Labor government was pressuring them to accept the development of JPP with the Australian multinational, and that if they didn’t, they’d be locked out of the deal entirely. Clearly, getting access to resources in a relatively untapped part of the world was a unique opportunity, and these companies desperately wanted to pursue it.
In a cable sent on 11 December 2009, a senior adviser at Chevron, Mike Edmondson, told the US consul-general in Perth that this ‘reflected [federal minister for resources Martin] Ferguson’s long-standing views on “use it or lose it” provisions and Woodside’s lobbying to pressure its partners’, adding that the decisions involved were ‘unprecedented and concerning’. The cable went on to express displeasure, via the Australian Petroleum and Explorers Association’s director of exploration and access, Ranga Parimala, with Martin Ferguson’s insistence that all LNG partners use JPP or face exclusion from the project. Parimala had told the US Government that ‘the decision was an “unprecedented interference” by the government in a project, intended to force Browse partners [including Shell, BP and Chevron] to choose Woodside’s preferred development pathway [at JPP]’.4
It remains unclear exactly why the federal government was so determined to push for the JPP site, except for the implication that Ferguson was seemingly convinced that the desires and infrastructure of an Australian corporation should be given preference. The other companies involved in the project, including Shell, BP, BHP (which sold its stake in the project in December 2012 to PetroChina, that country’s biggest gas and oil producer) and Chevron (which also left the project in 2012, selling its share to Shell), wanted to use an alternative site near Karratha in the already industry-heavy Pilbara region of Western Australia. Another option that was floated was to anchor a platform developed by Shell, called Prelude, some 200 kilometres off the Western Australian coast. But, according to a US embassy cable, Woodside and Minister Ferguson insisted that all the partner companies had to start working on JPP within 120 days or be forced from the development of the gas fields. Ferguson’s energy adviser, Tracy Winters, said that the government ‘would not allow companies to build portfolio investments by sitting on Australian resources over a long term’. It was resource nationalism of the most transparent kind, lacking any consideration of environmental impact.
Environmental NGOs based in Broome told me they heard that Chevron even voiced its concerns about JPP to former US secretary of state Hillary Clinton, asking her to write to the Australian Government to put pressure on Woodside to move its project elsewhere. While it may seem unusual that a foreign company should expect to have so much power over Australian resources, successive federal governments have granted various multinationals permission to control the rights to military hardware production, the management of water supplies and the extraction of coal across the country. Our resources and infrastructure have long been for sale. The push by both Australian and foreign interests for access to the Kimberley’s resources is just business as usual.
Environmentalists had their own concerns about Woodside’s plans for JPP. Apart from an abundance of fragile marine life, the area contains irreplaceable fossils and dinosaur prints. New Scientist has editorialised that no price can be placed on preserving these rarities: ‘A fossil lost today is thus knowledge lost tomorrow’.5 Former Greens leader Bob Brown, who has been a regular visitor to the JPP site, condemned Woodside for ignoring concerns that fossils and the local whale population would be affected by the development, particularly as approximately 1500 large ships and support vessels are required to maintain dredging of the area. He also said: ‘You can’t be in Broome now without knowing that the town doesn’t want the project’.6 Global warming is another issue, with environmental campaigner Geoffrey Cousins estimating that the LNG plant would emit 39 million tonnes of carbon dioxide each year.7
In light of such powerful opposition to the development of JPP, Woodside, whose CEO since May 2011 has been Peter Coleman, formerly a vice-president at ExxonMobil, remained determined. In November 2011, it released its own environmental impact statement, which found little reason for concern. In addition, the company claimed up to 8000 jobs would be created and that construction at the site could generate up to $50 billion for the Australian economy.8
When I visited Walmadan, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) was on-site, assessing the area’s suitability for devel opment. But activists expressed their concern about the environmental impact assessment process. This seemed particularly valid after four EPA board members had to withdraw from the assessment due to conflicts of interest.9
The business editor of the West Australian, Peter Klinger, said in mid-2012 that the constant political and environmental protests against the JPP plant were upsetting foreign investors: ‘There’s senior executives in California and in the Hague, and probably in London as well, who are looking at this and going, “Well, do I really want to be involved in a project over here in Western Australia that results in so many negative headlines, day in, day out?”’10 This echoed what the managing director of corporate risk firm Futureye, Katherine Teh-White, said in late 2011, that both Woodside and the Western Australian Government had provided a template for how not to proceed with a big project. ‘Browse has become a national scandal’, she said.11 Indeed, her words now seem prescient.
Western Australian Premier Colin Barnett was unresponsive to the corporate and environmental backlash against the project. During a Perth business lunch in November 2012, in front of Woodside’s Peter Coleman and Shell Australia chairwoman Ann Pickard, the Premier argued that bringing gas production online via JPP was still the best option and that Shell should drop its opposition. ‘We would be stark raving mad as a country not to have Australian participation in the development of Australian resources’, Barnett said.12
Also in 2012, on ABC TV’s Q&A, Bob Brown challenged Barnett’s description of JPP as a ‘giant refrigerator’ that will ‘sustain exports and energy in this state and perhaps other parts of Australia for decades to come’. Barnett responded by emphasising the job creation potential of the project and dismissing concerns about animal welfare. ‘The whales are fine. They’re very happy’, he said, smiling.
‹   ›
Vulture, or predatory, capitalism has easily taken root in Australia and many other self-described democracies because of the limited ability and willingness of the public to scrutinise it and demand change. The Financial Times opined in the 1990s that a capitalist democracy works best when it is focused on ‘the process of depoliticising the economy’. The Washington Post agreed, arguing that a contemporary democracy ran smoothly when the leading political parties ‘essentially agree on most of the major issues’.13 However, when an unthinking public is coupled with an unquestioning, absent or, even worse, compliant media and a self-interested political system, it’s not hard to see how a high-impact plan like that intended for JPP can too quickly become a reality—a reality that is different for all involved.
The major difference in the ways in which resources are exploited in Haiti and PNG compared with Australia and other Western nations is the illusion of compensation being offered to those who are negatively affected by a project. In developing nations, where multinationals routinely bribe government officials, environmental checks and balances are often neglected and the locals are either uninformed of their fate or told to accept the situation, including minimal financial benefits. We like to think the situation is radically different in the West, but corruption can occur in more subtle ways than the handing over of cash in brown paper bags, and the results can be similar on the ground. It should not be left to faith that the market will decide what’s viable. Community and environmental sustainability cannot only be measured by a share price.
The net benefit of Australia’s resource boom for the general population is a contested point. The Australian economy is undoubtedly insulated from global pressures due to China’s enormous desire to buy what lies beneath the ground. But, as journalist Paul Cleary explains in his 2011 book Too Much Luck, Australia’s ‘state and federal politicians have become so bedazzled by the prospect of even greater mineral riches that they are eagerly encouraging a resources rush while neglecting long-term ecological and financial consequences’. Cleary argues that ‘increasingly we see weak and inept governments up against muscular multi nationals. Small state governments find themselves negotiating with companies whose revenue is many times their size’.14 He continues: ‘Under-taxed and under-regulated, big multinational companies are now making colossal profits by selling off our non-renewable resources. New projects are being rushed through, but who is looking out for the public interest? Industries such as tourism and education that, unlike mining, involve many jobs, will fade away’.15
The Greens and NGOs such as The Wilderness Society and Greenpeace challenge Australia’s reliance on environmentally destruc tive fossil fuels; the country ranks as the world’s biggest exporter of dirty coal. This is in contrast to the bulk of Australia’s mainstream media and its two major political parties, which act as if emitting carbon into the atmosphere for decades to come is unavoidable, that it is essential for the country’s economic prosperity. Prime Minister Julia Gillard’s ‘candid admission that Australia is going to be reliant on fossil fuels for “a long, long period of time”’, editorialised the Australian Financial Review in July 2012, ‘is a welcome dose of reality’.16 Renewable energy sources and the serious investment required to make them a viable alternative to current energy sources apparently isn’t part of the discussion in ‘serious’ circles.
What also goes largely unspoken are the global implications of aggressively pursuing projects like an LNG plant at JPP. Woodside and other energy companies are playing the long game. JPP was only the beginning of a much bigger resources push that they hope to make in the region. The Canning Super Basin, not JPP, is arguably the real goal in the Kimberley. The shale gas in this basin may be worth untold billions.17 The U.S. Energy Information Administration has labelled the Canning Super Basin as one of the world’s major potential energy sources, estimating that it contains 6.5 trillion cubic metres of gas. After returning from a visit to Texas as part of the Australian American Leadership Dialogue in August 2012, Liberal MP Josh Frydenberg hailed shale gas as the path to ‘a richer and self-sustaining future, and a more stable one’.18
I have heard for myself the claims that with JPP-style projects, Australia could be looking to set itself up as the next Saudi Arabia or Qatar, a global energy centre. The same is being said of East Africa, which is shaping up as a potential competitor to Australia’s ambitions after massive LNG reserves were found in Mozambique and Tanzania. Widespread privatisation will follow wherever such reserves are found.
The extraction of shale gas poses serious ecological danger, not least a huge amount of emitted methane, an increased risk of earthquakes due to drilling, and the potential contamination of underground water aquifers—issues that would be avoided by investment in the ‘clean’ alternative of renewable energy sources. Regardless, plans to undertake this and other resource exploitation in the Kimberley continue apace. Huge reserves of uranium, iron ore, gold, coal, bauxite, diamonds and oil lie below the surface of the region, 80 per cent of which is already under exploration leases. In fact, the Barnett government has changed legislation to fast-track project approvals, thanks to the establishment of a government– industry group that recommended this. Robin Chapple, a Greens representative on the Western Australian Legislative Council, told the ABC that the Barnett administration had ‘amended the Planning Act to facilitate development-assessment panels which override local government’, and that it was in the ‘process of proposing to amend the Aboriginal Heritage Act’.19
ABC TV’s Lateline investigated the environmental costs of this explosion of energy sourcing and found that fracking was the way in which one major company, Buru Energy, was exploiting resources in the Kimberley’s interior. Wayne Bergmann, former Indigenous leader of the Kimberley Land Council, said, ‘There should be a moratorium on any further drilling in the Canning Basin until there are clear rules and guidelines in place so that we can be assured that world’s best practice is being carried out’. He also said that Aboriginal rights were being ignored.20
The use of military forces to ‘protect’ the Kimberley’s ‘vulnerable’ offshore gas reserves has come to be seen as logical in the context of this resources frenzy. A federal government statement released on behalf of Defence Minister Stephen Smith in January 2012 confirmed this view. It said that ‘a loss in confidence in the reliability of global markets or a major conflict could increase the likelihood of strategic competition for resources’. The answer, the statement stressed, was a massively increased military presence in the nation’s north and west, whereby the Australian Defence Force ‘could be better positioned to respond to Australia’s strategic and security demands’. It maintained that the risk to Australia’s energy assets were low ‘unless a regional conflict breaks out … [which is when] tensions over resources may exacerbate existing security problems’.21
Premier Colin Barnett was also quoted as expressing a desire for more troops on the ground:
 
Western Australia has got a 13000 kilometre coastline. It runs 2400 km north-south. It is a very exposed part of Australia and it is the closest part of Australia to South-East Asia and a very troubled part of the world. So our position is very consistent: we want a strong military presence, particularly a naval presence, off our north-west coast.22
This is militarisation by media.
Compounding the issue of state and federal governments calling for an increased military presence in resource-rich areas for security reasons is the privatisation of infrastructure using public resources. This results in a combination of police and private security overseeing various developments, and the protests that may take place at these sites.
Woodside is a case in point. In 2010, it contracted the American security company Kellogg Brown and Root (KBR)—a multinational that has been cited for countless human rights and accounting breaches in Afghanistan and Iraq since 11 September 2001—to monitor the JPP site. A KBR press release from that time states that the contract was to ‘execute the study for a 12 million tons per annum liquefaction facility, as well as the associated infrastructure and marine facilities’. KBR maintains a strong relationship with Australia, having taken charge of water resources, transport infrastructure and mining developments in the country, and on occasion working with the Australian military.
‹   ›
When I visit, people at the JPP blockade camps are keen to tell me about the private security firm Hostile Environment Services (HES), which they claim has intimidated and harassed activists, and filmed them without their consent.23 One man tells me: ‘They use footage for who knows what and where, and work alongside state police’. The presence of HES at JPP is a relatively new phenomenon, but it has already earned a reputation. In 2011, The Australian called it a ‘militia’ due to the aggressive tactics it uses against Kimberley protestors.24
One of the blockade’s leaders, Damien, who has a long bushy beard and is comfortably attired in a khaki shirt, shorts, a hat and Blundstone boots, walks with me to the nearby Woodside compound to show me HES staff in action. About 200 metres down a red-dirt track from Walmadan, we come to a gate that marks the entrance to the compound, which marks the first stage of work on a massive camp that will house the nearly 1000 people who will construct the LNG plant. A security guard is opening the gate as we arrive, to allow the departure of Woodside workers who have finished their shift. Damien says the blockaders are told they can’t go in despite it being public land, and that they are harassed if they try to. I think to myself that it is not reasonable to keep citizens away from public land just to protect multinational interests.
We walk around the perimeter of the Woodside compound, which is a collection of shipping containers accompanied by a first aid station, water tanks and excavation equipment. Damien, who comes here regularly to monitor the environmental damage caused by the work being undertaken, points out countless examples of the breaking of environmental laws, including pollution of the surrounding land. He also indicates air conditioners secured with flimsy pieces of rope, which contravenes occupational, health and safety regulations. But despite the blockaders reporting these breaches, Damian says that the authorities do nothing except harass them for raising these issues. He points to some massive lights that rise above the compound and says that Woodside and its security personnel regularly shine them directly at the blockade at all hours of the night.
At various points of our walk around the perimeter, a man with a video camera appears behind the fence, loudly announces the time and place, and starts filming us. I film him back, and he quickly disappears. We come across two security men sitting in a car and they start filming us too. They say nothing, despite our attempts to start a conversation with them.
As we start walking back towards the camp, we are approached by a well-built security man wearing black wraparound sunglasses, a fluorescent Thrifty Car Rental vest and a small chest camera, who asks if we are leaving. We ask him who he is and for whom he works, but he says little except that he’s just doing his job. He follows us as we walk, an aggressive presence. I say that he has no right to shadow us on public property. Damien asks if he cares that the environment is being exploited by his bosses, and does he worry that his children or grandchildren will not be able to enjoy the natural surroundings. He only receives a blank stare in response. Eventually, the security man repeats that he’s there to make sure we’re safe around the Woodside compound, but it’s obvious that the real rationale for his job is protecting the company’s assets.
A few days later I meet Shane Hughes, a local massage therapist and a key activist against the JPP gas hub. Hughes, who was arrested once for challenging Woodside’s authority, gives an example of the collusion between police and private forces and the subsequent harassment that I routinely hear about during my visit.
‘Some months back’, says Hughes, ‘I was with three other campaigners in my car on Manari Road [the turn-off to JPP, near Broome]. I was there to intercept the Woodside convoy, which had been travelling illegally across Yawuru country. As we saw a Woodside vehicle approaching, I used my car to effectively block their progress. Two weeks later, on a sunny Saturday afternoon, two police turned up at the door of my house to issue me with a $500 fine and four demerit points for the passengers in my car not wearing seatbelts. If I had provided police with the names of the passengers with me, they would have gone to those peoples’ residences and issued them also with $500 fines each. All this was derived from video footage supplied by Woodside security from that day. Most Woodside security vehicles have in-car video cameras. This has since become common practice—for Woodside to provide footage to police who then charge the campaigners. When I ask the security what they’re doing, what will happen to the footage and for whom they’re working, there is usually stony-faced silence’.
Hughes is softly spoken but determined. ‘This is a battle we have to win’, he says. He’s not opposed to all gas extraction, but he believes the current site is inappropriate and that the development will destroy the area’s ecology and natural beauty, with no long-term benefit to the community.
The relationship between the government, in the guise of the police, and private security workers at JPP is a mysterious one. What is the chain of command? Who issues the orders? Who is responsible for the nature of the action taken against protestors?
In 2011, a Woodside spokesman defended the hiring of private security, saying that ‘we have a responsibility to ensure the safety and wellbeing of our people as they go about their lawful business and [we] will report any unlawful behaviour to the police’.25 But no comment was made about the lack of transparency regarding the relationship between the corporations, state police and private security companies. Western Australian Police Commissioner Karl O’Callaghan did confirm in May 2012 that sending around 200 Western Australian police officers to JPP would cost $100 000 per day. The government, not Woodside, met this cost.
One night in Broome, I have pizza and drinks with key figures in the Save the Kimberley group. We meet at a place 20 minutes out of Broome and sit in a large shed with a high roof. A big sign at the entrance of the property reads, ‘No gas hub. We love Broome just the way it is’. There are several women, but the majority of the people at the meeting are men. They’re a passionate bunch, committed to maintaining Broome as a sustainable place. They are initially wary of me, as a number of corporate reporters have written spurious stories about anti-JPP activists, but Glen Klatovsky vouches for my integrity.
The people I am listening to share an enormous concern: What happens after the boom? They complain about the prevalence of short-term thinking, about how neither the government nor big business has articulated an effective plan for when the resources run out. They explain that Australia, unlike countries such as Norway, Chile and even East Timor, refuses to establish a robust fund from current resource revenue to provide money when the boom is over. Instead, Canberra perpetuates the myth that the country’s wealth is infinite, that Australians will always be comfortable and insulated by resource exports. The federal government did introduce a Mineral Resource Rent Tax in 2012, which applies to new coal and ironore projects, but this is seen as having been considerably weakened by the mining industry. The perception is that the politicians have once again been outmanoeuvred by resource giants such as BHP and Rio Tinto. Furthermore, the Liberal Party has pledged to abolish this initiative if it wins the next federal election—many of the conservative politicians are overly close to the mining companies, which makes a serious attempt at planning for the post-boom period a virtual impossibility.
The figures released by the Australian Government in a 2010 resource assessment reveal a disturbing lack of candour about the country’s reliance on the resource advice provided by companies such as Chevron and Woodside.26 In 2012, a report by Deloitte Access for the Australian Petroleum Production & Explora tion Associa tion claimed that, within a few years, Australia would become the second-largest exporter of liquefied gas in the world. But it’s impossible to determine the truth of the claim that oil and gas output will peak at $46 billion in 2020.27
Over the next couple of hours, I hear stories about how a small group of people in Broome are challenging the pro-mining narrative coming from the media and politicians. It is a rare campaign because of the combination of Indigenous and white participants. Glen Klatovsky says, ‘Most green groups are scared of losing east coast supporters, in Sydney and Melbourne, by taking on Indigenous groups supporting JPP’. The Wilderness Society is a notable exception.
‹   ›
The JPP proposal offered much to Indigenous groups. Some, for instance, received funds from Woodside. The company released a statement in May 2012 that outlined its commitments to Kimberley’s Indigenous people, including a target of 300 Aboriginal jobs during construction of the JPP plant and spending $1.3 million a year to assist education programs in the region. Unfortunately, Woodside used this pledge to condemn groups that opposed the JPP project, saying that they ignored the employment and financial benefits it would bring to local communities.
Government funding of services for the country’s first inhabitants is a much better long-term approach, but this can be compromised too. Western Australian Premier Barnett was asked on ABC TV’s Q&A in November 2012 why the money he was offering Kimberley’s Indigenous people—$1.5 billion in compensation over 30 years—was dependent on them accepting the JPP project.28 He avoided the question, merely arguing that the area was ‘vacant Crown land’. Former Greens leader Bob Brown shot back: ‘Why not give those things anyway [the $1.5 billion]? That’s a state responsibility. That’s should be the right of all Australians’.
Barnett then defended his government’s position on massive resource exploitation: ‘I was slightly offended when Western Australia was described as China’s quarry … that sells the state short. The industry here is world leading, very sophisticated, high technology, and the mining and petroleum industry is Australia’s leading industry. This is the future income for all Australians’. Reflecting the age of ‘austerity’ and public–private partnerships, JPP was sold by both the government and Woodside as the best and only way to give Aboriginal people the services they need—a bag of riches that would cause no environmental damage and provide economic independence for Indigenous locals.
The Aboriginal Kimberley Land Council (KLC) voted to back Woodside’s development. In September 2011, its then leader, Wayne Bergmann, wrote in The Australian that JPP ‘represents a once-in-a-lifetime chance to move beyond welfare and create real jobs and facilities for Indigenous people. Indigenous communities are struggling in the Kimberley, and without integrating our people into the modern economy and the world of work we risk losing a priceless cultural heritage’.29
But Glen Klatovsky told me that Tony Burke, the federal Environment Minister, believed that if KLC voted again, 80 per cent of the participants would oppose JPP due to concerns over the original approval process. That first vote, held in May 2011, was rife with procedural problems, not least that some of the Goolarabooloo people who’d been called to the meeting hadn’t been forewarned about the vote and had walked out, allowing the remaining Aboriginal people to support the initiative. There was also evidence that children participated in the ballot and bullying tactics were used. It was widely believed in Broome that the vote was strategically organised to ensure a particular outcome.
Wayne Bergmann told the National Press Club in Canberra in June 2012 that working with multinationals was the only way his people could prosper: ‘You cannot have an Indigenous culture, you cannot have an Indigenous people without an Indigenous economy to support it’.30 He argued that native title laws must be changed to allow Aboriginal people better and fairer access to the mining boom.
Mervyn Maher, a Jabbir-Jabbir man and KLC employee, shared Wayne Bergmann’s view. ‘I voted for it [JPP] but it must be on Aboriginal peoples’ conditions’, he said. ‘It’s all about health, education, training, employment, housing … because those are the things that really needed fixing’.31
There’s little doubt that some Indigenous businesses are benefiting financially from the resources boom. For example, Rio Tinto, Australia’s largest private employer of Indigenous people, has signed around $1 billion of deals with Aboriginal people– linked companies since 2010.32 But a key reason why the mining industry hires so many Indigenous workers is that they face labour shortages, as well as the fact that many mining projects are on or near Indigenous land. In addition, Woodside and other oil and gas companies certainly don’t want to be seen to be shafting Indigenous people in a first-world country such as Australia—they’re very sensitive to public opinion.
Also consider that Wayne Bergmann is just one Indigenous voice. There were other traditional owners who opposed the JPP plans. The deputy shire president of Broome, Indigenous woman Dr Anne Poelina, rightly wondered ‘why we have to give up our land to get the kind of benefits all Australians are entitled to anyway’.33 Mitch Torres, an Indigenous elder of the Jabirr Jabirr-Djugun Yawuru tribe, told The Australian in May 2012 that she condemned the government’s use of private security to protect Woodside’s interests. ‘Who are they protecting us from?’ she asked. ‘Ourselves?’34
Competing Aboriginal claims over the JPP land began as soon as Woodside announced its plans.35 During my visit I met Phillip Roe, the Indigenous elder who had a constant presence at the JPP blockade site, and who in December 2011 successfully challenged in the Western Australian Supreme Court the land-acquisition process threatened by the Barnett government. He was rightly appalled when it emerged that KLC had assisted Woodside in applying for permission to drill at Aboriginal sacred sites at JPP. ‘There are some ceremonial grounds in there’, Roe said.36 By contrast, Premier Barnett described JPP as an ‘unremarkable beach’.37
Perhaps the nadir of the public stoush over JPP was a frontpage story in The Australian in September 2011 that alleged a racist newsletter was being circulated in Broome, which accused a key Aboriginal leader who negotiated with Woodside of being the ‘chief coconut’ (an insult implying that someone is black on the outside but white on the inside). Despite environmental groups denying any involvement in the newsletter, the KLC’s Nolan Hunter lashed out at opponents of the LNG plant, green groups in particular, for betraying Indigenous Australians: ‘For them, the environment can stay pristine and the people in it can live in poverty and destitution’.38
A retiring Labor MP, Carol Martin, Australia’s first Aboriginal female parliamentarian, agreed with Hunter, calling anti-JPP protestors ‘a lazy bunch of bastards’ whose actions only empowered ‘ferals and mung beans’. She condemned activists’ alleged racial taunting of those backing Woodside, citing a video of a British man telling a Woodside employee, ‘You look like you have got a bit of kaffir in you’.39
What Australia faced at JPP is replicated across the world. Unhappy arranged marriages between Indigenous rights, private investment, multinationals, pro-mining governments, lobbyists and environmentalists rarely last, mostly ending in an acrimonious divorce.
It is wholly legitimate for Indigenous communities, after more than two centuries of attempted genocide, abuse and neglect, to want economic self-determination. It’s a view that was expressed by Kimberley elder John Watson when he said, ‘What many white people don’t understand is that our people have never had the opportunity to make that decision [to receive money from governments and companies] on their own’.40 Watson said the white people opposed to JPP, many of whom lived in relative luxury compared with black Australia, seemed to mean well but they ‘don’t see the struggle we go through every day, they don’t see the social issues, they don’t see the problems we need to fix’.
On the other hand, the history of Indigenous Australians is littered with companies that have pledged the world to traditional landowners but ended up giving very little. I see this in PNG and Haiti, where over recent decades many Australian and other foreign companies have seduced poor landowners and enriched a corrupt system designed to pollute the land at the expense of the people’s wellbeing. Woodside were no different, selling JPP as the ultimate gift to Indigenous Australians.
When multimillionaire businessman and anti-JPP campaigner Geoffrey Cousins met with Woodside bosses Michael Chaney and Don Voelte in October 2010, he questioned the benefits that would flow to Aboriginal people from the project. He was told that helping black people was the company’s business. ‘You are trying to deny the Aborigines in the Kimberley the benefits we will bring to them’, Chaney said to Cousins.41 However, even a cursory examination of life for Indigenous workers in Karratha, the home of Woodside, shows parlous living standards. ‘Despite 40 years of sustained economic development in the Pilbara region, the labour force status of indigenous Pilbara residents has barely altered’, stated a 2005 Australian National University study.42
In July 2012, Chaney accused Cousins and other JPP protestors of being dangerous: ‘[They] are really a handful of people who I think are anarchistic in their approach—that is, they don’t accept the decision of the umpire and they go their own way and try to stop projects’.43 Cousins responded that the tactics of Woodside and its ‘hired goons’ were ‘akin to totalitarian government’, namely the filming, photographing and harassing of protestors ‘on a public road, in Australia’.44
‘A social licence to operate [JPP] is what is required’, Cousins stated in 2011, ‘not just some backroom deal’.45
‹   ›
While I am in Broome, I meet Martin Pritchard, executive director of Environs Kimberley, the leading environmental organisation in the Kimberley and a key campaigner against the JPP development. A Welshman who has lived in Broome for over a decade, Pritchard tells me, ‘There’s a new reality in Western Australia of privatised security working with state security forces to isolate, intimidate and bully protestors’.
This has happened due to a matrix of close political relationships. A number of Premier Barnett’s senior advisers, for instance, are former Woodside employees. Various conflict-of-interest allegations concerning the Barnett government have been reported, including in 2008, when it was asserted that the WA environment minister could not work with Woodside because her husband had lobbied the government on their behalf. Later that year, Barnett was challenged by revelations that his daughter-in-law lobbied for Woodside.
This political culture made the JPP proposal just one part of a wider ideological shift. The public services in Western Australia, including hospitals, prisons and water and electricity provision, have been outsourced.46 Serco, for example, runs Perth’s Fiona Stanley Hospital. A 20-year $2-billion contract was awarded to the company in 2011 despite it having a record in the British hospitals it manages of overcharging and abusing patients.47 Britain’s National Audit Office found in 2013 that Serco had fiddled its data hundreds of times when reporting out-of-hours GP services in Cornwall. Clinics were routinely understaffed by Serco and ‘dummy accounts’ were used to falsify records.48
A Western Australian parliamentary inquiry found in June 2012 that Premier Barnett didn’t follow the appropriate procedures when picking Serco to run the hospital. It stated that the government had a weak negotiating position due to a lack of any serious competition to the Serco bid.49 Large protests led by United Voice, the union that represents workers at Fiona Stanley, highlight the ongoing displeasure with Serco management.
The way in which a company such as Serco lobbies government was revealed when Western Australian Treasurer Troy Buswell released a report of a visit to Britain in 2010 when he met with Serco executives. He was convinced about the benefits of privatisation before he left Australia, so it came as no surprise when he wrote that ‘Western Australians have much to potentially gain from greater engagement of the private sector and the community sector in the delivery of traditional state-based social services’. There were no areas of government that Buswell believed were not a candidate for privatisation.
The rot is taking place countrywide. It was revealed in 2013 that former Australian treasurer Peter Costello, who has been equally enthusiastic about granting Serco contracts in Queensland and leading an ‘independent audit’ of the state’s finances, part-owns the consultancy Epstein Costello Gazard, which has lobbied for Serco Asia Pacific.50 This made news for a few weeks until Queensland’s anticorruption watchdog said it had no jurisdiction to investigate the matter—yet another case of ‘Nothing to see here, move along’.
In 2011, the Barnett administration awarded Serco the contract to operate a juvenile detention centre in Western Australia.51 The secretary of the Community and Public Service Union, Toni Walkington, reacted by saying, ‘Private companies exist to make profits for their shareholders. They do not exist to keep the community safe’. The profits were forthcoming when the WA Govern ment’s ‘tough on crime’ approach led to a large increase in the prison population and more business for private prison operators.
A late-2010 poll of 400 voters in marginal Western Australian seats found that the vast majority of those questioned opposed the Fiona Stanley Hospital privatisation.52 A few months later, Essential Media Communications, a progressive polling and campaigning company, released another WA survey which found that 76 per cent of those surveyed wanted prisons to be kept in public hands, while 71 per cent thought community services such as child protection would be better run by the state. But Premier Barnett is a former CEO of the Chamber of Commerce and Industry Western Australia and clearly supports business enterprise.
The privatisation of Western Australia is occurring at a hectic pace and select companies are reaping the benefits, despite some appalling examples of negligence. In 2011, British multinational G4S had a lucrative contract to transport prisoners around the state torn up after an investigation into the 2008 death of an Aboriginal man in its care—Ian Ward was found dead of heatstroke in the back of a truck that had no air conditioning. But instead of putting prisoner transport services back into public hands, as many citizens demanded, the Barnett government simply transferred the contract to Serco, a company that faced serious allegations of life-threatening mismanagement when moving prisoners in 2012.53
Crony capitalism thrives in Western Australia,54 and despite national and international concerns about the JPP project, local scrutiny was weak. Members of the board of the state’s only daily newspaper, The West Australian, include a former head of Woodside, Don Voelte, and a director of Rio Tinto, Sam Walsh. So it’s unsurprising that the publication looks favourably on the Barnett government’s privatisation agenda. And while the deputy leader of the Labor Opposition, Roger Cook, issued a press release in March 2011 that said ‘privatisation is a recipe for disaster’, in reality, his party has been practically mute when it has come to opposing Barnett’s privatisation of public services.
There is also the fact that privatisation, despite being championed by most of the corporate press and politicians, remains unpopular among the general public. An Essential Research report for Crikey in March 2013 found that a majority of voters across all political parties opposed the placement in private hands of key infrastructure such as electricity, water, schools, universities and public transport.55 These facts don’t bother neo-liberal governments that continue selling off public assets; there was news in 2013 that the New South Wales administration was seriously considering Serco to run a profitable rail link.
Martin Pritchard spent considerable time attempting to get accurate information from the state government about the JPP plant and the exact relationship between Woodside and private contractors. It was no easy task. In November 2011 he arranged for questions to be asked on notice in parliament to the environment minister and his department. Few useful details were forthcoming.
He shows me a map of Western Australia that details petroleum titles. There are literally hundreds of exploration permits. Two companies, Rey Resources and TPL, are particularly involved, and their reach extends for thousands of kilometres. The EPA decided in 2012 not to assess formally small-scale coal seam gas projects, despite serious questions about their viability and safety.56
‹   ›
In April 2013, Woodside announced it was scrapping its plans to develop JPP. It was a victory for the environmentalists and activist groups who had targeted the project. In explanation, Woodside said that the development concept did not ‘meet the company’s commercial requirements for a positive final investment decision’. Western Australian Premier Colin Barnett said he was devastated by the multinational’s decision, adding that “it would be a tragedy and a missed opportunity if that gas did not come on shore into Australia’.57
Some business analysts have argued that a key reason for Woodside’s about-face is that the United States is busy expanding its shale gas production to make the country a massive exporter of energy rather than an importer. The huge US shale gas industry is pushing down global LNG prices.
Woodside’s ditching of its JPP project is a victory that should be savoured, one that is undoubtedly the result of years of activism, legal action and political pressure by its opponents. But it may prove merely to be a temporary setback to multinational plans to extract and process shale gas from the Browse basin. At the time of writing, Shell is already revisiting the floating platform option. Shell head Ann Pickard said, ‘We believe Shell’s floating LNG technology is the fastest, most economic and … best technical solution available for Browse. Floating LNG can bring significant long-term, sustainable jobs to Western Australia and the Kimberley, as well as providing employment and business opportunities for Kimberley’s Indigenous people’.58 Pickard’s claims are eerily reminiscent of what was said by the advocates of the JPP development.
The real resource prize, however, is still the exploitation of the Canning Super Basin, and the termination of the JPP plan has done nothing to change this. Buru Energy and Mitsubishi have joined forces to tap the region’s reserves and reported in 2013 that drilling was progressing positively. There is the potential, Buru has stated, for Canning to ‘hold a very large accumulation of high-quality gas and hydrocarbon liquids’.59
Furthermore, the key issues in the JPP controversy, such as energy security, Indigenous rights and climate change, remain just as significant. After the JPP project collapsed, the man who originally negotiated with Woodside, former Kimberley Land Council head Wayne Bergmann, demanded that the company and the Western Australian Government still pay $1.5 billion to the local Indigenous population. The unprecedented compensation, Bergmann argued, was a necessary ‘regional benefits package that deals with ripple effects that impact on all Aboriginal people’.60 Woodside disagreed that it was obligated to pay the money.
The environmental movement was unanimous in its backing of Woodside’s retreat, though Greens leader Christine Milne rightly pointed out that ‘the battle is not won until they leave James Price Point and the Western Australian Government repeals the legislation that enabled the development’.61 Milne reiterated her party’s opposition to the industrialisation of Australia’s north-east due to its unique environment and Aboriginal history, but she said she would consider an alternative Woodside proposal so long as it appropriately assisted Indigenous people. The corporation isn’t resting. At Woodside’s annual general meeting in April 2013, its chief executive Peter Coleman confirmed the company was investigating the viability of exploiting the Browse Basin.
The Wilderness Society praised the ‘people power’ that had enabled the success at JPP, and stated that ‘a major lesson that Australia can take from all of this is that states cannot be trusted with environmental assessments’. The group pledged to continue fighting any corporation that wanted to ‘exploit the Kimberley’s gas’.62
But this sense of achievement is tempered by the fact that the JPP saga was simply the latest move in an increasingly aggressive effort by multinationals to wrest control of Australia’s natural resources. Journalist Paul Cleary argues in his 2012 book Mine-Field that without ‘serious regulatory reform’, Australia, like so many others in the world, will be left barren. ‘Our political leaders need to think and act as the masters rather than servants of the companies making a handsome profit from our common wealth’, says Cleary.63
There is little evidence this will happen. The resource boom is too appealing to governments that have an eye on the next election and the lobbyists and corporations looking to exploit a weak regulatory framework.
Colin Barnett recently expressed a sentiment that is common among resource companies and governments—that not exploiting resources is against the national interest. ‘We would be foolish as a country or a state if we allowed all of our gas and all of the jobs and all of the economic opportunities to business to simply go offshore. No other country would do that’, he said.64 Apparently, restricting heavy industry in the Kimberley with a view to environmental and social sustainability goes against the fundamental interests of business and is therefore verboten.
More concerning still is that a far bigger multinational search for new resources to exploit is in progress, a global hunt that is taking place in a century in which climate change poses an enormous threat, and in which humanity’s reliance on oil and coal must be reduced if the world wants to mitigate catastrophic atmospheric shifts. And all it takes for this sort of exploitative capitalism to thrive is for good people to do little to oppose it. However, the huge and successful campaign against the JPP development could be a model for future opposition.65 It has shown how a well-organised information campaign, directed at both the public and investors, can create uncertainty about the corporate- and government-argued benefits of large-scale resource projects for locals, including Indigenous Australians, and the environment.







4
PAPUA NEW GUINEA—THE RESOURCE CURSE
We are the ‘sacrificial lamb’ for the few capitalists whose hunger for wealth is quenchless and unceasing … We are not going to sit by and watch capitalists and their Papua New Guinean political allies exploiting us … We have planted the seeds which will germinate soon not only in Bougainville but throughout Papua New Guinea.
Francis Ona, Bougainville resistance leader, 19891
It’s like a scene out of Mad Max, a post-apocalyptic setting of polluted rivers, corroded equipment and human scavengers. This is what I see as I descend into the massive old Panguna mine in Bougainville, Papua New Guinea. One of my companions is a onetime resistance fighter who, along with his fellow combatants, won a brutal battle against one of the world’s biggest mining companies, Rio Tinto.
‘The Crisis’, as locals call it, was a vicious dispute that pitted Rio Tinto and the PNG and Australian governments against aggrieved Bougainvilleans whose lives were being violated by a polluting mine. Tensions had been building between the parties for two decades when, in 1988, negotiations broke down. The Bougainville Revolutionary Army (BRA) was formed and the Panguna mine soon closed. The resulting civil war lasted until 1997, devastating the province and bringing both pride and poverty to its inhabitants.
The Asia-Pacific region had never seen anything like it—a fight against a multinational led and won by indigenous people. But another conflict looms. Moves are afoot to reopen the mine.
‹   ›
To visit what was the centre of the conflict, I first travel via the PNG capital Port Moresby to Arawa, the closest town to the Panguna mine, which is on Bougainville Island. The surrounding Autonomous Region of Bougainville joins with nineteen provinces scattered over various islands and the ‘mainland’ of PNG to form a country with a population of over seven million people who speak at least 841 languages.
From the closure of Panguna up until a few years ago, it was nearly impossible for a white man to access the mine pit because of a legacy of mistrust. Even today, there’s great sensitivity about who I am and why I want to visit. But after several days of negotiation with locals in Arawa, I’m cleared to proceed.
I’m picked up early one morning by a jeep driven by a man named John, a former local politician and miner, and Willy, a man in his sixties who was a key figure in the BRA and particularly its militant faction, Mekamui, a still-active defence force that once fought the PNG army (‘Mekamui’ means ‘Sacred Island’ and is also the traditional name of the immediate area). Willy is my designated guide for the day. He has a thick grey beard and wears a red cap, a faded purple polo shirt and grey shorts; a bumbag is slung across his chest. He’s barefoot and has surprisingly white teeth, given the widespread tradition of betel-nut chewing in PNG—the fruit of the betel palm is a mild stimulant.
I see abandoned, rusting buildings as we speed along the relatively smooth asphalt towards Morgan Junction; ferns have wrapped themselves around the old power lines that were used when the mine was operational. Waiting for us is a man I know as Commander Alex from having scouted the checkpoint the previous day. He lifts the boom gate to let our car through and I go and sit with him in a little booth to discuss the entry fee. He asks for 300 kina or about A$150 (he has already prepared an invoice and a receipt), but I say I have been told it will cost only 200 kina. He agrees, but first he wants to know what I’m doing here, my profession, and how long I’ll be looking around. He then proceeds to stamp my documents, takes my money and smiles. ‘Welcome’, he says.
Alex is forty-eight and it’s clear The Crisis is not over for him. He dreams of a Bougainville free of mining and surviving solely on agriculture. He worries that younger people may accept the reopening of the Panguna mine to exploit its still-sizeable reserves of copper and gold. He says this is a real possibility because many locals are desperate for economic independence and mining is seen as a quick and easy way of achieving it. Alex articulates the struggle between the PNG Government, the mining companies and Bougainvilleans over who should benefit from a reopened Panguna mine. Sovereignty is craved by most locals with whom I speak, but the ways in which this will be achieved is unclear. Alex’s hesitation is borne from experience, reflecting a cynicism towards past and present corporate promises.
Alex is shy but his attitude is that of a committed activist. He claims he’ll continue to man the community-run checkpoint around the clock, living in makeshift conditions, until compensation is fully paid to all those who deserve it. ‘The checkpoint is a symbol of what happened in Bougainville, the revolution’, he says. ‘It’s to let the world know that the cost of the revolution is about mining and independence’.
Driving towards the mine, we soon see the massive buildings that were used to process copper in the 1970s and 1980s. Lush greenery surrounds the sealed road, but I know that vast tracts of this land were blighted after Rio Tinto dumped huge quantities of the dredged waste called spoil. If left untreated, spoil will sit in the ground for thousands of years. The company never cleaned it up.
Willy has mixed feelings about the prospect of the mine reopening. Like Alex, his ideal is that agriculture sustains PNG. But he’s also a realist. ‘People are being educated and they need employment to sustain their living’, Willy says. He also tells me that Bougainville is experiencing a massive baby boom and that this population explosion requires urgent action. It’s obvious where he thinks the money will come from. ‘They say there’s still a lot of gold here that could last for forty years of mining’, he says.
Willy hopes that whoever runs the mine will clean up the environmental damage it has caused, such as the pollution in the soil and rivers, and ensure the mistakes of the past do not happen again. He’s sceptical that this will occur, however, citing mines in other PNG provinces and internationally where ecological destruction takes place. Willy makes particular mention of the gold- and copperproducing Ok Tedi Mine in PNG’s Western Province, which since the 1980s has caused enormous environmental destruction and social upheaval affecting tens of thousands of nearby residents. Even PNG’s attorney-general has admitted that the mines in his country have been allowed to use unsafe methods of waste disposal that have been banned in many other countries.2
Willy and other Bougainvilleans seemingly cannot escape the resource curse. They are desperate to establish an independent nation and know that four decades of copper and gold profits could help fund the new state. But the clash between the desired independence, economic freedom, sustainability and raised living standards, and a lack of PNG and foreign support, mean that the matter is not a simple one for locals.
The average age of Papua New Guineans is twenty-one, and 30 per cent of the population is under thirty, making education and employment significant issues in the country—regarding the former, adjusted for inflation, the current funding for every PNG student is one-fourteenth of the level in the late 1970s.3 They are arguably especially important in Bougainville, whose so-called ‘lost generation’, the young people whose parents died during The Crisis, urgently need mental rehabilitation, tuition and jobs.
In March 2012, a protest march took place in the streets of Arawa, with the participants demanding that the Autonomous Bougainville Government build schools and universities so that local students would not have to leave the region to get educated. The march came on the heels of a three-day government conference in 2011, supported by AusAID and the New Zealand Aid Programme, that began developing a land policy for Bougainville. A key point was that in a region that lost years of potential development during a civil war, ‘there has been little adaptation of customary ways with modern processes, which has contributed significantly to the level of confusion’.4
AusAID then funded a reconciliation meeting in February 2013 that discussed, among other things, the reopening of Panguna. The return to operation of the mine, which is still controlled by Bougainville Copper Limited Ltd (BCL), whose largest shareholder is the Australian company Rio Tinto and whose second-biggest investor is the PNG Government, is favoured by the country’s political establishment as one of the fastest ways of generating employment. So it was no surprise that the media narrative that emerged from this meeting cited local positivity about the mine. But a PNG blogger who visited Arawa after the conference challenged this. He claimed that most people he spoke to preferred agriculture to thrive.5
One reason for this is that people remember the violence that resource exploitation often brings. A lecturer in criminology at the University of Ulster, Kristian Lasslett, has produced evidence that BCL placed intense pressure on the PNG Government to send police squads to Bougainville in 1988 to quell unrest, despite their shocking human rights record. According to the minutes of a meeting held on 8 June 1989, the company was told by PNG’s minister of state that ‘brutal firepower’ was to be used against the resistance movement. BCL welcomed this, hopeful it could continue its mining work as soon as possible.6
The mistrust directed at BCL in Bougainville did not stop when the fighting ended, and for good reason. In 2011, the company appointed to its board Sir Rabbie Namaliu, PNG’s prime minister from 1988 to 1992, and the man who directed his security forces to terrorise the population of Bougainville by torturing and killing its citizens, as well as imposing a blockade on the province.7
The stance of the President of the Autonomous Bougainville Government, John Momis, has added to the uncertainty. When he was serving as a minister in the PNG Government during The Crisis, Momis argued that ‘it is important to understand the significance of holding Rio Tinto responsible for its actions’—indeed, Kristian Lasslett interviewed eight managers who worked for BCL between 1987 and 1992, and they all openly admitted that the company had provided whatever weapons and logistics the PNG military had requested.8 Momis went further, saying that ‘PNG took its direction from BCL’s management’.9 Momis wrote a letter in 2001, composed for a US-based legal action against Rio Tinto, which detailed the deep complicity between Rio Tinto, BCL and the PNG Government at the height of the brutality against the people of Bougainville. ‘I was aware of one meeting’, he stated, ‘where BCL management instructed PNG to ‘’starve the bastards out’’.’
However, by 2013, Momis was advocating the reopening of the mine. Recent legislation he has proposed, drafted thanks to a large AusAID grant by an Australian academic, Tony Regan, who has denied the complicity of BCL in The Crisis, advocates that landowners have the right to veto mining projects, but permits the institution of large-scale mining nonetheless.10 One of Regan’s colleagues, Griffith University’s Professor Ciaran O’Faircheallaigh, has direct links with Rio Tinto—receiving unspecified amounts of financial support from the company—while he has also been contracted by Coffey International, another corporation close to Rio Tinto.11 Attempting to absolve the earlier PNG administration of any responsibility, Momis told ABC Radio’s PM in March 2013 that Rio Tinto and the Australian Government were to blame for the original crisis. He said that in ‘their zeal to generate revenue, [they] completely ignored the people’s way of doing things’.12
In theory, the people of Bougainville will choose whether or not the Panguna mine will reopen once their independence has been achieved. But it is not a choice centred on sustainability and economic empowerment. Rather, it is a toxic choice between further environmental devastation or poverty. These alternatives stem from a war that followed intensive mineral exploitation, all of which has deeply impacted the wellbeing of the current generation of Papua New Guineans, not to mention the prospective welfare of future generations. This is the legacy of predatory capitalism. Environmental vandalism should not be the price tag for ‘progress’. Bougainvilleans are at least savvy enough to realise that they are carrying a weak hand into negotiations with the mining companies and the governments that support them.
The anger towards the Panguna mine has been there since its birth in the late 1960s, partly because Australian companies had been exploiting PNG’s minerals for decades before this. By 1975, when PNG gained independence from Australia, the fully functional operation was the biggest non-aid earner in the country. The new state lived and breathed through Panguna—at its most productive, the mine contributed 20 per cent of PNG’s national budget—even though the mine was simultaneously destroying any chance of resource sustainability. However, the citizens of Bougainville, despite suffering ecological devastation, received less than 2 per cent of the profits to assist their own communities.
In addition, PNG workers didn’t enjoy equal employment opportunities in the mine, a common situation in other mines across the country. A type of job apartheid was established by BCL, with much better facilities and pay offered to white workers than to locals. The Australian administration of the late 1960s also excluded landowners from the bargaining table, dealing only with the Australian Government and Rio Tinto.
In the late 1980s, the quiet fury boiled over. The BRA demanded independence from PNG, an end to the environmental damage caused by the mine, and compensation for being excluded from the initial negotiations. The mine was shut down in 1989 after continued sabotage by the BRA, but the bitter conflict continued for another eight years, by which time 15 000 locals (about a tenth of the population) had died and Bougainville was economically ruined. This was the price of the BRA’s decisive blow against multinational colonisation, a rare example of a mining company being forced to accept defeat despite receiving support from two national governments.
‹   ›
We arrive at the Jaba River close to the centre of the mine site, a waterway that’s filled with glowing blue copper tailings. This is the end result of many years of BCL dumping chemicals and heavy metals in the area. We watch as dozens of men, women and children pan the river for gold in a desperate attempt to earn a living. It’s their only form of income—I’m told that 1 gram of gold can earn around A$40—but this primitive form of resource extraction is taking place in Panguna’s toxic waste. The villagers know the health risks but they have no other options, although even this will be denied them if the mine reopens. They have set up very basic temporary shelters on the banks of the river to house them for short periods while they are panning, before they head back to their villages.
We drive a short distance across rocky, uneven gravel to the main part of the tailings. No vegetation grows here. It’s desert-like, with sand as far as the eye can see, an abandoned wasteland. All that’s visible are small mountains of dirt around which polluted water runs, and old batteries and tyres with weeds growing through them, as well as a crane that’s fallen on its side. It’s a depressing sight.
Willy says that he has no idea how the area can be properly rehabilitated. He tells me of the times he hunted animals here in the 1960s, when it was a lush forest with a healthy river running through it. Now he can only look around in disbelief.
Another short drive takes us to the mine pit. It’s massive, 7 kilometres across at its widest part, and layered like an inverted wedding cake, with trees and bush slowly taking over its upper levels. At the edge of the pit are two large processing centres, both overgrown with plants. John, who worked in one of the centres in the 1980s, remarks that the buildings are slowly disappearing as scrap-metal seekers work their way through them.
At Panguna’s inception, it was one of the world’s biggest working open-cut mines. Now, abandoned earthmovers and cranes lie rusting across the vast expanse. In the middle of the pit is a patch of bright blue water that almost glows on this overcast day, while green slime covers the surrounding rocks. Amazingly, here, too, people have built makeshift huts and pan for gold.
The heart of the mine emits a deafening, machine-like sound. It comes from a large, rusty column which is busily naturally sucking air into a pipe that transports water outside the mine. For 24 hours a day, every day for the past quarter-century, this has ensured the mine does not fill up with water, particularly when it pours during the rainy season.
Willy looks shocked by what he sees. He says he’s never been to the centre of the pit before. Both he and John naively wonder whether, should BCL have no interest in reopening the mine, the company might help to fill in the hole to allow locals to grow crops here.
As we walk back to our jeep, John picks a purple flower. He says he wants to prettify his home with a reminder of our day together. He laughs when he tells me this, but I think he may be serious.
Willy is hungry so we drive to Panguna town, which before the war sustained 3500 people and included supermarkets, cinemas, banks and schools. Now it has little more than a bare-bones general store. Inside the dim wooden room, American hard-rock music plays from a stereo and a young girl sells children’s clothes and fizzy drinks, among other things. I pay A$15 for Chinese biscuits, soft drinks and tinned pork for my travelling companions. Nearby is the closest port to Arawa, once a busy hub of export but now a decrepit place infused with abandonment. I see the derelict hulks of three power plants, while fuel tanks leak oil close to the sea. Pieces of metal are strewn over ground that has accumulated nothing in the last twenty-five years but moss and weeds.
The final place the men want to show me is the Arawa runway, which although currently disused was recently flattened and cleaned up. No-one seems to know who is going to use it, but the consensus is that it will be politicians, miners or scrap-metal workers. Willy tells me that local landowners have disputed the use of the ground and are fighting for the right to grow cocoa here.
Sitting and standing on the runway, our group talks about the future of PNG. Prime Minister Peter O’Neill’s government has announced that soon, all education in the country, from the earliest years until Year 10, will either be free or subsidised. Willy says the money for this will be sourced from mining and the country’s biggest energy project: a 407-kilometre, $19-billion ExxonMobil LNG pipeline, which is due to open in 2014 and will funnel gas to buyers in China, Taiwan, Japan and beyond. This is part of what is being called a resource boom in PNG. Port Moresby recently welcomed an ANZ Bank–commissioned report that found the country had the potential to export resources to the tune of $38 billion a year until 2030. Prime Minister O’Neill said the challenge was to develop such assets responsibly.13
‘I don’t care where it comes from, as long as my people are educated’, Willy says. I challenge this position, asking if it matters whether these resource-exploitation projects are affecting the environment and local communities, as happened in Bougainville, and if so, whether they should be opposed. But Willy and John maintain the pragmatic line I heard earlier. In particular, although they care about other provinces and communities, both argue strongly that Bougainville, after decades of providing massive wealth to PNG, now deserves payback in the form of financial compensation and free education for its children.
Willy then warns that Australia should play its cards right and not just think of its resource companies. He says that Canberra has already supported the wrong side too many times in the past. It isn’t anything like a threat, more a faint hope that Australia will start thinking beyond money and mining.
‹   ›
PNG has long been aware of the dangers of an overreliance on the mining industry. In 1975, the year in which PNG gained its independence from Australia, a constitutional planning committee reported:
 
We believe that since we are a rural people, our strength should be essentially in the land and the use of our innate artistic talents. We caution that large-scale industries should be pursued only after very careful and thorough consideration of the likely consequences upon the social and spiritual fabric of our people. The basic concept in our society with regard to the use of natural resources is that one generation holds and uses resources in the capacity of trustee for future generations. We, the generation of today, cannot squander our country’s resources. We would clearly be failing in our responsibility if we sold our resources to foreigners for our own short term benefit, without regard to the needs of generations after us.14
It could have been written today.
Unfortunately, from its first day of independence, the fledgling PNG state has had little bargaining power in its dealings with the foreign mining and timber groups15 that have been keen to exploit the nation’s abundant natural resources. It can be argued that PNG was ill-prepared for its break from Australia, in that the transition resulted in lenient laws that gave foreign corporations undue influence over a largely unregulated state.
During World War II, PNG was a major battleground on which over 215 000 men—Japanese, American and Australian—were slaughtered. The assistance that New Guineans gave the Western forces created an enduring relationship, at least in the Australian consciousness. However, since its independence, there has been little development of an understanding of PNG, which mostly has been characterised as a poor nation teetering on the edge of collapse despite its abundance of natural resources—a state reliant on outside help and plagued by institutional corruption.
The new nation’s first prime minister, Michael Somare, is fondly remembered by some young Papua New Guineans as the man who commenced negotiations with Australian Prime Minister Gough Whitlam in the early 1970s to begin the decolonisation process. But he is mostly seen as having delivered few long-lasting projects that have assisted all PNG people. He’s certainly unpopular in Bougainville, where he is viewed as having contributed to many alleged corrupt, business-as-usual practices that now blight the state. Somare’s ‘look north’ policy (towards China) has been particularly prominent. Critics have accused successive PNG governments of giving companies that have close ties to Beijing preferential access to resource projects. In fact, the country has become a battleground for a proxy war over access in the Pacific, as Washington becomes increasingly engaged in the region.
Neither America nor Australia is pleased that another power is trying to gain influence over what they see as their turf—PNG’s wealth is apparently not to be shared further afield. In statements she made to the US congressional Foreign Relations Committee, US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton was direct. ‘Let’s put aside the moral, humanitarian, do-good side of what we believe in and let’s just talk straight, real politics’, she said. ‘We are in a competition with China. Take Papua New Guinea—huge energy find’. Clinton then accused Beijing of attempting to ‘come in under us’ and stated that it would be a ‘mistaken notion’ to think that America would retreat from ‘the maintenance of our leadership in a world where we are competing with China’.
Australia has been giving aid to PNG since 1975—$492 million in the 2012/2013 period alone—but very little of that money has been seen by the local people. Rather, many corrupt PNG officials have enjoyed the largesse of the Australian taxpayer because of this aid, and countless billions have found their way into the pockets of Australian corporations—so-called ‘boomerang aid’. Michael Somare claimed in 2010 that 60 per cent of Australian aid ended up back in the coffers of Australian companies, firms such as Coffey International, SMEC International, GHD, JTA International and Cardno ACIL. The money has also found its way further afield. In 2013, PNG’s forestry minister complained about how Canberra had hired a US-based environmental group, The Nature Conservancy, to spend $6 million on a sustainable forestry project without consulting Port Moresby.16
Some of this aid does go towards assisting school enrolments, training midwives, and providing anti-HIV drugs, police training, scholarships for students, disability programs and other forms of essential care. But I regularly hear that corruption eats up far too much of the money and, as a result, locals who have spent decades watching Australian firms exploit the nation’s resources have become extremely cynical and angry. This has led to calls for Australia’s aid to be far better managed, or even reduced or removed. An attempt has been made to address this issue through performance-based aid programs, which are worth tens of millions of dollars annually, but these are often public relations exercises that are designed merely to give the impression that Canberra is concerned about stolen funds.
The truth is that Canberra has been content to pay hefty fees to white Australians working in PNG while offering far less to local workers. In 2010, a review found that half of Australia’s aid budget to PNG was being spent on consultants who were routinely receiving six-figure salaries, though this figure had dropped to around 20 per cent by 2012. It’s a very similar situation in Haiti and Afghanistan.
A study by Sydney’s Daily Telegraph in 2012 also found that seven companies had earned over $1 billion in Australian taxpayer– funded contracts in recent years.17 These so-called ‘private sector corporations’ are the beneficiaries of an aid industry that has been the subject of little political oversight or media scrutiny, one through which a handful of multinationals rake in the money. This arrangement is encouraging foreign firms to establish Australian arms in order to win lucrative contracts; one example is the US-based company URS, which won a $110 million contract to deliver services in education, health and gender training in PNG.
It seems that the Australian Government has never lost sight of its main goal in PNG, which is to ensure that Australian corporations have a ready market in which to turn a profit. Needless to say, the financial and political assistance given to foreign mining companies to operate in PNG has ultimately done nothing to alleviate the many problems that exist in a resource-rich but infrastructurepoor nation.
BHP Billiton, for example, is one of the world’s largest mining companies and has worked in PNG for decades. In 1995, the corporation known as the ‘Big Australian’, due to its former status as a domestic steel producer, helped draft a bill in the PNG Parliament that invalidated the right of PNG citizens who were negatively affected by the Ok Tedi mine to seek legal redress in court. Multinational Monitor magazine, a non-profit publication founded by American political activist Ralph Nader in 1980 to document the global economy, highlighted what was going on:
 
In August 1995, BHP drafted legislation for the PNG Parliament that subjected anyone who sued BHP to fines of up to $75 000. Even more remarkably, the bill also applied the same fines to anyone who attempted to challenge the constitutional validity of the proposed law in PNG courts. The bill made it an offence to commence compensation proceedings against BHP, to assist a person to do so or to give evidence at compensation proceedings.
In an attempt to seduce the landowners, BHP offered to establish an $82 million fund to pay out compensation and benefits to plaintiffs over the life of the mine. This package would provide $180 per landowner per year over the mine’s remaining 15-year life.18
Copper mining uses a procedure involving cyanide and is virtually guaranteed to bring ecological destruction. So BHP had good reason to anticipate that locals would eventually try to seek legal recompense for the fallout from its mining activity at Ok Tedi, a campaign that continues to this day. Bizarrely, despite the welldocumented environmental destruction that BHP has caused, the PNG Government gave the company a good corporate citizenship award in 2011—though by 2013, Port Moresby’s relationship with the Ok Tedi mine was more fraught.19
Canberra has always been keen to assist Australian companies to expand their activities overseas. It’s worth remembering that the foreign affairs division of the Australian Government is intimately involved in trade, which is why it’s called the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. This may explain why assorted environmental groups have had little success when calling on the federal government to impose tighter restrictions on potentially destructive operations undertaken by Australian companies overseas, and to force those corporations to abide by the local environmental laws.
The Greens, for instance, unsuccessfully argued in 2011 for legislation to stop Australian mining companies working overseas from behaving in ways that would be illegal at home. The then Greens leader Bob Brown had just visited the highly polluting Chinese and Australian-controlled Ramu nickel mine in PNG’s Madang Province, which he said was ‘an appalling indictment of modern technology being brought to Papua New Guinea without the safeguard that you would get in the home countries against this sort of destruction of marine eco-systems’.20
There is also ongoing tension over the billions of dollars of Australian aid delivered to PNG that has been spent on supporting the mining and petroleum industries at the perceived expense of agriculture, which has the potential to benefit many more people. According to a paper released by the Australian National University in 2009, ‘over 75 per cent of PNG people rely on agricultural exports for their livelihood’, not least because there is often no other option. Furthermore, the paper stated:
 
As the PNG government and Australian corporations [and government] pursue profits from the operation of PNG mines and petroleum stations, they have largely ignored the environmental impact that the mines have had on the PNG people … The development of the resource sector has benefited Australian corporations and PNG officials at the expense of the PNG people, who suffer the financial, social and ecological effects of their activities.21
Recognition of the role that PNG officials have played is important here. After 1975, Papua New Guineans were rarely asked what they wanted. Policies were imposed by a corrupt Port Moresby elite and Australian bureaucrats. Civil disturbances over low pay and poor work conditions, as well as a lack of employment, were common, but there was little improvement in the standard of living of the majority. Thirty-eight years after its independence, PNG’s vital statistics remain some of the poorest in the Asia-Pacific region. The World Bank estimates that close to 40 per cent of the population is below the poverty line, the average life expectancy is barely 60 years, and only 33 per cent of rural citizens have access to an adequate water source.
Nearly everyone I discuss these figures with in PNG wonders why conditions for most of the country’s citizens remain so inadequate considering the international support—mainly American, Australian and Chinese—that has been given to the nation in the last four decades. It appears that this support is tailored to those with vested interests, and that PNG’s political elite are content to leave the country on an aid drip-feed, dependent on outside forces.
It’s another form of disaster capitalism: predatory corporations that are supported by foreign aid payments and tax concessions, and insulated from media scrutiny or political criticism, act solely to benefit international shareholders and thereby prevent a nation from truly exercising its independence. I see similarly dysfunctional relationships in Haiti and Afghanistan, where great influence is wielded by the multinationals at work in those countries. PNG can never enjoy real sovereignty unless the ties that bind it to corporations and foreign aid are severed, and the capacity to create self-sufficient businesses is allowed to flourish.
A January 2013 story in Rupert Murdoch’s Australian perfectly illustrated this problem. The article spoke about Canberra and Port Moresby becoming increasingly close, but the Papua New Guineans themselves were completely ignored in the article. All that matters, it seems, is ensuring that the resource pipeline remains open.22
Bougainville has been a model for resistance to this ugly reality, an island province that foreign interests expected to bow down and simply accept having its resource wealth exploited, only to face irrepressible opposition. But that is not all that sets it apart.
The 1970s gave rise to a Bougainville secessionist movement that opposed the province being part of an independent PNG, claiming they had far more in common with their near neighbour, the Solomon Islands—during my visit, I am repeatedly told of the area’s deep racial, spiritual and cultural connections with the Solomons. The BRA then reignited the independence movement in the late 1980s, and it still burns. The Bougainville Peace Agreement, signed in Arawa in 2001 by Port Moresby and Bougainville’s leaders, dictates that a free vote on independence must be held between 2015 and 2020.
A fundamental concern of those who embrace the sovereignty cause has been PNG’s adoption of the Australian state-ownership approach to resources instead of the more culturally appropriate Melanesian system of landowner rights. The latter involves fair negotiations with the relevant landowners, whereas under the state-ownership model, landowners’ wishes are ignored and community-based protection of the land is often sidelined.
Debate about the desire for independence always occurs within the context of a sustainable economic base, which explains the heated discussions about the potential reopening of the Panguna mine. History casts a long shadow over these arguments. The Panguna Landowners’ Association supports mining by local landowners who can then choose to work with foreign companies if they wish. In keeping with this ideology, in March 2012 it released a statement that challenged the PNG Chamber of Mines and Petroleum over its support of state ownership of the country’s resources. Association secretary Lawrence Daveona outlined a number of reasons why it was impossible to trust the promises made by Rio Tinto, or any other multinational. ‘No adequate controls had been in place’, he said, ‘to insure that royalties, taxes, environmental law compliance and human rights’ were upheld, and that foreign investors in PNG paid their dues.23
‹   ›
Samuel Kauona was one of the leaders of the BRA in the late 1980s, alongside the now deceased Francis Ona. I meet him in Arawa’s District 17, whose name has been carried over from the mining era. The softly spoken Kauona is in his late forties and is highly articulate. He tells me about his twin vision for the island: independence and sustainable mining. For him, keeping the region’s enormous mineral wealth in local hands is essential. ‘This is why we fought the war’, he says. It is also why, in 2012, he presented the Autonomous Bougainville Government with a mining exploration application. He wants to examine land that he believes contains gold and silver.24
Kauona, who played an integral part in the peace process that ended the war in the late 1990s, believes that the citizens of Bougainville need to reclaim what is rightly theirs. When new resources are found, he says, Bougainvilleans should receive appropriate compensation for collaborating with outsiders. He argues that the power dynamic this time must clearly lie with the locals.
In 1994, with the civil war still raging, Kauona wrote:
 
Papua New Guinea and international interests came and took our land without asking, destroyed it and tore it apart, poisoned our streams and made our people sick … You can break our bones, but you can never break our spirit. The land of Bougainville is ours. We will not give up this land.25
This determination, he explains to me, was instrumental in Bougainvilleans winning a war against seemingly overwhelming odds. I ask him whether he sees any similarity between his war and those fought by America in Afghanistan and Iraq. He does, saying it proves that local knowledge is a powerful weapon when you are fighting a better-armed adversary.
Kauona resents the fact that Australia supported his opponents, namely the PNG Government and its army, during The Crisis via annual aid payments.26 ‘I would stop all the aid tomorrow’, he tells me. ‘It’s not making people self-sufficient.’ He also has little time for the older men who dominate both the Port Moresby and Bougainville parliaments. ‘We need young people to lead’, he says.
Kauona’s desire to make sure mineral development benefits locals first is shared by other influential Bougainvilleans, including ex-militant and Mekamui spokesman Philip Takaung. On hearing that a number of landowner groups in Bougainville had begun inviting exploration companies onto their lands, he said that environmental management had to be the priority. ‘We mustn’t let money lure us into disaster, and damage our natural habitat by destroying the eco system … [so that] we will be evacuated somewhere [else] to live’. Takaung had a different message for former BRA fighters:
 
Don’t be fooled by money, and remember what we all fought for, because when a lot of people see money, they become greedy and forget about the others. A lot of us, especially us the ex-combatants, I can admit right now that we are very greedy. We have lost our soul and vision of what we fought for.27
I ask Kauona about leading the revolution. He says that no-one expected it to last so long or to inflict the damage it did, particularly the loss of so many lives. He says he spent most of those years constantly on the move, rarely staying in the same spot for any period of time. His wife gave birth to two girls during The Crisis and they now have two grandchildren.
He laughs when I mention the Sandline controversy. When the PNG Government requested military support from Australia and New Zealand, both countries refused, so Port Moresby started negotiating with a London-based mercenary company called Sandline. Run by a former British army officer, Tim Spicer, Sandline was hired to crush the BRA by force. But the plan became public and the members of the private army, who were mostly hired through a South African group called Executive Outcomes, were disarmed and arrested in PNG before they could cause any damage.
‘We would have beaten them in two weeks if they had come’, Kauona says proudly.
‹   ›
It’s a Sunday morning and rain is falling as I wander the muddy streets of Arawa in the clingy humidity. The town’s roads are potholed. Old Mobil and Shell service stations lie in ruins, covered in graffiti. Grime smears the facades of apartment blocks originally intended for police but that now shelter locals. Arawa was established by Australians as the main service hub for the Panguna mine. But when the Bougainville civil war broke out and the mine was closed, the place was neglected. Now, decades later, it looks and feels like a ghost town. I wonder why the countless millions of dollars of Australian aid haven’t made any difference here. Perhaps Samuel Kauona will—he is staying in Arawa, determined to see it rebuilt.
Few of the town’s 25 000 inhabitants are out and about. Sunday is when the predominantly church-going public attend prayer services. When I investigate the source of some singing I hear, I find a small evangelical congregation of ten adult worshippers, five children and three guitarists, all of them singing songs of praise to Jesus. The hall they are using is a basic set-up with low wooden pews on which lie a number of Australian-made prayer books titled The PeaceMaker: a New Testament to Men in Contemporary English. A forty-something man who welcomes me at the hall’s entrance tells me that evangelical Christianity is the fastest-growing religion in PNG.
The pastor, dressed in a red shirt and tie, strolls around the front of the church while playing a guitar. He rarely opens his eyes and leads the congregation in stirring songs. The members of the congregation raise their hands and faces towards the roof and sing in a combination of English and Tok Pisin, the pidgin language that is spoken throughout PNG. A man emerges from the audience, introduces himself, and then points at me, saying, ‘Welcome to the Australian back there’. The others then proceed to walk over and shake my hand, grinning broadly. I stay for an hour and find myself transfixed by the repetitive singing.
When I continue my walk around Arawa, I encounter Leonard, a teacher in his fifties. He has betel nut–stained teeth and a sizeable gut. I ask him for his thoughts on the reopening of the Panguna mine and Bougainville’s potential independence. ‘More than 50 per cent of young people here are illiterate and don’t really understand what’s going on’, he says. ‘I worry that they would be voting for something and not get why. Our people need to understand ourselves better before we do that’.
I ask Leonard why almost everybody talks about a ‘crisis’ rather than a ‘war’ or ‘conflict’ when discussing the brutal fighting that took place here in the 1990s. He just says: ‘We all call it that. Because of this crisis, so many children weren’t educated. We have so much to still do before we can move on’.
One of the as-yet-untackled tasks that comes to mind is the dangerous legacy of the large number of wartime weapons still circulating in the community. I learned about this from the head of the Autonomous Bougainville Government’s Veteran Affairs and Weapon’s Disposal division, Aaron Pita, whom I visited in Bougainville’s comparatively functional capital, Buka, which is four hours drive on a rough road from Arawa. Pita spoke fluent English, having studied in the United States in the early 1980s. He told me that his job was to find and decommission the countless weapons used during the war, and to document on a computer database the names and details of all former combatants, of whom he guessed there might be between 3000 and 5000.
Perhaps predictably, our conversation eventually shifted to Panguna. Pita was ambivalent about the reopening of the mine, fearful, like Leonard, that the issues that created the backlash against it in the first place hadn’t been resolved. Compensation from Rio Tinto was essential, he said, as was the consent of the landowners of the area and the people of the island. It will be a long process, he told me. He didn’t seem convinced that mining was the solution to Bougainville’s problems. He said that people who were his age—he is fifty-seven—remember how badly things went the last time around. ‘Nobody wants to return to that’, he said.
As I wander around Arawa, women are visible on the streets, and I am able to speak to them in markets, shops and hotels to get their views. But, generally, women struggle to be heard here. Politically, PNG is a man’s country—only three of the 109 members of the PNG Parliament were female at the time of writing. This reflects a trend throughout the Pacific, which is the region with the lowest level of female political participation in the world. It’s been stated that women comprise only 4 per cent of politicians in the sixteen-country Pacific Island Forum; this compares with 18 per cent across Asia and nearly 15 per cent in the Arab world.28
PNG’s decidedly patriarchal society is also reflected in the fact that sexual assaults and domestic violence against women are common. Médecins Sans Frontières estimated in 2012 that 70 per cent of PNG women either will be raped or sexually assaulted at least once in their lifetime.29 Equally disturbing is PNG’s maternal mortality rate, which, according to the United Nations, is one of the highest in the world at 733 deaths per 100 000 births.
I stay at the Arawa Women’s Training Centre, a basic tourist and worker accommodation unit that also assists local women to learn domestic skills. It’s run by Josephine, a woman in her fifties who explains that the centre was formed in the wake of The Crisis by a group of women from different political factions. They were united by the desire to help the women who suffered during the war to gain essential ‘home management skills’ such as basic accounting, cooking and sewing.
‘Women were the bread and butter earners in the family [during The Crisis]’, Josephine tells me. ‘The women suffered more than men … because they were the backbone of the family and often the opportunity for women to look after their families wasn’t there. There was a blockade with few medical facilities, and basic items like soap, salt and household needs weren’t around’.
Josephine opposes any return to mining on the island, preferring the development of adventure tourism such as hiking and diving. She believes that tourism combined with agriculture, such as cocoa and copra production and traditional gardening, can fulfil the nation’s economic needs. The ecological record of the Panguna mine is so bad, she explains, that it’s almost unimaginable it could reopen.
This last concern was echoed in 2011 by Patricia Tapakau, president of Panguna Women in Mining, a group representing women in thirteen mining-affected areas. Tapakau told Inter Press Service that her members were nervous about the future. ‘What sort of mining and with what process will it [Panguna] reopen?’ she asked. ‘We need to know, because we don’t want any more destruction. We have had enough of that.’30
‹   ›
It is clear that reopening the Panguna mine is one of the most contentious and emotive issues on Bougainville. There is no consensus on the island about how to move forward. One former Mekamui commander, Moses Pipiro, summed up the angst when he said in 2012 that the redevelopment of the mine site was inappropriate until the people of Bougainville were educated about what options they had.31 This obviously includes forgetting about the mine and focusing on agriculture. After all, people have noticed that the fertility of the soil in certain areas around the mine has improved in the last two-and-a-half decades, and that coconuts have reappeared in many villages. Also, BCL has yet to explain how it will remove the huge amount of toxic waste still polluting much of the site.
Still, a new beginning for Panguna was firmly on the agenda at an initial meeting between the Autonomous Bougainville Govern ment, BCL and landowners in July 2012. Soon afterwards, the interim chairman of the Panguna Landowners Association, Chris Damana, told Radio Australia that all stakeholders wanted Rio Tinto to return. ‘BCL will … reopen the mine but needs to tidy up a lot of things before they come’, he said. ‘We all agree that BCL will come back because they have learned their mistake … and maybe we can start on a new slate.’32 He added that for the mine to reopen, it was vital that a reconciliation ceremony be held and ‘belcol money’ (compensation) be paid to those who had suffered in the region. All interested parties apparently expressed satisfaction with the discussion.
Bernadine Kirra, the chairwoman of the lower-tailings landowners, the 3000-strong group that suffered the most while the mine was open, also told Radio Australia in July 2012 that it was vital Panguna again operated, so that BCL could ‘build maybe some schools for a better standard [of education] and maybe better hospitals for Bougainville’.33
These are all understandable desires on the part of Bougainvilleans. The question is whether or not the mining companies can be trusted to fulfil them.
Unsurprisingly, the chairman of BCL, Peter Taylor, is enthusiastic about his company’s prospects, telling a shareholders’ meeting in Port Moresby in May 2012 that ‘there is widespread agreement today that Bougainville’s economic future needs mining if it is able to fund services for the people from its own resources’.34 However, he made no mention of the environmental destruction that occurred the last time the mine was running, nor of how this would be addressed, despite claiming it would cost around $3 billion to reopen the site. He was still sticking to the commercial positives in April 2013, when he said that the mine would employ around 2500 workers and would yield its valuable minerals for roughly twenty-four years; according to Taylor, it will take six years to ready the mine for production. One mining expert, Gavin Mudd, tells Radio Australia it will cost at least $1 billion to clean up the environment on Bougainville.35
Market doubts concerning BCL, in particular about the negotiations to resume mining activity on Bougainville, led to the company recording a financial loss in 2011. ‘Uncertainty is poison’, said European Shareholders of Bougainville Copper president Axel Sturm in March 2012, before demanding that the PNG Government invest heavily in Panguna to get it moving again.36 The resources at stake are likely to continue to win over investors—BCL announced in 2013 that Panguna contains up to 5 million tonnes of copper and 19 million ounces of gold, worth $41 billion and $32 billion respectively.
The renewed interest shown in PNG by Rio Tinto and other resource giants such as Shell has been welcomed by the PNG Government, mostly because Port Moresby is desperate for foreign investment. Minister for Petroleum and Energy William Duma said that this was ‘a demonstration of the trust and confidence multinationals around the globe have for PNG … We as a country stand to gain more and we can’t go wrong’.37 Prime Minister Peter O’Neill, officiating at the opening of a Shell office in the capital in February 2012, reassured foreign investors that ‘despite the perception of political instability, unlike many other countries of the world, PNG has been able to maintain the confidence of the business community’.38
But the governor of PNG’s Gulf Province, Havila Kavo, voiced his concerns, asking why Shell was being welcomed back to the nation after the company had described PNG as a ‘failed state’ a decade earlier. ‘They [Shell] ripped off the country and left’, he said. ‘What infrastructure have they left and what positive development have they left before departing? Such companies have no confidence in the country.’39 It seems that Shell has decided to retract its previously held views in order to participate in PNG’s developing gas industry.40
It is a rare that a poor country can resist the charms of a multinational offering substantial investment within its borders. This is an option open only to strong economies and institutions. The Norwegian Government, for example, divested $1 billion from Rio Tinto in 2008 for ‘grossly unethical conduct’ at its mine at Grasberg in West Papua, which involved ‘severe environmental damage’.41 In September 2012, the New Zealand Superannuation Fund also pulled its investment from the Grasberg mine, in which Rio Tinto holds a 40 per cent stake, explaining that the key reason for doing so was the human rights abuses committed by Indonesian forces against locals.42
Sometimes, though, the legacies of the past are challenged. There is an ongoing lawsuit in America that was filed in 2002 against Rio Tinto by landowners in Bougainville, who claim that the company was involved in the commission of war crimes and genocide during The Crisis. An attorney for the landowners, Steve Berman, told Radio Australia in November 2011 that Rio Tinto ‘financed the helicopters and troop carriers and communications devices, and the means that the [PNG] government used to try and suppress the uprising’.43 The class action represents up to 14 000 Bougainvilleans.
There are additional concerns in PNG today about a ‘mobocracy’. That’s the word used by Sam Koim, the chairman of PNG’s Task Force Sweep, which was set up in 2011 to look into government corruption. ‘A few mob is beginning to dominate the resources at the expense of the majority’, he has said.44 Documents released by WikiLeaks confirm the belief that the PNG political establishment is a ‘totally dysfunctional blob’ and the country is trapped in ‘Ponzi politics’. Such honest statements run counter to the usual comments by Australian officials, who speak of ‘institution building’.45 The problem extends to Australia, where, it is alleged, money laundering by PNG politicians and other officials to the tune of tens of millions of dollars is common.46
One good piece of news in 2012 was the establishment of a sovereign fund that would save some of the huge wealth created through oil, gas and mineral exploitation in PNG. But, again, critics worry that a corrupt government is ill-equipped to manage it. ‘The real challenge is keeping sticky fingers out of the revenues pot’, writes former PNG Prime Minister Mekere Morauta.47 The 2013 announcement by the PNG Government to consolidate state-owned companies and the country’s oil and mining assets, including Bougainville Copper and Ok Tedi, into a new corporate structure was heralded as a better way of maximising the benefits to the people, although without proper oversight, the mistakes of the past are destined to be repeated.48 The worrying backdrop to all of these factors is Australia itself, which can appear to be thwarting the autonomy of its northern neighbour in order to protect its significant vested interests there. This sentiment was articulated by Australian Foreign Minister Bob Carr in March 2012, when he warned PNG against postponing upcoming elections, otherwise it would ‘place Australia in a position where we’d have no alternative but to organise the world to condemn and isolate Papua New Guinea’. Carr subsequently backed down in the face of PNG anger—by late 2012, he was claiming that PNG could be a regional leader49—but the outburst was instructive of the mentality that resides in the Australian political elite.
Australia pays lip service to the fact that PNG is an independent nation, but its actions over the last few decades, not least making a poor nation dependent on its aid largesse, has made sovereignty close to impossible. ‘PNG has a way of holding itself together but we do have to be watchful’, the Australian high commissioner to Port Moresby, Ian Kemish, said patronisingly before the country’s 2012 election. A few years earlier, PNG’s high commissioner to Australia, Charles Lepani, had critically reviewed the Howard government as ‘proselytising the values of Western society without attempting to understand the values of Pacific islands’ culture’.50
Successive Australian governments have seen PNG as a problem that can be managed by aid agreements, which are currently worth $500 million annually. Canberra even appears willing to tolerate the loss of funds to PNG corruption despite spending more than $160 million on Australian advisers in the first decade of the twenty-first century to ‘strengthen governance’.51
In 2011, AusAID introduced a ‘Mining for Development’ initiative, which claims to ‘provide countries with the expertise they need to build a sustainable mining sector, making better use of revenues, improving socially and environmentally sustainable development and growing the economy’. All fine words, except that in PNG, they are completely contradicted by the facts on the ground.52 Canberra has even brought out politicians and bureaucrats from across the world, mainly Africa, on ‘study tours’ to see how apparently model corporations such as BHP Billiton and Rio Tinto conduct their business. In November 2012, ten women from five African countries toured Queensland and Western Australian mines and their communities. Sylvie Gilbert, a provincial director of Madagascar’s interregional department of mines, told the ABC that ‘one of the things I am hoping to learn from this study trip is better governance principles as well as a better income stream for the country’.53
The most incisive of PNG’s bloggers, Martyn Namorong, called this idea ‘neo-colonisation’ and asked what kinds of positive development PNG locals have seen in the areas where mining is occurring. He wrote that the Australian Government, through AusAID, has been pursuing a clear agenda for years: ‘to act in Australian mining company interests as they did in Bougainville’. He also damned the PNG ‘elite’ who were trained in Australia and ‘run the country’ only with regard for the interests of outside forces and themselves.54
Even Australia’s adoption in 2011 of the global Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI), which was welcomed by NGOs such as Jubilee Australia, has been viewed suspiciously by critics in PNG. There’s a lack of solid evidence that the plan, which aims to provide transparency concerning company revenues in countries where extractive industries are important, has helped the nations that have signed up, which include Liberia, Niger and Mongolia. In fact, the Financial Times reported in 2013 that countries in Africa that are involved in EITI, such as Mozambique, still struggle with endemic corruption.55
But there are some in PNG who want even more Australian involvement in the country. I spent some time in Port Moresby with an employee of Oxfam who told me he wished that Australia would again take control of PNG. He said the nation’s independence in 1975, pushed by Michael Somare, came too early and that not enough local people were equipped to manage the new country. This led, in his view, to the current malaise whereby corrupt politicians are wasting PNG’s vast natural wealth. He said his father still speaks longingly about the pre-1975 days, when Australia supposedly treated PNG in a respectful way.
This man claimed that his view is widely shared across PNG, though I have only come across a handful of other supporters. I have never before heard of a formerly colonised people wanting to be once again controlled by their former colonisers, but it isn’t hard to see the logic. How else to repair a troubled state with poor public services and wasted or stolen resources when there is little faith that locals can solve the myriad problems? Though whether an army of well-meaning Australian aid workers on high salaries would do any better is clearly arguable.
‹   ›
I arrive in Madang, a province on the northern coast of mainland PNG. After the edginess of Port Moresby and the decay of Bougainville, the area is a revelation. It is less crowded, there are lush, green fields, and the people seem more relaxed. But looks can be deceiving.
I am here to spend some time with the Bismarck Ramu Group (BRG), a progressive grassroots organisation that works with local communities to help them achieve sustainable control of their land and resources. When I arrive at the BRG compound, which is situated on the same property as a tourist resort in the centre of the province, I notice that security is provided by the British multi national G4S, a company readily present across PNG.56 I’m ushered into a meeting with BRG’s senior management, one of whom is Barry Lalley, an American who tells me that PNG doesn’t have a history of reliable NGOs and that BRG is unique because it challenges the rapacious ‘development’ agenda favoured by multinationals, the Australian government and the PNG elite. I’m also told that the group is independent. ‘We’re a leftie organisation’, says network coordinator Rose Koian, ‘and we don’t take Australian aid funding’. BRG is critical of the PNG Government, dismissive of the country’s Supreme Court—which mostly defends commercial interests over people’s rights—and believes in the power of communities to challenge the resource extraction business. This includes the up-and-coming industry of seabed mining, about which there is already concern that environmental safeguards aren’t in place.57 Another concern arose when Britain announced in 2013 that American defence company Lockheed Martin would lead the country’s push into the $1-billion industry.58 The risk to the Pacific, where the multinational wants to operate, is the eventual militarisation of the region.
According to BRG’s mission statement, its goal is to ‘create a more fair and equitable society … by challenging the current model of development which unfairly and ruthlessly exploits the earth, its people, land and natural resources’. It’s impossible to know how many people in PNG might share this view, as reliable public polling is rare. There’s also the fact that Prime Minister Peter O’Neill comfortably won the country’s 2012 election on a platform that included the continuing pursuit of the resource exploitation model; albeit he called for more government accountability and less corruption.59 But it is true that public anger towards the political elite remains palpable in PNG.
The following morning, I see evidence of what BRG is fighting for—the human face of the resource curse. In late December 2011, the PNG Supreme Court dismissed an appeal by local people living along the Rai coast in Madang Province against the dumping into the Bismarck Sea of 100 million tonnes of toxic waste by the Ramu nickel mine, owned by the Chinese firm Metallurgical Construction Company (MCC) (the Australian firm Highlands Pacific is a minor partner in the mine).60 The key figure behind the court case was a PNG man in his fifties called Terry. He tells a grim tale.
Terry has five children—a son and four daughters (he says he would have preferred more boys because they’d inherit his land)— and they all thought he was a crazy old man for pursuing the case. But he convinced his neighbours that the paltry 1 per cent they were being offered by MCC wasn’t satisfactory compensation and that the operation would destroy the land, robbing future generations of the ability to use it. ‘We had to take action’, he says softly, looking forlorn.
It was a long and tortuous process, though BRG provided funding for a lawyer (‘a wonderful woman from New Zealand’) to represent Terry and his co-defendants, as well as constant moral and political support. ‘They were invaluable’, he says. ‘There’s no other group in PNG like them.’
The landowners initially tried to negotiate with the mining company, but they were rebuffed; there was not even an acknowledgement of the problems being caused on the land and in the sea. Terry believes attempts were then made to intimidate him into dropping the case—he’s sure that the company hired local thugs to come to his house on two occasions to rob and harass him. But he persisted. Eventually, however, the PNG Supreme Court found in favour of MCC and the PNG Government, which sided as usual with the corporation. ‘It was very disappointing but unsurprising’, Terry says. ‘This is how our country works.’ Even though clear evidence was provided that the nickel mine would cause great environmental damage, the court decided, as in so many similar cases, that ‘development’ was ‘progress’ and must be continued.
Terry, like many others I meet in PNG, is opposed to Chinese corporate influence in the country. He says the Chinese often ignore agreements or simply change the terms, and that they can refuse to even enter agreements in the first place. ‘At least with Australians we can talk with them about things, even if we disagree’, Terry argues. I sense that the issue here isn’t really about the Chinese people per se but about their business practices in PNG; it’s the ignoring of environmental standards, as often happens in China itself, that causes the angst.
A 2012 report by Michael Komesaroff published in the Chinese Economic Quarterly—since 1997, a key publication detailing the Chinese financial world—found that ‘it’s hard to pinpoint any Chinese foreign mining projects that are trouble free and profitable’, as opposed to domestic Chinese projects, which are comparatively manageable. Komesaroff listed the Ramu mine as a key example.61 In addition, PNG geologist Jerry Garry claimed in 2010 that the PNG Government had hugely undervalued the Ramu mine to appease Chinese interests, calling it another example of the ‘broad daylight rape’ of PNG’s resources.62 It has not been unusual for local outrage over such issues to cause the mine to shut down for periods of time, and for local police to use excessive force in dealing with protestors.
The problem is that foreign influence is ubiquitous in PNG. Although Terry loathes the Chinese, his son studies at Nanking University in China, and he says that one of his daughters is applying for a scholarship through Beijing’s embassy in Port Moresby. His family is poor, with few financial options. For the sake of education, it would be pig-headed, Terry suggests, not to take some Chinese money and use it for a ‘good’ purpose instead of seeing it merely used for exploitation. The same thinking applies to China’s investment of billions of dollars in PNG road infrastructure—very few locals, despite their reservations, are rejecting this money.63
Terry says that no-one has yet become sick because of the Ramu nickel mine’s pollution, but he knows that day will come soon. He sees discoloured fluid and other pollutants in the water next to his home. Fish stocks have already been affected by the waste spewing from the mine. Yet there’s nowhere for Terry to turn. The Madang Government has ignored his pleas, while Port Moresby backs the mine. Some of the local media have interviewed him sympathetically, but the country’s major press supports the project.
During my stay in Madang, I see a Ramu advertisement in the Sunday Chronicle newspaper, in which MCC indicates its efficiency and reliability by listing figures of ‘earth work completed’ and ‘drainage and process pipe laid’. The level of contempt shown by the mining company is startling. When a memorandum of understanding was agreed in 2006 between MCC and local landowners, one of the conditions was that the corporation would connect the residents to the power grid. But six years later this is yet to happen, despite the firm using its own power supply. In Terry’s village, which is inhabited by 500 people, everyone relies on battery-powered lights. A few months ago, MCC did deliver a solitary solar cell to the village, which was a token effort by the company and now lies idly on the ground. ‘The frogs sit in it at the end of the day’, Terry says.
It’s not just mining companies that are causing ecological destruction in Madang. I visit a fisheries factory run by the Filipino company RD Tuna, where yellowfin tuna is packaged for shipment to Australia and Europe. I am accompanied by a BRG employee who travels throughout Madang encouraging landowners and villagers not to be seduced by the alleged riches dangled by resource companies in return for consent to use their land. He explains that the factory has led to the severe depletion of fish stocks in the area, and that the pollution released by visiting ships is gradually destroying the local environment. He also says that such fisheries are supported by the local and national governments, which see them as ‘development’, and that RD Tuna is soon to open many more factories in Madang. ‘They provide jobs’, my guide laments, ‘but nothing about this is sustainable’.
The rusted forklifts and the puddles of oil that sit outside the factory are just some indications of RD Tuna’s questionable business practices. Locals tell me that the firm also underpays its staff, kills dolphins in its nets and pollutes the local waterways—the putrid smell of dead fish and other waste permeates the air around the factory.64 When Australians and Europeans consume the company’s fish, there’s little chance they will have any idea of the myriad problems created in delivering the food to their plates.
BRG’s Rose Koian is a strong-willed woman with intriguing facial tattoos (mostly done, she says, during an initiation ceremony when she was thirteen) who seems like the soul of the organisation. She says that PNG must reject the ‘250-year failure of capitalism’ and embrace new ideas. That means no mining and the rejection of all Australian aid. It means the encouragement of agriculture to sustain the nation—after all, more than half of PNG’s population gain their daily income from growing and selling fresh food. Above all, she says, it means empowering local communities to get active—to find their voices and feel confident enough to reject supposedly lucrative offers from extraction companies.
She talks passionately about how BRG takes no money from AusAID—‘We don’t want to spend all our time filling in countless forms’—and how it is attempting, with various degrees of success, to reject the decades-old ‘development’ model pushed by Australia and other foreign powers and to find other ways of improving living conditions in PNG. ‘We wonder why there’s no school or health services and why people have to carry loads of coffee or cocoa on their shoulders to markets in town’, Koian says. ‘We ask why is this so? We are a country with lots of mines, forestry activity and fishery canneries … we have almost everything here, but why is PNG [still] at this stage?’
It’s a crucial question. Koian continues: ‘During the 2008 global economic crisis, people in PNG were not affected because they relied on the land and had a house and didn’t worry about a thing except when they came into town and wondered why the price of food was higher. BRG takes the role of educating people of what’s happening globally and how it’s affecting you. Why are you being denied that health service? Why are your children being denied education? … We have been criticised for our work but most people appreciate a different, non-mainstream view that is challenging the development the Western world is bringing. We need a different economic model that’s brought from our own people’.
It’s a theme that Koian aired in the Port-Courier in 2010. She wrote that her country had failed to heed the warnings in the 1970s given by ‘visionary leaders’, who urged the rejection of a foreign takeover of PNG. ‘We have allowed development beyond our capacity into our country’, she argued. ‘We have allowed outsiders to tell us what is right for us. Papua New Guineans, when will we decide for ourselves?’65
I ask her about the Chinese influence in PNG. She says that she doesn’t object to the Chinese people but she dislikes the fact that ‘90 per cent’ of the shops in central Madang are owned by them. ‘How is this helping locals?’ she asks. She’s an economic nationalist who rejects the stunting of local initiatives that could bring the people economic independence. She repeats the mantra of backing the country’s informal agriculture sector and developing a better transport network and public service delivery.66
The next day, BRG’s community organiser, Frank, takes me to his village, a beautiful collection of wooden houses sitting within a forest near a main road. Tall trees stand behind every home, chickens run between the house stilts, and children play on the manicured grass. Every property is linked by a dirt path that perfectly connects the entire village, making all of its 150 inhabitants feel included. But I’m drawn out of the beauty of the scene and back into the reality of the development model when Paul, a local landowner, tells me the heart-breaking story of his clan, which has lost ownership of its land to RD Tuna and is fighting the company in the courts. He explains how local women used to fish and then sell their catches, but that the company had stopped the activity. Now, many woman are selling their bodies to people from the company in exchange for fish. ‘They call it a fish for a fuck’, Paul says, looking ashamed.
The odds are stacked against Paul’s clan winning the case, as they are up against a biased Supreme Court and governments that prefer to back foreign corporations. I later hear from BRG that some of the youth in Frank’s village are considering sabotage, burning down the tuna plants, if things get desperate.
These stories are ubiquitous in PNG, where village after village seems to be either fighting a multinational or welcoming one—the latter also usually ends badly for the locals, as the promised schools or hospitals often don’t eventuate. Poor communication between villages means that such adverse experiences of vulture capitalism are infrequently shared, but BRG tries to address this problem by taking communities to afflicted areas to hear the tales of woe there.
‹   ›
It’s easy to see how disaster capitalism found sympathy in PNG. A land with little regulation, institutional corruption and great natural wealth breeds an environment in which exploitation comes easily. Of course, these problems are not unique to PNG—according to The New York Times, in Mongolia, which is currently experiencing a mineral boom similar to PNG’s, ‘first-world profits are colliding with third-world problems’.67 But the corporatisation of PNG seems to have been especially undemanding for those pursuing this agenda, Bougainville being the obvious exception.
Then there’s the fact that the privatisation of aid, under the guise of ‘consulting’, is rarely discussed in the public domain, despite countless corporations profiting hugely from taxpayer funds that are supposedly directed at assisting developing nations. The Australian Government faces little opposition to its policies and pays a minimal electoral price for advocating a development model that benefits its own companies and advisers while sacrificing the empowerment of PNG and its citizens.
Nations with vested interests in PNG don’t overly care about its economic system as long as they can perform their resource extraction effectively and within a reasonable time frame, which can require the influencing of legislation and the law and order environment. There’s no accountability for failed policies, even those that stretch back decades, and different governments merely allow the trend to continue.
A devastating report was issued in 2012 by a Deakin University expert in international development, Professor Mark McGillivray. He found that PNG’s resource-rich Western Province ranked just above Zimbabwe but below the Democratic Republic of Congo in terms of human development based on the United Nation’s Human Development Index. ‘If PNG’s Western Province was a country, there would be an international outcry about their plight, given its appalling low levels of human development’, McGillivray said.68 This stark finding was only reported by a couple of small blogs and news websites.
Disaster capitalism isn’t a static ideology but adapts to the circumstances in countries that are economically reliant on too few sources of income. In PNG, as one resource project comes to its natural end, Port Moresby inevitably looks to other projects to replace the lost revenue. So as the Ok Tedi, Lihir, Simberi and Porgera mines approach the exhaustion of their reserves, Ramu, Panguna and the LNG development become more and more important. The bargaining position of the PNG Government inevitably weakens, forcing it to offer far too many concessionary arrangements to the owners of these resource projects, which include ExxonMobil, Oil Search and BHP Billiton.
This is how states become dependent on profit-driven multinationals that have no incentive to seriously improve the lives of locals.
ExxonMobil’s LNG project, for example, is being heralded by the PNG Government as the key answer to the country’s financial woes. But it’s hard to see how the flaws in previous energy projects won’t also haunt this one. The early signs aren’t encouraging. They suggest that the lessons of history are being ignored and that attention is only being paid to the dollar.
‹   ›
I have decided to visit ExxonMobil’s LNG plant, which means a visit to Port Moresby—there are fifty-four homicides per 100 000 citizens there, which is around ten times higher than Australia’s national average. I’ve arranged to check out the development with a local Oxfam employee, Greg, and his friend Jimmy, a part-time policeman and part-time gangster, a combination that can work well in PNG. At one point in my visit, I discover how easy it is for someone with a little cash and the right connections to change an upcoming flight on Air Niugini, even though the local airline allegedly has no empty seats on any of its services for weeks.
The capital contains a number of new skyscrapers, and processing plants dot the landscape. ExxonMobil has a strong presence here. Eoin Blackwell, an Australian Associated Press journalist based in Port Moresby, later tells me that ExxonMobil has designated the city’s various districts as either red or green areas, depending on the probability of attack by rascals (gangs) or other criminals. G4S security personnel consequently drive ExxonMobil staff members around town in armed vehicles, which causes resentment among local people, who accuse them of living in a bubble, wilfully ignorant of the mass poverty that surrounds them. The failure of the PNG police to provide adequate security is the key reason given by resource firms for hiring private outfits. But Blackwell says that the highly paid Western security companies encourage security fears by offering apocalyptic safety assessments. This prompts Western interests to spend a fortune on protection, which ends up increasing the price of accommodation and other services for everybody else.
We drive out of Port Moresby on a road that hugs the coastline, headed towards the LNG plant construction site some 30 minutes from the centre of town. We pass small villages as we make our way along the cracked road, which steadily improves as we approach one of the biggest gas projects in the world. We’re soon stopped at a roadblock manned by five policemen. One comes over and asks our driver for his licence. The driver reaches into the ashtray, pulls out 5 kina, and when the policeman puts his hand on the side mirror, he pushes the note into the man’s palm. The policeman hesitates, then seemingly refuses the bribe and orders our driver to pull over to the side of the road. It’s clearly time for Jimmy to step in. He jumps out, walks over to the other policemen, some of whom he recognises, shares a comment and a laugh, and within a minute we’re on our way—after the cash has been pocketed, of course.
‘You see, Antony’, Greg says, ‘this is PNG’. Everybody laughs. Then the men return to chewing betel nuts, periodically spitting the red juice out of the car’s windows.
The LNG project covers a large area and is in various stages of development. We approach a fenced-off section and a local security guard immediately appears and tells me I’m not allowed to film. He apologises for this and says we can arrange a meeting with his boss, though I decline the offer. As we drive away, Jimmy says he’ll sort the man out later. I presume he’s joking, but I still say: ‘Please don’t hurt him, Jimmy’. He responds with: ‘I’ll recognise him now when I see him in town’. I laugh nervously.
We drive on towards Papa Lea-Lea, a village that’s become a key hub for the LNG pipeline. On one side of the road there are LNG production facilities as far as the eye can see, while on the other side are lush, rolling hills. I’m told that some landowners have done deals with ExxonMobil over the use of their property, while others complain they weren’t properly consulted before work was begun.69
We cannot go any further—this is the end of the road for us. As we prepare to return to Port Moresby, Greg tells me that the project is bringing both good and bad things to local people. The positives include economic opportunities and jobs. The negatives include the fact that so many Papua New Guineans are still missing out on the proceeds of the resource boom. Furthermore, some local LNG workmen aren’t coping well with the influx of money, spending it on excessive alcohol consumption and women, a sad by-product of which is a rising rate of HIV infection. It’s a perfect storm that the country’s government is doing little to address.
Greg is resigned to the project, saying there’s no chance it won’t go ahead. However, while he fears that Port Moresby won’t deliver on the promises it has made to the people, he—like many others— nurtures a faint hope that the Peter O’Neill administration will make a break from the past and do the right thing. ‘The government needs to teach people how to manage their funds and budgets’, he tells me. Many locals apparently don’t have such skills.
‹   ›
Oxfam released a report in 2011 called Listening to the Impacts of the PNG LNG Project. It featured comments from various Papua New Guineans, some saying they appreciated the funds they were receiving, but others saying they were worried about the communities who were struggling to receive a fair share of the benefits. It was reminiscent of the argument put forward by the former president of the Autonomous Region of Bougainville, James Tanis, that ‘the people started seeing each other not as brothers and sisters and clan mates with common ownership of wealth, but more as business competitors, with only the fittest to survive. This contributed to inequality, to social gaps and to hatred’.70
This is also a fear—one of many—expressed by Stanley Mamu, a 29-year-old man with a broad smile who is from the Southern Highlands, and who is soon to graduate from university, qualified to work in real estate. He’s also the blogger behind the website LNG Watch, whose key aim is ‘to raise awareness of the illegalities associated with the signing of the multi-billion dollar PNG LNG project’. I spend an afternoon with Mamu in downtown Port Moresby. He has just returned from the Southern Highlands, where he spoke to the landowners affected by a devastating landslide in Tari that buried alive at least twenty-five people. It’s thought that the landslide might be related to drilling activity carried out in the area by ExxonMobil as part of its pipeline development, and Mamu wants international experts to examine the site independently. But the PNG Government has so far refused to allow such an investigation.
Mamu acknowledges that the LNG project may go ahead, but says ‘it will not be smooth’. He says that the government in Port Moresby and ExxonMobil forced illiterate landowners to sign an agreement on LNG in 2009, and that ‘the vast majority of people there don’t support it’. He thinks that it’s possible a new and better agreement will be signed before 2014, but, he fears that if it isn’t, ‘something like Bougainville will happen’. It seems that civil war is never far from everyone’s mind.
This echoes what I heard from another highlands source, that many locals there are starting to collect weapons and grenades for the ‘coming fight’. I was told, ‘This is about dignity and our rights. These things are happening all over PNG and we can’t allow it’.
The prospect of violence surprises no-one. Conflict is already a well-established part of PNG’s resource boom, with private security readily hired to protect mining interests from angry locals who feel disenfranchised from the projects. The head of an NGO in Madang Province, who has connections at high levels of the PNG Government, told me that the private security company G4S essentially runs the country. He argued that years of depletion of the PNG military have allowed ExxonMobil and other Western multinationals, with the complicity of Port Moresby, to forge forces that are more loyal to them than to the state.71 Naturally, ExxonMobil disputes this. Its PNG-based media communications adviser, Rebecca Arnold, told me that the company was simply ‘ensuring the safety of our workforce and facilities’ and that ‘none of our security guards carry firearms’.72
A key figure in The Crisis, the now-retired major-general Jerry Singirok, who oversaw the departure of foreign mercenaries during the war, has warned that the PNG Government needs to remember history: ‘Now with the LNG project … the Government has allowed developers to bring in foreign-owned security companies who have no appreciation of their local customs, cultures and the people’.73
Listening to these dire warnings, it’s hard not to sympathise with the sentiment of resistance, but Stanley Mamu knows that the cost in human lives could be great, just like in Bougainville, where the locals won the war but are still trying to get back on their feet economically. ‘With corporate predators circling PNG’s national wealth’, wrote Mamu on his blog, ‘how on earth are the people to protect their rights when the … the national government is a partner and financial beneficiary of these operations?’74
Mamu is pessimistic because the government completely backs the LNG plant, ‘so it is up to the people to resist because our leaders will not’, but it feels like a lone battle. While the LNG Watch blog gives the landowners of the Southern Highlands a voice that the world can hear, Mamu can only access the Web three to four times a week, and the internet café he uses charges an exorbitant A$10 an hour.
Mamu and I walk around the corporate centre of Port Moresby, where the city’s most expensive hotels are surrounded by run-down areas. It reminds me of India, though with fewer people. We enter the surreal air-conditioned calmness of one high-rise hotel, from where there is a view of poor people on the pavement outside, sweating in the sun selling single cigarettes and betel nuts just to make a few kina.
Mamu then takes me to Port Moresby’s largest market, ‘where white people never go because there’s so much rubbish but people are very friendly’. We find a sea of locals and discarded plastic bags. Young men and women sell vegetables, meat, tobacco and a range of fruits, all of which are cheap. ‘Expats go to Vision City [a modern mall] and pay many times as much for the same things’, Mamu tells me. People greet me, as Mamu has said they will: ‘They never see white people and they feel that by being here you are humble and have come to their level to see how they live’.
‹   ›
What’s needed in PNG is a new model of investment, one that doesn’t treat the country’s natural wealth as jewels to be admired then taken. If this isn’t forthcoming, the horrors of Bougainville could be repeated. When I walked around the old, decaying mine in Panguna, I imagined the rusted trucks being replaced with new models and the whole cycle of exploitation beginning again, the resource curse striking anew. Riches are there for the taking, and there’s currently little incentive for Western corporations to behave any differently unless a public campaign of naming and shaming takes place.
A truly sovereign Papua New Guinea—sovereign not simply in name but in reality—was not created in 1975. Vulture capitalism was ingrained in the new regime from the very beginning, something for which Australia bears a deep responsibility. Today, there is an obligation to assist Port Moresby to break free of the aid trap and develop far more sustainable practices; most obviously, agricultural ones. The people and tools are already there. All that’s now needed is investment in infrastructure, training and education—and a change in mindset.
PNG shouldn’t be condemned to remain a land that offers little to locals and much to Western shareholders. Twenty-first century independence is possible.







5
AFGHANISTAN AND PAKISTAN—THE WAR ECONOMY
Frankly, I’d like to see the government get out of war altogether and leave the whole feud to private industry.
Major Milo Minderbinder, Catch 22
The rain pelts the car’s windshield as we speed through Kabul’s streets, which resemble a sea of mud. Women in burqas appear, faceless and shapeless, and disappear just as quickly. Young boys put out begging hands when the traffic stops us, desperate for coins or food. I see some children pushing wheelbarrows full of bricks, while other kids play alongside the road. Large trucks roar past, pumping their horns.
I am half an hour from the centre of Afghanistan’s capital, on Jalalabad Road, which is lined with large compounds owned by logistics companies and protected by guards. Behind one of the nondescript fences are the premises of a private security firm. Speaking to senior players in the private security industry in Afghanistan is notoriously difficult because it’s an inherently secretive business, but I’ve been promised time with a senior manager.
My driver and I pull up near a concrete barrier. It only takes a few seconds before two armed guards appear to ask what we’re doing here. The men each carry an AK-47 and wear a cap emblazoned with the security company’s logo. They take me to a small office near the main gate and offer me a seat and tea. Rain drips through a small crack in the wooden ceiling, splattering on the dirt below. One of the guards talks to me as he searches my bag. He spent a number of years in Karachi, the financial capital of Pakistan, but he’s been with this company in Kabul for two years and says ‘they’re a good employer’. He likes the job because it provides a steady income.
I’m invited into the compound. There’s a large courtyard where 4WDs are parked, and this is surrounded by multistorey demountables. Around twenty Gurkhas, recent recruits, mill about in one corner. The company’s managing director approaches and introduces himself. Jack is an affable man in his sixties who wears beige chinos, a blue shirt and a navy fleece jacket. He tells me that he fought as a British soldier in some of the toughest wars of the last few decades, including those in Iraq, Afghanistan and Central America, but says he makes far more money in his current job. ‘Western militaries should pay their soldiers more money, otherwise they’ll continue moving to PMCs’, says Jack, referring to private military companies. (‘We don’t call ourselves mercenaries’, he later tells me. His company thinks the word has a bad connotation.)
Jack leads me into his office, a small, dimly lit room with a window, a desk and a black leather couch, and on the walls, a map of Kabul outlining where his company operates, a map of Afghanistan, and a photo of the Hindu Kush mountain range. As we enter, he calmly tells me that his corporation ‘survives off chaos’.
Jack’s company came to Afghanistan in 2002, the first PMC to arrive after the October 2001 US-led invasion. Now there are many more PMCs, about 75 per cent of which are Afghan-run. Up until serious resistance against the invaders began in 2004, the violence was relatively low-level. The company offered ‘assistance to anyone’ for a hefty fee, with its personnel earning at least $1000 per day, and initially this meant protection for journalists and NGO and UN employees. But from 2002 onwards, the company worked with the Afghan Government because of a perception that its Ministry of Interior Affairs couldn’t properly secure businesses and people.
This was the birth of the apparent necessity of private security in Afghanistan, a trend now familiar worldwide. The thinking was that a tough war required hiring the best security, which mostly meant former soldiers looking to make a quick buck. Cultural or social sensitivity and knowledge of a country were not prerequisites. Kabul’s view of PMCs has changed over the years, however, from initially welcoming them to now viewing them with suspicion. This has led to the creation of many new rules, most of which seem to be designed to abolish military companies, and about which there is much confusion—during our conversation, Jack receives a call from an American client who is struggling to understand them. ‘It’s chaos’, Jack says, explaining that the Afghan laws against PMCs are applied unevenly. He equates this with injustice, telling me that ‘in a civilised country, people are not guilty before appearing in a court. Here, you’re guilty and arrested first’.
With a hint of regret, Jack says: ‘With constantly changing regulations here, life is difficult’. In 2002, he recalls, there was an abundance of ammunition and guns and ‘it was easy to operate’. The United States and the United Kingdom were focused on chasing Osama bin Laden and the Taliban, so PMCs could purchase weapons easily and ‘get the job done’ without having to worry about any pesky official oversight. But now, Jack says, the Afghan Government is trying to dismantle the foreign PMCs and replace them with locally run outfits and the state-controlled Afghan Public Protection Force. He says these groups are incapable of performing their duties competently, yet his company is losing commercial contracts to them.
Nevertheless, in Kabul, Jack’s company still manages four embassy buildings, the UN headquarters and a few banks; what he calls ‘static work’. They avoid shadowing convoys, a risky enterprise that requires transporting foreign troops’ goods through oftenhostile tribal territory. Jack says such areas are only accessible upon handing over ‘brown envelopes’ (bribes)—as he puts it, the ‘dollar works here’. Of course, foreign companies are not allowed to pay bribes; in theory, these firms could be prosecuted at home. But Jack merely smirks when I ask if any companies are doing this.
Jack can’t understand why so many activists in the West are also ‘obsessed’ with imposing tighter regulations on PMCs. He takes pride in the way his company delivers its service. He has an almost apolitical mindset—he is without regard for the exploitation that is occurring in this privatised war zone, instead merely seeing it as a job that involves taking some risks. When I challenge him over his lack of curiosity about the problems in outsourcing security during a conflict, he responds that there’s nothing inherently unethical about providing a safe service on time.
Jack’s company employs six international staff, a number of Gurkhas and 1200 Afghans. He speaks proudly of hiring so many locals, saying that many of them are sent to ‘night school to learn computer skills to use in our HR office and visa section’. He says it’s one way for a foreign company to contribute something tangible to Afghan society. ‘My young men and women are the people who could be leading the country’, he says. ‘My 1200 pay packets feed 12 000 people in their families. If I didn’t employ them, where would they work?’
Responding to the idea that Afghan sovereignty is undermined when PMCs are at work, Jack says, ‘The US is not capable of running empires’. He points out that Washington’s occupation of the country was done so badly that it was inevitable that outside forces would enter the fray to make money. Besides which, Jack says, it’s ultimately cheaper for states to employ PMCs than to put their own ‘boots on the ground’ because the military companies take care of their own insurance, provide vehicles and manage all the administration. As for anything else a PMC may need, after being in the country for years, Jack understands how the system works and who in Kabul you need to approach for such things as permission to register weapons. ‘I’m my own government’, he says.
Jack continues his justifications: ‘America, Britain and [other] foreign forces, in both Iraq and Afghanistan, are not big enough to rebuild nations. PMCs are needed to fill the void, protecting contractors building prisons and schools. They’re now an essential part of war’.1 (He admits that this might not have been the case in Afghanistan if the United States had used more troops in the first place.)
Not that Jack sees a long-term future for his company in Afghanistan. He believes that when most Western forces depart the country, towards the end of 2014, he and his staff will follow them. ‘We’ll stash some weapons in caves’, he tells me cryptically, ‘[but] I don’t see any PMCs here then’.2 His company does, however, already operate in several other places around the world, and he expects more wars—in Iran, the Korean Peninsula and Africa. ‘If we can make money, we’ll go there’, he says.
In his mind, the PMC business has no negatives. It’s purely ‘jobs for boys leaving the army who can continue their trade’. He expands on how positively he feels about the work: ‘Money is not the sole motivator for me, I just want to have a job … I would be bored staying at home. I feel secure, I don’t have an operational role and we have good intelligence around the country. It’s better than the British military, actually, direct from the provinces and local Afghans, and we inform the UK military if it’s relevant to them. We talk with G4S, who’ll pass intelligence on to us, and vice versa. We’re all mates, [we] trained together and fought together globally over the years. We really just compete over contracts’. It sounds like a very cosy PMC club.
Jack mentions an issue I constantly hear about during my stay in the country: a potential Afghan mining boom. ‘There are massive mineral resources here’, he explains, adding that ‘unless corruption is resolved’, greed will win out. ‘Western corporations won’t come here to invest’, he says, ‘but already India and China are buying up land with resources and waiting until security improves.’ He says his company has been approached by mining multinationals but that they’d ‘need diplomatic permission to operate legally here’.
After nearly one and a half hours, the friendly, fast-flowing conversation ends. As Jack and I exchange farewells, I can hear the Gurkhas training outside, in the drizzling rain. Before I leave, I look out Jack’s window, first to the horizon, where dark, menacing clouds hover, then at the countless similarly appointed compounds around me. It is clear that there are many PMCs benefiting from the war here.
‹ ›
Before the American-led invasion of Afghanistan, the country was ruled by the brutal Taliban: people were executed in football stadiums, music was officially outlawed, and young girls were banned from schools. It was a barbaric regime, though not so barbaric that it couldn’t negotiate with the American energy company Unocal over running a Turkmenistan–Pakistan pipeline through the country; extremism is rarely a barrier to vulture capitalism. After the invasion, Afghanistan became the perfect place for a war economy to thrive.
The battle that surrounded Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait in August 1990 provided a solid model for post-9/11 war propaganda. The US public relations firm Hill+Knowlton was employed to demonise the Saddam Hussein regime, a campaign paid for by a group of Kuwaiti oil sheiks who called themselves Citizens for a Free Kuwait. One of its stunts involved a young woman, who called herself Nayirah, who told a meeting of the United States Congres sional Human Rights Caucus that she had seen Iraqi soldiers take babies from incubators and place them on the floor to die. It was a lie—the woman was actually the 15-year-old daughter of the Kuwaiti ambassador to the United States. Nonetheless, it succeeded in encouraging the support of military action against Iraq.
In 1918, at the close of World War I, US Senator Hiram Warren Johnson famously said, ‘The first casualty of war is truth’.3 With Kuwait, we saw a lack of truth help to fuel a war.
The enlistment of PR personnel continued when the George W Bush administration declared its ‘war on terror’ in 2001. Countless Hill+Knowlton staff became government staffers to assist in selling the fight, initially against the Taliban. Victoria Clarke, director of the firm’s Washington office, left the company to become then defense secretary Donald Rumsfeld’s press spokesperson, leading the charge to embed journalists in US military units, which helped ensure military-friendly coverage.4
Another Hill+Knowlton staffer, Jeff Raleigh, became a member of the Afghanistan Reconstruction Group, helping the US ambassador in Kabul to encourage public support for the corrupt Afghan Government.5 He worked for the Rendon Group, a company paid tens of millions of dollars by the US Government to push war propaganda in Iraq and Afghanistan post-9/11, and to prepare ‘a counternarcotics information campaign’ in Kabul. This was despite the central government caring little for the anti-drug campaign experience that company founder John Rendon said he had gained while he was a state official in Massachusetts.6 In 2006, the company was paid $4 million to persuade Afghans not to grow opium poppies and so stop fuelling the global heroin trade, but the campaign was a spectacular failure.7
Hill+Knowlton is just one example of a company that straddles the worlds of big business and high-level government, and in doing so benefits financially from war.8 Another is DynCorp, one of the firms America relies on to conduct the training of its military forces across the world. Its résumé includes providing bodyguards to protect Haitian president Jean Bertrand Aristide in the 1990s. But demand for the company’s work surged after 9/11, when the US Government began outsourcing its war on terror.
The State Department has handed out contracts to DynCorp, worth over US$1 billion, for ‘police advisers’ to assist America’s efforts in building up Afghan security forces. But the results have been disappointing to say the least. Serious allegations of waste, mismanagement and overcharging are rampant, and the effectiveness and trustworthiness of the Afghan police force remain in doubt. A 2009 UN report found that at least half of the Afghan police who had been trained by the Americans were corrupt, while a particularly disturbing statistic is the growing number of so-called ‘green-on-blue’ attacks, where Afghan recruits turn on their trainers.9 Yet in 2012, after years of consistent failure by DynCorp in Afghanistan, and barely one week after the US special inspector general for reconstruction labelled as ‘unsatisfactory’ the com pany’s work at the Kunduz army base, it secured a US$72.80 million contract to train US Air Force pilots.
DynCorp has a major presence in both Afghanistan and Iraq, earning 96 per cent of its US$3 billion annual revenue from the US Government. This has occurred despite the fact that the company hasn’t implemented any serious mechanisms to consult with the locals with whom they work, instead relying on ad-hoc relationships that almost guarantee cronyism.10 It seems that privatisation has become so entrenched in the aforementioned countries that placing the affected services back in public hands is rarely even discussed by Western governments.
‘They [DynCorp] were brought in during the heyday of our innocence’, said Ashraf Ghani, Afghanistan’s former minister of finance and adviser to President Hamid Karzai, in 2012.11 A year earlier, journalist Charles Glass reported from Kabul that DynCorp ‘paid the least and hired people other companies would not touch’,12 which is also what I heard during my own visit.
Another player in the war economy is KBR, a former subsidiary of Halliburton, the company once run by one-time US vice-president Dick Cheney. From the beginning of the Afghan war in 2001, KBR/Halliburton were winning contracts to prepare bases for incoming US troops. The figures were staggering—the companies received hundreds of millions of dollars to provide basic services such as food, laundry, camp maintenance and airfield services. By 2008, KBR said that it had served more than 720 million meals, driven more than 643 million kilometres in convoy jobs, treated 45 billion litres of water and created more than 242 million tonnes of ice in the war on terror.13
Many other companies have taken their place in the armedconflict outsourcing queue. An army reporter for the US Department of Defense wrote a story in 2003 that featured representatives of three contractors talking about how they imported into Afghanistan vegetables and fruits from Germany, soft drinks from Bahrain and Saudi Arabia, and meat from the United States. ‘A lot of the guys working here are prior military’, said one employee. ‘We’ve been there and done that too, so this is like we’re giving back. I remember what … [the soldiers are] going through’.14 The message was clear. No expense was spared to provide the comforts of home, and contractors were enriched in the process.
There are often more contractors than soldiers in Afghanistan, a trend that is likely to continue for years to come, as it has in Iraq and Guantanamo Bay. In the last quarter of 2012, there were over 109 000 contractors in Afghanistan, nearly double the number of US troops.15 And the number keeps growing. Also in 2012, the US company Mission Essential Personnel received a US$2.3-billion contract to provide more than 8000 translators at 200 bases in Afghanistan.16
This is occurring despite profound systemic problems. There exists, for example, in Afghanistan and other US theatres of war a two-tier system of privatised employment: one that benefits Westerners and the other that exploits locals. In journalist Sarah Stillman’s 2011 investigation of this trend, she wrote of an
 
invisible army … primarily from South Asia and Africa [who] often live in barbed-wire compounds on US bases, eat at meagre chow halls, and host dance parties featuring Nepalese romance ballads and Ugandan church songs. A large number are employed by fly-by-night subcontractors who are financed by the American taxpayer but who often operate outside the law.17
Of course, the official line was that outsourcing was largely accelerated after the 2001 attacks on New York and Washington as a way for the Bush administration to continue to reduce waste and increase efficiency. The day before the attacks took place, defense secretary Donald Rumsfeld gave a speech that set the scene for what was to come. ‘The topic today is an adversary that poses a threat, a serious threat, to the security of the United States of America’, he began. This turned out not to be terrorism but ‘Pentagon bureaucracy’. Rumsfeld claimed the Pentagon was wasting at least US$3 billion annually and that the logical answer to this was privatisation. ‘When an entire industry exists to run warehouses efficiently’, Rumsfeld continued, ‘why do we own and operate so many of our own? At bases around the world, why do we pick up our own garbage and mop our own floors, rather than contracting services out, as many businesses do?’18 Events unfolded the follow ing day that gave Rumsfeld the perfect excuse to fast-track his plan, emblemised by the privatisation of various war-support services that led to huge job cuts in the US Department of Defense. Cutting a massively bloated budget undoubtedly contributes to a fairer society, but outsourcing these services did nothing to address the problem.
Rumsfeld and Cheney’s joint legacy has cast a long shadow. The favouring of corporations that profit from conflict is now the way that America fights its wars. And this is not just how Republicans think. Democrats like Hillary Clinton and John Kerry have also argued in favour of this system, saying it is more efficient. The two main arms of American politics are infected by the same disease. As a result, not enough accountability has been demanded, such as oversight mechanisms to follow the money trail or measure efficiency, and so billions of dollars have been wasted.
‹   ›
There was almost universal support for the US-led invasion of Afghanistan after the 9/11 attacks (although some in the Left, me included, opposed the war because they argued that America’s aim wasn’t to create a democratic state that would respect all its citizens, as claimed, but to seek revenge). The Taliban regime, which had hosted al-Qaeda and its leader, Osama bin Laden, were quickly overthrown by Operation Enduring Freedom, but many of its senior leaders fled to neighbouring Pakistan and the group has maintained control over vast swathes of Afghanistan. The conflict is now America’s longest-running war, though it is due to end officially in 2014, with the removal of the bulk of Western troops.
The Western occupation of Afghanistan has profoundly changed the country, mostly for the worse, including at the conversational level. An Afghan reporter for The New York Times, Habib Zahori, wrote in early 2013 that his family in Kandahar province now routinely use military terms such as ‘night raid’ and ‘casualties’. ‘When two friends tease each other’, he explains, ‘and one gets angry, maybe he will say: “Leave me alone or I’ll put on the vest”— referring to an explosive suicide vest’.19
The bigger picture is that Hamid Karzai was installed as president in 2004 through undemocratic elections and then re-elected in a sham vote in 2009 that was compromised by voter fraud, of which there was widespread evidence. An insurgency against Western forces didn’t occur immediately, as many Afghans, though opposed to a foreign occupation, initially welcomed the fall of the Taliban. But, in 2003, militants initiated attacks against Kabul and the NATO-run International Security Assistance Force (ISAF). Tens of thousands of Afghan civilians have been killed over the last decade—the UN only started publishing estimates in 2007, and by the end of 2012 the total figure was 13 400. Over 3250 foreign soldiers, including 2100 US troops, have also died in the conflict. It is estimated there have been thousands of US contractor deaths since 2001, although many go unreported; in 2011, at least 430 employees of American contractors were reported killed in Afghanistan.20
Shockingly, a 2010 US Government report, Warlord, Inc., found that a large number of US-paid contractors were actually assisting the insurgency the West is fighting, by paying local warlord-controlled security companies to protect the cargo needed by ISAF forces. This empowered ‘warlords with money, legitimacy and a raison d’être for their private armies’.21 US officials in Kabul estimated in 2009 that at least 10 per cent of the Pentagon’s logistics budget involved paying off insurgents.22 In 2012, the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission released an 800-page report titled Conflict Mapping in Afghanistan since 1978, which documented scores of atrocities that have taken place in the country in the past few decades, many of them committed by the very warlords who are supported by the West today.23
Afghanistan was susceptible to privatised security from the beginning of the post-9/11 war. The country was a veritable blank slate on which a new society could be drawn purely to benefit the bottom lines of corporations that sell themselves as essential to the war effort. And such companies wasted little time in doing so.
The end of the Cold War resulted in an explosion in demobilised labour looking for work, from which PMCs quickly developed. The founder of Aegis Defence Services, Colonel Tim Spicer, said that in the years after the fall of the Soviet Union, PMCs ‘fill[ed] the gap’ where governments were reluctant to engage.24 Western military interventions, already long undertaken covertly by special forces with dubious legality and morality, were increasingly run by unaccountable companies that thrived on maintaining, inflaming or worsening a conflict. The profits were there for the taking.
Then September 11 happened, and the American administration of the time saw an opportunity to reshape the Middle East with overwhelming force. It was a goldmine for PMCs, which became one of the few industries aided by the 9/11 attacks. In his seminal book Corporate Warriors, PW Singer writes:
 
Warfare is no longer an exclusive affair of men in uniform fighting for their state’s political causes. Rather, warfare, as it was often in the past, has become a multi-faceted affair, involving men and women, inside and outside the public military, fighting for a variety of causes—political, economic, religious, social and cultural—that often have little to do with the state.25
A US Defense Department official, James Des Roches, didn’t mince words about the PMC world either: ‘The war on terrorism is the full employment act for these guys … A lot of people have said, “Ding, ding, ding, gravy train”’.26
It is this environment, combined with minimal media scrutiny and limited public knowledge of PMCs, which has allowed this aspect of vulture capitalism to flourish in US war zones over the past twelve years. Compounding the situation is the fact that global legal regulations concerning private security are limited and murky. In 2000, a commentator in the PMC community told PW Singer that anybody who was taken to court under the then Geneva laws deserved to ‘be shot and their lawyer beside them’27—he was referring to the fact that the laws were so weak, it was easy to circumvent them. The security corporations are often based in Western nations, but their operations take place worldwide and therefore contracts are drawn up in countless jurisdictions. Operating outside effective state control is the ideal for these firms. It’s not just PMCs making a fortune. Take the private airline companies quietly transporting military, CIA and intelligence forces in and out of Afghanistan, and around the world. Corporations such as World Airlines, Evergreen Aviation and Tepper Aviation are servicing the endless needs of the US Government.28
Singer articulates the post-9/11 environment as ‘the lax and haphazard way in which governments have privatised their own military services over the last decade. The simple fact that one can outsource does not always mean one should’.29 Perhaps the most remarkable aspect of the recent outsourcing of war is that many US government reports have found the practice to be irresponsible, yet this has had no effect on the granting of massive contracts to the profiteers. America’s bipartisan Commission on Wartime Contracting released a report in 2011 that found between US$31 billion and US$61 billion worth of Pentagon projects in Iraq and Afghanistan had amounted to nothing due to fraud and waste. In the same year, The Centre for Public Integrity concluded that the Pentagon’s no-bid contract system had exploded from US$50 billion in 2003 to US$140 billion in 2011.30
Soon after taking office in 2009, President Barack Obama announced that he would fight a war against bloated Pentagon spending:
 
Last year, the Government Accountability Office, GAO, looked into 95 major defense projects and found cost overruns that totaled $295 billion. Let me repeat. That’s $295 billion in wasteful spending. And this wasteful spending has many sources. It comes from investments in unproven technologies. It comes from a lack of oversight. It comes from influence peddling and indefensible no-bid contracts that have cost American taxpayers billions of dollars.
We will stop outsourcing services that should be performed by the government and open up the contracting process to small businesses. We will end unnecessary no-bid and cost-plus contracts that run up a bill that is paid by the American people. And we will strengthen oversight to maximise transparency and accountability.31
These were empty words. A member of the Commission on Wartime Contracting, Charles Tiefer, told Democracy Now! in 2011 that many US projects in Afghanistan, Iraq and elsewhere, such as dining services and construction, were never finished, or the work was shoddy. He also said the Pentagon awarded contracts to a subsidiary company of the controversial Blackwater without realising it, and that corporate lobbying of members of Congress was the key reason vulture capitalism was on the rise, and unstoppable.32
‹   ›
My flight into Kabul was a spectacularly scenic way of entering the country. Most of the trip from Dubai was spent sitting just above the clouds, but twenty minutes before landing, the Hindu Kush appeared and the pilot threaded the plane between these mountains and the Kabul River. Snow sat on the range’s uninhabited peaks, which seemed almost to touch the bottom of the plane. As the capital approached, I saw small mud-home villages dotting the landscape.
But on the ground in Afghanistan, what I see is a nation destroyed by a brutal occupation, fierce Taliban resistance and numerous companies that are making a fortune amid the misery. It’s immediately clear to me that the country has suffered extraordinary carnage, visited on it by various outside forces, and that the pain has been reciprocated. Afghanistan is called the ‘graveyard of empires’ for good reason—no nation has ever completely successfully occupied or controlled the country. When I visit the British cemetery in Kabul, I see countless graves that testify to various British attempts to tame the place from the nineteenth century onwards. The quiet, well-tended space also has signs detailing the fatalities among NATO and ISAF forces since 2001, including the death of soldiers from Germany, Spain and the Netherlands.
The futility of all these past conflicts hits me: so many states who have come here with supposedly noble aims only to find the country can’t be won. The world’s most powerful nations over the last century have all been defeated here and yet they keep on returning. It’s depressing to think that the Americans will inevitably be followed by other powers in the decades to come.
There have been terrible social costs. I constantly hear in the field that pervasive drug use has gradually worsened since the 2001 US invasion. Afghans have used opium for medicinal purposes for centuries, but since the Soviet Union invaded in 1979, opium production has been a key source of income for warlords fighting the country’s various occupiers. Even the Taliban, except for a brief ban it imposed in 2000, has profited from the trade. Today, largescale opium trading is ubiquitous across the country, with barely any serious effort being made by foreign troops or Kabul to eradicate it.
There have been reports of many thousands of US soldiers abusing drugs in Afghanistan, including the use, sale and dealing of heroin and opium, not unlike the rampant drug problem that occurred during the Vietnam War, but it’s the Afghans who are principally suffering.33 Exact figures are impossible to find, but the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime alleges that at least 8 per cent of the population aged between fifteen and sixty-four are hooked on opium, with few government programs to help manage the epidemic.34 That’s around one million users out of a population of 35 million people. Up to 40 per cent of the addicts are women and children.
The ISAF-led war has prompted a resurgence in the drug trade.35 The drug economy in Afghanistan is thriving and it will only worsen as most Western troops leave in 2014. Up to 90 per cent of the world’s heroin originates here, and countless American and British counternarcotics campaigns staged since 2001 have failed to dent the trade. A poppy farmer in the province of Tarin Kowt told The New York Times in 2012 that it was worth taking the risk. ‘The poppy is always good, you can sell it any time’, he said. ‘It is like gold.’36 Drugs are a central tenet of the war economy, enforced by the devastating effects of the Western occupation.
I decide to see the extent of the crisis for myself by visiting Pul-E-Sokhta, a densely populated and rubbish-strewn area of Kabul that is notorious for drug use. The only relatively safe way of doing this is to have an armed policeman accompany me. So, on the day in question, my fixer, Zubair, approaches a handful of young policemen sitting on metal chairs arrayed in the dust near a roundabout. He doesn’t offer a direct bribe but, rather, says that we want someone’s help to walk under an infamous bridge; US$20 is the asking price for being a ‘guide’—it’s a bribe by another name.
A friendly officer in his early twenties, who carries an AK-47 and wears a mask to shield his face from the dust, obligingly takes us under an overpass newly built by USAID. ‘It’s the best in Kabul’, Zubair says.37 The smell here is putrid; the Kabul River flows nearby and there are discarded plastic bags everywhere. Hundreds of addicts have been known to gather here, but today the site is partly underwater and relatively few users are around. Fifteen men huddle together under shawls while they smoke heroin. A few scatter as soon as we arrive, scared off by my camera and the policeman; the armed cop’s presence is serving its purpose.
It’s a sorry sight. Discarded bottles, torn clothes and rotten food lie under the bridge. The men are in a collective drugged stupor, their eyes bloodshot, crouching in the filth to get a fix. One man, who has a bushy brown goatee, says that he lost his job and was then thrown in jail in Iran, where he became addicted to heroin—many Afghans become addicts in neighbouring Iran and Pakistan and then return home, swelling the number of local drug users. The policeman, despite being surrounded by illegal drug use, doesn’t attempt to arrest anybody.
Later, we leave Kabul and drive east along a winding road towards Jalalabad and Sarobi, swapping the pollution of the capital for the fresh air of the countryside in order to see the opium crops up close. I see countless poppy fields that remain unmolested by Afghan or foreign forces. Local security forces have erected checkpoints alongside rusted Soviet tanks covered in colourful graffiti, and they simply wave us on with a smile. Narrow mountains soon give way to a wider expanse, which includes some of the most spectacular scenery I have ever seen. Lush green poppy fields and lakes are interspersed with mud-home villages and memorials with colourful flags that commemorate fighters who fell against the Soviets or the Taliban. White painted rocks indicate areas that have been cleared of landmines. Overflowing trucks pass us on the road, moving entire families from one part of the country to the other, some of them nomads who shift with the seasons.
Zubair and I have lunch—freshly cooked fish—in a small, decrepit hotel perched precariously above a valley. The cook is a young man who, along with his two younger cousins, earns a living for his family by selling the fish that are caught in a lake a few kilometres away. The Taliban used to terrorise the area but today it has the illusion of calm, with clouds floating serenely in the sky and only the whirring sound of NATO helicopters in the distance.
‹   ›
In Kabul, I at first avoid speaking to NATO or government officials because I think they would offer little worthwhile information. But I eventually decide I want to hear firsthand why the influence of PMCs in Afghanistan is being limited by the powers-that-be in Kabul, so I arrange an interview with a senior official at the Ministry of Interior Affairs.
I arrive at the ministry compound on foot because cars are mostly blocked from using the access road, due to the high incidence of suicide attacks and other bombings. Knowing this makes me nervous as Zubair and I wait at the first visitors’ checkpoint while armed Afghan security officials radio their superiors to confirm our presence. We wait and wait, and I try to remain calm. There are no other Westerners around. After about fifteen minutes, we’re waved through, whereupon my backpack is checked and I’m frisked. When we reach the next checkpoint, the same process occurs.
We finally arrive at the ministry’s main building, where a guard asks me to switch on both my camera and video camera to ensure they aren’t explosive devices. Inside, the atmosphere is chaotic. I show another guard my press pass while countless armed men walk in and out of the building. Insurgents have previously breached the department’s outer defences and made it to this point to cause mayhem, so all the security seems somewhat illusory.
We push through a pair of large cushioned doors and walk several flights up a staircase. Sitting on the landing between every floor is a man armed with a large weapon. I smile at one of them as we pass. He doesn’t return the favour. We then wait in a room while a ministry employee prints and staples documents and a television shows the TOLOnews channel, which was launched by an Australian Afghan and is now partly funded by Rupert Murdoch. Finally, we’re called into the interview.
Sediq Sediqqi is the ministry’s ‘spokesperson and director of communication/public relations’. He’s clean-shaven and dressed in a sharp grey suit. He speaks fluent English, but is even more fluent in what to say to a visiting journalist. He tells me that the Karzai government is committed to eradicating private security companies in the country. ‘Years ago we needed them, before the Afghan … forces were built up, but not anymore’, he says. With 350 000 Afghan security personnel, Sediqqi claims the country will soon be standing on its own feet and won’t need unaccountable firms running the place. He also says the Karzai regime decided to remove the PMCs because it ‘had intelligence’ they were ‘causing trouble’ with locals and weren’t helping the state to grow. What he doesn’t say is that these companies are often run by relatives of Hamid Karzai himself, including his brothers. One of the Afghan president’s siblings, Ahmed Wali Karzai, who was murdered in Kandahar in 2011, was allegedly a notorious drug-dealing warlord. WikiLeaks documents released in 2010 hinted that one of his main activities was controlling trucking on Highway 1, Afghanistan’s national ring road, by demanding bribes.
Sediqqi frets about the destabilising conduct of the militants who have taken refuge in Pakistan, including the Taliban, and who launch attacks on Afghanistan from there. He doesn’t sound overly optimistic that this will change in the near future. He also acknowledges the human rights and corruption problems in his country, though he believes these are slowly being addressed.38 But when I ask him if he imagines leaving Kabul before the proposed 2014 handover due to personal safety concerns, he doesn’t flinch, offering a robust defence of a brighter Afghan future. I’m not sure I believe him. Like many elite Afghans, he is sure to have a second passport and may be tempted to use it when Western forces pull out.
I also want to hear the official line on the Western occupation of the country, so I visit another Kabul compound to speak to M Ashraf Haidari, who is Afghanistan’s deputy assistant national security adviser and the senior policy and oversight adviser to President Karzai. The suave Haidari studied at Georgetown University in Washington and then worked for seven years at the Afghan embassy in the US capital. When I meet him, he’s dressed in a Western suit and his black hair is slicked back.
Haidari gives me the standard line on a range of issues: he says that PMCs are a problem and the government is trying to remove them, as most of them are operating illegally, without a licence; he wants me to know that he ‘appreciates Australian support and troops in the war’ (though he wishes Canberra would treat Afghan refugee boat arrivals better); he tells me that there has been ‘big progress in Afghanistan since 2001, as there was no real state when war began after 9/11’. He’s particularly keen to point out that the presence of Western forces in the country will be required, in some capacity, after 2014.39 He says that ongoing Western involvement is essential because ‘terrorists’ still reside in the country and must be defeated, ‘even if Osama bin Laden is dead’.
I try a number of times to challenge his statements, but without success—he knows the media game well. He does acknowledge that Afghanistan is a work in progress and that corruption still exists, but he insists the nation is on the right track. He also refuses to acknowledge any of the major corruption allegations that have been made against members of the Karzai family.
Perhaps the most troubling part of the interview, however, is when he asserts that the US-led night raids—a counterinsurgency tactic that simply creates more enemies by arresting or killing suspected ‘militants’ in the middle of a night40—are ‘effective’. He briefly concedes the concern that US forces bursting into Afghan homes in the middle of the night might convince people that the Americans are ‘occupiers, not liberators’ (many already believe the United States cannot be otherwise; even the former American ambassador to Afghanistan and Iraq, Ryan C Crocker, has argued that Washington can only ever be a stranger on foreign soil).41 But not to worry, Haidari argues. New rules that allow Afghans to lead the night raids will address these problems. Sovereignty has been restored.
Occupation apologists like Haidari, willing participants of the Washington-led process, are easy to find in Afghanistan. Without them, the project would have been doomed to failure right from the beginning. Instead, a sham political process has lasted more than a decade, one that has armed and empowered the very warlords whom former US president George W Bush labelled ‘evil doers’.
My next stop is the privately run, not-for-profit American University of Afghanistan which opened in 2006 and is housed behind high concrete anti-blast walls. It is a tranquil space that feels like it’s a million miles away from the chaos that plagues the nation. I’ve come here to speak to an eloquent supporter of Hamid Karzai and hear why, for him, the president is the only worthwhile game in town. Davood Moradian was educated in Britain but returned to the capital of his homeland to teach political science at its new university at the urging of Karzai, whom he’d met a few years earlier. He’s been a senior adviser to the country’s foreign minister and is now the director of the Afghan Institute for Strategic Studies. Our conversation takes place on the green grass of the university’s grounds, where men and women mix freely, though the women are all wearing hijabs.
Having spent many years in the West, Moradian generally looks favourably on the US presence in his country; in many ways, he would make the ideal face for the United States here because he’s Afghan, wears modern clothing and talks positively about the need for ongoing Western assistance. However, Moradian does fault America for not understanding Afghanistan, albeit he believes it has the ‘right intentions’ in helping the place, and he also blames Washington for empowering local warlords. He has few bad words to say about Karzai and his rule, dismissing the persistent corruption allegations. (He tells me after we finish the interview that it’s his ‘responsibility to not talk down Afghanistan when it’s in need of much help’.)
Moradian is more forthcoming when I ask him about the presence of PMCs and intelligence-gathering companies in the country. He says that when the ‘profit motive is supreme’, there will inevitably be negative outcomes. He blames people in Washington for allowing this system to thrive after 9/11, and says the companies that benefit from it shouldn’t be operating in Afghanistan. Again, he steadfastly refuses to blame Karzai or his relatives for this trend.
I ask Moradian if he can see a future for himself in Afghanistan if the Taliban once again take over. He answers indirectly by saying he believes the people will ‘never accept that’, and that ‘it’s essential Western partners continue to support the country and train and fund its army’. If they don’t, he believes, there will be a regional war that engulfs many nations.
Such fears about what will happen to Afghanistan after the United States departs in 2014 are common among the country’s urban elite, who returned here after the fall of the Taliban in 2001 and have helped to swell Kabul’s population from 1.2 million people to over five million people within a dozen years. Those who currently live in relative safety behind high-security walls have the most to lose when the US-backed largesse peters out.42
It’s hard to take Moradian’s thin optimism about the country entirely seriously, and I wonder how many Afghans share his desire to maintain a strong Western presence indefinitely. As recently as October 2012, he wrote in Foreign Policy that the ‘United States and Afghans can still win—together’.43 Win what, exactly? Rejecting true independence seems to me to be exactly the wrong way to go about weaning a humiliated nation off the Western teat. Such dependence has lasted for over a decade on tens of millions of dollars that has been packed into suitcases and shopping bags and given to the Karzai government by the CIA. There’s little evidence the money bought influence, but corruption deepened.44
I do, however, agree wholeheartedly with Moradian’s thinking on private security, which he compared to a leech that feeds on war, ‘the dark side of globalisation’. During my visit, I hear the raw anger of locals who’ve experienced the deadly reality of privatised security.
On one such occasion, I am sitting among colourful, red-tinged cushions in a quiet room above a central Kabul restaurant, chatting to two Afghan men in their thirties, both of whom are from Wardak province. They tell stories of Afghan security thugs causing mayhem in their areas, in the past and today.45
Habib-Ur-Rahman is a journalist with a long beard who wears traditional garb: a light-blue salwar kameez. Fahim, an unemployed engineer, also has a long beard and wears an army-green waistcoat. The men explain that before moving to Kabul they both faced threats, not just from the Taliban and US forces—night raids were common, with innocent men from their villages often killed or captured and held for months without charge before being released—but also from private security companies. The job of PMCs, Fahim tells me, is to guard the convoys, but they regularly establish so-called security perimeters around the army personnel and, in the process, often engage in firefights with the Taliban. He says that innocent civilians are regularly caught in the crossfire. Watan Risk Management, a company prominent in this line of work, seems to be particularly notorious when it comes to this.46
Fahim says that his cousin, a shopkeeper, was shot dead by a private security guard a year ago for no other reason than being in the wrong place at the wrong time. The PMC that employed the guard admitted fault and offered US$20 000 compensation, but Fahim says the family is still waiting for the money and the dead man’s wife and children are now struggling financially despite family assistance. He says that such killings by PMCs are routine across the country, inflaming the resistance to the foreign occupation forces that use them.
As tea is brought in, followed by a large bowl of meat and a plate of bread, tomato, onion and cucumber, Fahim and Habib-Ur-Rahman continue to speak lucidly about their country’s situation, without resorting to hyperbole. Fahim reiterates his view that PMCs have ‘only brought misery and violence’. It’s also clear that the fact that men in the Afghan army are getting paid way less than private military company men has increased the resentment.
Neither man believes Karzai when he pledges to completely disband the companies, asserting that they are controlled by ‘powerful’ people close to the government. ‘They have too much to lose if the companies shut down’, Habib-Ur-Rahman tells me. But Fahim also believes that PMCs, whose employees ‘never face justice for killing and maiming civilians, will become unnecessary in 2014 because there … [will] no longer be any convoys to protect; the US will have left’. Tellingly, he then says he isn’t overly concerned about the withdrawal of Western troops, because the Taliban, who he expects to take over, will ‘hopefully bring some stability and peace to the country, as happened before the 2001 invasion’.
This last view is one that may not be shared by many women in Afghanistan. The country’s female population endured many severe restrictions under Taliban rule.47 That said, change has been slow in coming since the US-led invasion. There have been some improvements for women, particularly in some areas of Kabul. While being driven around the city, I see shops selling all forms of women’s clothing, including Western-style garments, and girls in white hijabs, rather than burqas, walking to school. But, as is regularly detailed by the organisation Human Rights Watch, the vast majority of the country’s women remain mired in repression when it comes to education, birth control, freedom of movement and justice.48
I have an opportunity to raise some of these issues when I visit a suburb of Kabul that is crowded with Soviet-style concrete apartment blocks. The buildings are enlivened by few colours, except for the washing hanging from the windows, and children play around their entrances. I imagine the soulless structures have remained largely unchanged in the decades since the Russians built them. I knock on the graffiti-daubed door of one apartment and it is answered by a woman dressed in a black hijab. I am welcomed by the Afghan MP Samia Khogyani, who hails from Nangarhar province. I take off my shoes to enter the apartment, which has no obvious security. The hallway floor is concrete and cold under my feet. I’m led into a small lounge room, which has some green couches and a few photos of children on the peeling walls. It’s dank and lit by a solitary light on the ceiling. There are two other women here, who are mostly silent during the conversation that follows.
Khogyani doesn’t support the ongoing presence of foreign troops in Afghanistan, though she worries about what will happen when the bulk of them leave in 2014.49 She is pragmatic about the PMCs, telling me that they provide jobs for many Afghan men, and that this in turn helps the men’s wives, daughters and sisters. She knows about the human rights abuses that the firms commit, but stresses that ‘in a poor country such as Afghanistan, employment opportunities are vital’.
Khogyani’s pragmatism runs deep. She has to be very cautious about what she says because making a comment that could be interpreted as criticism of PMCs or their warlord or political backers might get her killed. It’s as simple as that.
Our talk shifts to the development of the country’s mining industry, in which Khogyani is involved. She’s been invited by Canberra to visit Australia, where she expects to see how ‘you’ve well managed the mineral wealth’.50 I ask Khogyani if she is aware of the exploitation of resources in other poor countries (I am of course thinking of Papua New Guinea and Haiti) by multinationals and corrupt officials who are uninterested in planning for long-term sustainability. She responds that the contracts that have so far been signed in Afghanistan protect its resources, and that local people will reap the benefits.
Afghanistan has massive untapped mineral reserves. The investor website Money Morning (‘Only the news you can profit from’) blurted this in 2011: ‘Think of Australia, Canada and Latin America. They pale in comparison to the goldmine Afghanistan could be sitting on’.51 The US Geological Society confirmed this wealth prediction by mapping the country’s minerals in 2012—the state has trillions of dollars worth of natural resources—and since then the scramble to claim them has been well underway. The countless foreign companies that have so far struggled to secure mineral-rich areas welcomed new laws, approved by the Afghan Cabinet in 2013, that will assist them in doing this.
Other states have joined the feeding frenzy. China has already invested heavily in Afghan mines, while Iran is also spending big in the country, seeking influence through aid projects.52 Britain announced funding of £10 million to support the Afghan Ministry of Mines when Prime Minister David Cameron hosted UK investors and mining contractors in March 2013. Many individuals have their eyes on the future, too. In 2012, a former American ambassador to Afghanistan, Zalmay Khalilzad, joined the board of Tethys Petroleum, a company dedicated to oil and gas exploitation in Central Asia.
Few Western politicians are urging any caution in this environment, but one who did was Australian Greens Senator Lee Rhiannon, who said in 2012 that the Australian Government should not prioritise aid money for ‘opening up Afghanistan to overseas mining interests’. She added that ‘Afghanistan has little capacity to negotiate the best deal for local interests’.53
On the issue of what confronts Afghanistan’s women, Khogyani says that Afghan men tend to see women here as needing to be protected and respected. ‘They react if women are mistreated or disrespected’, she says. But she isn’t afraid to explain the reality of life for a woman here, even one who is an MP: ‘Being a woman in Afghanistan is tough. I’m often unable to speak in the parliament because I’m a woman … [I’m] not given appropriate protection because I’m a woman. I fear for the future of the country because I’m a woman’.
I admire her bravery. In a country that practises such blatant misogyny, it takes guts to stand up publicly and demand better things for all citizens, including women.
That afternoon I meet Maryam Kofi, another female MP, from Takhar province. Her home office has security cameras and armed guards. During our interview, her three mobile phones constantly ring—she says that constituents from her district always need advice and assistance.
Kofi consolidates what I have learned from Khogyani. Like her fellow MP, she isn’t overly critical of PMCs, citing the positive of Afghan men getting employment and supporting their families financially. She also acknowledges her hesitation in saying too much publicly about the companies, especially the ones connected to powerful families, because if she does, she will suffer even more threats than usual. ‘I face severe threats as a female MP’, Kofi tells me, ‘but I try to do good in my province to rehabilitate former Taliban fighters … [helping them find] peaceful ways to earn a living and turn away from the gun’.
After the interview, she shows me today’s issue of the local paper. Her photo accompanies an article that says she’s one of the most influential women in the country, which brings the threats against her into sharp relief.
‹   ›
In Kabul, a large hydrogen balloon sits idly inside a compound, a gift from the Americans to the Afghan Government, to monitor insurgent activity. It’s often seen hovering in the sky above the city and reportedly has been very helpful in catching militants after an attack—an eye in the sky. But in terms of outsourcing in this country, nothing is off limits. Even intelligence gathering has been privatised.
‘They either make it up or exaggerate threats because they don’t have reliable intel themselves, and tell clients everywhere is dangerous and they should stay secure in a compound’—so says the head of a private intelligence company in Kabul, explaining how most of his competitors service their foreign clients, by lying.54
Clive is Swedish and in his mid-thirties, with closely cropped hair, and we’re talking in a Kabul cafe. His organisation describes itself as an ‘information management consultancy’ that provides ‘ground truth’ to enable companies to ‘operate effectively’ in Afghanistan. The group is just one of many such businesses that have sprung up in the country in the last decade, offering the kind of information that the military supposedly can’t access itself and has to pay a corporation to source.
Clive is deliberate in his use of the word ‘information’. He says his organisation doesn’t gather ‘intelligence’, arguing that that word has been abused and misunderstood over the last decade. He says intelligence has come to mean information that’s used for military purposes, something his company, to the best of his knowledge, has never sourced. His major clients are actually Kabul-based embassies and foreign companies who want up-to-date, reliable information about the country’s various provinces and how volatile they are at any given time. ‘They’re naturally risk-averse’, Clive tells me, ‘and have never ignored our advice and visited an area, as they need to get permission from [their] superiors back home, though I was once asked to rewrite a few lines [of advice] for a client … [who] said he simply had to visit an area, and his superiors relied on my advice’.
The company employs a handful of expats to analyse the rough information sent in by twenty Afghan contacts around the country. I ask if there’s a risk that these Afghans might send false information as payback against local enemies; apparently this happens to the Americans, who are regularly given untruthful intelligence that then leads to night raids or the bombing of innocent civilians, all because a tribal elder or another pissed-off individual wants to use the US military to settle a score. ‘It’s possible’, Clive says, ‘but I don’t think [it happens] very often’. He admits, however, that the vast amount of information his company receives can’t be independently verified. I say the work sounds mundane, but Clive says it doesn’t simply involve reading local publications and sending reports to info-hungry clients in faraway places. Rather, he says, it entails discovering the lay of the land in various provinces, daily if need be.
Clive argues that such work is increasingly being done by private companies rather than government agencies because ‘today’s wars aren’t between two equal sides. Armies don’t fight like they used to’. He says it constantly strikes him how clueless the US and other Western forces are when it comes to understanding local cultures, something he puts down to the excessive time such personnel spend in a ‘military-enforced bubble … barely speaking to locals. An insurgency is complex and doesn’t allow simplistic explanations of good vs evil’.
This cluelessness is evident in how Western forces don’t seem to understand why resistance to the Afghanistan occupation is deepening, and how they enhance their ignorance by paying millions of dollars to corporations to tell them why they’re hated. Washington’s counterinsurgency strategy involves trying to understand Afghan lives, hence General David Petraeus’ directive to soldiers in 2010 to ‘spend time’ with locals, to ‘listen, consult, and drink lots of tea’, and the development of approaches like the Human Terrain System that wield anthropology and sociology to try to understand better the local population.55 The director of the counterinsurgency centre in Kabul wrote in an email in late 2011 that he hoped to teach his students about ‘tribal/village structure’ and ‘what to do to establish mutually respectful relationships’. However, this is a futile plan because it presumes America can bomb people and romance them at the same time.
I have gained access to some of the intelligence gathered to this end by the US consultancy firm AECOM, which was hired by NATO in 2011 to spy on mosques, universities and the general community throughout Afghanistan.56 The company’s reports are delivered as spreadsheets with columns titled ‘Atmospheric Value’, ‘District’ and ‘Province’, and they mostly comprise uninteresting conversations between people who are complaining about the Taliban or foreign forces or corruption in the Kabul government.
Take this entry from 12 March 2012:
 
ASC-504 overheard a conversation between two Uzbek males between the ages of 40–45 at market in the city of Shibirghan:
One man said, ‘The other day I was riding on a bus when it became very windy. It seemed as if it was raining dust. People were saying that this could be a sign [of] God’s wrath. This is happening to us because the Americans have burned the Quran, but we are calmly sitting idle. We should be rising up against the Americans for what they have done. We are being punished for doing nothing’.
The other resident stated, ‘I do not know, but it might be possible’.
Here’s another one, from 16 March 2012:
 
ASC ATE10-003 overheard a 50-year-old Hazara male and a 65-year-old Tajik male in Kandahar province:
The 50-year-old said, ‘If ISAF continues making mistakes, I promise you that the Afghan people will no longer accept apologies. Every other week, they kill innocent people and insult our religion. I want the entire Afghan community to be united …’
The 65-year-old said, ‘I believe the Americans are becom ing like the Soviets. The Americans killed thousands of innocent people in Iraq and now they are doing the same thing in Afghanistan. They are killing innocent people so they can get revenge for their military personnel that were killed in Afghanistan’.
The problem is that these statements could be enough to prompt elements within the US army to capture and interrogate the people involved, because of a perceived sympathy for the insurgency.57 It is very difficult to make a definitive link between such intelligence and actual NATO actions. But when I meet a senior analyst, Carol, at one of Afghanistan’s most respected think tanks, the Afghanistan Analysts Network, she tells me there’s ample evidence that Western troops regularly action night raids on the barest of suspicions.
Carol says it is now rare for a foreign government not to use privatised intelligence-gathering services. Before 2006, she explains, intelligence was mainly acquired to meet counterterrorism objectives. But Washington soon realised that broader knowledge was needed, such as an understanding of the tribal system, or even who was marrying who in strategic areas. Carol says the war on terror has resulted in the blending of what she calls ‘peace building’ with military tactics: ‘It’s the militarisation of development which leaves space for privatised intelligence to fill the void, because Western donors … are desperate to understand the country’. This is a shortterm strategy, which ignores certain realities, such as the fact that many Afghans have had, and will continue to have, contact with the Taliban. In NATO’s eyes, this is grounds for suspicion, but the Taliban inevitably will be part of any future peace settlement.
Carol tells me how she recently met an Afghan man who was arrested by US special forces in a night raid: ‘He never knew why he was arrested and he told of clueless US questioning, suggesting they had no real idea about the area or culture’. Apparently the Americans had been tracking the man’s mobile phone and had determined that ‘suspicious people [were] speaking to each other’. Carol says that privatised intelligence simply ‘adds one more level of confusion’.
I had already heard about how deep this confusion runs when I met an Afghan translator who had recently returned from working with the Americans in Kandahar during night raids. He hated the work and said the United States rarely knew what it was doing. ‘They only understood force’, he said. He also said the intelligence that was being relied upon was often wrong, and that during the raids, he struggled to make sense of the chaos unleashed in Afghan homes when the US soldiers burst in on sleeping men, women and children.
Carol slams the presence of US special forces, calling them mere ‘Taliban hunters’. She argues that ‘being Taliban or related to Taliban members is not necessarily against the country’s positive future, but [the] US seems to see all Taliban as enemy’. This does not bode well for future peace in Afghanistan.
Another consequence of intelligence privatisation is that local security entrepreneurs have become the new Afghan elite, the inevitable rise of locals out to exploit the naivety of the country’s occupiers. Carol says this exemplifies the worsening of disaster capitalism that she has noticed since first arriving in the country. ‘If you have a contract with the US as a local, you create [an] imbalance between haves and have nots’, she says. It is the same economic disparity I witness in Papua New Guinea and in Haiti.
‹   ›
If Afghanistan was a laboratory for research on privatised military and intelligence, Iraq was the experiment that spiralled out of control. Washington’s intention with the 2003 invasion of that country was to overthrow then president Saddam Hussein using the fewest possible resources, with barely any thought given to what would happen after the dictator inevitably fell. Sure enough, it was chaos right from the start. According to US cables released by WikiLeaks, subcontractors and mercenaries engaged in minimal coordination with the Americans and subsequently caused great carnage with their trigger-happy antics.58 Between 2003 and 2008, such military contracting accounted for half of a massive rise in American war funding, from US$7.2 billion to just under US$62 billion.59
Washington Post journalist Rajiv Chandrasekaran’s book Imperial Life in the Emerald City: Inside’s Baghdad’s Green Zone is one of the finest explanations of what transpired. ‘I’m a neo-conservative who’s been mugged by reality’, the journalist is told by John Agresto, a man with no experience in the Middle East or in post-conflict reconstruction, but who was given the mammoth task of rebuilding Iraq’s university system because he enjoyed a connection to Donald Rumsfeld’s wife.60 He’d asked for 130 000 desks from the U.S. Agency for International Development but had only received 8000 of them.
Chandrasekaran documents a litany of cases in which companies managed to give the illusion of control or efficiency in the conflict zone and, consequently, they and their partners made huge profits. Referring to the cafeteria at the Republican Palace in the Green Zone, he says, ‘None of the succulent tomatoes or the crisp cucumbers grown in Iraq made it into the salad bar. US government regulations dictated that everything, even the water in which hot dogs were boiled, be shipped in from approved suppliers in other nations’.61 Complaints about the cafeteria had to be directed to Halliburton’s ‘customer service’ liaison, a pimply 22-year-old. ‘Whatever could be outsourced was’, Chandrasekaran writes.62 While Arabic-speaking Americans ‘could fit around one table’, the contractors, mercenaries and soldiers built their own personal empires quickly, all the while praising the Bush administration’s ‘mission’ to ‘transform Iraq’.63
The scale of the privatised mismanagement that occurred in Iraq from 2003 is staggering. America has claimed it spent at least US$53 billion on reconstruction, but little infrastructure was ever completed. The US Office of the Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction Funds reported in 2013 that at least $8 billion of that money disappeared through financial abuse, waste and fraud.
As the security situation in Iraq worsened, for instance, the private contractors who were employed to protect the US military massively increased the price of doing their job.64 Hundreds of millions of dollars were added to contracts.65 WikiLeaks documents released in 2010 revealed that elements of the US Government, oil companies and even Halliburton complained about how the ‘mafia’ of PMCs inflated their ‘outrageous prices’.66 Yet they kept on paying the fees.
As in Afghanistan, Washington made decisions about a country it occupied that virtually guaranteed the locals would feel disempowered. Military companies with poor records were continually awarded contracts by the Pentagon, one of them mere weeks before Washington claimed to be handing over to the domestic government in 2004.67 In addition, the day before the Bush administration’s enforcer of the occupation in Iraq, Paul Bremer, left the country in June 2004, he issued Order 17, which granted immunity to private contractors working for the United States.
A PMC called Blackwater, now known as Academi, had one of the worst reputations of any contractor in Iraq, its record hitting its nadir in Baghdad’s Nisour Square in 2007, when seventeen civilians were killed while the company was protecting a US State Department convoy.68 It was reported that employees of the contractor had their own motto: ‘What happens here today, stays here today’.69 Part of the logic of outsourced wars is that crimes committed in those situations have little or no effect on the companies involved continuing to operate elsewhere. This is why Blackwater did not lose contracts with the Pentagon over any of its misdeeds, and why, in its new incarnation, it can continue to rely on American taxpayers to boost its profits.
Unlike in Afghanistan, where America’s military presence will likely continue for years after the bulk of its troops leave, Washington’s ability to influence the Iraqi Government is limited. Apart from a failed multibillion-dollar plan to train the country’s police force,70 America appeared to leave thousands of private contractors behind in 2011 when the last of the official US troops came home. But the United States’ presence in Iraq continues—in 2012, the Pentagon requested nearly US$3 billion for what was called ‘Post Operation New Dawn Iraq Activities’, which basically meant heaps of money for a battalion-sized group of contractors to protect State Department staff.71 Of course, facilitating the sale of American weapons and exerting influence over oil deals are two possible reasons why the United States might want to maintain a foothold in Baghdad.
Vulture capitalism has also thrived in Afghanistan’s neighbour, Pakistan, which I visit on my way to Afghanistan, travelling to the capital, Islamabad, as well as to Peshawar and Karachi. Here, too, the private security and intelligence business has expanded dramatically since 9/11, with violent internal conflict feeding the PMC beast. This is aided by the now familiar crossover between the government and military establishments and the profiteers—a leading journalist in Karachi passed me a list of sixty-two former senior figures in the Pakistan army who now work for PMCs but maintain close ties with their old colleagues. The civilian government doesn’t control Pakistan. Rather, it is the country’s national security organisation, Inter-Services Intelligence, which has the power and wields it ruthlessly, including backing militancy and terrorism while claiming to be a US ally. A leading Pakistani journalist with close ties to the country’s military takes me to the suburb of Sohrab Goth on the outskirts of Karachi. There, I see the run-down concrete apartment blocks sitting far back from the road in swirls of dust, where many key al-Qaeda and Taliban members have lived since 9/11, with the protection of the state and the support of local sympathisers.
I’ve never been to a country where the state itself is so often either absent, incompetent or criminal. Nor have I ever been to one where conspiracy theories are so rampant. The daily newspapers are filled with wild accusations. During my visit, a columnist for The Nation writes that there are ‘15,000 [US] marines in the capital’, although it’s a fact that no-one I speak to takes seriously.72 Sometimes, however, vague suspicions have some foundation. In 2011, an American, Raymond Davis, killed two Pakistani men in Lahore while working for a PMC, assisting the CIA in tracking militants. Despite calls for him to face justice in Pakistan, he was flown back to protection in America.73 Pakistan’s sovereignty was breached by a private company working for Washington. It’s obvious that the relentless drone war in the country’s Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) also fuels some ferocious anti-American sentiment, though it should be said that little affection is directed towards the Taliban.
PMCs have been able to grow in Pakistan because there is little regulation of them there. ‘Private security com panies operate under “law of the jungle”’ boomed a headline in The Express Tribune, alleging that at least 500 PMCs were at work in Pakistan74—it has also been estimated that there are up to 300 000 private security personnel here.75 The security companies themselves, however, have a very different view of their existence in the region. In Islamabad, I meet a senior manager of the multinational security firm G4S, Muhammad Alamgir Khan, who once worked for the Pakistani air force. He tells me that the company guards the offices of the National Bank of Pakistan, UN agencies, Motorola, BP Pakistan, Chevron, Caltex and the US embassy. He then explains the importance of PMCs in Pakistan: ‘If direct foreign investment doesn’t come to Pakistan, the economy fails. Private security helps protect these investments’. Later, in Karachi, in the office of another G4S head, where I am surrounded by photos of him standing alongside famous figures such as former president Pervez Musharraf, I am told that the company’s work is a ‘natural fit’ in modern Pakistan, ‘protecting NGOs and the UN’.
I also visit Peshawar, an edgy, dusty town near the Afghan border that has seen countless bombings and other violence in recent years. In the late 1980s, this place was heaving with foreign contractors who were involved in the war against the Soviets in Afghanistan—the American Club was a favourite hangout for journalists, spies and mercenaries—but today there are few non-Afghans here.76 All the women wear burqas, while all the men have long, bushy beards. I wear a salwar kameez to look like a traditional Pashtun man and blend in with the locals. I’m advised not to spend much time walking the town’s streets, due to the risk of kidnapping or assault, though sitting in a car in gridlocked traffic, where there is the possibility of a suicide attack, doesn’t exactly calm my nerves.
In Peshawar I meet a senior manager in the provincial government, Mohammed, who tells me about the relationships between the US military, USAID and private companies.77 He says that corporations have mapped local communities in the FATA and that this information is then used by the US army in planning action against suspected militants. ‘Villagers are asked personal questions about their children’, he explains, ‘including ID numbers, families and how many people sleep in the house. There are local Pakistanis employed by contractors to do the interviews, due to language fluency, but locals aren’t told where the information may go or for what it may be used’. Mohammed gives the example of the consultancy firm Gulf Associates, which has surveyed the citizens of Peshawar on ‘water supply and drainage’. Every household was asked questions about their family size and ‘told they needed to provide these details to get water’.
Unfortunately, the focus of such community mapping appears to be on military dominance, with civilians being an afterthought. Certainly the residents I speak to believe this mapping is not being done to help them, but rather to pressure the Pakistani military to crack down on militants who operate against Western interests here and in Afghanistan.
I also visit the sprawling compound of the Khyber News Bureau, a local media company, whose journalists confirm my suspicion that military and humanitarian work is all too often fused in the post-9/11 world. The journalists tell me that foreign NGOs, especially American organisations, often act as fronts for Washington’s everdeepening spying activities. The bureau’s compound was allegedly once used by Blackwater as a base for its mercenaries.
Everybody I talk to says they feel like their country is occupied by outside forces.
‹   ›
One of my aims in Afghanistan is to understand the thinking of the private security contractors who work there, to know what makes someone join a company that is literally in the firing line.
Soon after I arrive in Kabul, I go to one of the city’s few quasilegal drinking holes, the Gandamack. It’s an airless bar whose walls are covered with images of the British Empire, such as ships sailing off on the high seas to liberate natives. It’s full of Americans, Asians, Russians and South Africans drinking to The Doors’ ‘The End’ and Tone Loc’s ‘Funky Cold Medina’. Cigarette smoke swirls in the air.
I talk to three South African men in their fifties who’ve all been in Afghanistan for about seven years, assisting the US forces with logistics and security. One of them wears a bomber jacket, on the back of which is inscribed ‘Operation Iraqi Operation’ along with countless world flags arranged in a circle. The most talkative of the trio, Peter, says, ‘I’m only here for the money, and it’s big’. He adds that the security situation has only worsened since he first arrived, when things were already wild here78—the other men agree.
There is no desire among the group to return to South Africa. Peter says that he imagines that before most Western forces leave, he’ll depart himself, ‘going somewhere else like here, maybe Sudan’. They follow the money.
On another night, I find myself entering a seedy Afghan bar, at the entrance to which a security man demands that all patrons remove their knives and guns and place them in lockers. Inside, I’m surrounded by muscle-bound men in tight T-shirts, their bare arms often covered in tattoos; the few women in the crowd seem to revel in their attention. Some of the men later tell me they’re on steroids, and I’m reminded of a comment made by a human rights advocate in Kabul, that if you go to a party in the city, ‘a quarter of the men will have no necks’.
I meet Josh, a gentle, tattooed giant in his late twenties from Townsville. He used to be in the Australian army in Iraq and has now been in Afghanistan for six months. ‘It’s for the money’, he says matter-of-factly, confirming a now-familiar theme.
Australian contractors play a significant role in Afghanistan’s privatisation boom, as they did in Iraq, but the experience is not always a happy one.79 At least a dozen Australian contractors have been killed here over the past decade, though their names are rarely recorded.80 Then there’s former Australian soldier Robert Langdon, whom I unsuccessfully try to visit in the notorious Policharki prison. He was found guilty of killing an Afghan colleague in 2008 while working for the PMC Four Horseman International.81
After talking to Josh, I have a substantial conversation with Greg, a former British soldier in his thirties who now works for a PMC. It’s a friendly chat, although we disagree about most things (‘You’re a liberal’, he says). He fought in Iraq in 2003, and while he didn’t question the rationale for the war at the time, he now calls former British prime minister Tony Blair ‘a cunt’ because of the lies about weapons of mass destruction. Today, he coordinates security at US bases around Afghanistan.
Greg is honest. ‘We’re looking for the new war’, he says, referring to what PMCs are doing as the conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan wind down for the West. But, he adds, ‘we aren’t baby killers’, presuming that I think PMCs are filled with reckless men on a collective adrenaline rush. He explains that companies such as Blackwater/Academi used to hire former soldiers who ‘only knew how to kill’, and that that is where the PMC reputation for firing first and asking questions later came from. Today, Greg says, the system is far more regulated, and hiring practices in PMCs are much tighter. The ‘rogue elements’ are now largely absent, he claims.
‘I’m only doing this for the money’, Greg says, adding that he dismisses the mental health concerns associated with the work.82 He has a wife and three kids back in Ireland, and spends nine weeks in Afghanistan then three weeks back home. ‘My wife knew what she was getting into when we married. I’m from a military family. I was sent to boarding school at eleven’, he says. Greg imagines doing this work for long as he physically can: ‘I would never earn this kind of money back in Ireland’.
As the night progresses, the bar becomes increasingly rowdy. The handful of women, some wearing sleeveless dresses, which would be impossible outside this smoke-filled room, dance with men of various ages to bad techno. Beefy men start pushing around other beefy men and heated words are exchanged—the typical drunken antics of people who don’t get much of a chance to socialise.83
‹ ›
Pakistan and Afghanistan were not truly independent nations before 11 September 2001, but since the attacks on New York and Washington they have been pushed even further from sovereignty, transformed into entities that sustain corporations overseas.
The bulk of Western forces in Afghanistan are scheduled to leave in 2014.84 But the country’s financial situation will be perilous without ongoing international support, not least because PMCs employed over 100 000 people in 2011, the majority of them Afghan. The departure of foreign troops will leave a huge vacuum that must be filled by Afghan politicians and other power brokers who are determined to rely mainly on their own people rather than on incoming aid. In 2010, Afghanistan received around US$15.7 billion in ‘development’ support, about equal to the state’s gross domestic budget. This will inevitably decrease as Western forces withdraw.85
The sheer scale of the foreign troops, and their equipment, in Afghanistan is overwhelming. NATO estimates that to remove all ISAF equipment by the end of 2014 would require a shipping container to leave the country every seven minutes.86 But the war economy won’t end then. Instead, as NATO tried but failed to do in Iraq, a mentoring and training program for Afghan forces will continue. The occupation will be rebranded with a kinder face, but the hated counterinsurgency battle, which often targets civilians, will be ongoing.87
A different future for Afghanistan must be forged, one in which aid is not coupled to sovereignty. Trophy projects must be abandoned and the will of the Afghan people respected.88 The building of civil and political institutions, without foreign for-profit corporations being intimately involved in the process, is vital. After more than three decades of conflict, the population deserves freedom from outside intervention. The West is not, as it claims, Afghanistan’s saviour or its liberating force. We’ve created chaos, and the Afghan people now need support, time and space to recover from the turmoil we’ve imposed.







6
HAITI—OPEN FOR BUSINESS
The US is doing a lot of good things in Haiti.
Haitian Prime Minister Laurent Lamothe, 20121
Large parts of the Haitian capital, Port-au-Prince, remain in pieces more than three years after a massive earthquake ripped through it on 12 January 2010. I’ve never seen anything like it. The sheer devastation makes the city look like a war zone, and life at street level is grimmer than I witnessed in Afghanistan, yet here there’s no conflict.
Half-destroyed buildings lean precariously along the city’s roads; the street vendors selling wares in their shadows are risking the very real possibility of injury or death. Ivy wraps itself around cracked concrete and massive amounts of garbage litter the streets. Water runs everywhere, along with sewage, spilling out of broken pipes that are yet to be repaired. Citizens forage through the muck for anything useful. Around them roam bony dogs. The devastating quake left many roads impassable due to the rubble, while others are accessible but treacherous.
As I walk through the shattered city, I see Haitians selling whatever they can: mobile phones, schoolbooks, homemade alcohol, belts, vegetables and fruit. I see women washing dirty shoes with a hose before dumping them on a pile marked ‘For sale’. I’m overwhelmed by the foul smells, but also by the brilliant colours of people’s clothing and the structures still standing.
There’s a skeleton of a large church that partially collapsed during the quake and has been sealed with concrete. A few people have made their homes in tents at its perimeter. Men, with their children, beg for money. I am told that people used to shit in the church. When the stench became unbearable, the government locked them all out.
Many other buildings are also still abandoned. A few bank branches have been rebuilt, but there’s little evidence of other construction. It all feels decrepit and temporary, but I remind myself that this is where over 700 000 people live permanently; more people come here daily to buy and sell, to shop and socialise.
My white face stands out in Port-au-Prince, as it does elsewhere in Haiti, and many locals look suspiciously at me as I walk through the destroyed city. I understand that, as a journalist, I am seen as a leech by people in developing countries such as this—we come, we go. But some people approach me, wanting to send a message to anyone who’ll listen.
A man starts screaming at me, then composes himself enough to say that every day his socks and shoes are wet because he can’t keep them dry while he is trying to earn money for his family. He demands that the government fix the city and make the place livable. But he also tells me he has little hope this will ever happen.
A woman in her forties wearing a floppy yellow hat and a black top also screams at me, waving her arms to chase me away. She soon calms down and explains that she wants Haitian President Michel Martelly to ‘do something for me and my two kids, one of whom is crazy’. She motions behind her to where she’s forced to earn a living, the squalid, waterlogged space where she tries to sell toys. She laments that she doesn’t have a house, clearly despairing.
The January 2010 earthquake lasted only thirty-five seconds but wrought incredible destruction. At least three million Haitians were affected—more than a million suddenly became homeless. The exact death toll has never been determined but the official estimate has gone as high as 316 000. Decades worth of poorly built infrastructure collapsed, rendering vast swathes of Port-au-Prince uninhabitable. Yet, stunningly, the population rallied together in the Haitian tradition of youn ede lot, Haitian Creole for ‘lending a hand to each other’. With little or no government assistance, communities pooled their resources to help save people in the wreckage; keep alive the seriously injured; find food, utensils and charcoal to burn for warmth; and create sleeping shelters in the streets. Makeshift clinics were established, with shopowners handing out water, medicines and other essentials. Young men and women worked to clear the rubble with their bare hands. And although there were some civil disturbances, principally due to frustration over a lack of local and international assistance, the nation didn’t descend into war.2
Haiti has long been portrayed as a country that can’t function properly on its own, but the inhabitants’ reaction to the earthquake belies this. ‘The Haitian people put away their economic and political differences and worked together, in dignity and solidarity, to collectively survive’, write Mark Schuller and Pablo Morales in the introduction to their book Tectonic Shifts.3
Unfortunately, Haiti, like other poor nations, has long been at risk of exploitation, and the earthquake provided a significant opportunity for this to occur, as was evident from some WikiLeaks cables released in 2011. Then US ambassador to Haiti Kenneth Merten headlined a 1 February 2010 cable with ‘The Gold Rush Is On’. He went on to explain his excitement: ‘As Haiti digs out from the earthquake, different companies are moving in to sell their concepts, products and services. [Then] President Preval met with Gen Wesley Clark [the former US presidential candidate was working for a Miami-based construction company] and received a sales presentation on a hurricane/earthquake resistant foam core house designed for low income residents’. Merten concluded, after seeing countless US firms angling for business, that ‘each is vying for the ear of the President in a veritable free-for-all’.4
The gold rush for private enterprise started almost as soon as the earthquake had ended, and ultimately meant that only a tiny percentage of USAID’s US$1.8 billion of funding reached the pockets of ordinary Haitians. At a ‘Haiti summit’ held in a luxury hotel in Miami a mere two months after the quake, private contractors, including the company Triple Canopy, which had taken over the notorious Blackwater’s contract in Iraq in 2009, jostled for opportunities.5
Lewis Lucke was appointed America’s special coordinator for relief and reconstruction in Haiti, and also the head of Washington’s earthquake relief effort. He was a veteran of nearly three decades in the US establishment, and a key figure in overseeing billion-dollar contracts for corporations while he was USAID mission director in post-invasion Iraq. Lucke stepped down from his appointments after only three months, but he went on to spruik the reconstruction effort during an interview with the Austin American-Statesman newspaper, saying that ‘it became clear to us that if it was handled correctly, the earthquake represented as much an opportunity as it did a calamity…So much of the china was broken that it gives the chance to put it together in a better and different way’.6 His motives for quitting became clear two months later, when he inked a US$30 000 per month deal with a Florida-based disaster recovery company, AshBritt,7 and a Haitian firm run by one of the country’s wealthiest men, Gilbert Bigio. Lucke promptly secured US$20 million in construction contracts and proudly told Haiti-Liberte that ‘just because you’re trying to do business doesn’t mean you’re trying to be rapacious. There’s nothing insidious about that … It wasn’t worse than Iraq’.8
It was just the latest example of canny capitalists sifting through the ashes of a disaster, looking for business opportunities.
‹   ›
‘True political freedom is as limited in Haiti as it is anywhere on the planet’, writes Canadian author Peter Hallward in his book Damning the Flood: Haiti and the Politics of Containment. ‘It is limited by the fragility of an economy that remains profoundly vulnerable to international pressure.’9
The reasons for this fragility can be found in the twentiethcentury history of the country, when the United States maintained successive brutal dictatorships that benefited local and foreign elites at the expense of the Haitian majority. It was colonialism with the bloodiest of hands. Paramilitary groups were a common feature in Haiti throughout these decades, and they remain a troubling weapon in the current government’s armoury.10 Free speech is still far from protected, and journalists face constant harassment.11
Haiti was the first slave country in history to overthrow its rulers successfully. February 1794 saw the abolition of French colonial rule, and in 1804 Saint-Domingue became independent Haiti.12 It’s a success that is constantly mentioned with pride during my visit, a reminder of a period in history when the people stood up and weren’t answerable to anybody except themselves. It’s the kind of sovereignty the country’s citizens say they crave again. Unfortunately for Haitians, this period came to an end in 1915, when the United States invaded and occupied the country, paving the way for the installation of the dictator Francois Duvalier (‘Papa Doc’) as president in 1957, and the replacement of him, on his death fourteen years later, with his son and fellow dictator, Jean-Claude Duvalier (‘Baby Doc’).
It’s a surreal experience to drive past the large home of Baby Doc up in the hills overlooking Port-au-Prince, knowing that there’s little international pressure to prosecute him for all the brutality and human rights abuses that occurred during his rule from 1971 to 1986. He returned to Haiti in 2011 after years of exile in France and now lives in carefree luxury. Duvalier, unlike the many African despots targeted by The Hague, remains a friend of the West and is therefore untouchable.
Documents released by WikiLeaks in 2013 through its Public Library of US Diplomacy revealed that Washington increased sales of deadly weapons to Baby Doc during his rule, weapons that were ultimately used against Haitian civilians.13 The US embassy’s deputy chief of mission in the early 1970s was Thomas J Corcoran. He wrote in a cable sent from Port-au-Prince on 23 November 1973 that ‘repression has been markedly and genuinely eased’ and there was a ‘clear desire to do more for the economic development of the country’. He argued that the Haitian military, which had been accused of plentiful brutality against their own people, should receive training ‘which will contribute substantially to advancing a number of our important interests in the region’. Decades later, little has changed.
The Duvaliers were devoutly anti-communist during the Cold War and so Washington lavished them with largesse. Thanks to the financial and military support provided by the superpower, Haiti was ruled with an iron fist—dissent was crushed, the press was muzzled, and many thousands of people were killed. Peter Hallward writes that in the 1970s, after Baby Doc had taken the lead of his father and declared himself ‘President for Life’, neoliberal policies were ruthlessly implemented, entrenching the state in poverty.
Hallward observes that America’s backing deepened
 
in exchange for providing the sort of investment climate his [Baby Doc’s] patrons had come to expect—minimal taxes, a virtual ban on trade unions, the preservation of starvation wages, the removal of any restrictions on the repatriation of profits. In the mid-1980s these measures were supplemented by the beginning of the structural adjustments that would soon reduce Haiti’s public sector to a bare-boned shell while stripping its markets of protective tariffs.14
The facts of this stark example of American corporate pillaging are startling. Hallward details the numbers:
 
There were just seven foreign firms in the light assembly sector in 1967; twelve years later there were 51, and by 1986 there were over 300 US corporations working in Haiti. In real terms, average wages fell by around 50 percent between 1980 and 1990, and as import controls were removed, the value of US agricultural exports to Haiti almost tripled during the last years of the decade.15
This was vulture capitalism on a countrywide basis. In the 1980s, however, some organised resistance began to appear: small, local groups—organisations populaires—started providing the services that authorities were unwilling or unable to implement. There was also nascent public discussion of how a tiny thugocracy had given both the United States and the International Monetary Fund full access to a population on sustenance employment.
In 1990, the tide turned. A former Catholic priest, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, who pledged to rescue Haiti from decades of misery, was swept into power on a wave of popular support. New schools were built, along with much-needed infrastructure, and higher taxes were imposed on the rich. But Aristide’s reforms proved deeply unpopular with elements of the military and the elites who had thrived in the Duvalier dictatorship years, and he was overthrown in a coup in 1991. A few years later he became president again, from 1994–96, and again from 2001–04, his last term cut off by a US-led coup.
The French and American governments, who had never been happy about the prospect of a truly independent Haiti, had long been intent on restoring a more compliant leadership in Port-au-Prince, and there was apparently a limit to how much they could take. One of Aristide’s greatest mistakes, at least in the eyes of his country’s former masters, was to demand of France in 2003 that it pay back the massive amount of money extorted by French gunboats in 1825 for losses of colonial property. Haitian officials estimated that in today’s money it was equivalent to US$21 billion.16 Such impudence from a former slave nation was unforgivable.
When he returned to Haiti in 2011 after seven years in exile, Aristide told Democracy Now! that the economic disaster of neoliberalism ‘didn’t destroy the human values of the Haitian people, neither their dreams—not foolish dreams, but dreams of freedom for all, justice for all, food for all, education for all, health for all. Those are like a model, driving the Haitian people, moving forward despite … political catastrophes’.17
‹   ›
After the earthquake came the cholera. The first cases appeared in October 2010 and they soon turned into an epidemic. More than 8000 Haitians have subsequently died from the disease, while at least 646 000 have fallen sick. These numbers point to the failure of the United Nations and governmental authorities to solve the problem, and highlight another factor in the country’s vulnerability to exploitation.
The spread of cholera after the earthquake was expertly detailed by The New York Times in March 2012, with journalist Deborah Sontag reporting that around 5 per cent of the country’s population had been affected by the disease. She cited strong evidence that Nepalese troops, who had been brought in to assist the state as part of the UN stabilisation force called MINUSTAH, had imported the cholera and contaminated a river next to their base through a faulty sanitation system. Within days of this, Haitians had begun dying. The UN initially denied the problem. Then, after the organisation’s head, Ban Ki-moon, started talking about developing sanitation and water infrastructure, the UN bungled its response and left thousands of Haitians without adequate health care.18 In 2013, the UN remained unwilling to accept culpability for all this, rejecting a legal claim for compensation issued on behalf of the cholera victims.19
Dr Paul Farmer, a co-founder of the NGO Partners in Health, told The New York Times that ‘this unfolded right under the noses of all those NGOs … Why didn’t they throw the kitchen sink at cholera in Haiti?’ The answer to this question lies in bureaucratic problems, a lack of proper water-sanitation facilities, inadequate funds for Haitian health workers, and stonewalling by the UN. Basically, too few people were vaccinated and the cholera death toll has continued to rise, fuelled by other natural disasters.
In 2012, Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF), the world’s leading medical humanitarian aid organisation, echoed the thinking that Haitian officials didn’t have the resources to cope with the disease, a fact explained to a large degree by decades of overreliance on handouts instead of the building up of local facilities. Nonetheless, it demanded a more comprehensive response from the Haitian Govern ment, including the provision of clean drinking water and focused care for cholera victims. MSF rightly argued that it was not the organisation’s ‘purpose to assume the responsibilities of the Ministry of Health and its international partners in managing the epidemic at a national level’,20 though they were happy to assist in any way possible. The NGO claimed that, up to that stage, it had treated more than 170 000 cholera victims, roughly 33 per cent of the cases across Haiti.21
The presence of cholera has exacerbated the deep unhappiness that many of Haiti’s citizens feel in regard to the presence of UN troops and their mandate to bring safety to the population. UN forces have been accused of countless violations in the country, including the murder of more than thirty Haitians in the Cité Soleil community in 2006 and the alleged rape of a man by Uruguayan troops in 2011. It’s therefore unsurprising that a 2012 survey conducted by the University of Haiti found that 70 per cent of Haitians wanted foreign armed forces to leave the country within a year.22
To many of the nation’s inhabitants, the UN troops are just another example of foreign powers imposing their will on Haiti. Canadian academic Justin Podur, in his incisive book Haiti’s New Dictatorship, takes this as an indication that Haiti remains a dictatorship and that its people ‘have no effective say over their economic and political affairs’.23 MINUSTAH, he argues, is an ‘internationalised military solution offered for what even the UN admitted were problems of poverty and social crime that occur in many places’.24
Demands for compensation from the UN in connection with the cholera outbreak are growing, along with calls for the international body to develop strategies to protect the population properly, something its troops have so often failed to do. The fact is that although the US ambassador to the UN, Susan Rice, claims that UN troops have ‘helped provide a more secure and stable environment in Haiti, strengthened the country’s institutions, protected civilians and safeguarded human rights’,25 evidence of this is very slim. During my visit to Haiti, I constantly see armed UN troops standing around in the hot sun, doing little more than sweating as they watch locals lay new asphalt on old roads. For many of the Haitians I speak to, it feels like another occupation.
‹   ›
‘Haiti is open for business’, said President Martelly in late 2011 as he opened a new industrial park, principally supported by Washington to the tune of hundreds of millions of dollars, at Caracol in the north of the country. Standing alongside former US president Bill Clinton, he then praised the huge amount of foreign—mainly American— investment that had taken place in Haiti since the 2010 quake.
Ironically, although planning for the industrial park had commenced in 2008, it wasn’t until the earthquake struck two years later that it, and other projects like it, became a reality. The disaster swiftly attracted investment by other countries, post-earthquake reconstruction or new building projects where Haitians were barely involved in the decision-making process. The United States and South Korea, for example, saw an opportunity to help their own businesses make a profit by building clothing factories for companies such as Walmart in poor areas of the state. This was all just the latest incarnation of a tired old model that fails to deliver long-lasting benefits to locals, but instead delivers cheap labour to multinationals. This view was reflected in a scathing 2011 report by the media organisation Haiti Grassroots Watch, which argued that Haitian workers were earning less than during the time of the Baby Doc dictatorship.26
The logic that has been employed is familiar from countries such as Papua New Guinea and Afghanistan. The owner of apparel maker One World, Charles Baker, even admitted to Haiti Grassroots Watch that the salaries he was paying his workers were too low. Baker also said that Washington was happy for foreign firms such as Gap, Levi’s, Banana Republic, K-Mart and Walmart to pay povertylevel wages so that their bottom lines could soar, excusing it as a means of assisting Haiti through employment and skill development. After all, Baker claimed, low-level wages and skills were not going to be permanent features of the local economy but would only be important for the next 10–15 years. ‘It’s a step’, he said. ‘We’re going up the stairs and it’s one of the steps.’27
The Economist was largely positive about the industrial park development, though it cautioned that President Martelly was a ‘politically inexperienced populist’ who needed to change Haiti’s image from ‘eternal aid supplicant into one of a hard-working place’.28 The New York Times was more circumspect, writing on the third anniversary of the earthquake that the world had failed Haiti and that one industrial park wasn’t a panacea. It highlighted the key problem with the open-for-business mantra: that Haitians ‘feel like bystanders in their own country’.29
Bill Clinton, who claims to have a special connection to Haiti after honeymooning with his wife, Hillary, there in the 1970s, was appointed by President Barack Obama in 2010, alongside former president George W Bush, to oversee the earthquake relief work. However, allegations of mismanagement were soon directed at the Clinton Foundation’s work in Haiti. The Nation discovered in 2011 that makeshift trailers provided by the organisation, which were to be used as temporary classrooms and hurricane-proof shelters, had been badly built and contained dangerous levels of formaldehyde. In fact, the company that constructed the trailers, Clayton Homes, was sued by the US Government for providing similarly defective trailers in New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina.30 Corrupt players moving from one situation of exploitation to another—disaster capitalism in motion.
Patrick Elie, a Haitian activist and former secretary of state for public security in the Aristide government, is well aware of the influence of self-interested outsiders in his country. He told Democracy Now!, a year after the January 2010 earthquake, that ‘Haiti is controlled by a foreign government and foreign interests, the so-called international community’.31
I interview Elie at his home in Peggy Ville, a wealthy part of Port-au-Prince. When I arrive around noon, I find the grey-bearded campaigner drinking Scotch and smoking Marlboro Reds, colloquially known as ‘cowboy killers’. His home is filled with DVDs, books and photos of his family. A copy of Chris Hedges’ book The Illusion of Empire testifies to Elie’s love of history.
‘I want to speak for the voiceless of Haiti,’ says the former chemist who found his calling in politics. ‘Since the American occupation of 1915, the US policy towards Haiti has never truly deviated. It has used different tactics, sometimes violence, sometimes more cunning, but it has kept a steady course, which is truly to remove Haiti’s independence, its self-determination. It has done so by undermining the Haitian small landowners who are really the anchor of Haitian culture, dignity and autonomy. I see this project being pursued and accelerated these days. The US saw Haiti from the beginning as a reserve of cheap manpower. In the modern era, the task is how to starve the peasant so they can flock to the cities… [but] instead of sugarcane plantations, like years ago, there are these factories’.
Elie stresses that today’s Haitian leaders are little more than representatives of Washington in Port-au-Prince. ‘It’s mostly America that controls Haiti’, he says, although France and Canada are also prominent here. In late 2012, France gave 29 million euros to Haiti, money slated to implement border security and the rule of law. Canada, meanwhile, has sent more than $1 billion of aid to Haiti since 2006.
Elie also points to the new problems that are appearing on the horizon as the country’s resources are exposed. There are reportedly billions of dollars worth of gold, silver, copper and zinc in Haiti’s northern hills. Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper has already encouraged his country’s NGOs to partner with mining companies when working in Haiti, in an attempt to pacify local communities about what is to come. Needless to say, according to Elie, the new gold rush here, long anticipated by foreign mining companies and the country’s elites, will be a disaster. His concerns are eerily reminiscent of what I have heard in Papua New Guinea: ‘It spells serious trouble for this country because the Haitian state is weak and so subservient to the international powers. The companies are greedy. Fertile land is going to be totally destroyed and polluted because they’ll be using cyanide and mercury’.32
‘Our subsoil is rich in minerals. Now is the time to dig them up’, said Haitian Prime Minister Laurent Lamothe in 2012. But the problem is that many of the companies looking to exploit the estimated US$20 billion in gold and copper, such as Newmont and Eurasian Minerals, have shoddy records, including Eurasian’s controversial copper-mining partnership with Israeli billionaire Dan Gertler in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Furthermore, the country has signed up to few of the international regulations for extractive industries, the bare minimum required to protect landowners from exploitation. In fact, Haiti Grassroots Watch discovered that a former minister of finance is now a consultant for Newmont Mining and has urged a loosening of the already weak mining laws.
Countless licences have been purchased to explore large swathes of Haiti’s north. But unlike in Bolivia, Peru or Cuba, where more independent governments have placed tighter restrictions on the ability of Western companies to exploit minerals and, in some cases, have nationalised their resources, Haiti shows no indication of regulating the behaviour of North American mining corporations. If anything, Port-au-Prince seems happy to follow the West’s lead—a common complaint I hear is that white men are turning up in remote areas with a few black Haitians by their side, as if the latter are there purely to support the former’s benign plans.33
Advocates of a busy resources industry claim that it’s one way for Haiti to lessen its dependence on foreign assistance—the same argument I heard in PNG. An alternative view has been articulated by Arnolt Jean, a peasant organiser who works in an area near the Dominican Republic border. He told Haiti Grassroots Watch in 2012 that ‘what is underground could make us not poor any more … [but] it’s the rich who come with their fancy equipment to dig it out. The people who live on top of the ground stay poor, while the rich get even richer’.34
Patrick Elie is another who is passionately opposed to the machinations of vulture capitalism in Haiti. ‘We are now in a situation where you have a regime that is trying to roll back history’, he says, ‘and go back to an authoritarian period where the people will be kept subdued and business can unfold and make money unchallenged … When they say Haiti is “open for business”, they are defining a concept where this country will be run like a [business] enterprise, with the majority of the loot going to the chosen few and their international bosses’. A UN envoy to Haiti phrased this a bit differently, saying that the country was ‘not yet’ prepared for foreign investment. Nigel Fisher added that ‘we can blame external partners for their slowness to pay the promised assistance’.35
Elie gives me a startling example of the way in which the Haitian Government accommodates its overseas business masters, explaining how two mobile phone companies, Digicel and Voila!, merged in 2012 and thereby ended up controlling more than 95 per cent of their market.36 ‘This reminds me’, Elie says, ‘of the Duvalier period, where everything was a monopoly for the friends of the regime. This is being done at the expense of the Haitian people but also [by] a company in which the state owns 40 per cent of the interest’. He laments that although there has been some vocal resistance to the merger, ‘a crowd is not a force’.
Elie tells me of his admiration for the Castros in Cuba, for how they provide free health care and education and resist the United States, offering Haiti an alternative model. He imagines the Haitian peasantry rising up to build a sustainable economy without relying on foreign handouts.
This from-the-bottom-up strategy, which is anathema to the ‘solutions’ currently imposed by corrupt politicians, is the dream of many Haitians I meet. But it does not reflect the status quo enforced by Port-au-Prince and Washington.37
A common complaint I hear in Haiti concerns the fact that Washington hugely subsidises its own rice farmers to the tune of billions of dollars, forcing Haitian farmers to sell their produce at a lower price than the imported goods. A more sustainable approach would be for local rice farmers to expand their production to provide for the whole island, but coherent agricultural policies have not been a priority of the Haitian elites or the international NGO sector.38 Besides which, Washington won’t allow it. As a result, at least 75 per cent of the rice consumed in Haiti is imported,39 which imposes a big financial burden on locals because rice is a key component of the Haitian diet.
Meanwhile, a lack of accountability has developed in the aid industry, especially in relation to USAID. The US Government agency pledged US$1.8 billion after the 2010 earthquake, allegedly to support Haiti, but in reality, much of this money has ended up in the hands of local and foreign contractors without anything being given in return. USAID’s own inspector-general found in 2010 (and again in 2012) that 70 per cent of the funds given to the large contractor Chemonics failed to result in the delivery of any key goals, and that far fewer Haitians were hired in the process than promised.40 Another disappointing case study was the Inter-American Development Bank pledged program, which was found to have rebuilt earthquake-damaged schools without any seismic protection.41
The US Government constantly talks about being the world’s most generous nation, but its largesse is often intimately tied to military support. Nearly half of the US$1 billion in humanitarian aid it provided to Haiti was handled by the Department of Defense. In addition, this money was often directed to contractors that had committed human rights abuses or fraud in Iraq, Afghanistan and domestically.42
One company, Agility Logistics, received more than US$16 million in contracts despite being under indictment at the time for overcharging the US army by over US$1 billion. Another firm, MWH Americas, which was found to have overcharged the city of New Orleans after it was devastated by Hurricane Katrina, secured a lucrative engineering contract through USAID to investigate the feasibility of port infrastructure in northern Haiti. The US Department of Homeland Security awarded GEO Group Inc. a no-bid contract for ‘guard services’ in 2010, despite the company having been found guilty of countless breaches of care in its treatment of prisoners.43 The ability of suspect companies to achieve such outcomes is directly related to the huge amount of government lobbying that they perform—for MWH Americas, that meant US$1.2 million worth of lobbying in 2010 alone.44 There is no transparency when it comes to such activity. Even US company DynCorp, condemned for its work in Afghanistan and Iraq, was able to secure a US$48.6 million contract from the US Government in 2013 for providing troops to support the UN Haiti mission.
Another fundamental concern of many Haitians I meet is the unwillingness of foreign players to empower local people economically, which would prevent the profits being made from con tinually flowing out of the country. The US-based Center for Economic and Policy Research (CEPR) found in 2011 that
 
only 0.02 per cent of contracts from USAID have gone directly to Haitian companies, while the largest contracts have gone to for-profit development contractors in the form of ‘high-risk’ indefinite quantity contracts. The overwhelming majority of contracts are for companies in the Washington DC area. The percentage that has gone to local firms in Haiti is even lower than USAID’s worldwide average, which over the past three years has been 0.63 per cent.45
Another report released by CEPR, in April 2013, claimed that details of the vast majority of US aid to Haiti is unavailable to the public and resides in a ‘black box’, despite USAID having launched a program called USAID Forward to reform its programs. The report recommended including Haitians in ‘project design and implementation’, increasing contract monitoring, and translating all relevant information into Haitian Creole and distributing it throughout Haiti.46 Perhaps Haiti should follow the lead of Bolivia, who threw out USAID in May 2013, claiming the organisation was conspiring against the country. President Evo Morales said that Washington ‘still has a mentality of domination, of subjugation.’
Hillary Clinton, during her 2009 confirmation hearings for the secretary of state position, admitted that USAID had ‘turned into more of a contracting agency than an operational agency with the ability to deliver’. It seems that everybody recognises the problem, but nobody seems willing or able to address the situation. In the meantime, Haiti, whose people crave independence, suffers the burden of innumerable USAID officers whose job it is manage contractor agreements.47 Worse still, the companies that have achieved the least continue to get contracts. Somehow, by lobbying the right people in power, they become controversy-proof, immune to the consequences of poor performance.
The only way this situation can improve, I’m told, is if international monies are used to foster local civil institutions and indigenous organisations. If this does not happen, it will be apparent that the aid agendas of Washington and its allies are more about enriching donors and friends at home than meeting the needs of developing nations. The simple fact is that too much of the money disbursed to Haiti after the 2010 earthquake to perform essential work has either disappeared or remains unspent, mainly due to corruption and mismanagement.48 And this goes to the heart of the desires of disaster capitalists, whose rhetoric rarely matches reality and whose pledges of financial support are principally about lining the deep pockets of multinationals.
This is a view shared by Yanick Etienne, an organiser with the Haitian organisation Batay Ouvriye (roughly translating as ‘workers’ fight’), which was established to protect the locals employed at the country’s industrial parks. I interview her at her home near the centre of Port-au-Prince, where Etienne talks about the curse of foreign aid. She says that tens of billions of dollars have entered Haiti in the last three decades but estimates that only a few per cent has directly assisted residents. She believes that Western private companies, NGOs such as the Clinton Foundation, the UN and the Haitian Government itself have practically colluded to keep the country addicted to privatisation and aid. They have done this by continually outsourcing jobs and services to the same inept corporations and spending too much of their resources on salaries, accommodation and transport for foreign aid workers. Little time, energy or money has been spent on developing civil infrastructure and improving the lot of the average Haitian.
‘We don’t plan here’, she says, exasperated. She doesn’t want aid companies to leave tomorrow, but she sees the destructive side of decades of the ‘same failed policies’ being continuously implemented. In Haiti, they have resulted in an unemployment rate of 60 per cent. Even where job opportunities have been created, such as in the industrial parks developed outside Port-au-Prince and in the north of the country, poor living conditions—cramped accommodation, a scarcity of fresh water—can be the norm.
Etienne is worried that one of the main aims of developments such as the industrial parks is to move people out of overcrowded Port-au-Prince, banishing them to areas with little infrastructure. She also suggests that Washington is keen to point to ‘progress’ in Haiti after many years of backing dictatorships, and so with the help of multinationals it pushes the Haitian authorities to build showcase factories, with cheap labour of course.
‘We are an occupied nation’, Etienne says, referring to the ubiquitous UN, aid organisation and NGO staff. She is particularly opposed to the presence of UN personnel, whom she collectively deems a ‘foreign military force’ because they’re here, she says, ‘to make sure the economic and political models are implemented. We receive democracy second-hand. We are not independent [enough] to make decisions. The Haitian Government and the International Monetary Fund are complementary even though they’ve been implementing these policies for over thirty years without positive aspects. We’ve still got shanty towns and poverty is rampant. The so-called investment they’re promoting just doesn’t work. We need to rally all the forces to oppose this, from the masses of people, and say that another Haiti is possible’.
She begins to talk admiringly of the Arab Spring.
‹   ›
I decide to see the new industrial park at Caracol. It is a long journey. I leave Port-au-Prince at 6 a.m. with a driver, a man in his thirties who keeps a pair of headphones clamped on his ears, and a fixer and translator, Yvon, who will help to smooth our passage.
It’s still dark as we drive through the city. We pass makeshift homes made from mud, sticks and whatever usable rubbish can be found, desperate constructions that offer little protection against rain, heat or humidity, let alone another earthquake. This ugly city feels unloved, beaten and dirty, the air filled with dust. As another day begins, shopkeepers—men and women of various ages—sit or stand beside their small wooden stalls. People sell whatever they can, wherever they can. When we stop at one of the few traffic lights or come to a standstill in the almost constant traffic jam, women appear with their arms outstretched, offering fruit, vegetables, soft drinks and little bags of sealed water.
As we reach the outskirts of Port-au-Prince, the sun rises and the landscape changes. The rubbish, filth and squalor transform into a vista of lush land and perfectly blue sky. Strikingly green rice fields lie alongside the road. Workers in the distance tend their crops. It is beautiful and calm, but we have little opportunity to enjoy it. The man behind the wheel of our battered old Suzuki 4WD likes to speed, and he drives erratically. We often ask him to slow down but he ignores us, flying over the many speed bumps. Our suspension seems to be gone, my seatbelt doesn’t work and the aircon is nonexistent. As we approach a market with a bustling crowd, our driver is going too fast to avoid hitting another car. The impact is minor, but it’s still a shock. As our driver looks back over his shoulder to assess the damage he’s caused, he unwittingly steers our vehicle towards another accident. We hit a large bag of charcoal hanging off a truck, sending dozens of pieces in through our windows. Again, the impact isn’t serious, but it disorientates me—I initially think we have hit another car, or perhaps a person.
We continue along hot, cracked roads that lead over a stunning mountain range filled with rolling hills and coconut palms. We pass many small villages, some with decrepit shacks half-submerged in water. We eventually reach the outskirts of Cap-Haitien, the country’s second biggest city, where we see more shops and dusty tracks. Less than an hour later we reach Caracol. Mountains sit in the distance and scraggly scrub and dirt cover the ground. Signs displaying images of the shiny new industrial park and praising the facility dot the road. We occasionally stop to ask people for directions to the park and find that everyone knows exactly where it is. We’re told by some of its supporters that it will become one of the country’s biggest employers.
Ten minutes out from the park we see row upon row of houses that are being built for the facility’s workers, and are in various stages of construction. The landscape here offers a beautiful vista, strangely enhanced by the sun shining down on the wooden homes. But while the dwellings probably offer better conditions than many of the workers have experienced before, they are still small and there’s little room between them. A peer review by American architect Greg Higgins found the housing project ‘extremely dense and monotonous’, accusing it of ‘violating numerous principles inherent to sound urban design’49—not least being potentially unsafe during a storm or earthquake. This is hardly a model environment for future prosperity. Critics claim it will simply be a new slum.
When we start filming the houses, two men speed over and ask what we’re doing. We say we’re journalists, which I prove by showing my pass, but they tell us we have to leave, that ‘as journalists you should know that you can’t just go anywhere without permission’. We ask the men, who have been contracted by USAID to oversee the construction, if there is anyone else we can ask about gaining access, but they say it is impossible.
As we leave, we pass a housing development that has stalled due to the failure of a Minnesota-based company to produce affordable residences.50 ‘Lots of money, few results’, argued a local deputy mayor, Pierre Justinvil. ‘Look, I personally, with my own hands, have just built a whole school for less than the cost of one of those houses, and more quickly. I think we Haitians need to take the wheel’.51
We drive on towards our destination. Suddenly we’re on a sealed road, newly laid and smooth, an indication that we’re heading in the right direction. We finally reach the entrance to the industrial park, where Haitians are milling around. Nearby are some air-conditioned shipping containers where the facility’s executives work, and it’s outside these that we are welcomed by Alix Innocent, who represents the South Korean company, Sae-A, that runs the park.
Innocent is a local man who tells us that he won’t speak about the politics of the park’s construction, only about the efforts that are being made to address various concerns at the site. ‘There are social and environmental issues but we’re dealing with this’, he tells us. ‘The farmers pushed off their lands are [going to be] paid compensation, I really enjoy working with them, and we aim to replace their livelihood. The Inter-American Development Bank is currently working out a master plan to manage the environmental issues.’ I ask why this is only happening now, when the site is nearing completion, long after allegations of water pollution and eco system damage first arose, but he gives little in the way of a response. Instead, Innocent gives me some manila folders full of pamphlets in French explaining the benefits of the park. They include a large map detailing the dozens of factories here that will soon be used by foreign investors such as Gap, Walmart and Target to produce garments for Western consumers. In 2012, when she visited the site, then US secretary of state Hillary Clinton claimed the project would create 130 000 jobs.
But ignored in the orgy of self-promotion is the fact that around 300 farmers, who grew produce such as beans, had their land acquired without consultation. They were simply told to move and were not given any assistance to relocate.52 Insult was added to injury when the US consulting firm contracted to find a site for the industrial park stated in 2010 that the chosen area had ‘large stretches of relatively empty land’. Even the mayor of Caracol, Landry Colas, was bemused: ‘I would have chosen another site, given that this one was already occupied by people earning a living. But I’m no expert’.53 One farmer, Jean-Louis Saint Thomas, told The New York Times that he was devastated when the Haitian Government started evicting other landowners. ‘We watched, voiceless. The government paid us to shut us up’, he said.54 Many of the farmers are still waiting for the promised alternative plots of land.
Innocent accompanies us on a tour of the site. We see massive white warehouses, which will house the tens of thousands of expected workers. Sae-A claims that 65 000 people is their goal on the 246-hectare site. Only one of the factories is operating—the rest are still being built—and as we slowly drive past it, we see large whirring fans on the exterior and hundreds of workers busy inside. We ask to go in but Innocent says we can’t without permission from the owner. He takes us instead to a nearby, still-empty warehouse, where the only activity is that of trucks rumbling by outside. A guard loiters at the entrance, carrying a shotgun. The space inside is surreal because of its size.
We say goodbye to Innocent, but before we leave we again try to get inside the operating factory. The building is decorated by self-promotion themed signs, such as ‘Sae-A loves kids’ and ‘Sae-A loves Haiti’. It’s late afternoon and hundreds of Haitian workers start to emerge, mostly men in brightly coloured clothing. As they stream towards the park’s exit, they check their mobile phones and talk to each other. We approach the open door, from where the textile machines and their clean surrounds are clearly visible, then walk inside. But a friendly Haitian security guard asks us to leave, saying he will get into trouble if we stay without permission. It strikes me that this nondescript, well-maintained place would probably not look out of place anywhere in the world, and I wonder if this is the face of the modern sweatshop.55
I speak to some of the female workers as they are leaving. The women, mostly in their twenties and thirties and uniformly thin, earn a paltry US$4 per day—US$5 is Haiti’s official minimum daily wage. Of this money, half goes on transport and food, leaving US$2 in each worker’s pocket. My translator is outraged that his fellow locals are working for this pittance. He tells the women that they should be angry, that they don’t have to work for these low wages. The women just look at him with a mixture of exhaustion and frustration. Unions are weak in Haiti and work is desperately needed, a combination that allows the multinationals here to do what they want.
The women pile into a number of tap taps, the small pick-up trucks that serve as share taxis in Haiti. Some will travel to Cap-Haitien, where some housing is provided by Sae-A. Others will stay in makeshift accommodation near the factory. Most have family in areas far away from Caracol and rarely get the chance to visit them.
‹   ›
The industrial park at Caracol is part of an alarming trend, one in which multinationals target cheap labour in countries that have little political will or muscle to protect their workers and regulate development projects. And the trend is growing, thanks to the enthusiasm of businesses like Sae-A. ‘Investors still do not believe or understand the value and potential of Haiti as we do’, said chairman Kim Woong-ki in 2011.56 Some of the company’s executives con sider themselves ‘frontiersmen’.57 Their excitement has been heightened by the fact that, through a public–private partnership, US taxpayers have invested over US$100 million in the project. Of course, the backers of the park aren’t interested in helping poor Haitians get on their feet, although they cite job creation while promoting their company as a good corporate citizen. Rather, their obvious priority is to extract the maximum benefit from the Haiti Economic Lift Program, which allows textiles to enter the United States tariff-free, as well as the US–Korea Free Trade Agreement.58
Says American scholar Alex Dupuy, the Caracol project ‘has absolutely nothing to do with creating a sustainable growth economy in Haiti’, one perhaps based on key farming crops such as coffee, corn, beans, sugar and rice. ‘It’s about tapping a source of cheap labour. They [corporations] did the same thing in Port-au-Prince, which had people leaving the countryside because of the free trade policies that have devastated the Haitian agriculture sector. So the fear … that the region will be flooded [by multinationals] is very real.’59
In fact, Washington’s role in facilitating Caracol’s industrial park is reminiscent of the Duvalier dictatorship era, when the US Government viewed Haiti as ‘the Taiwan of the Caribbean’. It was a time when massive slums were created to house the workers in Port-au-Prince. History now seems to be repeating itself. Sae-A has a record of shocking labour practices in Guatemala and Nicaragua, which includes crushing unions and threatening employees. But Washington only cares about so-called ‘progress’ in Haiti, whatever the human costs.60
Powerful Haitians also lend their support to new developments. I interview George Sassine, the founder and manager of the Caracol initiative, who is involved in other projects across the country. Sassine is in his mid-sixties and works out of a surprisingly dingy and sunlight-starved office in central Port-au-Prince. His desk is buried under piles of manila folders, while alongside it is a small table on which a PC sits. His assistant hovers around him for the entire interview.
Sassine is a smooth talker. He tells me that he and other local businessmen pushed the idea of Haitian industrial parks and other economic initiatives for years, lobbying various members of the US Congress. In 2006, this resulted in the Hope Act, a set of special trade rules that enabled the tariff-free sale of Haitian textiles in the United States, in exchange for the preferential treatment of American imports. But it was only after the 2010 earthquake that the Obama administration helped him get the industrial park project off the ground. Naturally, he was quick to seize the business opportunity that the natural disaster presented.
Sassine argues that previous Haitian governments failed to adequately prepare the country for a sustainable future. He speaks about the restoration of national sovereignty, refuting the suggestion that the United States controls Haiti and arguing that USAID supports positive programs. As for the Caracol industrial park, Sassine says, there are few environmental issues with it. He also says that Sae-A was vetted and told they had to abide by certain laws regarding worker’s rights and the compensation to be paid to farmers. When I raise the matter of landowners being stripped of their property, he responds loudly with, ‘Nobody rejected it!’.
‘When you have an industrial park, it’s like a shopping centre’, Sassine goes on to explain. ‘You need to have big players. Sae-A is one of the largest garment manufacturers in the world and is vertically integrated, from designing to making their own fabric, so this is the perfect fit for us. I visited South Korea at least eight times over two years. We had a lot of support from the US administration and if I may drop the name of Ms Clinton, she convinced former president Bill Clinton, and when he talks people can’t say no to him.’ Both Hillary and Bill, using their long-term connections to Haiti and corporate interests, helped persuade key stakeholders to develop the park.
Sassine predictably argues that less regulation will allow the country to develop. ‘It means understanding that the investor is a customer’, he says, ‘and the customer is always right … The foreigner or local is investing and risking his money and you have to listen to him’. True to form, in 2009, when Sassine was the head of an organisation of Haitian industrialists, he complained about the Haitian Government doubling the minimum wage to US$5, claiming it would cost jobs.
Sassine acknowledges that industrial parks aren’t the only way to get Haiti moving again. He talks about supporting local agricultural projects, adding that the Clinton Foundation regularly backs such ideas. But his main goal, he says, is the mass production of cheap goods for export.
‹   ›
The National Palace in the centre of Port-au-Prince was a symbol of political freedom to Haitians. Although its latest incarnation was completed by American architects in 1920, during the US occupation of Haiti, it became the place where countless citizens rallied to publicly voice their views. But it collapsed during the 2010 earthquake—video footage of the event shows terrified workers running for their lives as massive pieces of concrete crash to the ground. Since then, the ruined building has come to represent the lack of sovereignty felt by many Haitians.
A European filmmaker who I meet in Port-au-Prince, Alice Smeets, tells me that an NGO founded by actor Sean Penn, the J/P Haitian Relief Organization, has been charged with demolishing what’s left of the palace and removing its rubble. She explains that the fact that Penn’s organisation, rather than a local company, is doing the work has deeply upset many Haitians. They see it as yet another sign of the loss of control of their own affairs. The federal government, meanwhile, is simply happy to outsource yet another job.
A Haitian friend of Alice’s who lives in a poor area of Portau-Prince wrote to Penn to complain about his organisation’s involvement in clearing away the palace. Apparently Penn responded angrily, writing to tell the man that he didn’t understand his own country and that Penn’s organisation was actually partnering with locals to do important work. This is true, but it doesn’t address the problem of having a foreign company demolish a place about which there is great indigenous sensitivity.
I’m in Haiti when the work by Penn’s group begins. After constantly hassling President Martelly’s communications director, Enrique Mari Chaparro, for access to the site, I’m allowed in a few hours before I’m due to fly out of the country. I wait outside the ruins for Chaparro and he finally appears, dressed in a suit and tie, his beard carefully manicured. He worked as a journalist in Spain and France before advising Martelly during the 2010–11 election campaign, and he’s now a close aide of the Haitian President. As workers gather near some cranes, we notice Haiti’s first lady, Sophia Martelly, standing nearby and she calls Chaparro over for a brief chat. (Later, after looking around the palace, I catch a brief glimpse of the leader himself as he steps into a dark-windowed SUV, which moves off down the road followed by countless armed men in cars and on motorcycles.)
When I’m finally able to ask Chaparro about the palace demolition work, he says, ‘Sean Penn is an official ambassador to Haiti. He’s had experience in clearing rubble and [in] demolitions, so it makes sense’. I ask if it matters that a local group isn’t involved. ‘Locals are working on this’, he responds, pointing at the site. He’s right, but only in the sense that Haitians are doing the hard labour while a number of American and French businessmen run the show.
The palace is still an imposing building, despite being in a terrible state. Now, within a few days, it will all be cleared and the site will then remain empty until a replacement is eventually built.61 The structure’s famous dome tilts precariously to one side, seemingly about to fall to the ground.
Chaparro says that he’s keen to foster international media interest in the country, in the hope of having Haiti portrayed in a different light. ‘It’s not just disasters and cholera’, he tells me. ‘Haiti is now progressing and moving in the right direction. I understand as a journalist that bad stories sell but there are many good stories here now.’ I guess he thinks that the demolition of the palace is one such positive story because it indicates progress and renewal, but I don’t agree.
The controversy involving Penn’s NGO reflects a deep structural problem in Haiti, something I also see in PNG and Afghanistan. The NGO sector, including the non-profit groups, often acts as a conduit that ensures business for Western firms. In March 2010, the self-labelled ‘politically neutral, non-profit’ US company CHF International (now called Global Communities) said that ‘by contributing to Haiti’s reconstruction in a lasting, meaningful way, companies will be helping to build a new, more vibrant Caribbean market for their own goods and services’. Decoded, this means assisting US businesses to exploit cheap labour, with US taxpayer dollars supporting the projects. After the 2010 earthquake, CHF ran ‘cash for work’ initiatives which were condemned by human rights groups as being akin to the payment of slave wages.62 NGOs clearly aren’t always the benevolent groups we’re led to believe they are.
The NGO-isation of humanitarian relief has been explained as an efficient means of assisting in post-conflict and natural disaster environments. Certainly, smaller organisations can sometimes provide lifesaving aid due to being nimble and unconstrained by bureaucracy. But the idea that a centralised UN aid service, namely the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, can utilise any number of NGOs to deliver urgently the needed help isn’t borne out by the facts. ‘In Haiti’, writes the international head of Médecins Sans Frontières, Unni Karunakara, ‘the system is legitimising NGOs that claim responsibility for health, sanitation or other areas in a specific zone, but then do not have the capacity or know-how to carry out the necessary work. As a result, people’s needs go unmet’.63
In January 2013, a former Associated Press correspondent in Haiti, Jonathan Katz, told Democracy Now! that a key problem for the country, and for many other developing nations, is that local institutions are never properly developed because ‘donor countries avoid local governments [and] fund through their own agencies, their own NGOs, their own militaries, and that weakens institutions’.64 So when another disaster hits, the state is barely there.
Another negative side effect of the mass influx of NGOs in Haiti has been the dramatic rise in housing costs, which are affordable for foreigners on high salaries but push locals out of the market. This is a common feature of disaster economies, and it is unsustainable because countless individuals and groups only stay for 6 months, or 12 or 18 months, before moving on to the next global crisis.65 Then there is the monstrous example provided by the charity Yele Haiti, which was founded by the Haitian-born, American hip-hop star Wyclef Jean in 2005 but was shut down in 2012. The artist wrote in his autobiography that same year that the organisation was ‘Haiti’s greatest asset and ally’ in helping the country to get back on its feet.66 The truth, however, uncovered by The New York Times, is a litany of corruption and mismanagement, with Haitians missing out on any tangible support after the earthquake.67 A New York attorney-general investigation found that millions of dollars in donations went to Jean and his friends. If ever there had been a need for NGOs to be regulated, just like banks and mortgage brokers, this was the time.68
In the countries I visited for this book, the use of distantly run, multinational-connected NGOs as a substitute for government planning has eroded the possibility of delivering truly beneficial services and assistance to the people who need them. By contrast, NGOs that are locally accountable, internationally connected and financially independent have made a difference and contributed to the greater sovereignty of those nations.69 A unique model in Haiti is the growth of the renewable and clean energy sector, where local NGOs partner with government departments to reduce deforestation.70
‹   ›
At least 350 000 Haitians remain in refugee camps more than three years after the 2010 earthquake. One of the largest camps, which houses around 40 000 people, who live cheek by jowl, sits in Port-au-Prince’s Parc Jean Marie Vincent, on the site of what was supposed to be a sporting arena. It’s called Sou Piste, which means ‘on the tarmac’. I arrive here to see armed UN troops wandering around, though I’m later told that their presence rarely keeps camp dwellers safe from local gangs and petty criminals. Their mandate, to provide stability, is incredibly vague, and their willingness to actively help individuals appears to be low.
Entering the camp, I see a handful of kids in various states of undress running around, tailed by mangy dogs. Bare and dirty feet and soiled faces are the children’s shared characteristics, and for many, their first memories will be of living in a refugee camp in their city of birth. American and Israeli flags have been painted on a small structure near the entrance, though nobody knows why, and a Digicel flag flutters on a nearby pole. The smell of shit hits me. I walk towards a small amphitheatre and find that it is covered in animal and human waste—the refugees come here to relieve themselves. Tents, mostly provided by USAID, dot the landscape. Many refugees I talk to say this has been the extent of the agency’s assistance. ‘We’ve never seen anybody from USAID in this camp’, one man says. In one area, women stand around holding babies while men sit at a makeshift table playing dominoes. When a game ends, a strange ritual takes place whereby the loser takes a water bottle filled with small rocks and clips it to his cheek.
Such is daily life in a Haitian ‘internally displaced person’ camp. This life can quickly change, however, as the risk of forced eviction is ever present. The Haitian Government routinely pushes thousands of people out of such camps and into the streets, with no compensation or assistance.71 Either way, women face the possibility of rape, a crime that is endemic inside and outside the camps. There are no accurate figures, but one study performed in 2012 found that 14 per cent of Haitian households claimed that at least one female resident had been sexually assaulted since the earthquake, though the actual figure is almost certainly much higher.72 And officials rarely investigate such crimes, routinely blaming the female victims for what has happened.73
I speak to three men who say they’ve been here since the earthquake. They’re frustrated, saying they’ve received little support from anybody except the Red Cross, which recently provided some essentials. As for the Haitian Government, despite constantly making promises to take action soon, it is invisible. The men are understandably opposed to more foreign aid and development money for Haiti because, they say, they never see it.74
One of the men, Wilbert, is thirty-three years old and lives in the camp with his family. His young daughter, dressed in an orange dress and sporting dreadlocks, stands nearby, staring at us. He tells me that he’s unemployed and has yet to receive anything from his state or president. ‘Nobody is helping us’, he says. ‘We have heard about organisations helping people but we’ve never seen anybody here. Life conditions are very difficult. We’re sleeping on the floor. It’s a mess. We have to blame the President’s office.’
Wilbert says that it’s not safe to stay in the camp. ‘The President will not look at me’, he adds forlornly. ‘If anybody here says they’ve had help, it’s a lie. We have nothing to do so we play dominoes all day. You see many kids around you. They are supposed to go to school. We don’t have the money to pay for the school fees.’
All of the men are opposed to the industrial parks. One man says people often have to have sex with a factory boss to secure a job. I also hear that pride stops many people from taking a job because the wages are so low. This does not strike me as laziness but rather as people demanding that their government finally take responsibility for them.
Another man invites me into the tent where he lives with his wife and five kids. Some members of the family sleep in bunk beds while the rest lie down on the rock and gravel floor. The man is a stone mason and travels far every day for work. He’s angry. He doesn’t understand why no-one has helped move his family to somewhere more secure and permanent. When it rains, everything floods. He says there’s violence over money, food and other meagre resources. I’m aware that he may be saying what he thinks we want to hear, but there’s no hiding his grim situation.
These camps are a damning indictment of the NGOs and the government in Haiti. Ever person with whom I speak in Sou Piste seems politically savvy, yet they don’t have any kind words for the UN or other NGOs. Some people say that they want the NGOs to leave Haiti because they don’t know what they’re doing here, apart from awarding contracts to enable various companies to turn a profit.
An aid insider who works in Haiti but also speaks critically of the aid process is rare. But American anthropologist Timothy Schwartz is such a man. The intense 50-year-old loves to talk, which he does profusely during our first meeting, at the busy Muncheez restaurant in the centre of Port-au-Prince. Schwartz moved to Haiti in 1994 and divides his time between it, the neighbouring Dominican Republic and the Democratic Republic of Congo. He’s written various reports for USAID and has alternately been loved and hated for them. After investigating the death toll from the 2010 earthquake, for example, he claimed it was actually far less than alleged. The official number of dead was estimated at more than 300 000 people, but he said it was really between 50 000 and 80 000. He contends that the figure was grossly inflated to gain more international support. That assertion didn’t go down too well in some circles.
Schwartz explains how the exaggeration of such figures allows NGOs and corporations to get more funds to solve problems that aren’t as bad as they claim. He gives a second example: reports alleging that child slavery is a huge problem in Haiti, which, he says, is ‘simply untrue … the people doing the reports, claiming 400 000 child slaves in Haiti, know it’s untrue’. Schwartz says this is done to attract Western donor money, which is then siphoned off to pay for excessive salaries and other perks. This lack of NGO accountability affects every country I have visited during my investigation of disaster capitalism.
I arrange to continue my conversation with Schwartz in his Spanish-style house in Thomassin, an area in the mountains above Port-au-Prince. The drive to his place is along rocky roads with spectacular vistas. It’s not hard to see why he stays here.
After he greets me, Schwartz picks up where he left off in the restaurant. ‘The earthquake was a perfect opportunity for them [the Preval government] to do the good things that they … [were] talking about, such as decentralisation and pump[ing] up peasant agriculture’, he tells me. ‘There was no better moment for them to step up and buy all the peasant surplus and bring it into Port-au-Prince because people needed food. But the international community flooded the country with food aid, not just for one month but for the next years. The [UN] World Food Programme rerouted the food to the maternal child health program.75 It was a clear flouting of the Haitian Government and what they wanted. It was clear that Preval wasn’t running the country at that stage.’
Haiti’s sovereignty was again lost on the day the tremors hit, he tells me. Schwartz continues: ‘What do you do when you have a country being flooded with all this goodwill and aid? Stand up and say “No”? If you do, you’re against the poor, victims and earthquake survivors. I met the key World Food Programme senior staff here a year after the earthquake and I said that there was no need for all the food. Everybody simply looked down. I honestly believe that all those people are sincere. They didn’t really understand and they were getting their information from the press or people on the ground. One thing that is happening in Haiti is [cries of] “Give me more”, from the peasant to the person in the city to the politician to the NGOs. That’s the industry. When it comes to writing the NGO report, though, everybody does what they have to do, put a nice spin on it and say it was a success. You can’t give a donor’s report and say something was a horrible failure and we wasted this much money’.
I ask Schwartz again about his allegation that the number of people who are said to have died during the earthquake has been inflated, which he reconfirms: ‘This was just one example of many of [the] radical inflation[s] of figures in the interests of more money for the NGOs. They [also] estimated initially there was … 10 or 20 million cubic metres of rubble, but the reality was far lower … around 3 million cubic metres. But the NGOs kept on getting the money from donors to clean it up’. And, what’s worse, they have been ineffectual in doing so. Vast swathes of Port-au-Prince are still littered with debris.
Schwartz says that many USAID people he knows are genuine and sincere in their desire to make a difference here, but that the system is rigged against them and their plans. Haiti isn’t an independent country, Schwartz explains, because its policies are decided and dictated by Washington. When asked by academic Justin Podur whether the ‘aid industry’ was doing more harm than good in Haiti, Schwartz responded that it was, but then said ‘we can’t cut off the aid because, however we got here, Haiti now depends on it’.76
‹   ›
Indigenous development in Haiti has been largely missing for decades. Now, attempts are being made to revive it, but with mixed results.
I visit the main office and factory of the Haitian manufacturer Indepco, which is situated on Highway One on the outskirts of Port-au-Prince. Its head and founder is Hans P Garoute, an energetic man who spent his formative years in New York working as a buyer and seller of women’s underwear. In 1966, he was caught by the US Coast Guard, along with a number of Cubans, on a boat off the coast of Florida. The group had weapons and was on its way to Haiti to try to overthrow the Papa Doc dictatorship. The result was that Garoute spent 20 years in America on a UN passport which showed he was stateless. He tells the story with humour.
Among other things, Indepco organises training for the workers at the Caracol industrial park. One of Garoute’s colleagues, Jean Robert Lebrun, who is sitting in on our conversation, tells me that he’s just returned from Caracol and that the training of the young men and women there has gone very well. ‘There are a few women who had never worked before who are now supervisors of over 100 people. This makes me very happy’, he says. He explains that Sae-A had never planned how it would source trained workers, so Indepco stepped in, though only on a three-month contract.
I ask Lebrun and Garoute about worker’s rights; in particular, how a foreign company like Sae-A should treat its employees here. They both agree that the current conditions are good and that a unionised work force should come later, not now. This is expressed matter-of-factly, without enmity. ‘We had a union leader in this office this morning talking to us about worker’s rights’, Garoute says proudly, ‘so don’t think it’s not a consideration’. Neither man seems especially worried about the below-minimum-standard pay at Caracol, although Garoute hints that ideally he would like workers to receive more money.
Garoute shows me around the Indepco factory, a steaming-hot warehouse with little fresh air blowing through it. Men and women are working on old sewing machines (the brand is ‘Finger’ rather than ‘Singer’) making shirts, dresses and pants. Some employees are painstakingly stitching colourful, heart-shaped vodou patterns. I talk to one young Haitian woman who grew up in New York and Philadelphia but whose parents now live back here, which is why she returned as well. She wants to break into the fashion industry and is producing ten different designs for an upcoming fashion show in Jamaica, where she hopes to receive some substantial orders. If she does, Indepco will then help her produce the garments for export. It’s one small way in which the company is trying to foster the next generation of productive Haitians.
When I ask about sweatshops in Haiti, Garoute says that the Western idea of worker mistreatment can’t be compared with life in his country. He says he also gets upset when visiting Westerners complain about such things as a young boy carrying a bucket of water, thinking this is akin to being a slave, when in fact the child is just helping his mother keep the home together.
Garoute is clearly an industrious man and appears genuinely to care about helping Haiti to become more independent. But he seems to have one foot in each of two camps: he wants to encourage much more local production and international investment in the domestic agriculture and textile industries while simultaneously praising foreign-owned industrial parks for assisting poor Haitians.
In the main office, there’s a photo of Garoute meeting George W Bush and his daughter Jenna here in 2010. He doesn’t have many kind words for the former US president, but is more positive towards the Obama administration. He has no love, however, for USAID. He explains how an Indepco training warehouse at the Sonapi industrial park in Port-au-Prince only operated for two years because USAID provided a manager who didn’t understand the needs of the project. Nearly US$100 million was wasted— no-one knew where the money had been spent. Garoute asks why instead a Haitian person couldn’t have been appointed to manage the venture. They would have saved half the money, he claims, and would have intimately understood the needs of Indepco.
‹   ›
At twilight one day I visit Fort Jacques, which is perched up on a mountain overlooking Port-au-Prince. It was built in 1804 after Haiti had declared its independence from France. The view is hazy but the air is clean, unpolluted, unlike in the city centre I have left behind. Pop and techno music boom from some SUVs. Couples snack and snuggle. A game of soccer begins on a rough football field, officiated by an excitable MC whose voice emerges from a makeshift speaker system set up in the stands. It’s a beautiful scene of untroubled community life. Seeing it reminds me how easy it is in a country such as Haiti to focus solely on the negatives and not appreciate the daily rhythms of ongoing life.
Another thing I can appreciate about Haiti, which all too often is seen as dependent and weak, is the inspiring resistance to the economic order that I find here. This is the case when I interview Reyneld Sanon, the head of Frakka, a grassroots group that advocates affordable housing. We talk in his office, which is set in a plain house in the suburb of Canape Vert. Sanon is a strong critic of the Martelly government and its pro-business policies, as well as the practices of Washington and USAID. He wants an emphasis on local producers and farmers rather than on foreign industries. Opening up Haiti to overseas markets, he says, has only resulted in the country being flooded with imported goods and Haitians being locked out of business opportunities.
Sanon rails against the countless NGOs and UN forces that have been in the country for years yet delivered very little. ‘The UN soldiers have never done anything to solve the housing issue’, he says, ‘and international NGOs, years after the quake, are still providing weak shelters. It’s ridiculous. Some local organisations, with only US$11 000, are able to build a good house. In areas near Port-au-Prince, these groups have built over 100 houses and given the keys to the owners. It shows that there’s no will for foreign groups to really help us when they’ve spent millions of dollars and we don’t see anything. The international private sector come here to make money. It’s a big business for them’.
Sanon’s views are shared by the Haitian economist and activist Camille Chalmers, who tells me that there has been no economic independence in Haiti for the last 100 years. He offers a story about former president Jean Bertrand Aristide wanting capable Swiss instructors to train the Haitian police, but being told by the Americans that because of some long-forgotten agreement dating from 1980, Washington had to be asked to approve such a plan. Needless to say, it was rejected.
Chalmers places Haiti’s dilemma in a global context. ‘We are unable to develop our own models of development and have to get international funding for the neoliberal agenda’, he tells me. ‘It’s a way to show capitalism that we’re willing to work with you, but you’re actually destroying our own economy and agriculture.’
Chalmers continues: ‘Haiti is one of the countries they call a “failed state”. Since 1915, it’s been about how Haiti will please the United States, but there are alternatives to industrial parks. If you invest in agriculture and farming, you’ll have much better and more sustainable results. There is a finite number of people who can work in industrial parks but millions of jobs are required. For example, we have over 168 species of mangoes in Haiti but we don’t have the industry that can work on it. That’s what the future should be’.
‹   ›
The challenge for Haiti is to reclaim its independence, and it will be a long and painful task. It’s hard to disagree with Peter Hallward, who argues that in places like Haiti, ‘NGOs provide rich countries [with] a morally respectable way of subcontracting the sovereignty of the nations they exploit’.77 I have seen this NGO-isation of poor nations before and it’s opposed only rarely, usually by individuals and small groups battling against tough odds. The fact that such nations remain economically occupied in some way emphasises how vital is the need for alternatives.
Haiti is an easy target for vulture capitalists because its inhabitants are caught up in a daily struggle for survival. This is not made any easier by the predatory aid groups, foreign governments and NGOs who have a one-model-fits-all mindset, and who refuse to assess the effectiveness of their methods. The relationship between USAID and Washington’s foreign policy is a case in point, one that prompts understandable scepticism in many Haitians.
When NGOs replace the apparatus of the state, there inevitably arises the neocolonial mentality that permeates far too many Western organisations allegedly working to alleviate suffering. A different model of investment must be prioritised.







POSTSCRIPT
Local people’s renewal movements begin from the premise that there is no escape from the substantial messes we have created and that there has already been enough erasure—of history, of culture, of memory. These are movements that do not seek to start from scratch but rather from scrap, from the rubble that is all around.
Naomi Klein, The Shock Doctrine, 20071
The History Channel describes its reality-TV show Bamazon as ‘eight out-of-work Alabama construction workers locked in the fight of their lives, risking everything they’ve got on a long-shot chance to find gold in the Amazon jungle’. Set in Guyana in South America, the program features ‘aggressive jaguars, venomous snakes, malarial mosquitoes and countless miles of impenetrable mud’. Missing from the program is mention of the human rights abuses committed by mining corporations against indigenous communities and the damage done to delicate ecosystems by the uncaring, excessive exploitation of resources such as gold.2
This is depoliticised entertainment that mainstreams vulture capitalism for the sake of sensationalism and the ratings that it will bring. All that matters is the excitement of the chase, the broadcasting of a carnival of grime and grit to an audience who will learn nothing about why resource hunting can be so destructive. The History Channel, writes environmental academics Nathan K Lujan, Devin D Bloom and L Cynthia Watson, ‘exploits habitats as a backdrop for glorified plunder’.3
TV cameras weren’t there to record it in the depths of Western Australia, Papua New Guinea, Afghanistan, Pakistan or Haiti, but the predatory behaviour of multinational executives, government officials and complicit NGO staffers is similarly the defining feature of what I have recorded in this book. Profit at any cost is what I witnessed. The methods vary from country to country, but the strategy is the same: exaggerate a threat, man-made or natural, and let loose unaccountable private-sector contractors to exploit it. If there is economic uncertainty, let foreign companies mine any available resource and then sit back and watch as most of the money leaves the country. Make sure that wars, including those started for tenuous reasons, last as long as possible to ensure ongoing work for mercenaries, guards and intelligence officials. Industries such as resource mining, construction and security feed off each other. It’s a global gravy train—when one country is sucked dry, it’s off to the next lucrative destination.
Rolling Stone journalist Matt Taibbi, in his incendiary book on the global financial crisis, Griftopia, describes the ‘grifter’ class: Wall Street criminals and tricksters and the financial players and politicians who indulge them. This phenomenon, he rightly argues, is why ‘our world isn’t about ideology anymore. It’s about complexity. We live in a complex bureaucratic state with complex laws and complex business practices, and the few organisations with the corporate willpower to master these complexities will inevitably own the political power’.4
In his book, Taibbi, a chronicler of the ways in which largely unregulated capitalism has corrupted global democracy, investigates how the majority of American citizens ‘are being bled dry by a relatively tiny oligarchy of extremely clever financial criminals and their castrato henchmen in government’.5 It’s a microcosm of what’s happening in virtually every Western nation. Billions of dollars in investments are being lost. This rarely matters to those spending the money because it’s not real cash but merely numbers in electronic portfolios that are easily rebuilt through a new mine or a fresh aid project in another country. Any crimes, human rights abuses and exploitation occur far away from financial regimes like Wall Street and remain unpunished—virtually no-one goes to jail. Who bothers looking, and anyway, who cares? Not Rupert Murdoch, who gave a speech in Melbourne in April 2013 during which he praised the ‘morality of free markets’.6 Unsurprisingly, he made no mention of the global financial crisis, price gouging by multinationals or concentrated media power.
In light of the declining abilities and constricting self-interest of the Western corporate press, it’s up to the individual, the citizen blogger and the Twitter and Facebook user, to document the effects of vulture capitalism—to provide what is missing from the mainstream media: a view from the ground.7 This is what I have tried to do in my book.
A PNG villager now has the ability to quickly connect electronically with an activist in Sydney and inform her of a chemical spill at a copper mine. An Afghan blogger can describe to a worldwide audience the corruption of a government official. Awareness doesn’t necessarily bring change, but it’s the first, vital step in doing so.
Reversing the trend of exploitative capitalism also means offering an alternative to its seductive charms.8 This is an urgent challenge, as I realised when witnessing the ideology at work in places like Haiti, where industrial parks are promoted as the ultimate opportunity. The answer is not more outsourcing of services or privatisation of resources. Listening to locals and empowering them is a better option. This means challenging the orthodox view that the West has all the answers, even when it comes to well-intentioned foreign aid policies.
There were countless times during my travels when I felt helpless, overwhelmed by the stories put before me. In particular, I was struck by how often people reported feeling like slaves to an economic system over which they had no control. Financial consultant Satyajit Das writes that ‘the rule of extreme money is that everybody borrows, everybody saves, everybody is supposed to get wealthier. But only skilled insiders get richer, running and rigging the game’.9 This book uncovers these covert players, exposes their tactics, recognises the financial, social and political groups that have created this mess, and makes the case for change.
The challenges, however, remain profound. While former British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, a key architect of today’s neoliberal destruction of the public sector, may have died in April 2013, mass privatisation, market fundamentalism and the supporting of dictatorships friendly to the West, which were championed by her and like-minded capitalists, continue to thrive.
It is essential that greater accountability is demanded from those institutions that create or perpetuate crises. This includes the organisations that run prisons for asylum seekers and those that undermine the autonomy and livelihoods of local peoples in pursuit of the resource dollar. It also includes those that sell questionable intelligence to US forces in the war on terror. They mask their greed with claims of helping America win its battle against terrorism, when it’s obvious that patriotism and global stability are not behind their actions.
In 2000, British writer George Monbiot published Captive State: the Corporate Takeover of Britain.10 Reading it today, it seems almost quaint. Privatisation was already in full swing under New Labour and its leader, Prime Minister Tony Blair, but the globalised nature of the threat to democracy was only in its infancy. In the wake of 11 September 2001, an unprecedented and aggressive mode of capitalism was unleashed that serves the military, defence and counterterrorism establishment as well as the prisons and detention centres that thrive on the warehousing and punishing of people.
This book warns of a future that is being written without your consent. The Pentagon is imagining a 100-year war that will be fought in foreign lands and at home, with the urban poor and powerless to be the main casualties. American journalist Nick Turse visited a 2007 conference in Washington DC at which countless private companies gave presentations on how best to trap, stun, subdue or kill an individual or population. This wasn’t just a typical weapons trade fair but something far more sinister. Corporations were working with government officials to develop techniques to maintain American domination overseas through force in the coming century.
Turse writes that
 
the Pentagon has evidently decided to prepare for 100 years more of the same: war against various outposts of a restless, oppressed population of slum-dwellers one-billion strong and growing at an estimated rate of 25 million a year … Unsurprisingly, the civilians of the cities that they plan to occupy, whether living in Karachi, Jakarta, or Baghdad, have no say in the matter. No one thought to invite any of them to the conference.11
At least 70 per cent of America’s annual intelligence budget is now spent on private contractors, which means that tens of billions of dollars are being invested in expanding an unaccountable, outsourced state.12 The post-9/11 world is defined by an obsession with ‘security’ at any human rights cost, and this book gives examples of how disastrous this has been for liberty while benefiting the private sector.
Hearteningly, resistance to predatory capitalism is occurring all over the world, enacted by affected communities in Haiti and PNG, refugee activists in Australia and NGOs in Afghanistan. There is increasing opposition to the fact that the West has become little more than a heavily fortified gated community, exploiting resources and people in its pursuit of increased profits and a self-serving notion of peace. A vision is evolving of how the world can be ordered differently, with true democracy thriving from the ground up.







ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work has taken me to places that fundamentally challenged my belief in journalism and what I’ve been doing professionally for over a decade. I found there was no other response to witnessing devastated nations such as Afghanistan, Haiti and Papua New Guinea than listening and learning and questioning whether reporting is the best way to convey the horrors, and the grim humour that accompanies the telling of them. But in the end I believed that it was an important contribution to revealing the ways in which our world is being sold to the highest bidder without public consent.
This book is the result of three years of work and has been made possible by the countless people across the globe who want their voices to be heard. It has been a collaborative process and I could not have done it without the dedication, passion and bravery of the journalists, activists, writers and citizens who graciously gave me time, information and support. Thank you.

This book aims, in the words of the campaigning British website Media Lens, ‘to correct the distorted vision of the corporate media’. My hope is that it generates a global debate, in the spirit of Naomi Klein’s No Logo and The Shock Doctrine, that challenges the silencing of the majority by the media, business and political elite that claims to represent them.
Resistance is never futile.
