ADVANCE PRAISE FOR THE COSTS OF CONNECTION
“A provocative tour-de-force. A powerful interrogation of the power of data 
in our networked age. Through an enchanting critique of different aspects of 
our data soaked society, Nick Couldry and Ulises A. Mejias invite the reader to 
reconsider their assumptions about the moral, political, and economic order 
that makes data-driven technologies possible.”
—danah boyd, Microsoft Research and founder of Data & Society
“There’s a land grab occurring right now, and it’s for your data and your 
freedom: companies are not only surveilling you, they’re increasingly 
inﬂ uencing and controlling your behavior. This paradigm-shifting book explains 
the new colonialism at the heart of modern computing, and serves as a 
needed wake-up call to everyone who cares about our future relationship with 
technology.”
—Bruce Schneier, author of Click Here to Kill Everybody: 
Security and Survival in a Hyper-Connected World
“This book is a must-read for those grappling with how the global data 
economy reproduces long-standing social injustice, and what must be done 
to counter this phenomenon. With a feast of insights embedded in visceral 
historical and contemporary illustrations, the authors brilliantly push the 
reader to rethink the relations between technology, power, and inequality.”
—Payal Arora, author of The Next Billion Users: 
Digital Life beyond the West

“This is a deeply critical engagement with the systems that enable ‘data 
colonialism’ to extend its reach into the past, present, and future of human 
life itself. Couldry and Mejias provide a comprehensive and well-considered 
challenge to the seeming inevitability of this transformative development in 
capitalism. Theirs is a giant step forward along the path toward rediscovering 
the meaning and possibility of self-determination. It is not too late to join in!”
—Oscar H. Gandy, Jr., Emeritus Professor, 
Annenberg School of Communication, 
University of Pennsylvania
“Nick Couldry and Ulises A. Mejias go digging deeply into the digital: its 
spaces, its layers, its deployments. One of their guiding efforts concerns 
what it actually takes to have this digital capacity in play. It is not an innocent 
event: it is in some ways closer to an extractive sector, and this means there is 
a price we pay for its existence.”
—Saskia Sassen, author of Expulsions
“Couldry and Mejias show that data colonialism is not a metaphor. It is a 
process that expands many dark chapters of the past into our shiny new world 
of smartphones, smart TVs, and smart stores. This book rewards the reader 
with important historical context, fascinating examples, clear writing, and 
unexpected insights scattered throughout.”
—Joseph Turow, University of Pennsylvania

THE COSTS OF CONNECTION

CULTURE 
AND 
ECONOMIC 
LIFE
EDITORS
Frederick Wherry
Jennifer C. Lena
Greta Hsu
EDITORIAL BOARD
Gabriel Abend
Michel Anteby
Nina Bandelj
Shyon Baumann
Katherine Chen
Nigel Dodd
Amir Goldberg
David Grazian
Wendy Griswold
Brayden King
Charles Kirschbaum
Omar Lizardo
Bill Maurer
Elizabeth Pontikes
Gabriel Rossman
Lyn Spillman
Klaus Weber
Christine Williams
Viviana Zelizer

THE COSTS OF CONNECTION
How Data Is Colonizing Human Life 
and Appropriating It for Capitalism
NICK COULDRY AND ULISES A. MEJIAS
STANFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
STANFORD, CALIFORNIA

Stanford University Press
Stanford, California
© 2019 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University. 
All rights reserved.
No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, 
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and recording, or in any information 
storage or retrieval system without the prior written permission of Stanford University 
Press.
Printed in the United States of America on acid-free, archival-quality paper
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Couldry, Nick, author. | Mejias, Ulises Ali, author.
Title: Th e costs of connection : how data is colonizing human life and appropriating it for 
capitalism / Nick Couldry and Ulises A. Mejias.
Description: Stanford, California : Stanford University Press, 2019. | Series: Culture and 
economic life | Includes bibliographical references and index. 
Identifi ers: LCCN 2019010213 (print) | LCCN 2019011408 (ebook) | ISBN 9781503609754 
(electronic) | ISBN 9781503603660 (cloth : alk. paper) | ISBN 9781503609747 (pbk. : 
alk. paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Information technology—Social aspects. | Internet—Social aspects. | 
Electronic data processing—Social aspects. | Capitalism—Social aspects.
Classifi cation: LCC HM851 (ebook) | LCC HM851 .C685 2019 (print) | DDC 303.48/33—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2019010213
Typeset by Motto Publishing Services in 10/14 Minion Pro
Cover design by Christian Fuenfh ausen

Contents
Preface: Colonized by Data 
ix
PART I. Extracting
 
1 The Capitalization of Life without Limit 
3
 
2 The Cloud Empire 
37
 
 Interlude: On Colonialism and the Decolonial Turn 
69
 
3 The Coloniality of Data Relations 
83
PART II. Ordering
 
4 The Hollowing Out of the Social 
115
 
5 Data and the Threat to Human Autonomy 
153
PART III. Reconnecting
 
6 Decolonizing Data 
187
 
 Postscript: Another Path Is Possible 
213
Acknowledgments 
217
Notes 
221
Bibliography 
265
Index 
307

This page intentionally left blank 

ix
Preface
Colonized by Data
Th e telegraph pole, the Christian cross, and the rifl e arrived all at once for 
the Bororo people of Mato Grosso. Th e rifl e of the soldier and the settler 
served to seize the Bororo’s land in the name of industry and progress, the 
cross “pacifi ed” and “civilized” them, and the telegraph integrated them 
into the rest of the newly wired Brazilian republic in the mid-nineteenth 
century.1 Some Bororo donned western clothing and moved from commu-
nal to single-family dwellings, as the priests told them to do. Th ey learned 
the settlers’ language and were put to work on the construction of the na-
tional telegraph network.
Such history is what comes to mind when most of us think of colo-
nialism. Yet we know that the eff ects of colonialism continue to be felt, as 
indigenous people even today resist dispossession, cultural invasion, and 
genocide. Consider next another starting point, the Idle No More move-
ment, a campaign by indigenous peoples in Canada to protect their ances-
tral resources.2 Like many activist movements, Idle No More has become a 
smart user of social media to promote its cause and enlist supporters. Th e 
telegraph pole used to link the Bororo into networks of colonial power has 
given way to a tool on which even the victims of colonization would now 
seem to depend. Nonetheless, the implications of such tools are, at best, 
ambiguous. Refl ecting on the use of social media during the campaign’s 
protests, Leanne Betasamosake Simpson, a scholar, writer, and artist of the 
Nishnaabeg people, wrote that “every tweet, Facebook post, blog post, In-
stagram photo, YouTube video, and email we sent during Idle No More 
made the largest corporations in the world . . . more money to reinforce the 
system of settler colonialism. . . . I wonder in hindsight if maybe we didn’t 

x 
Preface
build a movement, but rather we built a social media presence that privi-
leged individuals over community, virtual validation over empathy, lead-
ership without accountability and responsibility.”3
Consider now a third starting point—the question that Irish novel-
ist Sally Rooney, dubbed “the J. D. Salinger of the Snapchat generation,” 
recently asked herself: “Why wasn’t I drinking enough water?”4 Follow-
ing a series of fainting spells, doctors advised her to increase her hydra-
tion because, like many busy people, she sometimes forgets to take a water 
break. Fortunately, as the cliché goes, there’s an app for that. Th e makers of 
Water Minder off er a program to bypass the part of the brain that regulates 
thirst, reminding you to drink regularly to meet predefi ned quotas while 
tracking your progress. Like many apps, the program claims to turn what 
would otherwise be an insignifi cant private act into a social celebration, 
allowing you to earn achievements that you can share with your friends. 
“Makes water fun again,” wrote a reviewer of the app.5
Th e continuity between the fi rst and second starting points is clear, but 
what of the third? It might seem counterintuitive to imagine that colonial-
ism’s sites of exploitation today include the very same West that histori-
cally imposed colonialism on the rest of the world. But what if the armory 
of colonialism is expanding? What if new ways of appropriating human 
life, and the freedoms on which it depends, are emerging? Th at is the dis-
turbing possibility that we explore in this book.
Let’s look at Sally Rooney’s story again. Th e simple, daily act that ev-
ery individual body does of monitoring whether it has drunk enough wa-
ter has suddenly become something that happens in a competitive social 
space. Th e human body has been reworked into something that requires 
a distant infrastructure, from which, incidentally, profi t can be made. In 
Rooney’s own words, “I have contracted out one of the essential functions 
of my body to a piece of soft ware.” But this is just one small example of 
something much bigger: the systematic attempt to turn all human lives 
and relations into inputs for the generation of profi t. Human experience, 
potentially every layer and aspect of it, is becoming the target of profi table 
extraction. We call this condition colonization by data, and it is a key di-
mension of how capitalism itself is evolving today.

Colonized by Data 
xi
If colonialism is the problem, you may be thinking, Isn’t the solution 
as simple as calling for the internet to be decolonized, liberating us all? Af-
ter all, there have been calls to decolonize everything from schools to mu-
seums and ways of thinking. But uttered too easily, such calls risk making 
anyone and everyone into metaphorical subalterns, serfs, or slaves of Sili-
con Valley. Such metaphorical complaints leave intact the social and eco-
nomic order that colonialism comprises at its core. It is not enough to “play 
Indian.”6 As Eve Tuck and K. Wayne Yang remind us, colonization “is not 
an approximation of other experiences of oppression”7 but a highly dis-
tinctive exercise of power.
Our argument in this book—that human life is being colonized by data 
and needs to be decolonized—is no approximation. We are not playing In-
dian. Th ere is nothing metaphorical about the new era of coloniality that 
we will describe. By tracing continuities from colonialism’s historical ap-
propriation of vast territories, such as contemporary Brazil, all the way to 
data’s role in contemporary life, we suggest that although the modes, in-
tensities, scales, and contexts of today’s dispossession are distinctive, the 
underlying function remains the same as under historical colonialism: to 
acquire large-scale resources from which economic value can be extracted.
If historical colonialism annexed territories, their resources, and the 
bodies that worked on them, data colonialism’s power grab is both sim-
pler and deeper: the capture and control of human life itself through ap-
propriating the data that can be extracted from it for profi t. If that is right, 
then just as historical colonialism created the fuel for industrial capital-
ism’s eventual rise, so too is data colonialism paving the way for a capital-
ism based on the exploitation of data. Human life is quite literally being 
annexed to capital.
Some Signposts
Th is book’s argument will therefore be a double one. Our fi rst assertion is 
that our everyday relations with data are becoming colonial in nature; that 
is, they cannot be understood except as an appropriation on a form and 
scale that bears comparison with the appropriations of historical colonial-

xii 
Preface
ism. Our second argument is that this new colonialism does not just hap-
pen by itself but is driven by the imperatives of capitalism. Whereas the 
relations between historical colonialism and what emerged as industrial 
capitalism became clear only aft er centuries, the new data colonialism oc-
curs against the background of centuries of capitalism, and it promises to 
take familiar aspects of the capitalist social and economic order to a new 
and more integrated stage, a stage as yet too new to reliably name.
Th ree further aspects of our argument about data colonialism and its 
relation to capitalism’s evolution must be noted at the start. One is that 
none of this would be possible without radical changes over the past thirty 
years in communication infrastructures, specifi cally the embedding of 
computer systems in human life at many levels. Th is book’s analysis of data 
colonialism and capitalism’s evolution takes very seriously the transforma-
tive role of information technologies and the resulting new infrastructures 
of connection. Th e second point is that such technological transformation 
does not change human life by merely existing. Technologies work, and 
have consequences for human life, only by being woven into what people 
do, where they fi nd meaning, and how their lives are interdependent. Data 
colonialism requires the creation of a new social and economic order that 
is potentially as enduring as the order that enabled capitalist market soci-
eties from the nineteenth century onward. Th e third point concerns how 
the power relations generated by this emerging order work: data colonial-
ism appropriates not only physical resources but also our very resources 
for knowing the world. Th is means that economic power (the power to 
make value) and cognitive power (the power over knowledge) converge as 
never before. Th erefore, what is happening with data can be fully under-
stood only against the background not just of capitalism but of the lon-
ger interrelations between capitalism and colonialism. Th e exploitation of 
human life for profi t through data is the climax of fi ve centuries’ worth 
of attempts to know, exploit, and rule the world from particular centers of 
power. We are entering the age not so much of a new capitalism as of a new 
interlocking of capitalism’s and colonialism’s twinned histories, and the 
interlocking force is data.8
What do we mean by data? If a shopping list is scribbled on a piece of 
paper, we don’t mean that. But if the list is entered on a mobile phone, per-

Colonized by Data 
xiii
haps on Google’s Keep app, then we do mean that. Furthermore, if we con-
sider the algorithms that collect information across all users of Keep to see 
what people are making lists of, we defi nitely mean that. For our very spe-
cifi c purposes, the concept of data cannot be separated from two essential 
elements: the external infrastructure in which it is stored and the profi t 
generation for which it is destined. In short, by data we mean information 
fl ows that pass from human life in all its forms to infrastructures for col-
lection and processing. Th is is the starting point for generating profi t from 
data. In this sense, data abstracts life by converting it into information that 
can be stored and processed by computers and appropriates life by con-
verting it into value for a third party.
Th is book introduces quite a few other concepts and neologisms, which 
are explained in detail as the chapters unfold. It might be useful, however, 
to provide some basic defi nitions and explain their relationships right at 
the beginning. Data colonialism is, in essence, an emerging order for the 
appropriation of human life so that data can be continuously extracted 
from it for profi t. Th is extraction is operationalized via data relations, 
ways of interacting with each other and with the world facilitated by digi-
tal tools. Th rough data relations, human life is not only annexed to capital-
ism but also becomes subject to continuous monitoring and surveillance. 
Th e result is to undermine the autonomy of human life in a fundamen-
tal way that threatens the very basis of freedom, which is exactly the value 
that advocates of capitalism extol. Th ese fundamental transformations of 
human life have dramatic consequences for the social world too. Th ey en-
able what we call social caching, a new form of knowledge about the social 
world based on the capture of personal data and its storage for later prof-
itable use. As social relations are thus transformed, we see the emergence 
of the Cloud Empire, a totalizing vision and organization of business in 
which the dispossession of data colonialism has been naturalized and ex-
tended across all social domains. Th e Cloud Empire is being implemented 
and extended by many players but primarily by the social quantifi cation 
sector, the industry sector devoted to the development of the infrastruc-
ture required for the extraction of profi t from human life through data.
For now, the good news is that these transformations are in their early 
stages. Th at is why an awareness of the historical roots of today’s trans-

xiv 
Preface
formations is so vital. We must respect the uniqueness of the struggles 
of historically colonized peoples, but that doesn’t mean we can’t learn 
from them. Today’s attempt to extract economic value from human lives 
through data has a systematic integration and depth that we argue is, in 
some respects, without historical precedent. But we see its features most 
clearly through their continuity with past relations between colonialism 
and capitalism. We fail to learn from that history at our peril.
Introducing the Social Quantiﬁ cation Sector
Some of the main actors in these transformations are already familiar. 
As just mentioned, we call them the social quantifi cation sector. Th is sec-
tor has been growing for a long time, in part through marketers’ accu-
mulation of consumer data, such as credit card data, which began in the 
1980s.9 In the past fi ft een years, however, the social quantifi cation sector 
has achieved a new depth and complexity.
Th is sector currently includes the manufacturers of the digital devices 
through which people connect. By this we mean not just well-known me-
dia brands such as Apple, Microsoft , and Samsung but also the less-well-
known manufacturers of “smart” (that is, internet-connected) fridges, 
heating systems, and cars through which we never imagined we would 
communicate. Still less did we imagine that, in the quickly expanding 
Internet of Th ings, such devices would communicate with other devices 
about us. Th e sector also includes the builders of the computer-based envi-
ronments, platforms, and tools that enable us to connect with and use the 
online world, including household names such as Alibaba, Baidu, Face-
book, Google, and WeChat. Th ere is also the growing fi eld of data brokers 
and data processing organizations such as Acxiom, Equifax, Palantir, and 
TalkingData (in China) that collect, aggregate, analyze, repackage, and sell 
data of all sorts while also supporting other organizations in their uses of 
data. And, fi nally, the social quantifi cation sector includes the vast domain 
of organizations that increasingly depend for their basic functions on pro-
cessing data from social life, whether to customize their services (like Net-
fl ix and Spotify) or to link sellers and buyers (like Airbnb, Uber, and Didi).

Colonized by Data 
xv
Beyond the social quantifi cation sector is the rest of business, which 
has also been transformed in the “great data transition.”10 Much of what 
ordinary businesses now do is crunch data from their internal processes 
and from the world around them; most businesses also depend increas-
ingly on the work of the social quantifi cation sector to target their ads and 
marketing. And beyond that is the vast array of everyday contexts in which 
people are integrating the outputs of that sector into daily life. Th e Cloud 
Empire is the larger outcome of this combined growth of the social quanti-
fi cation sector and data practices right across business and social life.
A few words of clarifi cation about the term social quantifi cation sector 
are needed. When we say social quantifi cation sector, we use the word social 
to refer to that constantly changing space of relations and interconnections 
on which the quality of human life depends but whose meaning is endlessly 
contested in political and civic struggle.11 When we use the word social, we 
do not necessarily mean a well-ordered or well-integrated way of living to-
gether. For at issue in this whole transformation is precisely the quality of 
life that human beings will have together in the new capitalist social order. 
Th e capture of personal data through social caching and its storage for later 
profi table use—normal today but two decades ago barely imaginable—has 
major implications for our quality of life as human beings.
Social caching is oft en hidden from users of platforms and internet ser-
vices under a veneer of convenience (“To use this app, you must fi rst . . .”). 
Stripped of that veneer, the deal looks rather diff erent. A key consequence 
of connecting with others in the era of data colonialism is submission to 
the continuous tracking of human life, a process known until recently as 
surveillance. As a leading computer-security expert, Bruce Schneier, put 
it, “Th e primary business model of the internet is based on mass sur-
veillance.”12 Th e all-seeing authoritarian state was a standard topic of 
twentieth- century literary dystopias (from Kafk a to Orwell),13 but Schneier 
points to an even bigger problem: the building into corporations’ routine 
operations of processes that confl ict, as surveillance always has, with basic 
freedoms such as autonomy. Th e tracking of human subjects that is core to 
data colonialism is incompatible with the minimal integrity of the self that 
underlies autonomy and freedom in all their forms.

xvi 
Preface
Th is was the deeper meaning of Edward Snowden’s revelations of US 
and UK security services’ data-gathering in 2013. Suddenly, citizens be-
came aware that today’s pervasive state surveillance would be impossible 
without the continuous social-caching operations of commercial corpora-
tions.14 Since then, fears of a new “corporate governance of everyday life” 
have been growing.15 But other fears have started to overtake them, in-
cluding the “fake news” scandals that have gripped politics since late 2016 
in the United States, United Kingdom, and elsewhere. Th ere are also fears 
that, because of polarizing forces online, “social media is ripping soci-
ety apart”;16 fears from other commentators of a social dystopia driven by 
platforms’ search for advertising income;17 and, fi nally, the fear that the 
targeting of news via social media platforms represents “the most lethal 
political weapon ever invented.”18 Calls for the regulation of social me-
dia platforms and other information technology giants are becoming fa-
miliar.19 But none of these highly charged debates answers the underlying 
question on which this book will focus: should human beings in the twenty-
fi rst century accept a world in which their lives are unceasingly appropriated 
through data for capitalism?
Colonial Echoes
Th is is where the long history of colonialism’s entanglement with capital-
ism helps us move beyond the sound and fury of contemporary scandals 
and grasp the longer pattern of resource appropriation that gives shape to 
today’s developments. Long before Karl Marx identifi ed it as a force in the 
world, capital was already expanding in the sixteenth century, in the pe-
riod most commonly identifi ed with historical colonialism and the emer-
gence of the Spanish, Portuguese, and British empires. Capital was acquir-
ing new territories from which to extract resources and new bodies from 
which to extract labor. Th ose close relations between colonialism and cap-
italism (indeed, between colonialism and modernity in general)20 are im-
portant to our story; they help us grasp what is distinctive about the cur-
rent expansionary phase of capitalism.
What do we mean by expansionary? Capitalism has been expanding 
from the start, in the sense of exploiting new resources, fi nding new ways 

Colonized by Data 
xvii
of making profi t, and fi nding new markets. But until recently, this expan-
sion has been based on the exploitation of human production through la-
bor relations, as classically theorized by Marx, resulting in the ever-greater 
transformation of physical nature as an input to capitalism. But the ap-
propriation of human life in the form of data (the basic move that we call 
data colonialism) generates a new possibility: without ending its exploita-
tion of labor and its transformation of physical nature, capitalism extends 
its capacity to exploit life by assimilating new or reconfi gured human ac-
tivities (whether regarded as labor or not)21 as its direct inputs. Th e result, 
we argue in chapter 1, is the expansion of the practical scope of capitalist 
exploitation, but in ways that can be linked back to Marx’s own sense of 
capitalism’s expansionary potential. In this emerging form of capitalism, 
human beings become not just actors in the production process but raw 
material that can be transformed into value for that production process. 
Human life, in the form of profi tably abstracted data, becomes more like 
the seed or manure that Marx noted became factors of capitalist produc-
tion, having once just been part of human beings’ cycle of interaction with 
the land.22 Th is transformation of human life into raw material resonates 
strongly with the history of exploitation that preceded industrial capital-
ism—that is, colonialism.
Th e very concept of raw material has deep colonial roots. Raw, in 
this context, means available for exploitation without resistance rather 
than a substance that needs no processing. Th e natural environment it-
self fi rst had to be reconstructed so that it became available for value ex-
traction.23 Th en, through the practice of slavery (which preceded colonial-
ism but which reached a massive scale under colonialism), human bodies 
were transformed into a raw material for capitalism in the form of slaves. 
Historians have warned us against treating slavery—usually imagined as 
a premodern practice—in isolation from the development of industrial 
capitalism. Th e plantation and the factory coexisted for a long time.24 Th e 
treatment of human beings as mere property stimulated the rationalities 
of profi t maximization, accounting precision, and data optimization that 
we now tend to associate with modern rationality.25 Here is an eloquent 
description by the historian of the capitalist slave plantation, Edward 
Baptist:

xviii 
Preface
So push a button (with the index fi nger of your right hand) on the machine of 
the trading world, and things happen to benefi t the man with sterling bills, a 
huge pile of cotton, a long roster of slaves, abundant credit that allows him to 
extend his reach across time and space.26
What if comparable processes for abstracting human life are today en-
abling new, extended forms of economic extraction? Human data is not ac-
tually raw,27 but business oft en imagines it is. Human life fi rst needs to be 
confi gured so as to “naturally” generate a resource such as data. Momen-
tary data about one individual’s actions or properties is worthless unless 
it can be combined with data about other individuals, actions, moments, 
and properties to generate relations between data points,28 and that is why 
an infrastructure has been built to ensure this. Th e world of internet- based 
connection is a world in which new types of corporate power, with privi-
leged access to data streams extracted from the fl ow of life, can activate a 
metaphorical button—an apparatus of extraction, whether platform, app, 
or AI system—that reconfi gures human life so that it contributes contin-
uously to the collection of data and thereby, potentially, to the generation 
of profi t.
Th e result of such data relations is certainly not a new slavery, since 
nothing can compare to the terrible violence of that institution (the prac-
tice of “distinguish[ing] every bad thing by the name of slavery” was al-
ready criticized by Frederick Douglass in the mid-nineteenth century).29 
But that should not blind us to what remains a disturbing line of conti-
nuity: as happened historically, but under new conditions, human life to-
day is becoming the object of appropriation for extraction and, in the pro-
cess, enabling capitalism to move to a still higher scale and integration of 
operation. Our intent is not to make comparisons to the detailed contents 
or form of historical colonialism but to focus on colonialism’s enduring 
function, which we see as enacting illegitimate appropriation and exploita-
tion and as redefi ning human relations so that the resulting dispossession 
comes to seem natural. It is such continuities that the term data colonial-
ism enables us to grasp.

Colonized by Data 
xix
What Is Data Colonialism?
More explicitly defi ned, data colonialism is our term for the extension of 
a global process of extraction that started under colonialism and contin-
ued through industrial capitalism, culminating in today’s new form: in-
stead of natural resources and labor, what is now being appropriated is hu-
man life through its conversion into data. Th e result degrades life, fi rst by 
exposing it continuously to monitoring and surveillance (through which 
data is extracted) and second by thus making human life a direct input 
to capitalist production. Data colonialism is, in other words, an emerging 
order for appropriating and extracting social resources for profi t through 
data, practiced via data relations. Unlike historical colonialism, whose vast 
profi ts helped create the preconditions for what we now know as indus-
trial capitalism, data colonialism emerges against the backdrop of the en-
tire intertwined history of colonialism and capitalism. Th is means that the 
basic colonial move of appropriating data from human life (data colonial-
ism) works hand in hand with social arrangements and technological in-
frastructures, some that emerged during earlier capitalism and some new, 
that enable that data to be transformed into a commodity, indeed, a direct 
input to contemporary capitalist production.
Although the site of data colonialism that we most oft en notice is the 
social quantifi cation sector, and particularly the personal data extraction 
practiced by social media platforms, the basic extractive principles un-
derlying data colonialism have been gestating in the business methods 
of modern capitalism for three decades. Th e original context was indus-
trial capitalism’s progressive globalization in the late twentieth century 
through trade liberalization and extended supply chains as well as its fi -
nancialization through an explosive growth of debt (both corporate and 
personal) and the acceleration of global capital fl ows. In this general con-
text, the information infrastructures emerged that enabled people and 
processes to be connected to each other under conditions that facilitate 
data extraction.30
Take an example far from social media: the discipline of logistics. Th e 
goal of logistics is to use continuously connected data fl ows to organize 

xx 
Preface
all aspects of production across space and time within global commodity 
chains.31 It was enabled, decades before social media, by soft ware inven-
tions such as the relational databases that help businesses fi nd patterns in 
huge data fl ows across diverse sources and locations.32 If logistics aims to 
rationalize production, the recent growth of the Internet of Th ings (IoT) 
aims to incorporate consumption—what we do with products aft er we buy 
them—into an extended chain of profi t extraction through the processing 
of data.33 Th e bigger vision of the IoT, and of data colonialism as a whole, 
has been expressed by a company normally seen as the enemy of the entre-
preneurs who built social media platforms—IBM. By turning the human 
environment into a network of listening devices that capture data about all 
activities, IBM suggests that they can “liquify” areas previously inacces-
sible to capital. Th e company put it this way: “Just as large fi nancial mar-
ketplaces create liquidity in securities, currencies and cash, the IoT can 
liquify whole industries, squeezing greater productivity and profi tabil-
ity out of them than anyone ever imagined possible.”34 In this view, ev-
ery layer of human life, whether on social media platforms or not, must be-
come a resource from which economic value can be extracted and profi t 
generated. Th e processing power of artifi cial intelligence is a key tool in all 
these developments.
Far from being a feature of the West only, the growth of the social 
quantifi cation sector, logistics, and the IoT in the context of rapidly ex-
panding uses of artifi cial intelligence is a core development and policy 
goal in China too.35 Th e social quantifi cation sector emerges as an arena of 
commercial and geopolitical competition between the West (particularly 
the United States) and China.
We can capture the core of our double argument most succinctly by 
characterizing data colonialism as an unprecedented mutual implication of 
human life and digital technology for capitalism. None of this would have 
been possible without the emergence in the past three decades of a radi-
cally new technological infrastructure for connecting humans, things, and 
systems, known generally as the internet. We have written this book be-
cause it is time to count the costs as well as the much-proclaimed benefi ts 
of such connection for human life.

Colonized by Data 
xxi
The Book’s Structure at a Glance
In telling the story of this double transformation (a new colonialism and 
an extended capitalism), our goal is to equip readers to better see the world 
that is being built for them and to imagine a diff erent one.
Chapter 1 lays out our argument’s foundations: the concepts of data 
colonialism and capitalist data relations, their contextualization within 
the twinned histories of capitalism and colonialism, and capitalism’s re-
cent turn toward the capitalization of human life itself. We will explain 
how much recent critique of data trends misses two crucial ingredients: 
the radically reconfi gured social world that computer-based connec-
tion makes possible and the unprecedented fact that the emerging colo-
nial/capitalist power structure has at least two poles of power in what, un-
til now, we have called the West and in China (with India an important 
player over the longer term).
Chapter 2 then explains in more detail the workings of the social 
quantifi cation sector as an economic and organizational transformation 
within the emerging larger formation of the Cloud Empire. We will map 
out the relations between the multiple ways in which data is transform-
ing the capitalist economy on the basis of data colonialism’s fundamen-
tal mode of appropriation. An interlude is off ered following chapter 2 for 
readers who might need a quick overview of colonialism and the critical 
and theoretical responses to it. Chapter 3 places our overall analysis in the 
context of the much longer history of colonial appropriation, demonstrat-
ing the hidden patterns that get missed until we look at the contemporary 
era through a colonial lens. As a result, we see the recent rise of data as a 
mode of social and economic ordering within the much longer perspec-
tive that decolonial theorists have called coloniality: the long-term skewing 
of the world’s economic-resource distribution in favor of particular types 
of power formations and the justifi cation of this skewing by an equally bi-
ased distribution of knowledge resources, loaded until very recently in fa-
vor of the “West.”
Th e next two chapters build on the framework established in the fi rst 
three chapters to examine more closely the social order emerging from 

xxii 
Preface
data colonialism and what it means for human beings and their quality 
of life everywhere. Chapter 4 asks what is happening to the social domain 
in datafi ed societies and, in particular, what is happening to our knowl-
edge of the social world as it becomes transformed by data relations. Data-
driven changes to social knowledge also have major implications for injus-
tice and inequality in the social world. Chapter 5 turns to the implications 
of data colonialism for the very nature of human subjecthood and specif-
ically for human autonomy. Autonomy may be a compromised concept in 
some forms, but it is one we cannot do without, because it provides the 
normative basis for resisting the violence of data relations. Without the 
notion of autonomy, and in particular the minimal integrity of the self that 
underlies it, democracy and freedom in any form would make little sense.
Chapter 6 brings the book’s threads together, assessing where data co-
lonialism and the capitalization of life are likely to head in the foreseeable 
future and what type of larger social order/disorder this will entail. From 
there, a postscript suggests ways to imagine forms of human connection 
that may be free of the costs of data colonialism’s regime and to begin ori-
enting ourselves toward possible strategies for resisting data colonialism 
on the ground.
Th is book is an attempt to disentangle a historical moment of great 
complexity. As the fi rst subjects of an emerging data colonialism, we can 
make sense of this complexity only within the much longer history of co-
lonialism and capitalism. We also need to do a considerable amount of in-
terpretative and analytical work across today’s societies and economies. In 
writing this book, we have been fortunate enough to build on much ex-
cellent work within the past decade that has begun to uncover the shape 
and dynamics of human life’s appropriation through data.36 But in search-
ing for a larger theoretical framework to make sense of the whole sweep of 
these developments—the framework of data colonialism—we have had to 
forge some new connections and take an eclectic path in terms of theory. 
Rather than positioning our argument exclusively within Marxism, post-
colonialism, Foucauldian analyses of biopolitics, or critical- information 
science, our aim is to put these perspectives into conversation, taking the 
best from each to forge a new starting point adequate to today’s complex 
transformations and their hidden violence.

Colonized by Data 
xxiii
We hope that, like us, you will fi nd worthwhile the eff ort to trace the 
“inner connection”37 of what is happening with data. It is now urgent to 
better understand the hidden and not-so-hidden costs of something hu-
man beings have until now generally seen as good: connection. Only from 
better understanding can come the chance of resisting today’s terms of 
connection and the forging of better ones.

This page intentionally left blank 

THE COSTS OF CONNECTION

This page intentionally left blank 

3
The Capitalization of Life without Limit 1
“THIS IS WHAT MODERN COLONIALISM LOOKS LIKE.” So tweeted Christopher Wylie, the 
whistle-blower who kicked off  the Facebook/Cambridge Analytica scan-
dal in March 2018.1 Wylie was referring to Cambridge Analytica’s plans 
to expand its operations in India for using social media targeting to infl u-
ence the political process there. But the scale and scope of data colonial-
ism is much wider than the malfeasance of a few overweening data mar-
keters and their in-house psychologists. It extends much wider even than 
Facebook’s normal practices of data extraction and data licensing that the 
scandal opened to view.
Yet the scandal was important. It was as though a side deal by Facebook 
with independent data prospectors had accidentally left  open a hole in the 
ground that allowed the general public, for the fi rst time, to see clearly into 
an underground anteroom. Th ere, in that anteroom, visible for all to see, 
was the entrance to social media’s real data mine, although few under-
stood exactly what lay behind that subterranean door in Facebook’s exclu-
sive domain, let alone the planetary scope of capitalism’s data mining. Th e 
long-anticipated “techlash” had begun but, as yet, without a map of the 
wider pattern of exploitation, whose traces had suddenly become visible.
Th e concept of data colonialism helps us draw that map. In this chapter, 
we unpack further what this term involves and outline its relation to cap-
italism and to the new social order that is stabilizing in and through cap-

4 
Chapter 1
italism. Along the way, we will also explain certain other key concepts, 
such as platform and data relations, while clarifying the similarities and 
diff erences that our argument has with other recent analyses of the digital 
era, for example, the huge recent commentary on the exploitation of digi-
tal labor.
To start, we must recall what made historical colonialism distinctive. 
Colonialism was a form of economic and social organization dominated by 
major colonial powers such as Britain, France, Spain, and later the United 
States. It is now usually regarded as historically closed, ended by the decol-
onizing movements of the later twentieth century, although in politics and 
other areas, neocolonial forms of power live on (a more detailed discussion 
of historical colonialism can be found in the interlude following chapter 2). 
Our interest in this book is in the continuities from that older colonialism 
to a new form of colonialism—data colonialism.
Th ere were four key components to historical colonialism: the appro-
priation of resources; the evolution of highly unequal social and economic 
relations that secured resource appropriation (including slavery and other 
forms of forced labor as well as unequal trading relations); a massively un-
equal global distribution of the benefi ts of resource appropriation; and the 
spread of ideologies to make sense of all this (for example, the reframing 
of colonial appropriation as the release of “natural” resources, the govern-
ment of “inferior” peoples, and the bringing of “civilization” to the world).
In describing the transformations underway today as data colonial-
ism, we use the term colonialism not because we’re looking for a metaphor 
but because it captures major structural phases within human history 
and specifi cally within capitalism. Colonialism has not been the standard 
reading of what is changing in contemporary capitalism.2 Yet it is becom-
ing increasingly clear that capitalism’s current growth cannot be captured 
simply in terms of ever-more ambitious business integration or the ever-
expanding exploitation of workers. Some have characterized today’s de-
velopments as increasing waves of “accumulation by dispossession,” a fea-
ture characteristic of capitalism throughout its history.3 But even this fails 
to grasp how the axis of capitalism’s expansion has transformed, through 
a shift  in the supposed “raw material” that capitalism aspires to get under 
its control.

The Capitalization of Life without Limit 
5
Th e discovery of new forms of raw material is what makes the current 
moment distinctively colonial. If historical colonialism expanded by ap-
propriating for exploitation geographical territory and the resources that 
territorial conquest could bring, data colonialism expands by appropriat-
ing for exploitation ever more layers of human life itself. Regarding data co-
lonialism, much debate on contemporary capitalism has been sidetracked 
by an excessive focus on whether digital labor is being exploited,4 a signif-
icant topic, certainly, but not the most important feature of today’s trans-
formations. We will show how data colonialism appropriates many spe-
cifi c aspects of human life—from work to school, from health treatment 
to self-monitoring, and from basic forms of sociality to routine economic 
transactions, plus the grid of judgment and direction that we call “gover-
nance.” When we refer to data practices as colonizing human life, we refer 
to the appropriation of data, potentially for profi t, in any and all of these 
areas. But we also intend the term human life to refer to the as-yet-still-
open horizon of exploitation over which data colonialism claims future 
rights: as ever more of our activities and even inner thoughts occur in con-
texts in which they automatically are made ready for appropriation as data, 
there is, in principle, no limit to how much of human life can be appropri-
ated and exploited. In this way, Marx’s core insight into the expansionary 
potential of capitalism is actualized in circumstances that Marx himself 
could not have anticipated.
To be clear, it is not the mere appropriation of data that is colonial. An 
individual can imagine appropriating the “data stream” of her own life 
and using it for her own purposes; she can also imagine agreeing to the 
appropriation of, say, some of her health data by medical professionals for 
purposes she approves of and on terms that she wholly controls. But these 
are not typical of the cases we will discuss. Data colonialism is concerned 
with the external appropriation of data on terms that are partly or wholly 
beyond the control of the person to whom the data relates. Th is external 
appropriation is what makes possible such data’s exploitation for profi t.
Th is progressive opening up of human life to externally driven data ex-
traction is what we mean by the capitalization of human life without limit. 
In this phrase, we recognize Marx’s long-standing insight that capitalism 
has always sought to manage human life for the maximization of profi t; at 

6 
Chapter 1
the same time, we emphasize that data colonialism absorbs new aspects of 
human life streams directly into the productive process. It is not that so-
cial limits to life’s capitalization can no longer be imagined—indeed, the 
whole point of this book is to argue for the necessity of such limits—but 
that, as things currently stand, much corporate discourse fails to recog-
nize any limits except those that it sets itself. Th e result of this convenient 
failure is not just to renew colonialism but also to expand the scope of cap-
italism too, that is, the capitalism developed on the basis of historical co-
lonialism. Th rough data colonialism, contemporary capitalism promises 
to consume its last remaining “outside,” dispossessing human subjects of 
their capacity as independent sites of thought and action. Resisting data 
colonialism becomes the only way to secure a human future not fused in-
dissolubly with capitalism, indeed, the only way to sustain the value that 
capitalism claims to promote: human freedom.
The Dimensions of Data Colonialism
Today’s technological infrastructures of connection are varied. Th ey in-
clude digital platforms such as Facebook and Alibaba that we are familiar 
with, the whole mass of corporate intranets, and any detailed interfaces for 
linking up persons, things, and processes for data transfer. Infrastructures 
of connection enable data colonialism to be more subtle than historical co-
lonialism in how it appropriates resources. Historical colonialism appro-
priated territories and bodies through extreme physical violence. Data co-
lonialism works through distinctive kinds of force that ensure compliance 
within interlocking systems of extraction in everyday life.5 Th ese systems 
are so many and, taken together, so encompassing that they risk governing 
human beings in just as absolute a way as historical colonialism did.
Colonizing Resources: The World as Input to Capital
Data colonialism appropriates for profi table exploitation a resource that 
did not begin to be universally appropriated until two decades ago: data. 
According to an authoritative defi nition, data is the “material produced by 
abstracting the world into categories, measures and other representational 
forms . . . that constitute the building blocks from which information and 

The Capitalization of Life without Limit 
7
knowledge are created.”6 More than that, human life, and particularly hu-
man social life, is increasingly being constructed so that it generates data 
from which profi t can be extracted. In doing so, ever more of life is re-
quired to be continuously monitored and surveilled, removing the bound-
aries that previously existed between internal life and external forces. In 
this double sense, human life is appropriated through data, becoming 
something else, a process tied to external processes of data extraction.
Capitalism can exploit any number of data sources. Any computer, 
any device with an embedded computer, or any entity readable by a sensor 
with computing power can generate data for this purpose. Data sources 
may be processes, things, or people as well as the interactions between any 
of these sources. Th e extraction of value from data is equally indiff erent 
to its origin. Capitalism as the systematic organization of value extraction 
has only one goal in relation to data—to maximize the production of value 
through data extraction—and so in principle cares little about the sources 
and types of data exploited.7
Contemporary possibilities for data extraction derive from connection 
between computers. Th e demand for human beings and things to “con-
nect” is common ground between corporations in the West and the East. 
Facebook’s emphasis on the value of connection is well-known: Zucker-
berg, ahead of Facebook’s fi rst public share off ering, wrote to investors 
that Facebook “was not originally created to be a company” but “to make 
the world more open and connected.” Th e 2017 open letter by “Pony” Ma 
Huateng, CEO of the Chinese company Tencent, is clearer, however, on 
what is at stake for the wider society: “With the full digitization of the en-
tire real economy and society, we not only need to reduce ‘islands of infor-
mation’ through more connections, but also need to achieve continuous 
optimization of communication and collaboration through better connec-
tions.”8 Connection, in other words, generates societies and economies that 
are integrated and ordered to an unprecedented degree.
Data expands the production resources available to capital. If, follow-
ing Marx, we understand capital not as static accumulations of value and 
resource but as “value in motion,”9 then the appropriation of data enables 
new ways of forming capital through the circulation and trading of in-
formational traces (data). But the trading of data is only part of a larger 

8 
Chapter 1
change whereby capital comes to relate to the whole world, including the 
worlds of human experience, as its extractive resource. “It seems to me we 
have squeezed all the juice out of the internal information,” said the CEO 
of US data company Recorded Future.10 Th e resulting move to external 
data sources has changed the rationale of business while seemingly mak-
ing “organizations smarter and more productive.” Human beings cannot 
remain unaff ected since, in the words of Th omas Davenport, a leading US 
analyst of the data business, “Human beings are increasingly sensored,” 
and “sensor data is here to stay.”11 Sensors can sense all relevant data at or 
around the point in space where they are installed. “Sensing” is becoming 
a general model for knowledge in any domain, for example, in the much-
vaunted “smart city.”12
Sensors never work in isolation but are connected in wider networks 
that cover ever more of the globe. All business relations get reorganized 
in the process, and new types of business (for selling and controlling data 
fl ows and for managing the new infrastructure of data processing and data 
storage) become powerful. Th is aff ects all types of business, not just social 
media platforms. As one business manager put it, “We make more money 
selling data to retail data syndication fi rms than we do selling meat.”13 It 
is all too easy to see this as simply a shift  within capitalism’s modes of op-
eration while forgetting that the cost is always the expansion of surveil-
lance regimes that intrude on the autonomy of human beings. As we show 
in detail in chapter 5, all notions of autonomy, until now, have assumed 
that individuals have access to a minimal space of the self that is its space 
of becoming. But the goal of continuous data appropriation intrudes on 
this space and changes humanity’s relations to external infrastructures 
decisively, erasing, potentially forever, the boundary between the fl ow 
of human experience and the environment of economic power that sur-
rounds it.
Operationalizing this move, however, is not simple. First, there is the 
question of how economic value can be extracted from data. Data can be 
sold directly, used to enhance the value of sold advertising, or integrated 
into the organization of other product streams or into production gener-
ally. But it is no part of our argument to claim that extracting value from 
data is automatically successful, only to argue that the goal of doing so is 

The Capitalization of Life without Limit 
9
increasingly the goal of business. Th e impact, however, on how business 
talks about itself has been profound.
When it comes to access, and this is the second complexity, contempo-
rary business tends to talk about data as though it was “just there,” freely 
available for extraction and the release of its potential for humankind. In 
the history of colonialism, a similar claim was expressed in the legal doc-
trine of terra nullius, land such as the territory now known as Australia 
that supposedly belonged to “no one” (nullius).14 Today’s equivalent meta-
phor is data as the “exhaust” of life processes.15 Data is assumed to just be 
there for the taking:
Verizon Wireless . . . is no diff erent from other wireless carriers in having a 
great deal of information about its customer movements. All wireless phones 
broadcast their location . . . in radio signals, and all carriers capture the infor-
mation. Now . . . Verizon is selling information about how oft en mobile phone 
users are in certain locations and their activities and backgrounds. Customers 
thus far have included malls, stadium owners, and billboard forms.16
But such claims are constructions of how the world is and should be. 
Meanwhile, the exploitation of data, now that the world has been found to 
be full of it, is becoming increasingly sophisticated. Th e use of data ana-
lytics is central to whole economies, including cultural and media produc-
tion once focused mainly on the content itself.17 Davenport distinguishes 
three phases in the development of data analytics: whereas early analytics 
was essentially “descriptive,” collecting companies’ internal data for dis-
crete analysis, the period since 2005 has seen the emergence of the ability 
to extract value from large unstructured and increasingly diverse external 
and internal data sets through “predictive” analytics that can fi nd patterns 
in what appears to have no pattern. Today’s “analytics 3.0” uses large-scale 
processing power to extract value from vast combinations of data sets, re-
sulting in a “prescriptive analytics” that “embed[s] analytics into every 
process and employee behavior.”18 Once the world is seen by capitalism as 
a domain that can and so must be comprehensively tracked and exploited 
to ensure more profi t, then all life processes that underlie the production 
process (thinking, acting, consuming, and working in all its dimensions 
and preconditions) must be fully controlled too. Th is principle, made pos-

10 
Chapter 1
sible by technological connection, is the engine that drives the capitaliza-
tion of human life in its twenty-fi rst-century form, and its remit goes much 
wider than social media platforms.
Yet the internet was developed against the background of the values 
of freedom and human cognitive enhancement characteristic of the US 
counterculture of the 1960s.19 Unsurprisingly, there has been some push-
back against capitalism’s apparent new dependence on extracting data 
from human life. Surveillance is not obviously a benefi t to citizens (except 
as a temporary means to counter serious threats), so it must be repackaged 
or disguised. Here is the source of data colonialism’s most interesting con-
tradictions. It is eerie but not uncommon to fi nd the language of personal 
freedom melded with the logic of surveillance, as in the motto of facial-
recognition soft ware manufacturer, Facefi rst: “Creating a safer and more 
personalised planet through facial recognition technology.”20 Google, 
meanwhile, is marketing Nest Hello, a video doorbell that includes facial-
recognition technology, and Amazon has its own facial-recognition ser-
vice called simply Rekognition. In China, facial-recognition soft ware is 
becoming the cool new way for customers to pay for fast food and a (less 
cool!) way for city authorities to monitor public spaces.21 But elsewhere, 
unease at the implications of facial recognition for democracy is growing.
As though in response, Apple, which makes vast profi ts through a 
walled garden of devices, proclaims its refusal to collect data on users via 
those devices.22 Yet Apple tracks its users for many purposes and so does 
not contradict the trend of data colonialism, except that its business model 
does not generally depend on the sale of this data. Indeed, Apple receives 
substantial sums from Google for allowing it privileged access to iPhone 
users.23 A controversy developed when Apple’s iOS and MacOS systems 
were shown to collect information on user location and search activity. 
Apple’s subsequent Privacy Policy states that collected data “will not be as-
sociated with [a user’s] IP address,”24 yet iPhone features still support the 
surveillance needs of marketers. Both the iBeacon service and the iPhone’s 
built-in Wallet app enable push notifi cations from marketers.25
Responsiveness to surveillance concerns is a selling point for other play-
ers too, at least outside China. WhatsApp distinguishes itself by its end-to-

The Capitalization of Life without Limit 
11
end message encryption, while Snapchat has its posted messages disappear, 
at least from the users’ view, aft er a short period. But the actual position is 
more complex. Although WhatsApp claimed it was “built . . . around the 
goal of knowing as little about you as possible,” a company blog post fol-
lowing WhatsApp’s $19 billion acquisition by Facebook admitted that its 
logbook of customer phone numbers would become connected with Face-
book’s systems, an admission that led to a European Commission fi ne for 
Facebook and a string of legal challenges.26 WhatsApp’s own terms now 
make clear that users are likely to yield up their entire mobile address book 
when they use the service, and there is evidence that WhatsApp also stores 
metadata on the time, duration, and location of every communication.27 
Snapchat’s disappearing messages have been mimicked by Instagram, also 
now part of Facebook, and the US Federal Trade Commission has chal-
lenged Snapchat on whether sent images really disappear.28 Meanwhile, 
the growing popularity of ad blocking29 may simply incentivize market-
ers to fi nd smarter ways of tracking people so that they can be reached with 
ads. As the CEO of PageFair, a company specializing in such tactics, noted, 
“Tamper-proof ad serving technology has matured to the point where pub-
lishers can serve ads on the blocked web.”30
Whatever the local resistances and derogations, extracting data from a 
“naturally connected” world has become basic to the very nature of brands: 
“Understanding that customers are always connected and consuming . . . 
allows marketers to think of both their digital and offl  ine touchpoints as 
one fl uid and integrated brand presence.”31 Th is vision of an economy en-
hanced by the data-gathering possibilities created by “connection” is shared 
by both market capitalism and state-led capitalism. In China, it is contin-
uous connection that underpins the government’s vision of “a networked, 
intelligent, service-oriented, coordinated ‘Internet Plus’ industrial ecology 
system,”32 a strategy that serves China’s desire to acquire both greater eco-
nomic independence from the West and greater infl uence within global 
digital capitalism.33 In India, the Aadhaar unique ID system introduced in 
2009 is creating huge new opportunities for data exploitation by both gov-
ernment and corporations, although it faces greater civil-society opposi-
tion than have parallel developments so far in China.34 Such costs to human 

12 
Chapter 1
autonomy are not accidental but intrinsic to emerging logics of connection 
that treat the continuous monitoring of human subjects as not exceptional 
but “natural.”
Colonizing Social Relations
Like historical colonialism, data colonialism would be inherently unstable 
if it could not translate its methods into more enduring forms of social re-
lations. As Nick Dyer-Witheford pointed out in an early analysis, capital-
ism has always approached the internet as a domain in which control over 
the communicative capacity of individuals would allow capital to appro-
priate not just labor but also, as Marx himself put it, “its network of social 
relations.”35 Data colonialism extends this network well beyond communi-
cative capacities, ensuring the continuity of data appropriation across an 
expanding array of social relations.
At the core of data colonialism is the creation of a new type of social 
relation that we call “data relations,” as defi ned in detail later. Data rela-
tions make the appropriation of human beings’ data seem normal, just the 
way things are. Data relations are of many sorts, but all share one basic fea-
ture: they ensure informational resources (data) for capitalism in areas of 
human life that, previously, were not considered direct inputs to produc-
tion.36 Far outside the sphere of normal productive activity, ordinary so-
cial interaction is increasingly lived in environments of continuous data 
collection, behavior prediction, and choice shaping. But this is possible 
only because social actors now enter more or less voluntarily into data re-
lations that secure regular data fl ows for capital. Th e drive to expand data 
relations explains a lot about contemporary capitalism. So, for example, 
it is the need to make data relations routine everywhere that drives Face-
book’s off er of simplifi ed internet connection (Facebook Free Basics) in 
more than twenty countries with weak or uneven internet infrastructure, 
principally in Africa. Th e emergence of data relations increasingly comple-
ments labor relations’ contribution to capitalism’s reproduction.
Meanwhile, existing social relations (including labor relations) for hun-
dreds of millions of people are increasingly datafi ed—that is, managed 
through data, including data gathered from the surfaces or insides of work-

The Capitalization of Life without Limit 
13
ers’ bodies. Work, for many, increasingly occurs within the sort of corpo-
rate environment of sensors that Davenport imagined; in its absoluteness, 
this recalls the continuous surveillance, if not the violence, that slave la-
bor endured on a large scale under historical colonialism.37 Labor relations 
are becoming more directly and continuously extractive, whatever the for-
malities that cloak them.38 Th is has implications too for inequality, as ex-
posure to (or freedom from) continuous surveillance becomes a key factor 
that distinguishes lower-status from higher-status jobs.
New forms of labor are also emerging under data colonialism in the 
“sharing economy.” Here data relations are fused with labor relations, al-
though the existence of labor relations is controversially denied by plat-
forms such as Uber.39 Th ese new hybrid data/labor relations encompass 
a huge variety of more or less formalized work, including data process-
ing.40 Labor is captured in a seemingly “scale-less” business model that de-
taches workers from institutional supports but richly rewards platform 
management. Rhetoric cannot disguise the potential for exploiting low-
level work skills at a distance and therefore at a scale and speed without 
historical precedent (for example, the repetitive coding and data inputting 
necessary for the training of artifi cial intelligence in so-called Machine 
Learning).41
Th e relations between state and economy are also being transformed. 
Data relations give corporations a privileged window into the world of so-
cial relations and a privileged handle on the levers of social diff erentia-
tion. States have become increasingly dependent on access to what the cor-
porate sector knows about the lives of those states’ citizens, reversing the 
long-subsisting direction of knowledge transfer (from states to corpora-
tions). Although the resulting relations have become hugely controversial 
in the West (consider Apple’s high-profi le battle with the FBI over the en-
cryption of its iPhones), in other states such as China the government has 
been heavily involved in encouraging platform development, in part be-
cause of their surveillance potential. As Jack Ma, CEO of Alibaba, put it, 
“Th e political and legal system of the future is inseparable from the in-
ternet, inseparable from big data.”42 Meanwhile in India, Paytm, a mo-
bile payment system (or digital wallet) used by 230 million people in which 

14 
Chapter 1
Ali baba has a 40 percent stake, has faced scandal over its sharing of users’ 
personal data with the government.43
Because data reinterprets the traces of the everyday world, large-scale 
data processing recalibrates social knowledge, with the consequences de-
pending on the type of market society under analysis. In liberal market so-
cieties, the new data infrastructure involves for the fi rst time market in-
stitutions in producing basic social knowledge. But in state-led market 
societies, such as China, the state acquires a remarkable new tool to direct 
the production of social knowledge in its own interests. It is now an ex-
plicit goal of the Chinese government to use artifi cial intelligence to “es-
tablish [an] intelligent monitoring platform for comprehensive commu-
nity management.” Direct social governance shaped by data colonialism 
becomes not a distant ideal but a practical reality. Th e result, as the Chi-
nese government put it with no apparent irony, is “a market improvement 
of the economic and social order.”44
New Colonial Corporations
Another way in which capitalism’s new interrelations with data deserve to 
be called colonial is the massively unequal global distribution of economic 
power on which they are based. Chapter 2 will provide much more detail, 
but for now, here are the basics.
Th ere is the ownership or control of the processes of data collection, 
which gives special power to whoever owns or controls the hardware and 
soft ware that collects and analyzes data. Some analytics companies oper-
ate at huge scale: in 2014 Acxiom notoriously claimed seven hundred mil-
lion customers worldwide and over three thousand pieces of information 
for every US citizen!45 Th e most dramatic example is Google, which, even 
though banned in China, still controlled 82 percent of the global search en-
gine market in 2018, collecting data from us every time we use it.46 Th ere is 
also ownership or control of the “ecologies” within which data is collected, 
such as digital platforms and apps of various sorts. In terms of human us-
ers, these processes and ecologies of data collection are vast, and the result-
ing concentration of advertising power correspondingly huge: 72 percent 
of global advertising spending is in the hands of Google and Facebook.47 

The Capitalization of Life without Limit 
15
From this base, huge investments in data analysis techniques become pos-
sible, with so called deep learning increasingly central to the largest IT 
businesses. From early on, the vision of Google’s founders was “AI com-
plete.” Much later, IBM announced in 2017 that it “is now a cognitive solu-
tions and cloud platform company,” while Microsoft  reorganized itself in 
March 2018 to prioritize its cloud services and AI businesses.48 Th e retailers 
Amazon and Walmart are giant data processing operations. But this is only 
the start of the layered power concentration that data colonialism enables.
Th ere are many additional layers of colonial-style ownership. One is 
domination over production of the “tethered” devices through which hu-
man beings connect to the infrastructures of data collection (by “teth-
ered,” we mean a device whose use ties users to reliance on a particular op-
erating system or set of proprietary products: think of Apple but also of 
the use restrictions built into most portable devices).49 Another is power 
over the computing capacity that enables large-scale processing and stor-
age of data, usually known as the cloud, a mystifi catory term.50 (Amazon 
by the end of 2017 already had 51.8 percent of global market share, rivaled 
only by Microsoft  with 13.3 percent, the Chinese Alibaba with 4.6 percent, 
and Google with 3.3 percent.)51 Important also are the remarkable monop-
olies in content delivery, whether monopolies over last-mile internet con-
nection or phone spectrum: consider the near monopoly power of broad-
band providers such as Verizon in the United States, which has driven the 
recent US net neutrality debates.52 Finally, as internet content circulation 
becomes ever more massifi ed,53 there are new forms of control over the 
production of content (think of Netfl ix’s growing commissioning power or 
the pricing power over books and music of Amazon and Apple).
Th ese layers of power concentration off er to citizens and consumers a 
world that is highly connected, but the quality of connection is distinctly 
uneven. Beyond questions of individual access, countries vary in the ro-
bustness of their internet connectivity, while intercontinental cable laying 
is becoming a growth area for the social quantifi cation sector itself.54 Al-
though the exact distribution of the benefi ts of these power concentrations 
will no doubt evolve, at this point the global domination of a web of US 
companies and a small group of Chinese companies is secure.

16 
Chapter 1
New Colonial Ideologies
Such profound shift s in how value is extracted, social relations are orga-
nized, and economic power is distributed require narratives that reframe 
them in more acceptable terms. Th is is another aspect in which today’s de-
velopments bear comparison with historical colonialism. Data colonialism 
is producing its own new ideologies.
First, there is the ideology of connection itself, which presents as natu-
ral the connection of persons, things, and processes via a computer-based 
infrastructure (the internet) that enables life to be annexed to capital. 
Connection is, of course, a basic human value, but the requirement to con-
nect here and now—connect to this particular deeply unequal infrastruc-
ture—means submission to very particular conditions and terms of power. 
Perhaps the most frank admission of connection’s ideological role came in 
an internal memo, later discounted by its author, that Andrew Bosworth, 
a Facebook vice president, posted in June 2016: “We connect people. Pe-
riod. Th at’s why all the work we do in growth is justifi ed. All the ques-
tionable contact-importing practices. All the subtle language that helps 
people stay searchable by friends. All of the work we do to bring more 
communication in. Th e work we will likely have to do in China someday. 
All of it.”55
Th ere is also the ideology of datafi cation,56 which insists that every as-
pect of life must be transmuted into data as the form in which all life be-
comes useful for capital. Practically, this means not just attachment to a 
computer connection but the removal of any obstacles to corporate extrac-
tion and control of data once that connection is established. Th e point is 
not that data itself is bad but that the compulsion to turn every life stream 
into data fl ows removes what was once an obstacle to extracting value 
from those life streams.
Th e marketing ideology of personalization makes such tracking and 
surveillance seem attractive. Who aft er all would not want a service more 
geared to his or her particular wants and needs? Th e argument, very sim-
ply, is that personally targeted messages require prior information that can 
come only from . . . targeted surveillance! Yet evangelists for data-driven 
personalization still feel the need to defend this ideology aggressively, as 

The Capitalization of Life without Limit 
17
when Acxiom, in a 2015 opinion survey, characterized acceptance of con-
tinuous data collection as “pragmatist” (fair enough) and opposition to it 
as “fundamentalist” (itself rather an extremist statement).57
Th ese specifi c ideologies are examples of “dataism.”58 Th ey are tools for 
shaping practice and thus highly specifi c in their applications. Th ey are of-
ten combined with an overarching imaginative claim that we might call 
myth: the myth that all this is inevitable and that today’s infrastructures 
of connection and data extraction fulfi ll human beings’ collective poten-
tial in some transcendent way.59 Th e term community, as something seem-
ingly inherent to human life, can easily fuel this myth. Th ink not just of 
Mark Zuckerberg’s frequent appeals to Facebook’s “global community” 
but also of the Tencent CEO’s invocation of a “digital ecological commu-
nity.”60 Th is ideology of inevitability also has its counterpart in ideas on 
the anticapitalist left  that treat networks as the basis for a leap toward over-
throwing capitalism.61
Colonialism’s and Capitalism’s New Embrace
Data colonialism has a distinctive geography. Like historical colonialism, 
data colonialism is global in its ambitions, but unlike it, it penetrates the 
life conditions of individuals across all societies, wherever they are, that 
are being reshaped around digital infrastructures of connection. Data co-
lonialism’s expansion is therefore both external (geographical) and inter-
nal (social). Given that the drive to appropriate data is fueling China as 
much as, if not more than, it is the West, it makes no sense to read data co-
lonialism as exclusively a Western project. Seeing today’s transformations 
bifocally—through the lens of both capitalism and colonialism—is essen-
tial to understanding their complex global dynamics. We cannot clearly 
see the scale of capitalism’s current appropriation of human life without a 
colonial lens, and we cannot understand the force of this new colonial ap-
propriation without understanding how capitalism operates through pro-
cesses of social ordering.62
Indeed, capitalism’s standard ways of understanding itself as a ratio-
nal order are eff ective in masking the colonial scale of appropriation that 
is underway. Much of today’s data appropriations are not seen in daily life 

18 
Chapter 1
as appropriation at all but as part of everyday business practice. As such, 
data relations introduce into business management a new bureaucracy, as 
fi rst theorized by Max Weber.63 Th is bureaucracy is based on the apparent 
“rationality” of organizations’ continuous data extraction. Here, as ear-
lier in history, capitalism expands by operating as a system of meaning-
ful social relations, reading the world this time as a mass of valuable data 
sources.64
Older critiques of historical capitalism can provide valuable insights 
here. One important idea is that of the “fetish.” For Karl Marx, the fetish 
(classically the “commodity fetish”) made the economic relations of capi-
talism seem necessary. Marx delineated a trinity of fetishized objects: in-
terest as the fruit of capital, rent as the fruit of land, and wage as the fruit 
of labor.65 Now we can add a fourth object: data as the fruit of life pro-
cesses.66 Th is is exactly how business now speaks (think of the mantra of 
data as the new oil).67
Another deep continuity with classic Marxist accounts comes from the 
data-driven possibilities of management control over production. Th e core 
of how industrial capitalism transformed work was not technological but 
social. Th e organization of work came under the exclusive control of man-
agement and, as such, became controllable at every stage of performance.68 
Traditional industrial management remained limited, however, to me-
chanical data collection based in observation or form fi lling. By contrast, 
data-driven logistics, built on infrastructures of connection and fueled by 
artifi cial intelligence, convert all aspects of production—far beyond the 
factory walls and in every corner and moment of a transnational supply 
chain—into a managed assembly line. Th e new infrastructure of data pro-
cessing that sustains data relations extends so-called scientifi c manage-
ment in ways that recall classic diagnoses of industrial capitalism: “Th e 
image of the process, removed from production to a separate location and 
a separate group, controls the process itself.”69 Th rough data, capitalism 
begins to govern the whole social domain with management logic, another 
aspect of its annexation of human life.
Having sketched the basic features of data colonialism, let’s look a little 
deeper into the capitalist social order that emerges through data colonialism.

The Capitalization of Life without Limit 
19
Data and the Emerging Social Order of Capitalism
Every aspect of data colonialism can be understood in terms of its con-
tribution to a fundamental principle of capitalism: the drive to maximize 
control of the inputs to its production process.70 Th is requires a reasonably 
ordered state of the social world that makes markets possible and func-
tional. In all societies characterized by increasingly overwhelming infor-
mation fl ows, the premium on society’s legibility, even its basic countabil-
ity, grows.71 In capitalist societies that are not democracies, such as China, 
capitalism’s desire for the control of production inputs works hand in 
hand with government’s unrestrained desire to control all inputs to the so-
cial order.
Th is newly intensifi ed role for both capitalism and governments in 
managing social life became possible only through the unprecedented 
technological opportunities for connection that we know collectively as 
the internet. Th eir origins lie in investment from the US Cold War mil-
itary-industrial complex and subsequent massive corporate investment 
that transformed the internet into a global space for corporate networking 
and transnational market coordination.72 Th rough the internet and its em-
bedding into everyday life and business emerged something else: the pos-
sibility of a new type of economic and social order.
Note that we are not claiming that this order is completely discon-
tinuous with the past. Certainly, data colonialism builds on the earlier 
growth of technological systems across most aspects of human life, some-
thing that German philosopher Jürgen Habermas metaphorically calls the 
“colonization” of lifeworld by system. But that process has been under-
way for more than a century and lacks the distinctive order of data co-
lonialism.73 It is important also, once more, not to just see this as a story 
about the West. Aft er all, Tencent had already fi nanced its fast-growing 
online chat platforms by a public fl otation in 2004, the year Zuckerberg 
was launching Facebook. Neither is this just a story about Western val-
ues such as possessive individualism with which capitalism’s growth has 
long been associated. For what today’s infrastructures of connection make 
possible is a new economic and social formation in which the orders of 

20 
Chapter 1
“liberal” democracies and “authoritarian” societies become increasingly 
indistinguishable.74
How then is this new type of order being built?
A New Social Order for Capitalism . . . Everywhere
Th e technological infrastructures of connection that have emerged in the 
past three decades have enabled a deep reorganization of social space and 
time, indeed, of social order. As Langdon Winner put it, “Technologies are 
ways of building order in the world.”75
Th e starting point was disarmingly simple. Computers are universal 
machines in the sense that they can perform an unlimited number of op-
erations; computers are able to model any aspect of the world that can, in 
principle, be modeled.76 But computers work by capturing and archiving 
data about their own operations: they capture “changes of state” that fol-
low from a keyboard action or other internal process.77 Such capture is a 
form of translation, representing computer actions (and whatever external 
realities they model) in a language that enables them to be processed by 
the computer’s “grammar” for storing information. Th is captured data be-
comes the basis for demanding future changes of state. When computers 
are inserted into social space (because human beings use them), this cap-
turing facility becomes available to reshape that social space too. Long be-
fore the general availability of the internet, sociologist Shoshana Zuboff  
predicted that the computerization of inputs to production would trans-
form the workplace by changing fl ows of information and the forms of au-
thority and power sustained by those fl ows.78
Added to such basic data capture came the possibility of interconnec-
tion between computers through the internet. In a small network, the im-
plications of data capture would have been limited, but when the push to 
commercialize the internet came with the World Wide Web, the introduc-
tion of commercial browsers (Mosaic and then Netscape), and the US gov-
ernment’s decisive transfer of ownership of the internet’s infrastructure 
from the state to commercial hands, decisive consequences for social life 
were to follow.79 If the massive increase in popularity of personal desk-
tops and laptops transformed the consumer market, it was paralleled by 
the growth of computer-based networking in the business world, an ex-

The Capitalization of Life without Limit 
21
pansion in which the United States played a dominant role.80 All these de-
velopments transformed the internet from a bounded “public infrastruc-
ture”81 to an infi nitely extendable space of connection across which global 
capital could freely range, under the auspices of the libertarian policy 
agenda sweeping the United States in the 1990s.82 Move forward another 
ten years, and, through portable devices with connectivity (smartphones 
and then tablets), the internet stopped being something statically avail-
able from particular points in space and became a dimension that over-
lays social space continuously. As Rob Kitchin and Martin Dodge put it, 
“Soft ware . . . alters the conditions through which society, space and time, 
and thus spatiality, are produced.”83 As a result, the internet, understood 
as an infrastructure of connection, has reconstituted social space in a fun-
damental way. In one sense, this was always the vision of IT pioneers. Tim 
Berners-Lee insisted in 1999 that “hope in life comes from the intercon-
nections along all the people in the world.”84 But such connection was only 
the start of a larger transformation.
Combine vastly extended interconnection with that basic feature of 
computers (they capture data), and the result is the beginning of a radical 
new possibility: that each computer’s archive of its own history becomes 
available to be tracked and infl uenced by any other computer anywhere 
in the internet’s vast universe of networks. Human beings themselves, as 
regular users of those computers and their archives, became, in principle, 
“trackable and tractable.”85 Th e actualization of this theoretical possibility 
resulted from multiple commercial innovations, spurred by various forms 
of necessity and opportunism. It was marketers, plagued by the perennial 
diffi  culty of reaching customers with their messages, who took advantage 
fi rst with the humble cookie, capable only of tracking people on single de-
vices,86 and more recently with techniques that link online data with of-
fl ine behavior or use a social media ID to combine data about various on-
line selves. Th e invention of social media platforms in which every user 
move is automatically tracked was a major further step. Th e data benefi t 
unleashed to social media providers such as Facebook was huge: through 
its Open Graph program, Facebook gained access to what users did not 
only on Facebook but also on every platform that users accessed via their 
Facebook ID—for example, Spotify.87 Th e result is what the industry, with-

22 
Chapter 1
out irony, calls “people-based marketing.”88 Meanwhile, Google’s alliance 
in 2008 with online advertising company DoubleClick brought together 
Google’s mastery of linking search activity to searchers’ interests and 
DoubleClick’s tracking of individuals based on their unique data profi les. 
Under Google’s control, the combination of the two approaches greatly in-
creased the information that could be matched with unique individuals.
Th e growth of computer-to-computer monitoring for marketing pur-
poses was only part of a more general growth, starting in the 1980s, in the 
monitoring and shaping of life at a distance. Much of this data gathering 
requires no subterfuge, because it is a basic mode of operation in corporate 
intranets, networks of environmental sensors, and scientifi c data collec-
tion—that is, “new types of sensors are constantly becoming available.”89 
Elsewhere the possibility of generating value through data by tracking us-
ers became a taken-for-granted feature of an online world whose resources 
were generally “free” but accessible only within a space in which sensing 
is built-in: the world of connected computers.90 Th e embedding of sensing 
into everyday life is not something that users can control, however. Rather, 
since those tracking capacities are grounded in the basic soft ware through 
which computers run, they introduce an internal form of order that is pro-
jected outward onto everyday life. Th e parallels with political and social 
order are not accidental. As Wendy Chun puts it, computer “code is exe-
cutable because it embodies the power of . . . enforcement that has tradi-
tionally been the provenance of government.”91
Th is power goes far beyond platforms’ data gathering, even though it 
is the accountability of platform power that attracts the most debate.92 Th e 
perspective of IBM on what it calls “digital disruption” (the rise of digital 
social platforms and infrastructures that were believed to challenge IBM’s 
power as a long-existing market “incumbent”) is striking:
Many believed that the world’s incumbent businesses were at risk of being 
marginalized. We had a diff erent point of view. We did not believe the plat-
form giants alone would dominate a data-centric economy—in large mea-
sure because they lack access to the most valuable sources of the world’s data: 
the 80 percent that is not searchable on the Web. Th e world’s incumbent busi-
nesses and institutions own and generate this data.93

The Capitalization of Life without Limit 
23
Much of data colonialism’s force in the social world comes from corpora-
tions of all types, with or without social media platforms, colonizing the 
world around them through the extraction of data.
Th rough these various steps, the capacity to order the social world con-
tinuously and with maximal effi  ciency has become, for the fi rst time, a goal 
for corporate power and state power. Our computers and phones, and even 
our bodies if they carry trackable devices, become targets of this new form 
of power.
Two possibilities result that, before digital connection, were literally 
beyond the imagining of corporations or states. Th e fi rst is to annex ev-
ery point in space and every layer of life process to forms of tracking and 
control. Aft er all, everything is in principle now connected. Th e second 
is to transform and infl uence behavior at every point so that this appar-
ently shocking annexation of life to power comes to seem a natural fea-
ture of the social domain. Far from being imposed from above, this double 
transformation, like industrial capitalism in Marx’s understanding, makes 
sense only as a deeply social transformation in which members of contem-
porary societies have agency, even if not much power.
From this transformation of the building blocks of social life follow 
other consequences that earlier social worlds had not foreshadowed.
Social power relations have become reversible in alarming ways. Th ink 
of our relations to everyday tools. Tools are basic to our sense of having in-
dividual agency in the world. But, as the Internet of Th ings expands, there 
will eventually be few everyday tools that do not have the capacity to mon-
itor us, collecting data about how we use them and possibly about other 
ambient data of value to the tool’s makers.94 One example is Google, the 
search engine that records our searches in order to “search” us; another 
is “intelligent personal assistants” such as Amazon’s Echo or Microsoft ’s 
Cortana95 that, to work, must record how we interact with them. For now, 
people are still shocked to hear that their phones have a built-in capacity 
to listen to them, even when not making a call; in time, we may regard this 
as normal.
Yet a more connected social world will not necessarily be more secure. 
Indeed, there is no limit to the instability that an interconnected social or-
der can generate. As Bruce Schneier argues, it is a fallacy to believe that 

24 
Chapter 1
more connection generates more security. On the contrary, since the pos-
sibilities of bad actors are infi nite, more connection must generate more, 
not fewer, problems of security.96 Th e average security robustness of con-
nected space tends to fall as more points get connected. Devices in the In-
ternet of Th ings (such as those that control fridges or thermostats) simply 
lack the computing power to have their security repatched remotely, un-
like, say, desktop or laptop computers.97 People cracking the code of baby 
monitors to speak to and scare children supposedly under digital pro-
tection are just graphic illustrations of a much deeper security problem, 
which in fact serves the interests of data extraction.98
Whether these things are serious concerns depends, of course, on 
whether the priority is the security of the individual or the security of the 
state. For a state like China, a more intensely connected system is likely 
to be an advantage, making freedom the problem and internal data colo-
nialism potentially the solution. Th is helps us make sense of China’s rev-
olutionary new “social credit system”—rather shocking to the West.99 Th e 
program aims to launch in 2020 and is expected to pool all information 
about the creditworthiness and social worth of Chinese citizens into a 
single interlinked system for monitoring and evaluation.100 China’s huge 
platform growth (especially of Alibaba and Tencent) in the past fi ve years 
provides the core infrastructure for this project, but those platforms are 
building their own supposedly separate systems of credit rating (Sesame 
Credit and Tencent Credit).
In both liberal market societies and authoritarian market states, data 
colonialism’s consequences for social inequality are dramatic. Th is stems 
from a basic feature not of computers but of data. Th e purpose of collect-
ing data is always to diff erentiate:101 data’s purpose is to generate informa-
tion that usefully discriminates between entities. Again, discrimination in 
itself is not bad: we want a heart recorder that correctly distinguishes be-
tween a heartbeat and other bodily signals. Th e issue is how data discrim-
inations are applied within the framework of existing structures of social 
discrimination. Today’s vast infrastructures of connection, like all forms 
of power, build on existing inequality. But they also create new forms of 
inequality through various means: inequalities of data capital,102 exploita-
tion of the human labor that sustains Machine Learning, and the ability of 

The Capitalization of Life without Limit 
25
data-driven categorizations to reinforce those existing inequalities. Just as 
the capitalization of work through labor relations has over time produced 
a highly unequal distribution of the profi ts generated by labor, so over time 
we can expect the capitalization of life through data relations to introduce 
new forms of inequality into human life itself. We can increasingly expect 
human beings to be socially managed in terms of their data value—that is, 
their value as data inputs to capitalist production.
Platforms’ Role in Stabilizing Capitalism
How, practically, does capitalism, whether in its pure market or state-
sponsored forms, try to hold together this emerging social order? Capital-
ism needs primary relations of data extraction to at least be stable, predict-
able, and convergent. One key tool for ensuring this is the digital platform, 
whose basic function we outline here.
Platforms are structured online spaces, made possible through elab-
orate soft ware, that off er services of various sorts: a space to sell things, 
meet people, share information, fi nd specialist resources, and so on. But 
they are also fundamentally spaces for data extraction. As Tarleton Gil-
lespie puts it, platforms are “built on an infrastructure . . . for processing 
data for customer service, advertising, and profi t” that makes them “ori-
ented toward eliciting more data, and more kinds of data, from [their] us-
ers.”103 Platforms generally operate without explicit payment. Th e actual 
“payment” that the platform operator receives is usually based directly on 
the data extracted, though oft en also in part on data-driven advertising. 
Th e data “payment” is more interesting than the advertising payment. It 
can be either the value that the operator generates by packaging and sell-
ing to third parties the data it gathers about transactions and users (the 
commodity value) or the value that the operator raises by giving others 
access to its data (what we might call the rent value). Either way, surplus 
value is generated, although in a connected space of infi nite size; economic 
success requires platforms to achieve a suffi  cient scale of operation to real-
ize that surplus value eff ectively.
As part of their basic business model, platforms operate as multiway 
data auctions, linking users, data buyers and users, and of course the plat-
form itself. As Julie Cohen explains, the basic structure of platforms gives 

26 
Chapter 1
their operators a remarkable power to organize parallel series of economic 
relations through adaptable arrangements,104 with each series arranged 
through the platform’s interface soft ware. Th is convening power of plat-
forms creates a recentralizing force that requires all actors to make their 
content “platform ready.”105 Th at force is based on platforms’ power to 
control the degree and type of data extraction that is the “price” ordinary 
platform users must pay.
Platforms create an interface without historical precedent: an inter-
change in which social life in its open-ended variety interfaces seamlessly 
with the forces of economic extraction. Th is seamlessness is not natural 
any more than data is naturally raw. It must be constructed through the 
painstaking removal of barriers to data fl ow within and between platforms; 
seamlessness is an achievement, in part, of soft ware that enables platforms 
to produce “the social” for capital. Th is explains the deeply ambiguous sta-
tus of the largest and most successful platforms, such as Facebook, which 
is expected to speak for and even regulate the social world because of the 
power that running a platform with two billion users gives it. Major plat-
form power in China (Alibaba and Tencent) is even more ambitious, de-
veloping a triple interface across social, economic, and fi nancial worlds to 
provide a new practical infrastructure for the world’s largest society. Th ese 
models of economic power and social order depend on the unspoken prin-
ciple of seamlessness: every barrier to data fl ow is a barrier to the unlim-
ited production of social life in forms that can generate data for capital.106
Th e largest platforms distribute their presence across the internet via 
plug-ins that allow platform users, wherever they are, to link back to the 
resources of the platform, creating even more possibilities for aggregating 
data continuously across space and time.107 Th ese power concentrations 
depend on the emerging social centrality of these platforms in a genuine 
sense, for we really do go onto platforms because we know others will be 
there (the so-called network eff ect). Th at is why platforms are fast becom-
ing meaningful social infrastructures too.108 In these various ways, plat-
forms are a principal organizational form through which capitalism’s con-
nected social and economic order is being realized.109 Th ey are a key tool 
for ensuring that the colonial-scale appropriation of data for human life 
becomes the norm. As networks, some platforms are larger than most na-

The Capitalization of Life without Limit 
27
tion-states. Th e largest platforms conceive of themselves accordingly. As 
Zuckerberg put it, “In a lot of ways Facebook is more like a government 
than a traditional company.”110 Th e longer-term implications for legal, po-
litical, and social power are as yet unknown. One key way in which plat-
forms produce the social for capitalism is through a new type of local so-
cial relation that stabilizes our habits of connection. Our term for this is 
data relations. Let’s look at these relations in a little more detail.
Data Relations
Data relations are the emerging social form through which data colonial-
ism as an extractive process gets stabilized between individuals, groups, 
and corporations, and so it comes reliably to contribute to capitalism’s 
emerging new social order.111 By “data relations” we do not mean relations 
between data but the new types of human relations that data as a potential 
commodity enables. In time, data relations are likely to become as natural-
ized as labor relations.
Some forms of data relations—for example, within a corporation that 
has the residual power to collect data across its activities—are operational 
and require no additional level of social agreement. But in many other 
cases a relation has to be constituted in such a way that it enables data to 
fl ow in the fi rst place. Once constituted, the seeming naturalness of the re-
lation frames the resulting data as something that can be validly extracted 
from the fl ow of life. Without the act of extraction there would be no iden-
tifi able item of data and thus no separate right to extract that data. It is the 
stability of data relations that enables data extraction to seem both valid 
and beyond challenge. Th is is another consequence of the basic point al-
ready noted, that data is not natural but a resource whose extractive pos-
sibilities must themselves be socially constructed, just as physical nature 
had to be reconfi gured so that it could be exploited by capital.112
Data Relations: Their Key Features
To be an eff ective foundation for a new type of social order, data relations 
need not have the solidity we imagine in many work contracts. Indeed, 
Zuboff  plausibly argues that much data extraction today is not a contract 

28 
Chapter 1
or relation at all, in that data just seems to get extracted at a distance.113 
But the wider set of arrangements on which data colonialism relies would 
be ineff ective unless they operated as something like a social form that 
seems both natural and normal, quite unlike an arbitrary act of theft  or 
extraction. It is this social form we call data relations; data relations en-
able the basic processes of social construction on which the stabilization of 
data colonialism depends for the long term.
We can expect the varieties of data relations to grow massively as data 
colonialism itself expands. To get at the core of what we mean by a data re-
lation, imagine yourself entering a spiral. Th e entry point is that at which, 
for whatever reason, you enter the ambit of computer monitoring. Com-
puter tracking is now so basic to the social world that it might seem hard to 
imagine one not already being within that ambit, but, even so, at any mo-
ment there is always likely to be at least one specifi c transaction in which 
you are engaged that motivates the capture of particular life traces from 
you. It could be using a search engine, investigating a particular website, 
searching for a product at a good price, using a platform, or dealing with 
an institution (say, a school, corporation, or government). Sometimes the 
entry point will derive from an extra step you have taken—for example, at-
taching a tracker to your body or accepting a tracker’s presence nearby as 
you perform a task.
You have, wittingly or unwittingly, entered the spiral of data relations. 
But those relations may or may not be based on consent. Implied consent, 
even if unenthusiastic, is common to many platform situations. Oft en 
rolled into this consent is acknowledgment of the platform owners’ claim 
to thereby own the data, even though this is rarely made explicit; if it was, 
it would likely be contested more oft en. Incorporated also is consent to 
other, more subtle conditions that are required to convert the fl ow of a per-
son’s life into material for valuable data extraction in combination with 
the parallel fl ows of data about others’ lives. Th e information that Face-
book requests before you join the platform illustrates this: What is your 
birthday? What school did you go to? And the like.
In most cases, however, there has been little consent to data collection 
as such, although recent European legislation, the General Data Protection 
Regulation, seeks to change this, at least in a formal sense. Yet, in agree-

The Capitalization of Life without Limit 
29
ing to or accepting data collection, people may have a pressing need to se-
cure a service of some sort (just as a labor contract is held together by the 
 worker’s need to sell her labor power for money so she can buy the ne-
cessities of life). Th rough data relations, for example, we access connec-
tion (platforms where everyone else we know is a user) and services that 
are basic to daily life, such as insurance. Service providers may claim they 
need to track us continuously to provide that service, or they may require 
registration through an identifying feature (say, a social media login) that 
draws us into releasing even more data.
Sometimes there is no consent to data relations at all, just brute ne-
cessity. One example is when people wear a sensor or tracker, on order of 
their employer, as they move around their work space. Another example is 
when, as in China’s Xianjiang province in February 2017, the government 
banned petrol sales to anyone without GPS tracking installed in his or her 
car.114 Th e logical limit of consent is when—as is increasingly common in 
China today—paying for transactions or just walking around public space 
involves facial recognition by algorithmically enhanced tracking systems 
linked to national databases. Th e development of systems that manage 
these barely consensual relations is a growth area: the Beijing company 
Face ++ was valued at $1.5 billion before its latest fund-raising from the 
Chinese and Russian sovereign wealth funds.115
Not all data is immediately available to be commodifi ed. Indeed, much 
data gathered by corporations may lack a value until a specifi c use for it 
can be found in the context of much larger data sets. But some data—
for example, about potential interest in a purchase signaled when a link 
is clicked—may have a precise value on an advertising auction platform 
such as Google’s Adsense and Alibaba’s Alimama. Whether immediately 
commodifi able or not, the data extracted has potential value in a wider 
space of equivalence in which the individual’s distinctive properties as a 
data source can be ignored (this abstractness is exactly how Marx under-
stood commodifi cation to operate).116 Th e commodifi cation of exchange-
able data is the end goal of data relations and is, as Matthew Crain notes, 
“the root of [their] power imbalances.”117
Th e fi nal turn of the data relations spiral comes when categorizations 
derived from the processing of your data are applied back onto you, the 

30 
Chapter 1
human subject, from whom the data was derived, whether or not you are 
identifi ed by name. Data subjects oft en attempt to modulate their behavior 
in order to infl uence the algorithm that they believe is categorizing them. 
But however well meaning, this ignores the basic point: that just by going 
on with the activity that brought us into data extraction’s ambit, we con-
fi rm data relations’ continued force.
Th rough the regular, compressed repetition of these elements in myr-
iad forms, data extraction starts to become part of the natural order of 
things.118
Updating Marx for the Age of Big Data
Th ere is an echo of Marx in what we have said so far about data relations, 
but our argument is not in line with orthodox Marxism.119
Many remember from Marx the idea that capitalism’s social order is 
based on labor relations: the transformation of what was once just produc-
tive activity into labor power. Labor power has the abstract measurable di-
mension of a commodity that can be exchanged in a market for money. 
Under capitalism, workers stop being “a part of the conditions of produc-
tion (as in slavery or serfdom),”120 and their labor power becomes some-
thing they can sell as a commodity. But if that were all there was to Marx’s 
social theory, it would not help us understand a world in which, as we have 
seen, capitalism’s underlying drive to capitalize life itself has taken on new 
forms that are not all routed through labor—that is, what is understood in 
some sense as productive activity. We are concerned here with the annex-
ation to capital of life processes whether or not they are labor, evidenced 
when many of the life streams from which data is extracted for value are 
not seen by those involved as part of any productive activity.121
What is core to the new capitalist social order is that ordinary social in-
teraction today contributes to surplus value not as labor but as a factor of 
production.122 Human life is being incorporated within a vastly expanded 
production process and, as such, faces increasing pressure to be commod-
ifi ed, whether as data for which platforms get paid in some form or (in the 
vision of some reformers) as a form of disguised labor power, for which 
those reformers propose platform users get paid.123 Th e key point is not 
whether some payment results but that the data traces of our activities are 

The Capitalization of Life without Limit 
31
under pressure to be commodifi ed at all.124 Th is is the central change un-
derway, and it fl ows not from the transformation of labor via digital plat-
forms but from something deeper: an expansion of the whole process of 
capitalist production and the factors that contribute to it to encompass the 
fl ow of human life in all its open-endedness. In the long run, this expan-
sion of production may develop into an entirely new “mode of produc-
tion,” in Marx’s term, but just a decade or so into datafi cation, it is prema-
ture to name this yet.
In arguing this, we are following Marx, but we are doing so in a way 
that works creatively with his social theory for the age of data colonial-
ism. We draw here on a radical reinterpretation of Marx off ered by the 
late Moishe Postone. Th is reinterpretation reads Marx as proposing that 
the fundamental social form of capitalism is not labor relations but rather 
the commodifi cation that underlies, for example, the transformation of 
everyday work into labor relations.125 We say “for example” because on 
this reading of Marx, other transformations through commodifi cation are 
possible, and not only in the domain of work. Marx himself seemed to en-
visage just such a broadening of commodifi cation when he wrote that “as 
capitalist production i.e. capital develops the general laws governing the 
commodity evolve in proportion.”126 As already noted, Marx discusses 
how the materials workers use in the labor process themselves acquire ex-
change value as commodities, and so, for example, seeds and manure be-
come commodities under capitalism, even though before capitalism they 
were just part of the normal cycle of land use.127
On this reading of Marx, at the core of industrial capitalism’s long-
term transformation of the social world was how work (the everyday pro-
ductive activities that have gone on since the beginning of time) acquired 
an abstract dimension that enabled it to be commodifi ed, that is, turned 
into a commodity that could be exchanged.128 It is this possibility of ab-
stracting value from life processes, even when they are not directly produc-
tive activities, that leaves open the prospect of new types of commodifi ed 
social relations and, through them, a new social order for capitalism.
We know that data is produced by abstracting the processes of human 
life into measurable bits and types. We know also that data is not simply 
abstracted from us automatically but through arrangements and relations 

32 
Chapter 1
into which we are assumed to have voluntarily entered at some point, even 
if retrospectively. Meanwhile, data is being increasingly, though as yet un-
evenly, commodifi ed. Th erefore, our proposal is simple: that just as indus-
trial capitalism, according to Marx, changed society by transforming the 
universal human activity of work into a social form with an abstract di-
mension (via the commodifi cation of labor), so capitalism today, in the ex-
pansionary phase we call data colonialism, is transforming human nature 
(that is, preexisting streams of human life in all its diversity) into a newly 
abstracted social form (data) that is also ripe for commodifi cation.
It is this transformation that is the larger context for the datafi cation 
of labor relations that many critics have noted.129 It is this transformation 
also that links the appropriations of data colonialism to contemporary 
capitalism’s latest lines of expansion. But the outcome is hardly something 
to celebrate. For the unwelcome truth is that, just as in Marx’s eyes capi-
talism had disrupted human beings’ relations with physical nature, in the 
era of data colonialism, capitalism risks disturbing humanity’s relations 
to its nature—that is, our lives as refl exive, relatively autonomous human 
beings. Data colonialism interposes infrastructures of data extraction di-
rectly into the texture of human life and so risks deforming human experi-
ence in a fundamental way, invading the space of the self on which the val-
ues of autonomy and freedom in all their forms depend.130
Our Argument within the Wider Debate about Data and Capitalism
Why is it that so far we have talked simply of capitalism and not digital cap-
italism, informational capitalism, communicative capitalism, platform cap-
italism, or surveillance capitalism, to name some rival terms?131 Th e rea-
son is straightforward. No convincing argument has yet been made that 
capitalism today is anything other than what it has always been: the sys-
tematic organization of life so as to maximize value, resulting in the con-
centration of power and wealth in very few hands. Contemporary societies 
are marked by the ever-increasing importance of the circulation and pro-
cessing of information. As we emphasized earlier, this accelerated circula-
tion and extraction of data and information has had profound impacts on 
the management of business, on the organization of work, and on the inte-

The Capitalization of Life without Limit 
33
gration of social life into the economy. But that is no reason to say that the 
fundamental drivers of capitalism have suddenly changed; they have not.
Th erefore, when we use the term capitalism with a contemporary ref-
erence, we mean capitalism as it is now developing in societies in which 
“the production, accumulation and processing of information” is grow-
ing.132 Surveillance is certainly part of this, again as we have emphasized, 
but not suffi  ciently to brand today’s capitalism as surveillance capitalism. 
For, within the longer history of colonialism and capitalism, surveillance 
has oft en been the accompaniment to the direct appropriation of labor-
ing bodies for value (think of the slave plantation).133 What is new today 
is not so much surveillance but rather the networks of social relations in 
which vastly extended modes of appropriating human life through data 
work to order economic and social life as a whole. Th at is the larger pic-
ture we see by working simultaneously with the concepts of data colonial-
ism and capitalism.
It might also seem surprising that, up to this point, our argument has 
not referred to neoliberalism. Th e concept of neoliberalism, most thor-
oughly developed by Michel Foucault, is enormously important for grasp-
ing the cultural, political, and social means by which capitalism has been 
reproduced and reinforced in the late twentieth and early twenty-fi rst cen-
turies.134 Th ere is no question of its continuing relevance. Indeed, some re-
cent accounts of neoliberalism, such as Wendy Brown’s, come close to ours 
in their overall diagnosis of what is wrong in capitalist societies.135 Th at 
is because neoliberal politics from the 1980s onward transformed culture 
and politics by insisting that market functioning should govern all of life, 
not just formal economic processes, thus justifying many forms of market 
deregulation and fi nancialization as well as the invasion of market logics 
into spheres previously protected from them. As such, neoliberalism has 
contributed to the general preconditions of data colonialism and specifi -
cally to preparing people for the intimate relation to capitalism that data 
relations bring. But data colonialism goes beyond neoliberalism by liter-
ally annexing human life directly to the economy and reorganizing it fun-
damentally in the process. When data colonialism is complete, there will 
be no need for the ideology of neoliberalism, since there will be nothing 
left  of human life except materials for potential commodifi cation. At that 

34 
Chapter 1
future point, the boundary around social and personal life that neoliberal 
logics once transgressed will have dissolved, revealing data colonialism as 
neoliberalism’s ultimate horizon.136
Finally, what of this book’s relation to the many Marxist readings, par-
ticularly in the Autonomist tradition, of digital networks and social media 
platforms as the launchpad for ending capitalism? Th ere are two impor-
tant points to be made here. First, we acknowledge that some might see in 
our analysis of the “capitalization of life itself” merely a replay of the Au-
tonomists’ 1960s analysis of capitalism’s social expansion. Indeed, today’s 
exposure of daily life to capitalist forces of datafi cation does seem superfi -
cially similar to the well-known Autonomist notion of the “social factory,” 
which argued that the capitalist organization of work had extended from 
the factory to the whole of society.137 But Autonomists were rather vague 
about the mechanisms of this general intensifi cation of capitalism’s infl u-
ence over social life, except when they claimed the structure and norms of 
capitalist work somehow expanded out into social life.138 Th at idea gives us 
no grip at all on data colonialism, which, as we have shown, appropriates 
life as raw material whether or not it is actually labor, or even labor-like. 
Our temporal scale for appreciating these developments should be not so 
much the past half century of socializing capitalism, especially in Europe, 
but the centuries-long global cycle of colonialism’s long intertwining with 
capitalism.
Th is takes us to a second key point. Because Autonomist analysis is 
based on a reading of capitalism’s long-term social expansion that was al-
ready underway in the 1960s, it does not serve us well to assess the sites 
and potentials for resistance to this century’s developments around data. 
What if human experience is becoming a condition or factor in capital-
ist production, with no agency as such to overthrow capitalism unless this 
integration into production is itself resisted?139 What if today’s networked 
social relations herald not a new awakening of the social spirit but capital-
ism’s deepening through the reorganization of human life as a whole and 
not of labor specifi cally?140 Th e latest Autonomist thinking certainly ad-
dresses the extraction of data141 but argues that although the creative ca-
pacity of humanity is exploited by the social quantifi cation sector,142 this 
capacity remains somehow unaff ected by the process, ready to jump into 

The Capitalization of Life without Limit 
35
resistive action.143 Th is ignores completely the pervasiveness of data co-
lonialism as a form of extraction and the force with which it is being ap-
plied, whether in the workplace, in fi nancial and legal transactions, or in 
our transformed understanding of the social world itself. And it ignores 
the power of data relations to restructure life for capital in societies such 
as China and Russia, where data colonialism proceeds under the auspices 
of an authoritarian state. As Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri write, “Be-
hind the value of data . . . stands the wealth of social relationships, so-
cial intelligence, and social production.”144 But there is no “behind” in the 
space in which data colonialism operates; it is not a stage with a front and 
back but a force fi eld, as powerful in the long run as the force fi eld of labor 
relations that transformed the social world two centuries ago.
In this chapter, we have unpacked the double theoretical foundations 
of our argument: data colonialism and the emergence through data rela-
tions of a new capitalist social order. In the next chapter, we look more 
closely at the Cloud Empire that is emerging through the playing out of 
data colonialism on a global scale.

This page intentionally left blank 

37
The Cloud Empire
Everything is free, except the video we capture of you. That we own. . . . 
I’m going to sell you your life back.
—Josh Harris1
2
IN 1999, YEARS BEFORE FACEBOOK WAS FOUNDED and just as Google was getting out 
of a garage, Josh Harris not only predicted but enacted the future of the 
internet in an art project he called Quiet: We Live in Public. Harris was 
a brilliant yet somewhat disturbed entrepreneur who made a fortune by 
creating platforms that integrated user content and new media in vision-
ary ways. For Quiet, he set up an underground bunker where volunteers 
lived for a month in hive-like conditions, cameras recording their every 
moment. Room, board, and amenities were provided free of charge. Th e 
experiment, which included Stasi-style interrogations and plenty of sex, 
drugs, and guns, ended in near catastrophe, but not before Harris had 
come up with the credo for the social quantifi cation sector, captured in the 
preceding quotation.
Fast-forward a couple of decades. According to end-of-2017 market-
capitalization values, if you are one of the two billion Android users in 
the world (Android being a “free” operating system), you represent a $363 
value to Google. Each Facebook user (using the “free” website) is worth 
$233 to the company.2 To parent company Tencent, based in China, each 
user of the “free” app WeChat represents a $539 value (at least before the 
signifi cant fall of their stock in 2018).3 Even when we pay for a service, the 
data obtained from us has considerable worth. A mobile phone company 
might record a user’s location about three hundred times a day.4 Th at com-

38 
Chapter 2
pany can then turn around and sell the data as part of an industry that 
generates $24 billion a year.5 Josh Harris seems to have realized early on 
that an infrastructure was being created for a system of pervasive yet in-
conspicuous surveillance that quantifi ed life and extracted profi t from it. 
But how did his vision come to be so perfectly realized?
In this chapter, we are using the image of the Cloud Empire to suggest 
that along with advancements in the coordinating power of information 
and communication technologies, oft en portrayed as progress, we are see-
ing a regression to blatant forms of appropriation that have a lot in com-
mon with the economic logic of historical colonialism. Although the word 
empire has acquired hyperbolic undertones, evoked as a quick and conve-
nient signifi er of exploitation on a grand scale, we use it here purposefully 
and strategically as a way to unpack the organized and ongoing appropri-
ation of social life through data. Unlike earlier forms of imperialism, the 
Cloud Empire is not founded on a particular state’s overt military and po-
litical desire for control of territories. Instead, it operates more informally, 
seeking to make all of life available to capitalization through data not by 
brute force but by sustaining the expansion of exploitable spaces.
As discussed in the previous chapter, data colonialism is what happens 
when human life becomes an input for capitalism. Th at human life should 
acquire this particular status under a capitalist system is not strange or 
new. Aft er all, capitalism seeks to commodify everything,6 so everything 
potentially becomes its input. But how “everything” is defi ned at a specifi c 
historical moment is what requires attention. What is unique about our 
historical moment, we argue, is that human life as organized through data 
relations becomes the direct input of capitalism, a condition that we de-
scribe as specifi cally and newly colonial.
One factor that makes the Cloud Empire colonial is the logistical and 
martial ethos of the enterprise of expansion. Colonialism requires an 
infra structure that facilitates the movement of resources, and what makes 
the Cloud Empire colonial is the scale and scope of this worldwide net-
work of extraction and distribution, which is managed through increas-
ingly sophisticated logistics. And we should not forget the debt that the 
concept and sometimes the practice of logistics owes to the military spirit. 

The Cloud Empire 
39
Th e smooth movement of resources along global supply chains is a move-
ment in which corporations and armies have oft en supported each other 
during colonial times. To be sure, Amazon does not require its own army, 
like the East India Company did. But as Deborah Cowen argues, logis-
tics “[map] the form of contemporary imperialism,”7 and as Ned Ros si-
ter points out, “Increasingly, logistics infrastructure is managed through 
computational systems of code and soft ware,”8 that is, through data. Th us, 
we can see data relations as part of a highly organized system of economic 
extraction and market penetration, a system founded on logistics.
Another factor that makes the Cloud Empire colonial is the enormous 
role that transnational corporate networks play in keeping the system run-
ning. In such an environment, we see the emergence of what Philip Stern 
called the “company-state”:9 a corporation with immense powers to regu-
late not just trade but also law, land, and liberty—in short, to regulate life. 
At the same time, as Immanuel Wallerstein points out, capitalism (and by 
extension, colonialism) cannot fl ourish without the active participation of 
the state, which controls the relations of production by legalizing (or refus-
ing to regulate) certain forms of labor, such as slavery in the past or tem-
porary or gig-based work nowadays.10 Th us, it is powerful corporations 
operating in collaboration with powerful states that are defi ning the new 
colonial geographies and constructing a diff erent social and economic or-
der. Th e world is conquered and divided roughly along old lines but with 
new motives. A clear axis is emerging that refl ects the divisions of politi-
cal and economic power and infl uence in today’s world, with China and 
the United States at opposite ends of that axis but equally engaged in ram-
pant data colonialism.
Before we go into more detail, let us summarize the relationship be-
tween our terms. Data colonialism is the how, the extractivist processes 
through which life gets newly appropriated by capitalism. Th e social quan-
tifi cation sector is the who, the consortium of private and public players 
who engage in data colonialism to achieve their fi nancial and political 
goals. And the Cloud Empire is the what, the overall organization of re-
sources and imagination that emerges from the practices of data colonial-
ism. Th e colonizing practices of the Cloud Empire are carried out mainly 

40 
Chapter 2
by the social quantifi cation sector but also by segments of other sectors 
such as fi nance, science, civil society, and cultural industries. Like older 
empires, the Cloud Empire is both practiced and imagined. It is a totality 
that emerges from data colonialism over time to achieve the imperial real-
ity of corporations’ domination of life through data.
How the Cloud Empire Came to Be
In chapter 1 we explained some technological preconditions for the emer-
gence of data colonialism. But how can we explain the emergence of the 
Cloud Empire in terms of the dynamics of capitalism itself? Th ere are two 
ways of thinking about this.
One is to see the creation of the Cloud Empire and the colonial drive 
toward data extraction as responses to various contradictions (or at least 
problems) within late twentieth-century capitalism.
Problem 1: As inequality increases and the majority of people have less 
money to spend, capitalism needs to fi nd new ways to exploit them that 
don’t involve buying things. Wealth is becoming less evenly distributed, 
which means most of it is accumulating at the top while the majority of 
people experience a loss of wealth.11 If people buy fewer and fewer things, 
this can become a problem for capitalism. Fortunately (for capitalism), so-
cial quantifi cation introduces a new model in which people can generate 
profi t for corporations simply by participating in social activities, without 
having to buy commodities.
Problem 2: If, as some argue, the rate of profi t is falling because of tech-
nological advances, social quantifi cation represents a valuable new source 
of profi t, at least for the immediate future. As new technologies are intro-
duced into the production process—or as workers are replaced with ma-
chines and artifi cial intelligence—things can be produced more cheaply, 
which brings down their prices, reducing the profi t that corporations can 
derive from selling their goods. Although opinions vary on how much ef-
fect this is having on the global economy,12 what is clear is that capitalism 
seeks opportunities to maximize profi t, and the social quantifi cation sec-
tor represents an opening, at least in the short term, to exploit new reve-
nue streams.

The Cloud Empire 
41
Problem 3: As natural resources are depleted, social life emerges as the 
next big reserve of resources available for extraction. Th e depletion of our 
planet’s natural resources can no longer be denied, and capitalism needs to 
fi nd new horizons of appropriation. Th e social quantifi cation sector poses 
as a “green” form of capitalism because it produces wealth by putting so-
cial, not natural, resources to work. Because the resources comprised by 
data from social life are symbolic and do not represent material wealth to 
the people from whose lives that data is extracted, it could conceivably but 
wrongly be argued that people are not dispossessed when corporations use 
that data. Th e eff ect of data colonialism, however, is to give corporations 
control of resources that can be extracted from social life by installing into 
people’s lives corporate powers and rights of surveillance that did not exist 
before. Th e result is to appropriate human life to corporate power and thus 
dispossess it of its independent agency, which is why we refer to this pro-
cess as a form of colonialism. Data colonialism completes the process of 
appropriating life that the expropriation of nature started.
A second explanation of how the Cloud Empire emerged emphasizes 
not disruptions but continuities. We noted at the end of chapter 1 how data 
colonialism’s social transformations go even deeper than those that stem 
from neoliberal politics and culture. Whereas neoliberalism has been at 
war with those parts of social life that remain outside the market, data co-
lonialism literally appropriates all of life for capitalism and therefore for 
markets. In this sense, data colonialism can be seen as a culmination of 
neoliberal ideology. In another sense, the kinds of changes that—in the 
West, at least—neoliberalism advocated or celebrated (the “liberalization” 
of trade and markets, the emergence of global fi nancial markets, and the 
huge growth of the personal fi nance sector) were among the practical pre-
conditions for data colonialism.13 Indeed, the tools of data colonialism 
(such as Machine Learning) emerged in part as solutions to the practical 
challenges thrown up by the need, for example, to manage complex global 
supply chains and massively accelerating fi nancial fl ows.
Both contextualizations are, in our view, important. Whether we see 
the emergence of the Cloud Empire more in terms of continuities or as a 
decisive break from what preceded it, its strategic importance in capital-
ism’s history remains clear.

42 
Chapter 2
The Cloud: From Metaphor to Episteme
Today’s data empires are not necessarily interested in land, but they are in-
terested—at least allegorically—in air. If there is one metaphor that cap-
tures the structure of this nascent empire, it is that of “the cloud.” Es-
sentially, cloud computing enables on-demand access to a shared pool of 
computing resources.14 Because information is stored on third-party serv-
ers, not on the owner’s computer, the data is said to live “in the cloud.” 
More than just a convenient and evocative metaphor, the concept of the 
cloud operates at diff erent levels to help shape our social realities.
To understand these diff erent levels of meaning, we can compare the 
similar ways in which the concepts of “the cloud” and “the network“ are 
used. Th e concept of the network (a set of nodes connected by links) can 
be used in three diff erent ways.15 First, it can be used as a metaphor to de-
scribe any kind of set of interconnected actors. Everything from proteins 
to terrorists can be said to be organized as a network. Second, networks 
can be used as a template not just to describe a form of organization but 
also to enforce it. When Facebook is described as a social network, we are 
not just using a metaphor to describe a group of nodes; we are suggesting 
that those nodes are arranged in a particular way by the architecture of 
the network, an architecture that facilitates some things and makes oth-
ers impossible. Th ird, the concept of the network can act as what Michel 
Foucault called an episteme,16 a way of imposing a certain structure on the 
world to make sense of it. For example, to think of social groupings as be-
ing composed of connections that can be quantifi ed (analyzed, predicted, 
and utilized) is a way of using a network episteme to understand and inter-
act with something by forcing an external structure upon it.
Th e concept of the cloud functions in a similar way. Th e cloud can be 
a metaphor to suggest that data is gathered together in a remote location. 
It can be a template to organize how data is extracted, stored, and ana-
lyzed so that it can be managed together “in” the cloud. And the cloud, 
especially the Cloud Empire, can act as an episteme, a model for knowl-
edge that organizes our social realities—even those that are not datafi ed—
into structures that can facilitate their datafi cation. When we say things 
such as “Pics or it didn’t happen!” or we participate in weekday memes like 

The Cloud Empire 
43
#Th rowbackTh ursday, we imply that the way to understand life is to pack-
age it and distribute it according to models specifi ed by the dynamics of 
the Cloud Empire.
One Buyer to Rule Them All
One reason the Cloud Empire is so successful at appropriating all of hu-
man life is because its biggest corporations can dominate our data rela-
tions both as sellers and buyers. Companies such as Google act as mo-
nopolies, “selling” us (sometimes providing to us for “free”) every device 
or service we need to live our datafi ed lives. But Google also acts as what 
economists call a monopsony, that is, the single buyer of all the data we 
produce (the identifi cation of monopsony as the dominant market struc-
ture of the internet was made by one of us back in 2013 and has since be-
come commonplace).17 A monopsony means that although digital tools 
have empowered us to become producers instead of mere consumers of 
media, there are limited options for choosing which platforms to partici-
pate in. Th ose of a certain demographic wanting to join a social network-
ing site will probably join Facebook, because that is where their friends 
are more likely to be. Th ose wanting to upload videos of cats are highly in-
centivized to use YouTube, because that is where most users are likely to 
watch; and so on. We—the producers of data—are legion, but the buyers of 
what we produce are few. A platform, in particular, is the perfect medium 
for monopsony, a means to produce social content for capital.
Th e power of a monopsony rests not so much in its ability to raise 
prices, like a monopoly, but in its ability to push prices downward.18 Lower 
prices might sound like a good thing, except for the fact that the reduc-
tion is accomplished not by reducing corporate profi ts but by paying less to 
those who supply or work for the monopsony. Because there are no other 
buyers of the workers’ labor, monopsonies are able to eff ectively set wages 
to whatever they want.19 Th at is why when it comes to participation in plat-
forms, we basically hand over our data to them at no cost, even though 
without our data these companies valued at billions of dollars (as of 2017, 
Facebook is valued at $434 billion, Snapchat at $35 billion, and so on) have 
little to show for themselves. Some might celebrate the power of the in-
ternet to subvert capitalism and decentralize cultural production,20 but 

44 
Chapter 2
this power means little if a handful of corporations control the entire in-
frastructure of data appropriation and use. Th e internet, which originally 
represented a rejection of mass media, is being remassifi ed. On a regu-
lar day, Netfl ix and YouTube account for half of all internet traffi  c in the 
United States, with massive implications for their ability to “buy” and dis-
tribute content for money or otherwise.21 Th e one-to-many model of mass 
media dissemination has simply been replaced by a many-to-one model, 
not the democratic many-to-many model we once hoped for.22
Th e monopoly-monopsony hybrids we are describing represent mas-
sive concentrations of power. Th ese companies currently exercise a hold 
over the infrastructure that makes social quantifi cation possible; they con-
trol everything from undersea cables to satellites to the “last mile” archi-
tecture that delivers internet service to individuals. Th ey also control the 
environments or platforms in which data is being generated, the design 
and production of the devices through which data is collected, and the 
computing capacity necessary to analyze the data, including through in-
creasingly sophisticated machine learning methods that do not require ex-
plicit human intervention. Finally, they also control the content. Whether 
it is user-generated or a corporation’s intellectual property, legal and tech-
nical mechanisms have been put in place to ensure that these corporations 
can either co-own it, derive value from it, or at least control its distribu-
tion (for example, companies such as Apple and GoPro have been appro-
priating user-generated content and integrating it into their own market-
ing campaigns).23
In a post-Snowden, post–Cambridge Analytica era, this kind of critique 
of social quantifi cation monopsonies is no longer diffi  cult to fi nd. We seek 
to expand this discussion by articulating a theory of data-based social quan-
tifi cation as the key means to install a new method of economic and social 
power. Our point is that through datafi cation, social interactions in all their 
forms become a domain in which market power can be exercised and value 
can be extracted, sometimes through extended means of labor and other 
times without any apparent activity on the part of those dominated but al-
ways under the rubric of a kind of appropriation and exploitation.
Appropriation and exploitation are the reasons we believe it is still rel-
evant to talk about colonialism in the age of data. Th ey are not outdated 

The Cloud Empire 
45
features of an old system but relations that newly defi ne our present age. 
Marx, in an attempt to identify the characteristics of industrial capital-
ism, diff erentiated what he was trying to describe from previous modes 
of production, including those forms of primitive accumulation that can 
be said to include historical colonialism. But as David Harvey points out, 
the problem with this approach is that it relegates “accumulation based 
upon predation, fraud, and violence to an ‘original stage’ that is consid-
ered no longer relevant or . . . as being somehow ‘outside of’ the capitalist 
system.”24 Our thesis is that primitive accumulation does not precede cap-
italism but goes hand in hand with it. We follow authors such as Shoshana 
Zuboff , Julie Cohen, and Saskia Sassen25 in recognizing an emergent phase 
of primitive accumulation so unique and historically signifi cant that it de-
serves treatment as a new stage of history that we call data colonialism.
The Logic of the Cloud Empire
Is the extraction of data like the extraction of bounty minerals, natural 
riches, or cash crops? Are companies such as Facebook and Google just 
as responsible as company-states26 like the East India Company, the Hud-
son Bay Company, or United Fruit were for devastating their colonies and 
enriching their empires? We are defi nitely not arguing that there is a one-
to-one correspondence between using an app to share pictures of cute cats 
and participating in a process that decimated the natural resources and in-
digenous populations of vast areas of our planet. But if colonialism can be 
understood, among other things, as a process that allows one party to oc-
cupy the living space of another and appropriate his resources, overpower-
ing him through a combination of ideological rationalizations and techno-
logical means (which include the use of surveillance and dominance), then 
we propose that we have entered a new phase of colonialism. To say this is 
not in any way to forget the racist, sexist, exploitative, and Eurocentric leg-
acy of historical colonialism (which, aft er all, continues to shape the way 
we relate to each other today, even online).
With this appropriation comes very specifi c reorganizations of space. 
Th e machines of data colonialism shape and mold the space around us, 
creating the new geographies of the Cloud Empire. As Lisa Parks and Ni-
cole Starosielski27 point out, the very infrastructure of digital networks 

46 
Chapter 2
(the wires, servers, and signals that constitute them) are the embodiment 
and medium of violence, the conduit through which extraction takes 
place. Th is infrastructure follows many of the same colonial routes of pre-
vious centuries, establishing vertical connections between the colonies 
and the centers of empire, where wealth accumulates and where the mana-
gerial and technical elites of the empire are still educated.
But the issue is not just about the continuity, through digital infra-
structures, of old imperial routes. Th e human and environmental relations 
of production also remain characteristically colonial. Raw materials for 
the electronic infrastructure that supports the social quantifi cation sec-
tor still come from Africa, Asia, and Latin America, with 36 percent of 
the Earth’s tin and 15 percent of its silver going into electronics manufac-
turing.28 Massive energy usage translates into pollution29 that, along with 
the dumping of toxic waste from the electronics industry, continues to im-
pact poor communities disproportionately (by 2007, 80 percent of elec-
tronic waste was exported to the developing world).30 And much of the la-
bor necessary for the social quantifi cation sector is still located in places 
such as Asia, where it is abundant and cheap. In China, manufacturer Fox-
conn, responsible for about half of the world’s electronics production, em-
ploys a massive workforce of one million laborers who are managed under 
military- style conditions.31 Meanwhile, much of the distressing work of 
content moderation for platforms (weeding out violent and pornographic 
images) is done in places such as the Philippines.32
How the Social Quantiﬁ cation Sector Works
If data in the cloud is stored in data centers and not in personal computers, 
this brings up the very important question of who owns it. Whereas ear-
lier models of the internet allowed for distributed ownership of resources 
that could be used collectively, the cloud centralizes ownership and estab-
lishes very specifi c parameters for how data is shared. Instead of data be-
ing stored at each individual computer and each individual node deciding 
what data to share or not share, the cloud represents a model in which data 
is stored in “banks” that are owned by private corporations. Owning and 
maintaining these clouds is the largest-growing IT sector, with $547 bil-

The Cloud Empire 
47
lion estimated to be spent worldwide on infrastructure-as-a-service by the 
end of 2018.33
Once data generated by individuals is stored in the cloud, it is the cor-
porations that decide what data other users are allowed to “borrow” from 
the bank, without those users being able to permanently store it in a way 
that would let them freely reproduce or transform it. Th at is why stream-
ing—or downloading content in a format intended for short-term stor-
age and access—is the norm instead of storing content locally and per-
manently. In this model, users are no longer the proprietors of any data 
they produce or acquire, and they don’t get to decide what is collected or 
shared or for what purposes. From producers and owners, they pass into 
being renters of data, laborers who generate data to be sent back to the 
servers or, as earlier discussed, who are the source of life streams from 
which such data can be automatically extracted. Ned Rossiter argues that 
“[as] an apparatus that governs the storage, processing, and transmission 
of data, the data center extracts value from the social and economic life of 
connection.”34
Th e infrastructure of the cloud thus enforces a certain violence of dis-
possession, which necessitates a broader critique of the political economy 
of the Cloud Empire. Our use of the label “social quantifi cation sector” is 
intended precisely to expand the discussion beyond infrastructure and to 
single out corporations and other actors operating at the intersection of 
larger regions of the economy, including the information and communi-
cation technologies (ICT) sector and the arts, entertainment, and recre-
ation sector.
Although our main focus is companies that seek to profi t from the cap-
italization of our social lives, it is important to keep in mind the relation 
that the social quantifi cation sector has to the larger ICT sector, and in-
deed to the wider business world, in its use of ICTs. Plainly stated, with-
out the tools and business models of the ICT sector, the social quantifi ca-
tion sector would not exist. A company such as IBM—which predates any 
social media company by decades—may today be involved in specifi c as-
pects of social quantifi cation (IBM owns weather.com, for instance). But 
its scope is oriented mostly to business applications, including consulting 
and cloud computing. For these reasons, companies like IBM may not fea-

48 
Chapter 2
ture prominently in our discussion of social quantifi cation, although this 
should not obscure the fact that the amount of digital data generated by 
businesses exceeds the amount of data generated by the social quantifi ca-
tion sector (even though the two are intersecting).35 Th e point is that the 
social quantifi cation sector is more of a subsector of the entire ICT busi-
ness sector, useful in identifying specifi c activities and approaches that re-
volve around the capturing of everyday social acts and their translation 
into quantifi able data, which is then analyzed and used for the genera-
tion of profi t. Th e point also is that in the era of data colonialism, the ICT 
sector is working ever more closely with all forms of business within the 
wider Cloud Empire.
We can develop an initial image of the social quantifi cation sector by 
focusing on its biggest and best-known players—the company-states de-
scribed earlier.
The Big Five
First, there is Amazon, one of the world’s most valuable brands, with over 
310 million active customer accounts worldwide.36 As an online store, Am-
azon captures about half of all the money that people in the United States 
spend online (around $136 billion in net sales during 2016). Amazon is no 
longer just an online store but a company engaged in electronics manufac-
turing and media production/distribution while it prepares to “disrupt” 
the grocery, health care, shipping, and retail businesses, among others. 
It is also a huge web-services provider, currently supplying 44 percent of 
the world’s cloud computing capacity, with clients ranging from Netfl ix to 
the CIA.37
Next there is Apple, which has become known for the high integration 
of its hardware and its soft ware: its devices use only Apple’s operating sys-
tem, and soft ware from other providers runs on its devices only when Ap-
ple allows it. Such a degree of control is seen as authoritarian by some and 
as the epitome of good design by others. Regardless, this stance allows Ap-
ple to distinguish itself from its competitors by, for instance, building ad 
blockers right into its Safari web browser or claiming that they do not sell 
any of the data they collect from users.38 Even if this is the case, Apple 
must take some responsibility for the labor conditions under which its de-

The Cloud Empire 
49
vices are manufactured, for its collusion with the media industry in ways 
that are not favorable to consumers,39 or for its innovative ways to avoid 
paying taxes: the company pays 9.8 percent in taxes, whereas global corpo-
rations typically pay around 24 percent.40
Facebook’s business model is premised entirely on its ability to capture 
data from its users and sell it to advertisers. Of the fi ve corporations being 
discussed, Facebook is also the one that seeks to profi t the most from con-
ditioning users to conduct their social lives on its platforms, which have 
extended to include popular services like WhatsApp and Instagram. Th e 
company has come under fi re for experimenting on users, targeting ads 
to them based on biased criteria, and shirking its responsibility to pro-
tect them from harmful or false content.41 Additionally, Free Basics, a pro-
gram with fi ft y million users that promises to bring free internet access 
to populations in underdeveloped countries, has been accused of breaking 
net neutrality principles by allowing users to access only certain websites, 
above all, Facebook.42
Google (also known by the name of its parent company, Alphabet) ac-
quired its prominence by becoming the search portal for the internet and, 
more importantly, monetizing the search process by including advertise-
ments in the results. Today, Google processes more than 40,000 search 
queries worldwide every second, or 1.2 trillion searches every year. Its cloud 
products—which include free email, maps, offi  ce soft ware, communication 
tools, and so on—and its Android phone operating system are used by bil-
lions of people all over the world, not to mention the number of users that 
watch up to fi ve billion videos a day on YouTube, its most popular subsid-
iary.43 Its dual dominance in the phone operating system and search en-
gine markets has attracted intense scrutiny from regulators, particularly 
the European Commission. It is also a huge player in artifi cial intelligence.
Finally, there is Microsoft , which was partly successful in transfer-
ring its early dominance in the PC soft ware market to the web market by 
bundling its internet browser (Internet Explorer) with its desktop operat-
ing system (Windows). Since then, the company has struggled to keep up 
with its competitors, although it retains a substantial share of the business 
IT market and it currently owns the second-largest cloud service in the 
world.44 It is also restructuring its business toward AI.

50 
Chapter 2
What is unique about these big fi ve monopoly-monopsony hybrids is 
that they have carved out the social quantifi cation space among them-
selves under an informal Pax Britannica–type of noncompetitive agree-
ment. Yes, Microsoft  spends about $5 billion a year keeping up with Google 
Search, and Apple spends about $1 billion45 competing only with Google 
Maps (just as Google tried unsuccessfully to launch Google+, an alterna-
tive to Facebook). But what this really means is that there are no other cor-
porations out there with the resources to compete at the same scale in this 
sector.
Th is is not to say that other large-scale competitors will not emerge 
in the near future. Walmart, for instance, is currently partnering with 
Micro soft  to attempt to bolster its digital presence to compete with Ama-
zon and has for more than a decade led the retail sector in the adoption of 
systematic data extraction and processing.46 And this is also not to say that 
smaller players are not important.
Beyond the Big Five
Th e Big Five sometimes interact and mix with other players in the social 
quantifi cation sector. Th e operations of these players can be organized into 
fi ve key (oft en intersecting) domains: hardware, soft ware, platforms, data 
analytics, and data brokerage (all of which may also describe some of the 
actions of the Big Five!).
Th e hardware area includes manufacturers of digital devices that ex-
tract and use social data, from laptops and tablets to phones and watches 
to gaming consoles, robots, cars, drones, and so on. A manufacturer of a 
“dumb” television set would not be part of the social quantifi cation sec-
tor, but any manufacturer of a “smart” device (a product that collects and 
analyzes information about its user) would be included. Th is sector also 
includes the manufacturers of the infrastructure required to run the so-
cial quantifi cation sector (routers, servers, transmitters, and so on) and the 
service providers that deploy hardware to deliver internet and phone ac-
cess to individuals. Examples of corporations in this domain include Ap-
ple, Cisco, Samsung, Amazon, Microsoft , and Verizon.
Soft ware includes the developers of the programs and environments 
that support social quantifi cation, including operating systems, websites, 

The Cloud Empire 
51
applications, services, games, apps, and plug-ins. Examples in this domain 
include Google, Apple, Microsoft , and Ubisoft .
It is important to note an emerging area at the intersection of hardware 
and soft ware, the so-called Internet of Th ings (IoT). By attaching sensors 
and connectivity features to a host of everyday objects, the IoT is creating 
a vast network of wired appliances that track, monitor, and report social 
data (data variously relevant to social actors). It is estimated that the num-
ber of connected devices will grow from nearly 27 billion in 2017 to 125 bil-
lion in 2030.47 Th ese devices include everything from cars to electric ap-
pliances and smart personal assistants such as Amazon’s Echo and Google 
Home. Some home systems can recognize the age, sex, and weight of peo-
ple in the vicinity as well as their emotional state, the language they speak, 
and the activities they might be engaged in.48
Next there are the builders of platforms, another distinctive particular 
combination of hardware and soft ware that, as it were, convenes streams 
of the social world for profi table data extraction. Any networked service 
that can collect data from users, via websites or devices, can be defi ned as 
a platform. Th ese environments can include not just “free” socialization 
services such as Facebook, Twitter, and WeChat but also platforms for the 
provision of paid services such as Uber, Airbnb, and Netfl ix (which, ac-
cording to its corporate website, counted on 130 million worldwide sub-
scribers by the second quarter of 2018). Platforms exist across all commer-
cial sectors, including banking, entertainment, fi nance, insurance, retail, 
travel, and, of course, romance and sex (from dating to porn platforms).
Digital platforms give gatekeeping power to their owners, much as the 
navigation routes of historical colonialism empowered the towns near 
where goods had to land. But because of the connected nature of the on-
line environment, today’s gatekeeping power has consequences on a vast 
global scale, not just a local or national one. All the data generated and 
captured through hardware and soft ware in platforms is then processed 
by two other important types of players in the social quantifi cation sector.
Data analytics fi rms are companies that collect data and analyze it. 
Hardware, soft ware, and platform companies analyze their own data, of 
course, but analytics fi rms provide more specialized services such as psy-
chometrics (large-scale analysis of users’ personalities and preferences) 

52 
Chapter 2
and telematics (coordinating production and distribution processes using 
data collected at multiple points). US examples of marketing-oriented an-
alytic fi rms include Paxata, Trifacta, IBM, and Google. But there is a wide 
spectrum of companies that collect and analyze data across many domains 
of life, including health (Mede Analytics), genetics (23andMe), education 
(Junyo), crime (Wynyard), and so on. In China, data analytics are con-
centrated in big corporations such as Alibaba, Baidu, and WeChat. Some 
of these fi rms focus on data that can be used for sales and marketing pur-
poses, but they increasingly integrate information about users’ social lives 
into their models and products. Th is information can also be used for po-
litical purposes, as evidenced in the recent case of Cambridge Analytica 
and Facebook.
Data brokerage fi rms are also companies that collect data but more 
with an intention of “packaging” and selling any personal information re-
lated to fi nancial, demographic, criminal, political, recreational, and social 
activities as well as data about general interests, purchase behavior, and the 
health of individuals. Examples include Acxiom, Datalogix, eBureau, ID 
Analytics, PeekYou, and Recorded Future. Data brokers take many forms, 
from those who simply gather data to those who match buyers and sellers 
of data to specialist data brokers who process data for specifi c purposes, 
for example, to advise creditors about debtor risk (such as Experian or the 
troubled Equifax). Th ere is even the practice of onboarding, which involves 
matching data from one’s offl  ine activity (gathered, for example, if you give 
your email address in the middle of a transaction that you thought was of-
fl ine) with the much larger amount of data available about one’s online ac-
tivities.49 Th e public recently got a rare glimpse of some of the secret prac-
tices of the social quantifi cation sector during testimony to the US Senate 
Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, which revealed 
that the data broker industry was collecting and selling lists of rape and 
domestic abuse victims, suff erers of dementia and erectile dysfunction, 
and payday loan responders, among others.50
In theory, all this data collection must work around privacy and con-
sumer-rights constraints, but oft en it does not. Although some countries 
off er more protection than others, Katherine Strandburg’s observation that 
“US law for the most part has not regulated the datafi cation or repurposing 

The Cloud Empire 
53
of information that is acquired as a byproduct of providing service”51 is ap-
plicable beyond North America and particularly in developing countries.52 
In India, for instance, one can easily buy lists of one hundred thousand 
individuals (car owners, retired women, or any number of categories) for 
less than $250; the lists are generated from information collected by mobile 
companies or even by enterprising individuals working at banks or hospi-
tals looking to make some extra cash.53 In China, regulation about what 
data companies can collect and what they can do with it is intentionally 
relaxed, which the government hopes will make Chinese companies more 
competitive in the global market.54 Across the globe, regulation is also dif-
fi cult because corporations can work across two or more of the abovemen-
tioned domains; Google, for instance, is a hardware and soft ware manu-
facturer as well as a data analyst and broker. In other cases, the operations 
of one corporation can be intimately tied to another. For example, Acxiom 
and Facebook were partners until recently, which meant that the latter pro-
vided data to the former.55 Th e fact that ties were severed in the wake of the 
Cambridge Analytica scandal suggests that Facebook probably plans to in-
ternalize the data-aggregation functions that Acxiom previously provided.
Th ere is great variety in terms of the size, scope, and mission of the 
players operating in the social quantifi cation sector. Some of them are 
small (sometimes one-person) developers of programs or services, such as 
the WaterMinder app mentioned at the beginning of the book. Th ere are 
also academic, governmental, and nonprofi t organizations performing an-
alytics, usually for research purposes but sometimes in collaboration with 
corporations. And there are powerful contractors that work closely with 
the government, including the army and police forces. Consider Taser, 
the company that produces the stun guns used by cops. Taser, through its 
Axon AI division, provides free body cameras and video storage to po-
lice departments and then sells them services that use the data generated 
by the cameras to perform things such as facial recognition and predictive 
crime analysis.56 Th ere are also the rogue players in the social quantifi ca-
tion sector: criminal or clandestine entities that engage in everything from 
manufacturing of knockoff  smart devices to pirating of content to stealing 
and hacking of social data. Given that 2017 saw 1,120 data breaches with 
more than 171 million records exposed in the United States alone,57 no one 

54 
Chapter 2
can deny that criminal players are part of the social quantifi cation sector. 
Th e role of crime is particularly important when, as noted in chapter 1, the 
overall insecurity of infrastructures of connection is increasing.
Finally, when considering the size and composition of the social quan-
tifi cation sector, we should also consider its economic impact. In terms 
of actual revenue, it is important not to overestimate the size of the so-
cial quantifi cation sector in the wider economy.58 Oil and gas, fi nancial 
services, automotive, and pharmaceuticals are in fact larger sectors than 
ICT. For instance, in 2016, oil conglomerate Saudi Aramco made $311 bil-
lion dollars in revenue, compared to Amazon’s $107 billion; Toyota made 
$237 billion compared to Google’s $89.5 billion; Apple posted a revenue of 
$234 billion, less than Walmart’s $482 billion; and Facebook’s $27.64 bil-
lion and Uber’s $6.5 billion of revenue are considerably less than Volks-
wagen’s $237 billion.59 But it is equally important not to underestimate the 
prominence of the ICT sector in terms of stock market capitalization and 
not to underrate the considerable growth in this sector: in the fi rst quar-
ter of 2008, the top four corporations in terms of market capitalization 
(the value of the shares of a corporation) were Exxon/Mobil ($452 billion), 
Petro China ($423 billion), General Electric ($369 billion), and Gazprom 
($299 billion). A decade later, in the fi rst quarter of 2018, they were Apple 
($851 billion), Alphabet/Google ($717 billion), Microsoft  ($702 billion), and 
Amazon ($700 billion). In that same year, Apple broke the $1 trillion re-
cord in capitalization for a brief period.
By itself, the social quantifi cation sector might be less economically 
signifi cant than others and certainly not as signifi cant as mainstream 
opinion would lead us to believe. But it plays a key role in the overall struc-
turing of the Cloud Empire and the shaping of the social world around it. 
Its smaller economic role is more than made up for by its enormous infl u-
ence on data processing and business models within the wider social order 
built around data colonialism.
Colonizer Within: The Social Quantiﬁ cation Sector in China
Although the infl uence of Google, Apple, Facebook, and Amazon is felt 
throughout the world, the power of non-Western social quantifi cation em-
pires that are regional and internal facing should not be overlooked.

The Cloud Empire 
55
Th ere are important examples of countries that have not been entirely 
colonized by the Western quantifi cation sector but have instead contin-
ued a historical practice of colonizing within their own borders. In Rus-
sia, there are companies such as Yandex and Vkontakte operating in the 
search and social networking markets, companies with close links to the 
government but which nonetheless compete nationally with Google, Face-
book, and the rest of the US social quantifi cation sector.60 India’s approach 
in the IT sector, meanwhile, has been to leverage cheap labor and engi-
neering expertise to attract global investment. But in contrast with yes-
terday’s image of the Indian call center providing customer support for 
Western companies, India’s current IT sector represents a burgeoning eco-
system of start-ups, technology developers, and service providers of global 
reach. Th is infrastructure is being developed in close collaboration with 
the state through public–private partnerships. For instance, India’s data 
centers, which provide server hosting and colocation services to compa-
nies all over the world, are supported by the government through land al-
lotments and tax rebates; furthermore, the IT sector and the government 
work closely on national data-management projects such as census or cit-
izen-identifi cation programs.61 Also, India’s immense population consti-
tutes an equally enormous market for both foreign and domestic fi rms, 
with the digital economy in India soon poised to represent a trillion-dollar 
market.62 Th is is why fi nancers and corporations in Asia and the United 
States are racing to fund start-ups and acquire companies in India; 63 as 
of this writing, Walmart is suspected of wanting to buy e-commerce giant 
Flipkart to compete with Amazon, and Alibaba plans to enter the game 
through its acquisition of Paytm.64
Th e most comprehensive example of internal colonization is, of course, 
China, a Cloud Empire in and of itself that is as advanced as the West’s 
and could in the near future surpass it. In fact, it is already extending to 
other parts of the world not just through hardware but also through cloud 
computing, fi nancial services, and artifi cial intelligence.65 Companies such 
as Baidu, Alibaba, and Tencent are sizeable conglomerates with more di-
versifi cation than their Western counterparts. If we take early 2018 values 
as our vantage point (but note Tencent’s subsequent loss of approximately 
$150 billion), the panorama looks as follows: Baidu, with a market value of 

56 
Chapter 2
$87 billion, focuses on searches and ads but also provides services such as 
maps, games, tools for small business, food delivery, and electronic wal-
lets. Alibaba, with a market value of $481 billion, specializes in e- commerce 
and online shopping but also off ers phone payment methods, cloud ser-
vices, mobile entertainment, marketing, enterprise communication, and 
its own operating system. Tencent, with a market value of $540.6 billion, 
showcases mobile chat and social networking, including the ubiquitous 
QQ and WeChat.66
Apart from the diverse scope and reach of each of these companies, the 
Chinese social quantifi cation sector diff erentiates itself from the West in a 
number of ways. First, it is much more integrated with fi nancial and bank-
ing operations; corporations are better equipped to track credit scores and 
off er bank-like services, including mobile micropayments featuring facial 
ID and various forms of platform-based commerce (innovations that the 
West is starting to replicate). It is worth keeping in mind that China is 
the largest e-commerce market in the world, twice as large as the United 
States. Second, China is much more interested in integrating the rural 
economy into the whole. Alibaba, for instance, has an extensive network 
of rural service centers that help farmers and small producers.67 JD.com 
(the third-largest tech company in the world, aft er Amazon and Alpha-
bet) has set up a system of delivery that allows even people in remote rural 
villages to buy items online and expect them to be delivered quickly and 
effi  ciently through a system relying on high-tech means such as drones 
and more traditional means such as delivery staff  recruited from the re-
gional population.68 Th is model could be exported to developing countries 
(in Africa, for instance) as an infrastructure for urban-rural integration 
that fl ows into the Chinese economy. Th ere is also a much more concerted 
eff ort to invest in artifi cial intelligence on the scale of the economy and 
society as a whole.69 Although Silicon Valley enjoys an early lead, China 
might quickly surpass it in terms of resources invested in AI-fueled ed-
ucation, research, and development. China’s 1.4 billion people, including 
its 730 million internet users, generate vast amounts of data that can be 
used to train AI algorithms and can be appropriated with little concern 
for privacy rights.70 Th ird, China’s social quantifi cation sector can use its 
AI technologies to collaborate with the government on ambitious projects 

The Cloud Empire 
57
such as the Internet Plus plan, which seeks to connect manufacturing, fi -
nance, government, agricultural, and medical services into one big infor-
mation superhighway.
Critics in the West see this close collaboration between government 
and internet companies as evidence of Chinese authoritarianism.71 Con-
sider the social credit system (discussed in chapter 1) currently being tested 
in China that will establish a nationwide data network to track the activi-
ties and reputations of every single citizen.72 Or note reports that facial rec-
ognition AI and big data are being used to monitor and control the move-
ment of Muslim ethnic minorities, turning the region of Xin jiang into a 
“surveillance laboratory.”73 On closer inspection, however, such initiatives 
are problematic not so much because they are uniquely anti democratic 
(the West has its own crises of civil rights) but because they perfectly il-
lustrate where datafi cation might eventually be headed everywhere. In the 
name of safety and security, other governments will fi nd it easier to claim 
they must not be left  at a disadvantage and will escalate the initiatives al-
ready in place (in fact, these governments might fi nd it appealing to im-
port ready-made systems of surveillance along with telecom infrastruc-
ture, as some African countries are doing from China).74 Ultimately, the 
close collaboration between a government that grants economic and legal 
advantages to tech companies75 and companies that help the government 
conduct its surveillance is a global feature of data colonialism, not one re-
stricted to China, Russia, or the United States.
To reiterate, data colonialism is what happens when life becomes the 
input of capitalism and becomes organized through data relations. As part 
of this process, data colonialism comes to depend on an emerging trans-
formation of social relations both within the formal economy and out-
side of it. Urgent calls for us to submit to this new order are portrayed as 
inevitable, when in fact they are not. Nonetheless, this alters neither the 
breadth of the new corporate ambition to transform social life nor the ex-
tent of the social inequalities that will emerge from implementing that am-
bition through the Cloud Empire. We have been clear that data colonial-
ism is transforming social relations beyond the context of labor, and we 
turn next to an analysis of how some aspects of work are indeed being re-
shaped by it.

58 
Chapter 2
Working in the Cloud Empire
Immanuel Wallerstein observed that “profi t is oft en greater when not all 
links in the chain are in fact commodifi ed.”76 By this he meant that capi-
talism has always relied on indirect modes of exploitation that can oper-
ate in addition to the direct modes of exploitation related to wage labor. 
Put diff erently, unpaid or underpaid work is of utmost importance in cap-
italism, whether that work is the work of the slave, the housewife, or the 
selfi e poster. Historically, this has served both to externalize costs so that 
it is members of society, not employers, who have to bear them and to ex-
tend capitalism beyond the formal economy. Today, social quantifi cation 
represents the most extensive attempt to construct a whole economy based 
on the free ride that capitalism can extract from our lives, so that modes 
of unpaid and underpaid work that were unimaginable before are legiti-
mized, normalized, and, in the long run, naturalized.
Unpaid Labor
Th ere is a lot of unpaid work performed by humans on social quantifi ca-
tion platforms, even when this work provides value to the network and 
allows the platform owners to enrich themselves. Consider, for instance, 
all the ways in which users can contribute free labor in the Local Guides 
program that is part of Google Maps. Th is program asks individuals to 
“Review a place,” “Rate a place,” “Add photos to a place,” “Answer ques-
tions about a place,” “Edit a place’s information or Edit a road on the map,” 
“Add a missing place,” “Check facts about places nearby,” and “Respond to 
Q&As.” In return, the platform off ers recognition; working for them can 
help “your contributions get noticed” and valued in this “gamifi ed” sys-
tem.77 Th e work can also be remunerated not in cash but in perks that can 
be used to further integrate workers into the platform (such as “3 months 
of Google Play Music and 75 off  a movie rental on Google Play” or some-
thing similar). Many social quantifi cation platforms have similar ways of 
rewarding users, but in general, the more “social” a platform is, the less ex-
pectation there is that users will be recompensed for their work, since the 
joy of social interaction facilitated by the platform is presented as enough 
payment. Julian Kücklich refers to this phenomenon in which participa-

The Cloud Empire 
59
tion itself generates value as playbor (part play, part labor), suggesting that 
from the perspective of capitalism, the means of production here are the 
players themselves.78
Companies in the social quantifi cation sector use unpaid labor not 
only to exploit users but to undermine other competitors in the cultural 
production sector. For instance, Jonathan Taplin points out that YouTube 
is the largest music-streaming platform in the world, to which users (un-
paid laborers) have uploaded practically every song in existence. At the 
same time, YouTube has relegated the job of monitoring for copyright in-
fringement to the owners of the underlying intellectual property (the re-
cord companies). Th e result is that artists and record companies collect 
less revenue from YouTube than from other music-streaming platforms, 
even though their content is played many more times on YouTube than 
anywhere else.79
Underpaid Labor
Sometimes, participating in the Cloud Empire economy is not an unpaid 
job but an underpaid one. Th e Turker is perhaps the quintessential ex-
ample. Turkers are freelance independent contractors who perform small 
tasks on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk platform, or MTurk, a crowd sourcing 
marketplace launched in 2005 where Requesters (businesses or individ-
uals) can post tasks that computers can’t currently perform or that are 
cheaper for humans to do. Armies of Turkers can then earn small amounts 
of money (usually less than one cent per task) to perform the jobs, which 
might include doing things such as categorizing, sorting, testing, rating, 
generating content, or training artifi cial intelligence algorithms that will 
eventually make the human Turker redundant. Workers are seemingly 
empowered because, as contractors, they set their own hours and choose 
their own tasks. But employers are empowered too, since they don’t have 
to pay payroll taxes, can avoid regulations concerning minimum wage and 
overtime work, and can get millions of microtasks performed that regular 
employees might resist doing.
MTurk never became a huge success (Turkers have consistently com-
plained it is nearly impossible to earn a living wage), but its real impact 
has been the inspiration it generated for what is now referred to as the gig 

60 
Chapter 2
economy. Also known as the sharing, peer, or on-demand economy, the gig 
economy continues the trend of replacing salaried full-time work with con-
tingent part-time “gigs.” Part-time work now accounts for almost one-fi ft h 
of the job growth in the United States since the 2008 recession ended. Ac-
cording to one estimate, currently there are around fi ft y-three million free-
lancers in the United States80 who, like Turkers, don’t have the opportunity 
to earn a living wage or receive essential work benefi ts through their free-
lance work. And yet, these trends are paradoxically being hailed—in the 
words of an Uber executive and former Clinton administration strategist—
as “democratizing capitalism” and “driving wealth down to the people.”81
A Pew report from 201682 put the supposedly transformative impact 
of the gig economy into perspective: 24 percent of Americans in that year 
reported making money from gig platforms, with only 8 percent (around 
twenty-six million) doing so from employment, as opposed to other ac-
tivities such as selling things on eBay. For comparison purposes, in China 
the sharing economy generated $500 billion in transactions involving six 
hundred million people in 2015 alone (although “sharing” in this context 
might simply mean renting a bicycle from one of the forty companies that 
facilitate fi ft y million rides every day).83
Th e gig economy, for all its limitations, has signifi cance as an exem-
plar of where capitalism is heading. Platforms and apps do the work of 
connecting demand (people looking to hire someone to do a job) to sup-
ply (temp workers willing to perform that job for a price set by the plat-
form). Because the economic transactions happen within and through the 
platform, companies are able to benefi t by taking a cut from each transac-
tion, through advertising, or by extracting data from the transactions that 
they can then sell to third parties, all the while washing their hands of any 
messy contractual obligations between themselves and the users (some 
platforms simply charge giggers to bid on jobs, regardless of whether they 
get the job). Th is is monopsony in action.
Th e demographics of the people who employ gig workers (in the United 
States, at least) seem to skew strongly toward young, white, wealthy ur-
ban dwellers.84 Th e demographics of the workers themselves (again, in 
the United States) skew toward those who are young, lower income (less 
than $30,000 per year), and black or Latino. Of the 8 percent of Americans 

The Cloud Empire 
61
making money from gig platforms, three-fi ft hs felt that their platform in-
come was “essential” or “important” to them.85 Anecdotal evidence seems 
to corroborate the fact that some gig workers do have opportunities to 
engage in new creative and leisure activities as a result of their unstruc-
tured lifestyles. But the system as a whole is designed to maximize plat-
form profi t at the expense of workers.86 Here is just one testimonial from a 
twenty-six-year-old kindergarten worker, babysitter, and cook:
It’s diffi  cult to think positively about my situation. I keep busy but I have 
to constantly juggle diff erent gigs every day (sometimes I start working at 
7:30 a.m. and I get home aft er midnight). What scares me the most is that I 
have no guarantees, no steady pay, no stability. . . . I currently work seven days 
a week to make €750 (£525) per month and I would earn a lot more doing a 
more traditional job with a traditional employment contract, but these ar-
rangements are a rarity these days.87
Since retirement plans seem to be out of the question, the advice given to 
gig workers is that they should simply plan to not retire!88 What we see is 
essentially a technologized form of a subsistence economy that seems to 
be creating a new kind of “reserve army of labor.” Marx had described the 
importance in capitalism of maintaining part of the population in unem-
ployment (the “reserve army”) so that they could be easily hired in times 
when overproduction was necessary.89 Th e promise of intermittent work 
on platforms positions large numbers of people as a reserve army for work 
outside institutions. Th us, the combined eff ects of the gig economy and 
automation will likely be disastrous for most workers—not only will many 
of them face replacement by machines but those who remain will more 
likely accept lower wages and worse working conditions as the specter of a 
reserve army of gig workers, robots, and AI hangs over their heads.
Given all of this, considerable PR maneuvering is required to make 
such a depressing trend palatable. Here, what in chapter 1 we called the 
ideology of personalization can do useful work. In its own marketing 
materials, Airbnb promotes itself as “an economic lifeline for the mid-
dle class.”90 An ad for Uber features an African American driver speak-
ing of the economic necessity to have a “side hustle,” a necessity Uber al-
lows him to fulfi ll while also giving him time to “chill” whenever he wants 

62 
Chapter 2
and to spend more time with his family.91 Th e reality of Uber in particu-
lar, however, paints a less rosy picture. Alex Rosenblat and Luke Stark92 re-
view Uber’s record of economic manipulation through surge pricing and 
sudden driver deactivation as well as the general opacity of its algorithmic 
processing from the point of view of its drivers (the company can make it 
seem as though there are more drivers available in a location than there 
actually are, simply to push worker wages down). Unsurprisingly, Uber’s 
retention rates are quite low, with 96 percent of new Uber drivers quitting 
their jobs within their fi rst year.93 Th is paints a picture of the Uber driver 
as the least important part of the equation, truly an expendable member of 
a reserve army. And yet, until recently, the company was a darling in terms 
of market valuation, and “uberize” became a widely used verb within in-
vestor circles.
Summarizing in a way that is applicable to the whole sharing econ-
omy, Melissa Gregg puts it well when she says that “liberation [from em-
ployee contracts] frees up Uber from the traditional responsibilities of be-
ing an employer. It is ingenious to make employment less predictable, and 
thus less costly, in the name of independence and choice.”94 As such, re-
gardless of its size or long-term success, Uber remains an important ex-
emplar of a projected direction for global capitalism: it represents the po-
tential to create new forms of exploitative work, to substantially increase 
the levels of exploitation within established forms of work, and to circum-
vent human labor altogether (the company is currently investing heavily 
in driverless cars and trucks). Data-gathering and data tracking are essen-
tial to all these functions, the fact of which makes exploitation seem like 
the “natural” outcome of algorithmic processes. Gone are the narratives of 
a benign form of capitalism in which institutions still acknowledged a so-
cial responsibility. Instead, we have institutions that merely engineer “pro-
cesses” or “interfaces,” and society has to live with the results.
Despite the challenges that gig workers face, those who celebrate the 
“disruptive” eff ects that the sharing economy is having on traditional sec-
tors (hotel and taxi companies, for instance) could perhaps be excused for 
seeing in all this a benefi t for society—cheaper services. What is missing 
from such an analysis, however, is any discussion of long-term eff ects. Th e 
buyers of gig services today may enjoy lower costs, but if more and more 

The Cloud Empire 
63
of them are forced to become the providers of gig services tomorrow, then 
the “disruption” that the sharing economy is creating is clearly negative 
over the longer term.
Surveilled Labor
Not only are workers’ conditions becoming more precarious, but their mo-
ment-to-moment activities are also becoming increasingly monitored. 
A large transformation underway is datafi cation’s role in changing how 
workers are managed, which entails an increasing degree of monitoring. 
As Larry Catá Backer argues, “Surveillance has become not only a tech-
nique of governance, but its substitute,”95 with assumptions and objectives 
beyond passive data collection. Extending beyond the workplace to all as-
pects of a worker’s life, this new kind of surveillance is very much a do-
main of the social quantifi cation sector. Its evolution must be placed in the 
longer history of surveillance within capitalism, which, as Christian Fuchs 
points out,96 was already noted by Marx. Alongside the consumer surveil-
lance, discussed more fully in chapter 3, and the mutual surveillance be-
tween competitors that is inherent to market economies, capitalist labor 
relations have—according to Fuchs—always been characterized by at least 
three types of surveillance: applicant surveillance, workplace surveillance, 
and workforce surveillance.97
For applicant surveillance, there is an increasing reliance on automated 
testing rather than on human assessment. By 2014, an estimated 60 to 
70 percent of US prospective employees faced online personality tests be-
fore they could even be seen or spoken to by a human being.98 Personality 
testing dates back at least to the 1930s, but greater data processing power 
has massively increased the capacity to integrate such testing and the re-
sults it produces into the categorization of actual and potential workers. 
One estimate suggests there might be as many as seventy-fi ve-million as-
sessment tests administered to potential employees each year in the United 
States.99 A form of anticipatory management, personality tests can fl ag any 
criterion an employer chooses—for example, candidates who are prone 
to join a labor union, who display potential markers for mental illness, or 
who are likely to ask for salary increases or, conversely, remain on the job 
without asking for a raise.100

64 
Chapter 2
Once an employee is recruited, both workplace and workforce sur-
veillance take over. Th e line between the two is in fact disappearing, as 
the workplace becomes any and every site the worker might happen to be 
at, while being pervasively measured and monitored through continuous 
streams of data collection and processing. Some of the models currently 
employed are discussed in the following paragraphs.
Smart scheduling. Work shift -management systems are increasingly 
being used by businesses such as retail stores and restaurants to schedule 
work periods, allowing corporations to replace a full-time workforce with 
a “just in time” army of temps whose schedules are irregular and unpre-
dictable. Th e benefi t for the corporations is that they can increase profi ts 
by avoiding overstaffi  ng and full-time contracts. As with the gig economy, 
the benefi ts to employees are much less clear. As of 2017, only 17 percent of 
US retail employees had a set or constant work schedule.101
Data-driven micromanagement of workers. Th is includes methods such 
as voice picking (short for “voice-directed order picking”), used extensively 
in Amazon’s warehouses. Whereas other techniques for managing work-
ers (RFID tags on goods, GPS tracking of workers and the machines they 
are operating) still leave the worker some autonomy (their position is man-
aged only indirectly), voice picking works to channel surveillance directly 
through the worker’s body. Th e worker is instructed through a headset 
that relays automated verbal comments—issued not by a person but by a 
warehouse management system—while of course simultaneously watch-
ing the worker’s movements. Th e system uses voice recognition to under-
stand what the worker is saying.102 Similar technologies of surveillance are 
in use in many other industries, such as retail, and there is evidence of 
considerable negative impacts on workers’ health as they struggle to keep 
up with their AI-driven foremen.103
Remote desktop surveillance. Th is method includes systems such as 
those used by online staffi  ng platform Upwork to keep an eye on freelanc-
ers doing work from home (about a third of the US workforce). Th e system, 
installed voluntarily by the freelancers, takes pictures of their desktops at 
random times and tracks their minute-by-minute activity, including key-
stroke and mouse movement (are they checking personal email? posting 
on Facebook?). Th is is a way for clients to make sure workers are not “wast-

The Cloud Empire 
65
ing time,” and freelancers face pressure to accept this level of surveillance 
because doing so guarantees that they will be paid immediately aft er the 
job is done, while refusing might mean having to wait a long time for a cli-
ent to pay an invoice. In other words, submission to surveillance is directly 
tied to economic benefi ts.
Telematics. Th is management approach involves using data generated 
by sensors to continuously monitor a worker’s performance. A growing sec-
tor in which this approach is being applied is transportation, where quan-
tifi cation provides new tools to monitor and control drivers. UPS package-
delivery trucks, for instance, are now equipped with around two hundred 
sensors that monitor everything from location and speed to whether the 
seatbelt is engaged and, of course, how much time the driver is taking to 
deliver each package. Likewise, 30–50 percent of the US trucking industry 
is now using electronic onboard recorders that radically change truckers’ 
relations to their work, fostering competitive individualism and infl uenc-
ing their behavior.104
Monitoring work interactions. Models developed and refi ned in the do-
main of general social interactions are now being applied to the domain of 
workplace interactions, thus normalizing the overall transformation. An 
emerging $11 billion industry is developing “enterprise social” platforms 
such as Microsoft ’s Yammer, Salesforce’s Chatter, and (the name says it all) 
Facebook at Work. Th ese platforms, inspired by social media, function to 
collect data from a worker’s daily interactions and convert them into met-
rics that can be used to assess job performance, identify interventions to 
reward or punish workers, or even make hiring and fi ring decisions.105
Bodily surveillance. Th is includes the use of wearable devices and self-
tracking technologies (WSTT), which employ Bluetooth, triangulation al-
gorithms, and infrared sensors to measure and track mental and physical 
manifestations of arousal and performance, allowing for ubiquitous mon-
itoring beyond the workplace and the workday.106 McDonald’s, for exam-
ple, has introduced “sociometric badges” that monitor everyday behavior 
and emotion. Leisure self-tracking devices such as Fitbit are increasingly 
becoming requirements of employment contracts within the context of 
“wellness programs.” Th is sudden focus on well-being stems less from hu-
manitarian concerns than from corporations’ eff orts to reduce the infl u-

66 
Chapter 2
ence of stress on productivity: according to the UK’s Health and Safety 
Executive, the number of days lost due to stress, depression, anxiety, and 
headaches is rising dangerously.107 Th e assumption that the constant mon-
itoring and reporting of health statistics will reduce (rather than increase) 
stress seems counterintuitive to anyone except the designers and enforcers 
of such programs. Yet by 2015, a total of 580,000 US companies had already 
implemented wellness programs involving such devices.108
In reviewing some of the methods just discussed, Esther Kaplan ob-
serves that
in industry aft er industry, this data collection is part of an expensive, high-
tech eff ort to squeeze every last drop of productivity from corporate work-
forces, an eff ort that pushes employees to their mental, emotional, and 
physical limits; claims control over their working and nonworking hours; 
and compensates them as little as possible, even at the risk of violating 
labor laws.109
In the context of the Cloud Empire, data becomes a core “management” 
tool110 that not only facilitates the logistical organizing of production but 
also monitors, evaluates, and regulates workers’ bodies and social interac-
tions to make them both more productive and ultimately more dispensable.
Where Is the Cloud Empire Taking Us?
As Ranabir Sammadar argues, “For capital this is the desirable history of 
labour—labour at work but not visible, ready at hand but not always nec-
essary, labour living but, whenever required, soon dead.”111 Th e last part of 
the quote might sound like an exaggeration, except when we begin to con-
sider the role of automation. Th e prediction that technology would bring 
about the end of unfulfi lling labor does not seem to be unfolding accord-
ing to the hopes of economists. Automation and AI technologies, which 
many corporations in the social quantifi cation sector actively develop and 
promote, seem to be designed to eliminate laborers, not liberate them. 
Given the investment in AI of companies such as Amazon, Apple, Face-
book, and Google, Scott Galloway argues they should be referred to as job 
destroyers, not job creators.112

The Cloud Empire 
67
With the arrival of the “second machine age,”113 the destruction of 
many jobs is a given, even if the scope of the transformation is still up for 
debate. According to some estimates, digital automation puts up to 47 per-
cent of all US employment at “high risk” of vanishing.114 In the retail sec-
tor alone, this translates into 7.5 million jobs out of a total of 16 million.115 
Other estimates that focus on tasks instead of occupations present a much 
smaller fi gure of 9 percent of jobs at risk of disappearing.116 Looking at his-
torical data instead of predictions reveals that adding one robot to a work-
force of one thousand human workers has increased unemployment and 
reduced wages, even if the shift s are very small thus far.117 Nonetheless, 
it is hard to project past trends into the future without accounting for the 
disruptive power of technology. Most analysts agree that the question of 
the impact of automation cannot be tackled without looking at wider so-
cietal issues such as basic income, tax reform, and educational changes.118
As more people become under- or unemployed, social controls for 
managing discontent need to be tightened. Th ere are two main approaches 
we are seeing within the Cloud Empire for dealing with this. First, there 
are, in various countries, increasing alliances between the state and the 
private sector in supporting each other’s goals. We see a similarity in ap-
proaches across the political spectrum—from open to closed societies. 
Th ese approaches include deregulation (if previous regulation even ex-
isted) of the media and technology industries in a manner that gives more 
market power to favored corporations; collaboration between the govern-
ment and the private sector to develop and implement technologies for 
surveillance; expansion of the state’s power to impose special measures 
of surveillance during increasingly permanent periods of emergency; and 
comprehensive secrecy about what governments and corporations do with 
data collected from citizens, all in the name of security and antiterrorism. 
Th ese practices are replicated in practically every country with a modern 
ICT infrastructure, regardless of whether they are democratic or authori-
tarian in character.
Second, there is a targeting of vulnerable social groups as part of the 
strategies of data colonialism. One thing that makes the Cloud Empire co-
lonial is the approach of corporations and states to the oppressed. Under 
the Cloud Empire, everyone contributes as a raw input to capitalism, but as 

68 
Chapter 2
with old forms of colonialism, the poor (always a racialized and gendered 
category) continue to pay a heavier price. Here we allude to the work of au-
thors such as Oscar Gandy, Seeta Peña Gangadharan, Virginia Eubanks, 
and Safi ya Umoja Noble,119 who argue that when it comes to the poor and 
the vulnerable, digital “inclusion” comes at the cost of extensive data pro-
fi ling, including practices that are predatory, discriminatory, exploitative, 
or simply degrading. Chapter 4 will look into this further.
Th e merciless power of the Cloud Empire comes from an overarching 
rationality in which data shadows—and eventually stands in for—the very 
thing it is supposed to measure: life. Apps, platforms, and smart technol-
ogies capture and translate our life into data as we play, work, and social-
ize. AI algorithms then pore over the data to extract information (personal 
attributes from “likes,” emotions from typing patterns, predictions from 
past behaviors, and so on) that can be used to sell us our lives back, albeit 
in commodifi ed form. Science, technology, and human ingenuity are put 
at the service of this exploitation, making it likely that, unless resisted, the 
Cloud Empire will in a few decades seem like the natural order of things. 
Th is is indeed a bleak picture, but it is not entirely new. Th e larger pattern 
harks back to a previous era of rampant extraction—that of historical co-
lonialism, as we will explore in the next chapter.

69
Interlude
On Colonialism and the Decolonial Turn
FOR READERS who wish to gain a basic understanding of what historical co-
lonialism was, how it developed, and the postcolonial and decolonial re-
sponses that emerged in reaction to it, we recommend reading this inter-
lude before proceeding. Others already familiar with these concepts may 
want to skip to chapter 3.
Colonialism in Context
Most allusions to colonialism refer to the European colonial period, that 
period in history from the sixteenth to the mid-twentieth centuries in 
which nation-states from Western Europe colonized large parts of the Afri-
can, American, and Asian continents. An immediate question might arise 
as to why earlier regimes are not considered to be part of this historical pe-
riod. Aft er all, there are plenty of examples of empires such as the Persian, 
Roman, Aztec, and Ottoman that engaged in the exploitation of nearby 
communities before the arrival of Columbus in America in 1492. But two 
characteristics made early-modern European colonialism unique. Th e fi rst 
one is that it extended the scale of empire not just geographically but in 
having imposed a single universalizing narrative of values, beliefs, and pol-
itics, ushering in the beginning of modern globalization. Instead of talking 
about coexisting worlds, such as the Iberian world, the Aztec world, and so 

70 
Interlude
on, we can talk about a single emerging “modern” world system with one 
Eurocentric world history.1 Th e second characteristic, which fl ows from the 
fi rst, is that colonialism sought to fundamentally change and reorganize 
the social and economic order of the societies it colonized, as opposed to 
satisfying itself with extracting tribute, as did earlier empires.2
Historical colonialism required fi rst and foremost an external colo-
nizer, a group of people who took land and resources that were not theirs. 
“Appropriation” implies that the land was already occupied by someone, al-
though these colonized, “primitive” inhabitants were not treated as the real 
owners of the resources. Speaking in general terms, then, colonialism can 
be said to consist of a global system in which colonizers use power to dis-
possess the colonized of valuable resources, sending the wealth back to the 
metropolis or the motherland and all the while justifying their actions with 
a discourse of hierarchical diff erentiation between peoples and cultures.
Th is discourse was necessary historically because oppression and bru-
tality needed to be rationalized in some manner. As philosophers from 
Hegel to Paulo Freire have pointed out, oppression dehumanizes not only 
the oppressed but also the oppressor.3 In an attempt to rehabilitate his im-
age, the oppressor needs to describe himself as having virtuous princi-
ples (religious or secular), even if they are in contradiction with his ac-
tions. In this manner, historical colonialism was framed as a worldview in 
which the colonizer was described as superior (strong, rational, civilized, 
resourceful, and Christian), and the colonized as inferior (weak, ignorant, 
savage, lazy, and heathenish).
A dichotomy of us versus them was established in which the European 
self was assumed to be a complete individual and the non-European other 
an incomplete one. Th e colonizer thus assumed the “obligation”—the “bur-
den,” even—of exploiting the colonized in the name of civilizing them. In 
the eyes of the colonizer, the violent cost of the enterprise to “modernize” 
the “primitives” was inevitable yet necessary, even if this meant working 
individuals to death.4 Indeed, the most inhuman treatment was not seen as 
unethical because it was not believed to be infl icted on full human beings;5 
violence was merely a feature of the economic mode of production.
European colonialism was not a period characterized by the same mode 
of production from beginning to end (in which “mode of production” is a 

On Colonialism and the Decolonial Turn 
71
historically specifi c arrangement of how things are produced, distributed, 
and consumed, further discussed in chapter 3). Instead, colonialism in-
volved a period of transition from a tributary mode of production (begin-
ning with the Iberian conquest of the Americas) to something that by the 
“end” of colonialism looked very diff erent: a modern capitalist mode of 
production. In a tributary mode of production,6 a ruling class extracts sur-
plus wealth in the form of labor, goods, or monetary tribute from a subju-
gated class through the use of force or the threat of such. In the case of Eu-
rope, this mode of production corresponded with early-modern feudalism, 
which from the ninth to the fi ft eenth centuries resulted in the gradual ac-
cumulation of vast quantities of wealth. But the tributary mode of produc-
tion didn’t just disappear from history; instead it simply metamorphosed 
into other modes. Th e wealth accumulated during feudalism allowed aris-
tocracies to develop increasingly large courts and armies, eventually giv-
ing rise to a mercantile system in which the surplus collected by the state 
and its agents could be made available to merchants, who would in turn 
engage in the exchange of commodities with those in other parts of the 
world. In this manner, trade routes were expanded, eventually leading to 
the “discovery” and conquest of the Americas—that is, the beginning of 
European colonialism and, with it, the dawn of globalization and what we 
understand today as “modernity.”
Th e characteristics that defi ned this modernity in postmedieval Eu-
rope and that became associated with European “superiority”—an empha-
sis on individualism, rationality, and secularism; the values of scientifi c 
and technological progress; and the establishment of the nation-state as 
primary social form7—were all facilitated by processes fi nanced through 
appropriation. As tribute fl owed from colony to metropolis, resulting in 
increased circulation of commodities and the accumulation of even more 
wealth, the disparity between colonizer and colonized began to grow. In 
this sense, sixteenth-century Spain and its viceroyalties can be seen as the 
fi rst set of “modern” core and periphery states,8 the former achieving de-
velopment at the expense of the underdevelopment of the latter. Th anks to 
resources extracted from its colonies, Spain became a modern unifi ed ter-
ritory with a national military capable of defeating the Turks in 1571 and 
ruled in a vernacular language and with an expanding economy. It was the 

72 
Interlude
riches in its colonies that fi nanced such progress, establishing a model to 
be followed by Holland, England, and France.9 In this sense, modernity—
the general mode of organized “progress” that became dominant—was co-
lonial from its starting point.10
If the fi rst three centuries of colonialism were marked by territorial con-
quest, wealth extraction, and an increasingly interconnected global mer-
cantile network, it would take until the industrial revolution of the eigh-
teenth century for a mode of production not directly based on tribute to 
fully emerge. Colonialism slowly created the conditions for the transition 
from the tributary mode of production (plantations or mines with slaves) 
to something diff erent: modern capitalism (factories with workers, devel-
oped national markets, and growing international trade cycles). Th e capi-
talist mode of production can be described as one in which people are paid 
to work instead of merely forced to work. Nevertheless, exploitation is still 
present in capitalism: workers generate an output value greater than what it 
costs to hire them, value that is converted by the capitalist into profi t. Ad-
ditionally, workers have no other choice but to sell their labor; since they 
do not own the means to produce anything themselves, they are obligated 
to buy what they need to subsist from the capitalist. A geographically ex-
tended labor pool—available and willing workers all over the world—was 
formed. Th is new labor market was created in large part by advances in 
manufacturing technologies linked with growth in the transportation, fi -
nance, and communication sectors that characterized the industrial revo-
lution, and it allowed factory owners to easily replace skilled workers with 
interchangeable unskilled workers, which meant workforces could be in-
creased or decreased (hired or fi red) in response to fl uctuations in the mar-
ket. Th e resulting social relations that sustained both labor and commodity 
exchange in industrial capitalism were radically diff erent from the feudal 
and family-based forms of production that preceded them.11 Despite the 
continuities between colonialism and capitalism, capitalism did indeed 
transform the social and economic order that had characterized Europe 
during early colonial times.
An important point in this discussion, however, is that wage labor did 
not spread evenly across the world. In other words, the capitalist revolu-
tion did not look the same or have the same results outside of Europe. Th e 

On Colonialism and the Decolonial Turn 
73
“coloniality of power,” as described by Aníbal Quijano, means that op-
portunities for labor were always linked to race and geographically dif-
ferentiated: while wage labor became the norm for white Europeans, their 
non-Western counterparts continued to be exploited under earlier mod-
els (slavery, serfdom, and independent-commodity production) that were 
nonetheless compatible with capitalism.12 Colonial labor had always had a 
racial component added to the other categories of worker classifi cation;13 
one’s place within the system and the kind of labor one engaged in was de-
termined by one’s geographical and geopolitical location as much as one’s 
race, sex, and labor power. Th is did not stop being the case under capital-
ism, at least not for the colonies. Although we may speak of a general tran-
sition during the colonial period from a tributary to a capitalist mode of 
production, the truth is that this transition was not experienced by every-
one on equal terms. What defi nes the history and development of capital-
ism is, in fact, its ability to simultaneously operate with multiple modes of 
production: a capitalist metropolis in which workers earn wages can co-
exist with tributary colonies in which workers are enslaved through mer-
cantile systems of exchange, setting in motion large-scale fl ows of com-
modities and people that progressively extended across the world the 
inequalities inherent in the capitalist system.14
Here we should pause to highlight the importance of slavery to the 
economic development of the West, both during historical colonialism 
and, just as importantly, during the transition to early industrial capital-
ism. Th e economic development of the West cannot be understood with-
out slavery, although this reality is neglected in the standard histories of 
capitalism.15 As late as 1800, other nations such as China or Japan could 
have emerged to occupy the place that Europe and the United States did 
in global capitalism, but it was the advantage provided by slavery that al-
lowed the colonizer nations to emerge as superpowers.16
Current scholarly work on “second slavery” (that is, the US-based wave 
of slavery in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries that followed the ini-
tial wave of slavery during the European colonial period) invalidates the 
view of slave labor as an “archaic institution, incompatible with moder-
nity, that was condemned to extinction aft er the advent of industrial cap-
italism, modern political regimes, and liberal ideologies.”17 During this 

74 
Interlude
period, slavery was rehabilitated and redeployed in the creation of new 
productive zones for the cultivation of cotton, coff ee, and sugar, shift ing 
agricultural production from the old colonies of France and Great Britain 
to the Americas, with the southern United States providing 75 percent of 
the world supply of cotton from 1830 to the beginning of the US civil war 
in 1861 and expanding its cotton production from twenty million pounds 
to over two billion pounds a year during the fi rst half of the nineteenth 
century.18 Th is increase was accomplished not through agricultural in-
novations but through the systematization of terror that race-based slav-
ery represented, including techniques such as the application of torture 
(for example, with a “whipping machine” that would turn slaves’ backs 
into “bloody jelly”) to increase output; expanded surveillance; decreased 
breaks; and plantation technologies such as inventory forms detailing the 
name, age, and value in dollars of slaves as well as spreadsheets for track-
ing daily cotton picking.19 Th e slave plantation thus emerges not as pre-
modern but as a site of the horrors and contradictions of modernity.20 In 
the words of Robbie Shilliam, it is “plantation slavery in the Americas, not 
industrial factories in Europe, [that] epitomise the fundamental relation-
ship between capital and (un)freedom.”21
Aspects of this relationship have survived to our day, not only in the 
conditions of slavery under which certain minerals for the production 
of electronic devices are extracted in places such as the Democratic Re-
public of Congo22 but also in the global networks of production that Jack 
Linchuan Qiu dubs “Appconn” (Apple-Foxconn), a form of “twenty-fi rst- 
century slavery”23 that relies on deplorable and exploitative work condi-
tions in China to manufacture the latest consumer technologies. Slavery, 
as Sven Beckert and Seth Rockman remind us, is a crime against humanity 
that is never reducible to an economic “externality.”24
From Neocolonialism to Postcolonialism
Strictly speaking, historical colonialism is over. Most colonies gained their 
independence by the 1960s. But independence, acquired at a bloody cost, 
did not overcome dependency. A combination of internal confl ict, debt, 
corruption, and poverty—all direct or indirect legacies of colonialism—

On Colonialism and the Decolonial Turn 
75
meant that liberated colonies seldom achieved authentic independence in 
the form of generalized prosperity. Consider the case of the 1791 to 1804 
revolution in Haiti, an uprising by black slaves that completely trans-
formed the social and racial politics of the nation. Although the revolution 
managed to expel the French, it came at a cost of 162,000 lives and the im-
position of an external debt of 150 million francs, or around $20 billion by 
today’s standards, a debt that was eventually paid back at huge cost, the ef-
fects of which have burdened the country ever since.
Th e legacy of colonialism explains not only debt and poverty but also 
other important issues of our times such as racism, migration, lack of ed-
ucational opportunities, and terrorism. Th e remnants of colonialism will 
linger as long as former colonizers continue to try to impose their eco-
nomic and political models of development as the only worthy goals for 
the rest of the world.25 Th us, although historical colonialism might be over, 
we can still speak of coloniality, that is, of legacies of colonialism that have 
outlived colonial rule per se. Th eoretical and critical approaches such as 
neocolonialism, postcolonialism, and decoloniality have emerged to help 
us come to grips with that legacy.
Although these terms—neocolonial, postcolonial, and decolonial—are 
sometimes used interchangeably to describe similar projects of critique, it is 
important to locate their roots and diff erentiate their goals. Neo colonialism 
is a term generally associated with a twentieth-century discourse that as-
signed to the former colonial powers the blame for the stunted develop-
ment of newly independent nations.26 It is also a concept that allowed intel-
lectuals to begin talking about the internal colonialisms that divide former 
colonial societies along ethnic, and not just racial, divides—for instance, 
with lighter-skinned people having a higher status than darker-skinned 
people.27 Today, neocolonialism is used more frequently to suggest a new 
form of colonialism whereby a powerful country might exercise control not 
through territorial occupation but at a distance through economic or po-
litical domination, cultural monopolization, or the threat of military force. 
Contemporary US imperialism might be said to be a form of neocolonial-
ism—in other words, a form of military and economic dominance without 
direct political control.
Since colonized elites played a crucial part in exploiting their own 

76 
Interlude
people (even if they did so under the protection of the colonizer), it is too 
simplistic to assign all the blame to the colonizers. Th us, postcolonialism 
attempts to off er a more nuanced analysis of colonialism and its repercus-
sions, particularly with respect to the ways in which the relationship be-
tween former colonizer and colonized continues to shape the realities of 
both groups in the contemporary world. Postcolonial theory and postco-
lonial studies encompass many concerns, methods, critiques, movements, 
and agendas, and a brief overview of these is attempted here in order to re-
late them to our account of data colonialism developed in other chapters.28
Even though it is a response to historical colonialism, postcolonial-
ism can be understood as a political reaction against inequality and ex-
ploitation today. A postcolonial critique is oft en adopted as a counter-
claim against capitalism, globalization, and neoliberalism in our times, as 
it seeks to make evident their colonial roots even if those roots are partly 
obscured by contemporary ideologies. In the words of Sankaran Krishna, 
“If neoliberal globalization is the attempt at naturalizing and depoliticiz-
ing the logic of the market, or the logic of the economy, postcolonialism 
is the eff ort to politicize and denaturalize that logic and demonstrate the 
choices and agency inherent in our own lives.”29 Or, as Robert Young de-
scribes it, postcolonialism is an “active transformation of the present out 
of the clutches of the past.”30
One of the central themes in postcolonialism is the issue of iden-
tity and representation: how the colonizer and the colonized represented 
themselves and each other. Th is is an important question because, as post-
colonial theories suggest, modes of representation are not just cultural pro-
nouncements; they are used to justify oppressive practices, including rac-
ism, enslavement, economic oppression, and even genocide. Post colonial 
theories posit that the foundation of colonial modes of representation is 
diff erence, that is, the way in which the colonizer and the colonized were 
rendered as belonging to diff erent categories of humanity, with the colo-
nizer represented—as mentioned earlier—in opposition to the colonized 
by virtue of being strong, rational, civilized, resourceful, chosen by God, 
and so on. Th is diff erentiation is not merely a passive description but a 
form of symbolic violence,31 imposing on the dominated a worldview cre-

On Colonialism and the Decolonial Turn 
77
ated by the dominant that condemns the former to perpetuate the very 
structures that oppress them.
Authors such as Aimé Césaire and Albert Memmi, writing in the 
1950s, argued that there was no real human encounter in colonialism, only 
thing i fi cation,32 an objectifi cation of the colonized that justifi es violence 
and racism. Th e colonized were forced to occupy a place in which their 
culture and the culture of the colonizer were constantly in confl ict and in 
which they not only suff ered subjugation but came to accept it as a natu-
ral social order (although theorists such as Memmi have always seen in 
this opportunities for creation, not just destruction). Other writers such as 
Edward Said have linked issues of representation to the exercise of power. 
Said argues that “the Orient”33 was formulated in the minds of Europeans 
to possess characteristics that were based not in a search for truth but in a 
desire to dominate, and he was mostly concerned with how these stereo-
types, which could serve not only to oppress but also to romanticize or pa-
tronize, were projected and reproduced through scholarship and culture.34
Postcolonial studies also attempt to examine how history and science 
were weapons in the quest to use knowledge to subordinate the colonized 
politically and economically and to get them to accept their subordina-
tion. In order to accomplish this, history and science needed fi rst to be 
portrayed as the domain of Europe, part of the heritage of the Enlight-
enment that the West deemed necessary to bring to the rest of the world. 
History (the particular histories and trajectories of colonial appropriation) 
thus became a universalizing Eurocentric endeavor, describing every thing 
not just from the perspective of European eyes but in terms that made 
sense only in relation to European values. Th is kind of historicism situ-
ates progress and “universal” principles as emanating from the West and 
then fl owing to the Rest: modernity emerges as a one-directional arrow 
pointing to Europe, something all “nonmodern” societies must strive to-
ward. Th e history of human civilization is seen as an evolutionary tra-
jectory that starts with man in a natural state and culminates with Euro-
pean “civilization.” Whatever inferior samples are encountered along the 
way (in the form of non-European humans) can have their diff erences ex-
plained through natural (that is, racial) means and not through a history 

78 
Interlude
of power.35 Whereas all knowledge systems can be said to be ethnocentric, 
this modern European ethnocentrism is the only one that claims for itself 
universality across time and space.36 Postcolonial studies help us see how 
the language of modernity and universal knowledge, inscribed in histori-
cal discourses, becomes a tool of imperialism to civilize and educate colo-
nial subjects.
Th e military, mercantile, and bureaucratic exploits of colonial Europe 
would not have been possible without scientifi c and technological tools. 
Th ese included new means of communication and transportation (the tele-
graph and the railroad) as well as new ways of collecting and analyzing in-
formation for the purpose of the administration of populations and com-
modities (statistics, accounting, economic theory, and so on).37 Th e success 
of these inventions in facilitating empire-building was seen as further vali-
dation of the superiority of the West.38 But beyond the creation of tools for 
managing territories and populations, discussed from a diff erent perspec-
tive in chapter 4, colonial science provided its own new rationalizations for 
conquest. A whole new obsession with classifi cation, particularly during 
the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, helped to establish the bound-
aries not only between human and beast but between perceived higher and 
lower forms of humans, all in the name of the expansion of science and, 
through it, the betterment of “man.” Immanuel Kant, a central fi gure in 
modern Western philosophy, provided the fi rst scientifi c defi nition of the 
concept of race in his 1775 essay “Of the Diff erent Human Races.” Subse-
quently, a branch of anthropology became invested in the elaboration of 
“racial types,” whereby certain physical attributes were linked to certain 
mental and behavioral characteristics—for instance, skull size and other 
arbitrary measures were used in an attempt to establish the superiority of 
white men over people of color and also over white women.
Th is “scientifi c” racism and sexism would become essential in colonial 
governance. Well-meaning white people believed (and continue to believe) 
that Western science and technology were the only means of improving 
the condition of the destitute “savages” in the colonized territories. Other 
less well-meaning individuals saw the absence of “advanced” knowledge in 
the colonized as a good reason for their annihilation. Frederic W. Farrar (a 
cleric born in India who became friends with Charles Darwin) argued, for 

On Colonialism and the Decolonial Turn 
79
instance, that the extermination of the Tasmanian people was justifi ed be-
cause these were people who had not “added one iota to the knowledge, the 
arts, the sciences, the manufactures, the morals of the world.”39
Whereas postcolonial debates have given us important ways of critiqu-
ing the evolution of Western modes of knowledge production, the relation-
ship between postcolonial theories and Western thinking remains compli-
cated. At times, postcolonialism has been accused of borrowing too much 
from the West. For instance, postcolonialism shares many research inter-
ests with postmodernism, a movement that preceded it and infl uenced 
it. Th ese overlapping interests include a questioning of signs and mean-
ings, the negation of universalizing master narratives in favor of narrative 
multiplicity, the displacement of the subject in language, the conceptual-
ization of the individual beyond a Cartesian framework, and the analy-
sis of how power operates. Th is has ignited debates about whether post-
colonial thinking is too close to the very thing it is trying to critique, but 
the case can be made that this engagement with Western theory has in fact 
strengthened postcolonialism’s ability to “provincialize” European think-
ing.40 By questioning its universality and insisting on its status as partisan 
historical narrative, postcolonial theory is able to challenge the concept of 
modernity and engage in telling “a diff erent story of reason,”41 one that ac-
counts for the diff erent subjects universalism has repressed.42 Postcolonial 
theory has played a major role in helping merge our understandings of so-
cial injustice and what Santos calls cognitive injustice, which lies at the 
core of the injustices that data practices generate.43
From Postcolonialism to Decoloniality
Th ese are goals that the project known as decoloniality also shares, but 
its approach to realizing them is somewhat diff erent. To begin with, de-
colonial thinkers critique certain aspects of postcolonialism. Th ey reject 
Western traditions more emphatically and instead draw their inspira-
tion from the work of nonwhite and mostly non-Western thinkers such as 
Frantz Fanon. Th ey accuse postcolonialism of being too aligned with the 
antihumanist thought of postmodernism: in their broad distrust of nar-
ratives, rationality, universalism, and constructs such as freedom and hu-

80 
Interlude
man rights—or, rather, in their association of all of these things exclusively 
with Western values—postcolonial theorists (the critique goes) become 
complicit in the continued dominance of Eurocentrism.44 Instead, de-
colonial thinkers are inspired by and engaged with grassroots movements 
such as the Sem Terra (Landless) movement in Brazil or the Zapatistas in 
Chiapas, gender-equality movements such as Chicana and Muslima femi-
nism, projects such as the Caribbean Philosophical Association’s eff orts to 
shift  the geography of reason, and the creation of institutions such as the 
World Social Forum.
Decoloniality thus seeks to provide not just strategies for surviving in 
a neo- or postcolonial context but also models for articulating an alterna-
tive worldview emanating mostly from the Global South, a worldview that 
challenges and rejects notions of a Eurocentric modernity.45 Ramón Gros-
foguel identifi es three central features of a decolonial theory. First, as al-
ready mentioned, it seeks intellectual sources beyond the Western canon 
and is inspired by political movements from the Global South. Second, it 
is based on a critical dialogue between diverse political and ethical proj-
ects that moves toward a pluriversal rather than a universal worldview 
(based on an abstract Western universalism). And fi nally, it recognizes 
that the decolonization of knowledge can be achieved only through criti-
cal thinking “from and with subalternized racial/ethnic/sexual spaces and 
bodies.”46
Decoloniality is therefore not simply decolonization, defi ned as the 
end of colonial occupation and administration, but a broader rethinking 
of relations to ongoing coloniality. As postcolonial theorists themselves 
pointed out, decolonization did not result in the liberation of subjugated 
peoples but in the continuity of domination through new forms (includ-
ing, as we argue in this book, in new social relations managed through 
data). Th e “coloniality of power,” to return to Quijano’s concept,47 means 
that colonial structures persist everywhere, both in the so-called First 
World as well as the Th ird World, in cities as well as slums, in the minds 
of the oppressor as well as the oppressed. Whereas postcolonial theorists 
conceptualize capitalism as primarily a cultural phenomenon48 and Marx-
ists accuse postcolonialists of paying too much attention to culture instead 
of economics,49 decolonial theory refuses to prioritize culture or the econ-

On Colonialism and the Decolonial Turn 
81
omy and instead sees the coloniality of power as both an ideological and 
material phenomenon.
Despite these diff erences, postcolonial and decolonial theories alike 
can be used for our purposes to examine the role of data relations in per-
petuating modes of oppression. Th at is our goal for the rest of the book. By 
aligning our argument with the project of decoloniality, we hope to con-
tribute to the imagining of alternative spaces for understanding and being 
in the world, spaces that, as Walter Mignolo argues, enable the building of 
life-affi  rming communal futures that are diff erent from our pasts.50

This page intentionally left blank 

83
The Coloniality of Data Relations
We are still living out the history of 1492. . . . The possibilities that were 
overlooked and unseen 500 years ago must re-emerge as humanity’s project 
over the next 500 years.
—Ashis Nandy, Merryl Wyn Davies, and Ziauddin Sardar1
3
IN SID MEIER’S STRATEGY VIDEO GAME Civilization IV: Colonization, you—the hu-
man—can choose to play Spain, England, France, or the Netherlands in a 
battle to colonize the New World. Th e colonized, though, are represented 
by “nonplayer characters” controlled by the game’s algorithms. Your role 
is to oversee an expanding territory from an omniscient “God view” per-
spective, allocating resources and squelching insurrections. Meanwhile, 
the only reason nonwhite people and their lands exist is to be conquered 
and used, making at least that aspect of the simulation seem authentically 
colonial. Rated E for “Everyone,” the game whitewashes the truly horren-
dous aspects of colonialism: the slavery, the rape, the genocide.2 And per-
haps because of this level of sanitization, the game-play quickly becomes 
boring and repetitive, falling into the established 4X pattern that charac-
terizes strategy video games: explore, expand, exploit, and exterminate.
It is not surprising that strategy video games, which are all about the 
expedient management of resources in the context of colonization, should 
follow this 4X model. But what of data colonialism? In this chapter, we use 
the framework of exploring, expanding, exploiting, and exterminating to 
conduct a transhistorical comparison of dispossession that will reveal con-
tinuities between historical colonialism and today’s data colonialism. To 
truly recognize the injustices of today, we need to look at them through the 

84 
Chapter 3
eyes of yesterday. By understanding the detailed parallels, we can uncover 
fully the coloniality3 of data relations, a concept that points to the broader 
continuities in how the legacy of historical colonialism resonates in the 
present—in this case, through social relations as abstracted and commod-
ifi ed by data.
Of course, we know that historical colonialism was anything but a 
game. On the American continent alone, of the 145 million people living 
in the hemisphere before the conquest, 90–95 percent had been extermi-
nated by 1691.4 Most of the survivors were condemned to poverty. Around 
the time Columbus arrived in America, a typical European had an aver-
age per capita income three times that of someone living in what is now 
sometimes called the Global South. By 1850, that ratio had increased to 
fi ve to one. By the early to mid-twentieth century, when around 85 per-
cent of the world was under some form of colonial rule, the ratio was four-
teen to one.5 Th e inequality that plagues us today is not entirely the result 
of colonialism but at the same time cannot be explained without it. From 
the perspective of postcolonial and decolonial studies (the disciplines that 
consider critiques of colonialism and capitalism from the viewpoint of the 
colonized), it is impossible to understand most aspects of our contempo-
rary world—including, we propose, the role of data in our lives—without 
considering the unfi nished history of colonialism and how it continues 
to shape former colonizers and the formerly colonized. We will be argu-
ing in this chapter that the social relations embodied in data are part of a 
broader colonial (and not merely capitalist) legacy. Th is legacy involves a 
more extreme degree of alienation than usually recognized within a tra-
ditional Marxist perspective, because subjects are estranged not only from 
the products of their labor but from their own personhood, their basic re-
alities as living beings. Th ey are, in short, dispossessed of something ba-
sic that belongs to them, through an appropriation carried out through the 
extraction of data.
Media studies have occasionally concerned themselves with colonial-
ism but mostly through approaches such as area studies or a critique of me-
dia and cultural imperialism. Th ese kinds of eff orts examine why, for in-
stance, media has developed in a particular way in former colonies or how 
Western media culture has saturated global markets. Although our en-

The Coloniality of Data Relations 
85
gagement with colonialism is much more direct, we reiterate that we wish 
to avoid simplistic metaphors when comparing historical colonialism and 
data colonialism. Rather, what is proposed in this chapter is that the dis-
possession inherent in data relations can be better understood through a 
careful analysis of how extraction worked in historical colonialism. Spe-
cifi cally, this chapter will argue that historical colonialism and data colo-
nialism share some fundamental structures that ground the resource ap-
propriations and social relations of each: the way the colonized subject is 
conceptualized and how colonialism shapes the way the colonized think of 
themselves; the naturalization of certain modes of ruling subjects; and the 
legitimation of certain types of knowledge with their associated claims to 
power, including a specifi c conceptualization of time and space that ends 
up universalizing a specifi c worldview.
If historical colonialism was an appropriation of land, bodies, and nat-
ural resources, data colonialism can be understood as an appropriation of 
social resources, one that represents both a progression of capitalism and 
its return, potentially, to more brutal forms of exploitation. It is because 
the dispossession of social resources today operates in ways that replicate 
how the dispossession of natural resources once worked that we argue data 
relations re-create a colonizing form of power. Data relations—as defi ned 
in chapter 1—are new types of human relations that give corporations a 
comprehensive view of our sociality, enabling human life to become an 
input or resource for capitalism. In this neocolonial scheme, the colony 
is not a geographic location but an “enhanced reality” in which we con-
duct our social interactions under conditions of continuous data extrac-
tion. Th e resources that are being colonized are the associations, norms, 
codes, knowledge, and meanings that help us maintain social connections, 
the human and material processes that constitute economic activity, and 
the space of the subject from which we face the social world.
When speaking in general terms about the exploitation of social re-
sources, we don’t mean to imply that the social constitutes a “pure” do-
main that somehow should exist outside of power and appropriation. As 
the history of capitalism shows, political and economic forces have en-
deavored for a long time to dominate diff erent aspects of human life and, 
in so doing, have produced particular social domains. Th us, under capi-

86 
Chapter 3
talism, social interactions became progressively commodifi ed, with every-
day social interactions increasingly embedded in economic relations.6 Th e 
data colonialism of our time expands this commodifi cation by an unprec-
edented order of magnitude. In this new world, corporations act as col-
onizers that deploy digital infrastructures of connection to monetize so-
cial interactions, and the colonized are relegated to the role of subjects 
who are driven to use these infrastructures in order to enact their social 
lives. Just as, to meet the requirements of industrial capitalism, all eco-
nomic relations were transformed into market relations via the medium 
of money,7 today social relations and human life in general are increas-
ingly transformed into potential market relations through the medium of 
data. Because it is very oft en the stuff  of a subject’s own life that is being 
exchanged, data relations comprise what in the perspective of colonial his-
tory can be seen as an embryonic “mode of production,” a new form of 
tributary relationship between colonizer and colonized.
In Marxist theory, a “mode of production” is a concept used to diff er-
entiate the way that the economy of a historically specifi c society is orga-
nized in contrast to other societies. Human beings plan and organize their 
labor—that is, the extraction of sustenance from nature—and in the pro-
cess shape their reality. Each mode of production thus represents a histori-
cally specifi c organization of labor: a unique arrangement of tools, knowl-
edge, and social structures that constitutes a particular kind of reality. We 
are not arguing here that data colonialism represents a new, fully formed 
mode of production. Rather, we are proposing that data colonialism rep-
resents a transformation that will eventually result in a new mode of pro-
duction. In other words, we are at the cusp of a radical expansion of the 
processes of capitalist production and the factors that contribute to it; this 
expansion will entail, over time, a complete reorganization of social re-
lations and a transformation of what counts as economic resources. Al-
though it is too early to describe the contours of this new mode of pro-
duction and to predict how exactly it will shape society in the long run, 
what is already evident is that the shift  entails much more than the emer-
gence of digital labor that so many critics have discussed.8 Just as histori-
cal colonialism reorganized all aspects of the lives of its subjects (from the 
economic and political to the psychological and spiritual), data colonial-

The Coloniality of Data Relations 
87
ism makes the entirety of our existence available to capitalism. Capitalism 
continuously seeks to integrate as many dimensions of life as possible into 
the production process, but what is concerning at the moment is the speed 
at which areas of sociality previously cordoned off  from capitalism are be-
ing commodifi ed.
In order to explain why and how this is happening, we need to rethink 
how we see colonialism and capitalism as apparently distinct and, indeed, 
incompatible modes of production. Instead of looking at them as discrete 
and separate moments in history, it is more productive to look at colonial-
ism as an “uncivilized” mode of production allowed to operate at the mar-
gins of a more “civilized” capitalism. Let us then conceive of colonialism 
and capitalism as two sides of the same coin: one side enacting dispos-
session in a brutal and rampant manner and the other normalizing this 
process by relegating it to the outside (outside the present, outside the civ-
ilized, outside the measurable, and so on). All the while, however, the pro-
cess of dispossession itself is presented as a necessary and benefi cial step 
in human progress. Various critics of neoliberalism and datafi cation9 have 
already recognized in our times a renewed race to amass wealth through 
new kinds of dispossession. But to understand why this form of accumula-
tion is a continuation and not a break with the historical arc of the past fi ve 
centuries, we need to look more closely at the history of colonialism and its 
role within capitalism.
One of the goals of this chapter is thus to bring critical research on co-
lonialism and critical internet studies into conversation with each other, 
methodologically and politically. To accomplish this, the chapter begins 
with an assessment of the continuities and discontinuities involved in the 
kind of appropriation that is at work in historical and data colonialism. We 
then proceed to analytically compare the historical correspondences be-
tween the past and the present in terms of the aforementioned 4X’s of colo-
nialism: exploration, expansion, exploitation and extermination. Th is will 
allow us to begin to formulate a framework for theorizing alternatives or 
what we call “counterpresents” to data colonialism, a task to which we will 
return more fully in the last section of the book but which we need to start 
here before analyzing in the second part of the book the threats to human 
sociality and autonomy that data colonialism poses.

88 
Chapter 3
Data Colonialism as Appropriation and Neoextractivism
Colonialism, in its old and new forms, operates through the disposses-
sion of resources. Th is dispossession happens through the appropriation 
of things that belong to someone else and through the extraction of value 
from the appropriated resources. By doing this, the natural and the social 
worlds are implicated in new modes of production, transformed into fac-
tors in ever-changing capitalist cycles of production. Put diff erently, ap-
propriation and extraction convert life, particularly human life, into profi t 
centers for capitalism. We will discuss appropriation fi rst and extraction 
second.
Appropriation frames resources as naturally occurring, free for the 
taking. Let us recall that historical colonialism dispossessed indigenous 
people of their land before they could conceive of it as private wealth in the 
way that the colonizers conceived of it as private wealth. Th e colonizers 
fi rst appropriated the land based on a particular legal and social framing 
of the land; then they gave the land value by putting it to use in a partic-
ular way, that is, as private property. By the time indigenous people un-
derstood the concept of private property, it was too late: their land had 
acquired new value, this value had been stolen from them, and they them-
selves had been overpowered and enslaved by the new system. In a similar 
vein, our social lives are not material “wealth” to us, like money and prop-
erty are. But once they are datafi ed, they cease to be just life and become a 
source of wealth.
For personal data to be freely available for appropriation, it must fi rst 
be rendered as a natural resource, a resource that is just there, ready to be 
extracted. Th is is where the logic of colonialism comes into play; the idea 
is reinforced that the depletion of resources by those who fi nd them is nat-
ural. Th ere is a parallel here with how capitalism has appropriated natu-
ral resources, which is by framing their state of readiness for exploitation 
through legal, linguistic, and other means. Jason Moore10 describes how 
this process has worked, arguing that capitalism has so far depended on 
the availability of cheap nature: natural resources that are abundant, easy 
to appropriate from their rightful owners, and whose depletion is seen as 

The Coloniality of Data Relations 
89
unproblematic. Th e resources are not cheap per se, but legal and philo-
sophical frameworks are established to rationalize them as such. Extermi-
nating natives and chopping down trees is accomplished “cheaply” only 
when a certain ideological, legal, cultural, and even religious system of be-
liefs is put in place.
Today, what we have is a diff erent version of the same fundamental 
move: the collection of cheap social data, an abundant “natural” resource. 
We can see this rationalization operating in the metaphors used to de-
scribe data extraction. A World Economic Forum report stated that “per-
sonal data will be the new ‘oil’—a valuable resource of the 21st century. It 
will emerge as a new asset class touching all aspects of society.”11 Th e al-
lusion to petroleum seemed to be particularly evocative in the early 2010s, 
as evidenced by the number of times it was employed by CEOs and ana-
lysts. Th e CEO of Tresata said, “Just like oil was a natural resource power-
ing the last industrial revolution, data is going to be the natural resource 
for this industrial revolution.”12 Th e vice president of the European Com-
mission responsible for the Digital Agenda claimed that “data is a precious 
thing. . . . Th at’s why I’ve called data the new oil. Because it’s a fuel for in-
novation, powering and energizing our economy.”13
Like oil, data needs to be processed. But unlike oil, data is not a sub-
stance found in nature at all. It is the by-product of social interactions that 
are mediated by digital technologies, a by-product that is captured and 
processed by a third party that is not intimately involved with the peo-
ple in the interaction and indeed can operate at many removes from them 
through the market for selling data. Th e fi rst use of the metaphor of data 
as the “new oil” is attributed to Clive Humby, the conceptual grandfather 
of the loyalty shopping-club card, who in 2006 said, “Data is the new oil. 
It’s valuable, but if unrefi ned it cannot really be used. It has to be changed 
into gas, plastic, chemicals, et cetera to create a valuable entity that drives 
profi table activity; so must data be broken down, analyzed for it to have 
value.”14 Data must thus be presented as an ownerless resource that can be 
exploited only by certain parties (what Julie Cohen calls data refi neries).15 
A few excerpts from a report by the Organization for Economic Coopera-
tion and Development are worth quoting at length.

90 
Chapter 3
Data are an intangible asset; like other information-related goods, they can 
be reproduced and transferred at almost zero marginal costs. So in contrast 
to the concept of ownership of physical goods, where the owner typically has 
exclusive rights and control over the good—including for instance the free-
dom to destroy the good—this is not the case for intangibles such as data. . . . 
Data ownership can be a poor starting point for data governance, and can 
even be misleading. . . . Th e important question isn’t who owns the data. Ul-
timately, we all do. A better question is who owns the means of analysis? Be-
cause that’s how . . . you get the right information in the right place. Th e 
digital  divide isn’t about who owns data—it’s about who can put that data 
to work.16
What is suggested by this kind of discourse is that data “oil” needs corpo-
rations to transform it into something useful. Th us, the appropriation of 
this resource is presented as something natural, with benefi ts for all of us.
Th e transformation of “raw” data into a resource from which corpo-
rations can derive value is possible only through a material process of ex-
traction, the second of the concepts we are discussing. As Naomi Klein 
observes, extractivism implies a “nonreciprocal, dominance-based rela-
tionship with the earth” that creates sacrifi ce zones, “places that, to their 
extractors, somehow don’t count and therefore can be . . . destroyed, for the 
supposed greater good of economic progress.”17 But extraction has also ac-
quired new horizons. Whereas authors like Alberto Acosta18 use the term 
neoextractivism to refer to the appropriation of natural resources in neo-
colonial settings (conducted by authoritarian or even progressive govern-
ments stuck in relations of dependency with the Global North), the term 
can also be used to describe the shift  from natural to social resources in 
the colonial process of dispossession. Today the new sacrifi ce zone is social 
life. It is this shift  that makes data colonialism such a threat to human life, 
for as Leanne Betasamosake Simpson argues, “Th e act of extraction re-
moves all of the relationships that give whatever is being extracted mean-
ing.”19 Life, extracted through data relations, acquires a devalued meaning 
and becomes a mere factor in capitalist production.
Warnings about the perils of data extractivism are not new, as Evgeny 
Morozov reminds us.20 But we can now be more specifi c about how this 

The Coloniality of Data Relations 
91
process unfolds through a series of extractive rationalities that further jus-
tify exploitation, including
• economic rationalities that frame the data we produce and the labor 
we contribute as valueless because they are generated through so-
cialization and not paid work and therefore are available for capi-
talization by other parties;
• legal rationalities that, as Julie Cohen argues,21 frame data as own-
erless, redefi ning notions of privacy and property in order to estab-
lish a new moral order that justifi es the appropriation of data;
• developmental rationalities that present data colonialism as a civi-
lizational project, carried out on behalf of underdeveloped subjects 
in the name of progress and safety;
• cultural rationalities that promote “sharing” while lowering the value 
of privacy and raising the value of competitive self- presentation; and
• technical rationalities that frame data appropriation as a legitimate 
goal of science, entrepreneurship, and human creativity.
Th ese rationalities are more practical and specifi c than are the broad ide-
ologies of data colonialism mentioned in chapter 1. Th ey help make all 
the small choices involved with data relations seem rational and common 
sense.
The 4X’s of Data Extractivism
Looking at data relations with colonial precedents explicitly in mind, as 
we do in this section, helps us see how it is that the extractive rationalities 
mentioned above are being actualized in the banal habits of data relations. 
Our goal in doing so is not to provide a conclusive compendium of ana-
logues but rather to select certain moments in the history of colonialism 
and describe their reverberations today in a way that evokes the persis-
tence of appropriation and extraction. To achieve this, we have organized 
our analysis in terms of the 4X’s of strategy video games mentioned at the 
beginning of the chapter.

92 
Chapter 3
Explore
Extractivism began at the point of contact between the colonizer and the 
colonized. Th is initial encounter contained within it the terms of exploi-
tation to be deployed as the colonizers explored and “discovered” new re-
sources. Consider the Spanish Requerimiento of 1513, a document read by 
conquistadors to newly found subjects, who were abruptly informed that 
their lands belonged not to them but in reality to the spiritual leader of the 
explorers, someone called the pope, successor to Saint Peter and leader of 
the Catholic Church:
Of all these nations God our Lord gave charge to one man, called St.  Peter, 
that he should be Lord and Superior of all the men in the world, that all 
should obey him, and that he should be the head of the whole Human Race, 
wherever men should live, and under whatever law, sect, or belief they should 
be; and He gave him the world for his kingdom and jurisdiction.22
Th e document also informed indigenous people that if they willingly 
subjected to this strange order, their lives, property, and religious beliefs 
would be respected and left  alone. Sensing that not many natives would 
avail themselves of this option, however, the Requerimiento spelled out 
what would happen to those who refused.
But, if you do not do this, and maliciously make delay in it, I certify to you 
that, with the help of God, we shall powerfully enter into your country, and 
shall make war against you in all ways and manners that we can, and shall 
subject you to the yoke and obedience of the Church and of their Highnesses; 
we shall take you and your wives and your children, and shall make slaves 
of them, and as such shall sell and dispose of them as their Highnesses may 
command; and we shall take away your goods, and shall do you all the mis-
chief and damage that we can.23
Th e irony, of course, is that voluntary submission was not even a real op-
tion, because this was a document read in Spanish to non-Spanish- speaking 
peoples. Even if they could have accessed a limited translation, they proba-
bly would not have understood the legal and theological concepts by which 
they were suddenly and forcefully dispossessed of their property, or even 

The Coloniality of Data Relations 
93
understood “property” in the same way as did the invaders. Th e quick an-
nexation of resources was justifi ed by means of these abstract rationaliza-
tions that needed to make some sort of sense only to the colonizer.
Th e Requerimientos of our times are known as end-user license agree-
ments (EULA) or statements of rights and responsibilities (SRR). Th ese 
documents spell out how newly discovered resources and their presumed 
owners are to be treated by colonizers. For instance, an earlier version of 
Google Chrome’s EULA stated that “you give Google a perpetual, irre-
vocable, worldwide, royalty-free, and non-exclusive license to reproduce, 
adapt, modify, translate, publish, publicly perform, publicly display and 
distribute any Content which you submit, post or display on or through, 
the Services.”24 Meanwhile, Facebook’s privacy-settings page reassuringly 
informs users that “you’re in charge. We’re here to help you get the ex-
perience you want.”25 Th e actual SRR tells a diff erent story, however (the 
agreement was last revised on April 2018, making the language more clear 
and accessible but not signifi cantly changing the terms of use). By agreeing 
to use Facebook’s platform, users have little control over things like how 
their location is monitored, how their behavior is tracked for advertising 
purposes, or what information about them is shared to companies outside 
of Facebook. Users can opt out of some of these practices, but by default 
new accounts are set to share as much information as possible with Face-
book.26 At least according to European law, “opting out” does not meet the 
requirements for legally valid consent.27
Users give Facebook permission to use, for commercial or noncom-
mercial purposes, whatever content they upload to the platform, including 
photos and videos. What is less well known is that the license that users 
give Facebook, as specifi ed in the SRR, is transferable (which means com-
panies affi  liated with Facebook also own the content), worldwide (which 
means it applies to all Facebook users, regardless of the laws in the places 
where they live), and royalty-free (which means users are not entitled to 
any remuneration). As Van Alsenoy and colleagues argue, this agreement 
might be in violation of EU laws, including copyright laws and those that 
the European Court of Human Rights established about the right of in-
dividuals to control the use of their images.28 Arguing that Facebook is 
bound only by California law is in itself a violation of the EU concept that 

94 
Chapter 3
consumer contracts shall be governed by the laws of their countries of res-
idence. Taking the laws and rationalities of one location and attempting to 
apply them universally to the rest of the world is a very colonial move, on 
par with the Requerimiento.
But that’s not all. Th e SRR also informs users of the following:
• “Facebook is not responsible for the actions, content, information, 
or data of third parties, and you release us, our directors, offi  cers, 
employees and agents from any claims and damages, known and 
unknown, arising out of or in any way connected with any claim 
you have against any such third parties.”
• “We do not guarantee that Facebook will always be safe, secure or 
error-free.”
• “If you violate the letter or spirit of this Statement, or otherwise cre-
ate risk or possible legal exposure for us, we can stop providing all 
or part of Facebook to you.”29
Such blanket and overreaching clauses—which are standard in the social 
quantifi cation sector—are not only legally dubious but as full of hubris as 
the Requerimiento was. Companies reserve the right to modify agreements 
at any time, and users are expected to preemptively agree to any changes, 
no matter when and how oft en they are implemented. Because the lan-
guage is so incomprehensible, most users simply scroll to the bottom of 
the document and click the “I agree” button without so much as a quick 
glance.30
“Exploration” and territorial annexation in historical colonialism were 
enacted by advances in the technologies of transportation and the sciences 
of management. Following the “discovery” of the Americas, a global net-
work for the fl ow of goods and information began to take shape, a network 
whose infrastructure continues to be visible today and whose develop-
ment was part and parcel of the growth of Western science and technol-
ogy. Francis Bacon, for instance, made an explicit connection between 
long-distance travel (that is, colonial expansion and the knowledge trans-
fers it unleashed) and the growth of various scientifi c disciplines.31 Since 
the colonies could not be managed directly by the metropolis, they had to 

The Coloniality of Data Relations 
95
be objectifi ed through scientifi c means and represented through emerg-
ing forms of records that could travel through time and space and thus 
conquer complexity. Principal among these new methods of management 
were two important technologies: maps (representations of the space to be 
colonized and managed) and surveys (mechanisms to extract data that can 
be analyzed in order to manage colonized spaces). Cartography, of course, 
had a long history preceding colonialism. But according to Cole Harris, 
modern maps “conceptualized unfamiliar space in Eurocentric terms, sit-
uating it within a culture of vision, measurement, and management.”32
Like the network visualizations of today, colonial maps illustrated a 
form of knowledge that can be described as nodocentric.33 Th e maps showed 
the location of mines, ports, towns, and other resources that were crucial 
to the operation of the empire; they isolated and represented the points or 
nodes that had value and rendered everything else invisible. A network 
diagram performs very similar functions. Only nodes and their connec-
tions are prioritized, giving us a reality in which nodes can only “see” other 
nodes, and only nodes deserve to be accounted for. In essence, the colonial 
maps of the past and the network diagrams of the present function as spa-
tial representations of a power structure that in each case submits to a cap-
italist and a colonialist logic. Th ey connect peripheral resources to process-
ing centers or network hubs while depicting intermediary spaces as empty 
or dead.34 Locations that hold no value to the colonial enterprise, just like 
individuals who are not users of the platform, practically disappear from 
the map or diagram.
Speaking of processing centers, it is important to note the role in ex-
ploration that the metropolis played as the centralized data bank in which 
information about colonized territories would be collected, analyzed, and 
used to assemble maps and other documents. Institutions such as the Casa 
de la Contratación de las Indias and the Consejo Real y Supremo de las In-
dias in Spain or the Royal Geographical Society in London would function 
as information repositories and map production centers at which stan-
dardized survey data would be organized into chorographic records and 
reports on the natural and social history of colonized territories. Other 
institutions such as the Dutch East India Company maintained extensive 
botanical gardens to collect knowledge about plant species from the colo-

96 
Chapter 3
nies. Centers such as the Society of Jesus in Rome served as clearinghouses 
of new medical knowledge based on remedies made from New World in-
gredients, knowledge that would then be disseminated through the con-
nections of these centers to universities.35 Today, data centers serve similar 
functions by storing data and “mining” it—a pertinent colonial meta-
phor—to produce new knowledge for the benefi t of corporations.36
Th e creation of a global network that facilitated colonial exploration 
was presented as further proof of the superiority of Europeans over non-
Western peoples.37 Th is network started to acquire a more familiar shape 
with the more recent commercialization of the telegraph and the tele-
phone starting in the nineteenth century. As the planet became criss-
crossed with an infrastructure that continues to account for 80 percent 
of global information fl ows today, the geography of the cable system rep-
licated the mercantile routes established during historical colonialism,38 
and colonial maps continued to exert their infl uence. For example, Britain 
forced companies that operated transatlantic submarine cables to use Lon-
don as their connection hub (aft er World War I, the epicenter for global 
communications shift ed from England to the United States).39 Owner-
ship of the new communication infrastructure continued to follow colo-
nial models as well by concentrating it in the hands of a few multinational 
consortia of state and private-sector corporations. When independence 
was fi nally achieved, former colonies simply inherited the infrastructure 
of the colonizers and in many cases were pressured to allow foreign com-
panies to continue to control and profi t from that infrastructure. To at-
tempt to intervene with that model could have potentially disastrous re-
sults, as evidenced by the extreme example of Chile, where the US-based 
International Telephone & Telegraph corporation played a crucial role in 
the CIA-backed overthrow of the government in 1973 aft er democratically 
elected president Salvador Allende threatened, among other measures, to 
nationalize the telecom industry.
We would do well to remember, however, that even when infrastruc-
ture came under the control of independent governments in post colonial 
times, it did not necessarily represent gains for the average citizen. As Miri-
yam Aouragh and Paula Chakravartty40 remind us, calls by former colo-
nies for the democratization of global media systems oft en went hand in 

The Coloniality of Data Relations 
97
hand with eff orts by those same governments to silence dissent at home. 
In most cases, the censorship and antidemocratic regulation undertaken 
by authoritarian regimes was backed by the United States and other West-
ern powers; commitment by the West to “freedom of information” consis-
tently took second place to the support of oppressive regimes that pushed 
the West’s agenda of modernization.41
By considering these precedents, we can see that the social quantifi ca-
tion sector’s exploration of the exploitable regions of our social lives ad-
heres in large part to colonial patterns of infrastructure development and 
ownership, intelligence gathering, and imperial politics. One need only 
consider Facebook’s Free Basics project. According to its own PR, Face-
book is “helping people around the world access impactful local services, 
including health resources, education and business tools, refugee assis-
tance sites, and more.”42 But the NGO Global Voices calls the program an 
instance of “digital colonialism” that, under the guise of bringing “free” 
internet to underdeveloped countries, locks its fi ft y million users into the 
company’s extraction model. Th e Global Voices report43 looked at the suc-
cess of the program in Colombia, Ghana, Kenya, Mexico, Pakistan, and 
the Philippines and found that Free Basics is not always customized to fea-
ture local content or use local languages. Additionally, the program breaks 
net neutrality principles by preventing users from browsing the internet 
openly, and, more importantly, it collects data about all the activities of us-
ers (restricted as they are), not just those conducted on Facebook. Because 
most users of Free Basics are people already connected to the internet who 
merely want to lower their data-plan bills, the report concludes that the 
program is motivated more by the desire to capture new audiences and less 
by a desire to help people bridge the digital divide. Th at is probably why in 
2016, civil society in India organized to force the government to prevent 
Free Basics from being off ered in that country,44 a move that drove Marc 
Andreessen (cofounder of Netscape and a Facebook investor) to lecture In-
dian civil society via Twitter on the economic futility of anticolonialism.45
Expand
Indians have plenty of reason to be suspicious of foreign corporations. 
Founded in 1600, the East India Company by the year 1833 controlled fi ve 

98 
Chapter 3
hundred thousand square miles of territory in South Asia, encompassing 
93.7 million subjects paying 22,718,794 pounds a year to the British empire 
in taxation. At its height, the Company controlled about half of the world’s 
trade, specializing in basic commodities such as tea, textiles, and spices. 
Th e power of the East India Company was secured by its own military and 
paramilitary armies, which served not only to protect its interests and en-
force compliance with its decrees but also to collect revenue and perform 
police duties.46
Along with military force, the East India Company relied on techno-
logical innovation to expand and manage its empire. A perfect example of 
this is the railroad, which in the nineteenth century came to embody co-
lonialism’s hunger and capacity for growth, not to mention its “civilizing” 
mission. Roads and maritime routes had already established fl ows of in-
formation and wealth even before colonialism, but the railroad was seen 
as a dramatic representation of the gap between civilized and noncivilized 
people. British civil servants, for instance, condescendingly joked that all 
signs of civilization disappeared beyond one hundred yards on either side 
of the railway track in India.47 Th is attitude can perhaps be explained by 
the fact that the railroad embodied most of what was seen as revolution-
ary in the industrial era: metal instead of wood as the primary construc-
tion material, mechanized power, unprecedented speed (which redefi ned 
the scale of distance and time), and a logic of rationality and precise tim-
ing.48 Th e eff ect of the railroad on the expansion of empire stemmed from 
its role not just as transportation technology but also as a means of eco-
nomic development, state building, and information distribution. Th e be-
ginnings of cybernetics can be traced to the information-overload crisis 
that the railroad introduced and that demanded new methods of control.49 
Domestic and international markets emerged thanks to the railroad, and 
states acquired cogency and identity in part due to the regular connec-
tions it made possible. Th e railroad as transportation and communication 
technology enhanced colonial governance by improving and extending 
tax collection and information fl ows, making centralization more effi  cient 
and allowing for the rapid deployment of military resources.50
Idealistic colonizers believed that the railroad, by bringing diff erent so-
cial groups together as they traveled in proximity, would eventually erode 

The Coloniality of Data Relations 
99
caste divisions and barriers imposed by religious beliefs51 (although, cu-
riously, this idealism did not extend to the divisions between colonizers 
and colonized). Karl Marx himself believed the railroad and the newspaper 
would help to politically unify India.52 Th is list of eff ects and hopes seems 
to closely mirror those surrounding the internet. During rosier times, 
many believed that the internet would transform economies by creating 
and redistributing new wealth, that it would facilitate new levels of inter-
cultural understanding by creating more opportunities for dialogue, that it 
would democratize governance and topple authoritarian regimes, and that 
it would lead to a renaissance of journalism.53
Other nineteenth-century innovations—surveillance and population-
control technologies—also had a profound impact on the expansion of co-
lonialism. Surveillance technologies are complementary to the use of force 
but are distinct from them. Th ey function as a prelude or threat to the ac-
tual use of violence, keeping certain elements of the population in check. 
In the case of colonialism, they also aimed to shape the modes of living 
of the colonized and rearrange these modes according to principles based 
on Western notions of progress. Oft en, the colonies served as laboratories 
to experiment with these methods before importing them to the home-
land. Surveillance technologies such as the panopticon, which Foucault 
described as an exemplary illustration of modern disciplinary power, were 
fi rst tried in India and then imported to the United Kingdom.54 Finger-
printing was also fi rst applied in South Asia in the mid-nineteenth cen-
tury by William J. Herschel as a means of controlling prisoners, pension-
ers, and contractors. Only later did the practice reach England. Along 
with other forms of identifi cation that were introduced in the colonies, the 
point of fi ngerprinting was not primarily to identify unknown subjects 
(who hadn’t been fi ngerprinted yet) but to extend police power over groups 
who were already under suspicion and already indexed by the system.55 
Th rough technologies that made it easier to control the population, colo-
nial power could be expanded to new provinces and social domains and, 
indeed, introduced at home.
Colonial implementations of these surveillance technologies continue 
to reverberate today in digital data and privacy issues. Similarly, digital 
methods of “fi ngerprinting” (capturing a unique computer identity in-

100 
Chapter 3
stead of an impression of unique fi nger ridges) are an essential component 
of computer-based surveillance systems that aim to track all activity in or-
der to identify threats.56 Initiatives such as the Aadhaar system in India 
(discussed in the next chapter) assign a universal identifi cation number 
to every citizen based on biometric data, supposedly to improve the dis-
tribution of social benefi ts but also to generate new commercial and secu-
rity streams of data.57 Meanwhile in China, where 530 patents were fi led 
in 2017 alone for camera- and video-surveillance technologies,58 the state 
is rapidly approaching its goal of providing continuous and total surveil-
lance in public spaces. Even public toilets in some locations are equipped 
with facial-recognition soft ware to dispense only the allowed amount of 
toilet paper to users, ensuring they don’t go above their quota within a cer-
tain time frame.59
Of course, no system of surveillance is perfect and all-encompassing, 
which is why the ultimate goal of a monitoring system is for the subject to 
internalize the disciplinary gaze of the authorities, as Foucault described 
in his analysis of the panopticon.60 But even before the panopticon, meth-
ods such as taxation and the confession of sins were used during histori-
cal colonialism to ensure that colonial subjects felt an obligation to behave 
as though everything, from their material possessions to their innermost 
thoughts and desires, was open for scrutiny and auditing and had to be re-
ported to the corresponding secular or religious authorities.61
Similarly, obedience to authority in data colonialism is promoted 
through a quasi-paranoid self-monitoring feeling that “we live in public” 
but that we need not worry too much about it because everyone else is also 
being watched. We need not worry, that is, as long as we have “done noth-
ing wrong.” If the panopticon eff ect relied on our inability to tell exactly 
when we were being watched, so that we behaved all the time as though we 
were, the “inverse panopticon eff ect”62 of pervasive data surveillance re-
lies on us knowing that we are being watched all the time but lapsing into 
behaving as though we are not, thus naturalizing acceptance of a world 
in which surveillance and continuous tracking operate unnoted in the 
background.
In this manner, the technologies of data colonialism become what 
Ashis Nandy called (in the context of historical colonialism) our most in-

The Coloniality of Data Relations 
101
timate enemies—internalized overseers that we carry with us even when 
we are not connected to the network. As Nandy observes, colonialism is a 
“state of mind” that requires a “shared culture” between the colonizer and 
the colonized.63 Our comfortable acceptance, at least until recently, of the 
extractive rationalities of data colonialism indicates the extent to which 
our subjectivities had already been utterly occupied by data colonialism’s 
norms and ideologies.
Exploit
Whereas exploration and expansion involve the “discovery” of new re-
sources and the extension of ideological frameworks for marking such re-
sources as available for appropriation, exploitation constitutes the actual 
work of extraction and formalizes a new type of relation within society, a 
new social contract.
Natural resources, or cheap nature, could be exploited by colonialists 
and capitalists only through employing cheap labor, which framed the pro-
ductive capacity of a certain class of human beings (fi rst slaves and then 
workers) as exploitable also. Like cheap nature, cheap social data can be 
fully capitalized only through the exploitation of cheap labor. But as we ar-
gued in chapter 1, data relations are not labor relations in the strict sense 
of the word. Jason Moore explains that “capitalism must commodify life/
work but depends upon the ‘free ride’ of uncommodifi ed life/work to do 
so.”64 Similarly, with data colonialism, the exploitation that occurs through 
social quantifi cation has less to do with the kind of exploitation that hap-
pens in a factory and more with the “free ride” that capitalism benefi ts 
from when extracting wealth from our broader social lives.
Words such as exploitation and labor have very specifi c meanings in 
Marxist theory, so it is worth discussing how they might be employed in 
the context of datafi cation. Strictly speaking, as Nick Srnicek observes, in-
ternet users do not receive wages, and their work is not used to lower pro-
duction costs, increase productivity, and so on, so “it is hard to make the 
case that what they do is labor, properly speaking.”65 Th us, from a Marxist 
perspective, internet users cannot be said to form part of a working class, 
and we can’t say they are exploited in the traditional sense. But theorists 
argue that media consumers are exploited not because they literally work 

102 
Chapter 3
for media companies but because as an audience they become a commod-
ity sold to advertisers without themselves benefi ting at all (for researcher 
and activist Dallas Smythe, for instance, watching advertisements was a 
form of labor and exploitation).66
Our argument is that data colonialism expands the domain of produc-
tion in our capitalist society in a more fundamental way, giving way to 
an emerging new order, a new structuring of social relations. Individu-
als continue to work and sell their labor per the traditional dynamics of la-
bor relations, but now they are implicated in capitalism in other ways that 
do not even require them to work for anyone. Th ey simply need to par-
ticipate in social life, as they ordinarily would, in order to generate value 
for the capitalist. Datafi cation thus meets Lawrence Crocker’s necessary 
and suffi  cient conditions for exploitation: “Th at there be a surplus product 
[data] which is under the control of a group [the social quantifi cation sec-
tor] which does not include all the producers of that surplus [the public].”67 
Capitalists also continue to exploit workers in the traditional way (by col-
lecting more in profi t than they pay in wages), but now they are able to ex-
ploit individuals who do not even work for them and to whom they do not 
pay anything. Th us, while the original Marxist defi nitions of exploitation 
should be respected, the important point is that the absence of direct ex-
ploitation (that is, through a regular job) does not mean exploitation is not 
happening indirectly (by workers being “excluded from the means of pro-
duction and from their benefits,”68 as Raymond Murphy observes).
For these reasons, the thesis that datafi cation technologies can have 
democratic potential must be treated with extreme suspicion. It has be-
come acceptable (even fashionable) to admit that while the platforms of the 
Cloud Empire are exploitative, they can still be used as ad hoc tools in the 
fi ght against capitalism. Although the short-term achievements that plat-
form activism can facilitate are important, we must be vigilant that these 
technologies do not become what Ellen Meiksins Wood calls an alibi for 
capitalism.69 When people insist that these platforms are an important 
“civic” space of resistance against the power of the state and of corpora-
tions, they are in fact weakening and corrupting our conceptualization of 
what a “civic” space must be. As Meiksins Wood argues, this reconstituted 
civic space is framed from the beginning as a new form of social power “in 

The Coloniality of Data Relations 
103
which many coercive functions that once belonged to the state [are] re-
located in the ‘private’ sphere, in private property, class exploitation, and 
market imperatives.”70 In that way, platforms are machines for turning the 
social into a form “adequate to capital,” as Marx would put it.71 Describ-
ing the commercialized civic space of 1990s capitalism in terms that might 
as well refer to the Cloud Empire, Meiksins Wood says of this supposedly 
civic and public space:
We are being asked to pay a heavy price for the all-embracing concept of “civil 
society. . . .” No ancient despot could have hoped to penetrate the personal 
lives of his subjects—their choices, preferences, and relationships—in the 
same comprehensive and minute detail, not only in the workplace but in ev-
ery corner of their lives.72
More bluntly, if the price of new tools for “overthrowing capitalism” is to 
annex all of social life to capitalism, then the deal is a bad one.
As with previous stages of colonialism and capitalism, exploitation cre-
ates and exacerbates inequalities between metropolis and colonies, between 
“developed” and “underdeveloped” worlds. Th e fl ow of data between the 
Global North and the Global South exemplifi es the inequalities that still 
plague neocolonial relations, especially since the circulation of digital data 
is becoming just as important as the circulation of material goods in inter-
national trade. Cross-border data exchanges represented an overall traffi  c 
fl ow of 211.3 terabytes per second (TBps) in 2014 (up from 4.7 TBps in 2005) 
and were valued at $7.8 trillion in that year alone. But a closer look reveals 
that exchanges are highly uneven: while fl ows between North America and 
Europe jumped from 1,000 TBps to more than 20,000 TBps between 2005 
and 2014, the fl ow between North America and Latin America, for exam-
ple, increased only from 500 TBps to 5,000 TBps during that time, and the 
fl ow between Asia and Africa (to illustrate fl ows between the Global South) 
went from less than 50 TBps to no more than 500 TBps.73 An overwhelm-
ing majority of all cross-border data traffi  c passes through the United 
States and is subject to whatever surveillance and collection methods that 
government deems necessary. Th us, the Global North still assumes the role 
of gatekeeper, as it did in the days of the telegraph and the telephone, and 
data fl ows continue to replicate the movement of resources from colony to 

104 
Chapter 3
metropolis. Th ere seems to be, however, an imminent shift  in the struggle 
for global dominance at a time of accelerating ambitions for artifi cial intel-
ligence. According to the McKinsey Global Institute’s Connectedness In-
dex, which measures the size of infl ows and outfl ows of goods, services, fi -
nance, people, and data relative to a country’s GDP, China has climbed 
from number twenty-fi ve to number seven in recent years.74
Th e inequalities in terms of data fl ows can be seen as part of a larger 
structure of exploitation. In a study on development and growth, Steven 
Weber75 describes the economic imbalance that can result when one side 
(the colonized) provides the “raw” data, and the other does all the cap-
turing, the processing, the analysis, and the creation of value-added prod-
ucts that the colonized cannot develop on their own and which they must 
buy at a disadvantage. As has been the case throughout the history of co-
lonialism, this results in the colonizers becoming richer and more power-
ful, and the colonized underdeveloped and dependent. “Th e users in [dis-
advantaged] countries get to consume the products but are shut out of the 
value-add production side of the data economy,” Weber writes.76 He also 
points out that the distribution of infl uential platform businesses is any-
thing but balanced. While enjoying global reach, most data empires are 
concentrated in the United States and China; other countries may contrib-
ute a few notable competitors (Spain’s travel website ODIGEO and Brazil’s 
e-commerce platform B2W, for example), but their international reach is 
much more limited.77 According to 2017 fi gures, three out of the top four 
revenue-earning IT companies in the world were US based, and one was 
Chinese; four out of the top fi ve “traditional” media companies were also 
US based.78 Th e extractive reach of these companies may be global (more 
so for US companies at the moment, with China close behind), but it is 
somewhat misleading to think of them as “transnational” corporations: 
most of their decision power, employment, capital expenditures, and prof-
its are kept close to home.79 Th e model of a few global empires dividing the 
world among themselves seems destined to hold; it is just that the empires 
are no longer confi ned to “the West.” As Kai-Fu Lee, CEO of a Chinese 
venture capital fi rm, says, “All the rest of the world will basically be a land 
grab between the US and China.”80

The Coloniality of Data Relations 
105
Th e last area we will discuss in which exploitation becomes visible at a 
global/neocolonial level is the negotiations around free-trade agreements, 
especially as they pertain to the regulation of data fl ows and e-commerce. 
Not surprisingly, the United States, China, and other developed countries 
have been pressuring developing and poor countries to open their digi-
tal borders in ways that benefi t the social quantifi cation sector. Th is usu-
ally means a number of lopsided trade tactics: antilocalization laws that 
prevent countries from demanding that data should be stored within their 
boundaries; fewer privacy requirements, which allows companies in the 
Global North to collect all sorts of information about users in the Global 
South; strict copyright measures to protect the intellectual property (in-
cluding media content and proprietary source code) of the companies in 
the Global North; and tax breaks that allow consumers to buy directly 
from foreign platforms such as Amazon without having to pay custom 
duties.81
Th is kind of deregulation is already being proposed in agreements such 
as the Trans-Pacifi c Partnership Agreement (TPP) and the renegotiated 
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). Th e rationale is not 
new and has been ideologically framed since the 1990s in terms of “non-
discrimination” (the Clinton and Obama administrations were enthusias-
tic proponents of it), meaning that in the name of “free trade,” corpora-
tions should be allowed to colonize markets in the Global South in order 
to offi  cially increase competition, provide better services, and incentivize 
innovation.
Th is does not mean, of course, that governments have not tried to resist 
this push. Countries such as China have stringent protectionist policies 
(not least to protect their homegrown data industries), and others (includ-
ing Russia, the EU, Nigeria, Vietnam, and Australia)82 have data localiza-
tion laws. As Indian policy analyst Anita Gurumurthy and her colleagues 
argue,83 the notion that the free fl ow of data will benefi t everyone is a myth, 
as the companies and countries that sign these “free” trade agreements 
are in very unequal positions. It is a myth we already heard loudly in the 
nineteenth- century liberal discourse on free trade that was so important 
to the expansion of industrial capitalism and historical colonialism.

106 
Chapter 3
Exterminate
It is estimated that 185,000 kilograms of gold and 16,000,000 kilograms 
of silver fl owed from Latin America to Spain during the sixteenth and 
early seventeenth centuries, coming principally from mines in Bolivia 
and, later, Mexico.84 A Catholic priest described these mines as verita-
ble mouths of hell, in which slave or indentured laborers—men, women, 
and children treated “like stray animals”—died from exhaustion, abuse, 
or poisoning within four years of arriving.85 In an ironic and cruel twist, 
however, Spanish law (the Compilations of the Laws of the Indies) prohib-
ited the exploitation of the “Indians” working in the mines and granted 
them the right to own and profi t from them.86 In other words, while in re-
ality indigenous people were being worked to death, the letter of the law 
treated them as rightful owners of the mines, explicitly denying the fact of 
their extermination.
Th e mission statements of social quantifi cation companies do not men-
tion anything about extermination of natives, but like Spanish law, they 
adopt a very generous and helpful attitude toward those whom they seek 
to subjugate. Th ey purport to “bring the world closer together” (Facebook) 
and to “enable people and businesses throughout the world to realize their 
full potential” (Microsoft ). Th ey also aim to “give everyone the power to 
create and share ideas and information instantly, without barriers” (Twit-
ter). Google has policies that promote values of transparency, user choice, 
and responsibility—including a “responsible manufacturing” policy and 
even a “confl ict minerals” policy,” both of which regulate the sourcing of 
manufacturing materials from war-free locations. Amazon wants to be a 
place where “customers can fi nd and discover anything they might want to 
buy online,” and Airbnb imagines a “magical world” in which “everyone of 
us can belong anywhere” and we “can be anything we want.” Intuit, which 
sells fi nancial soft ware to individuals, declares that they want to change 
their users’ lives “so profoundly, they couldn’t imagine going back to the 
old way.”87
Granted, none of these companies is setting out to commit genocide. 
But while physical violence is the feature we most oft en associate with co-
lonialism, economic violence can also have disastrous and lasting eff ects 

The Coloniality of Data Relations 
107
on a society. Undeniably, extermination was a key component in the pro-
cess of extraction and appropriation during historical colonialism. But as 
the system “evolved” to one characterized by the organized economy of in-
dustrial capitalism, the need for applying physical violence was reduced. 
Systemic violence is a costly strategy, to be applied only when there is a de-
monstrable “return on investment,” (when the costs of the large-scale bru-
talization of native populations still translates into profi ts for the empire). 
But a point can be reached when these costs become too high, economi-
cally but also ethically, since empires can present themselves as righteous 
while engaging in genocide only for so long. At such moments, direct sys-
temic violence is gradually replaced with indirect and interpersonal forms 
of localized cruelty (as between masters and slaves) and eventually elimi-
nated and replaced with entirely diff erent social relations, such as labor or 
data relations.
Th us, extermination in data colonialism is better understood not as 
the elimination of entire peoples but as the gradual elimination of social 
spaces that can exist outside data relations. We know from looking at the 
legacy of historical colonialism that genocide always entailed the oblitera-
tion of cultures, languages, and ways of life. In that sense, data colonialism 
continues mass media’s project of homogenization, a project whereby dif-
ference is subdued in the interest of conformity. Th e actual extermination 
of subjects becomes unnecessary once the elimination of forms of life that 
do not exist merely as inputs for capitalism is achieved.
Th e pervasiveness of data relations does not mean, however, that the 
subjects of data colonialism are all treated the same. During colonialism, 
the social relations of exploitation were defi ned primarily by race in the 
colonies, by class in the metropolis, and by gender across all locations. One 
category of subjects, affl  uent white males, was placed at the top of the hi-
erarchy, and everybody else was arranged below them. Today, it would 
super fi cially seem as though we are all equal subjects of data colonialism, 
so that economic violence is diff used almost to imperceptible levels. But in 
fact we are still unequally positioned by our class, race, and gender in re-
lation to the global infrastructures and categorizing practices of the Cloud 
Empire, as chapters 4 and 5 explain. Our identity still functions within the 
new platforms to determine how we are categorized, what information we 

108 
Chapter 3
encounter or is hidden from us, and what we are allowed to do with that 
information. In other words, class, race, and gender (the whole trajectory 
of historical exploitation) still determine the extent to which we are ex-
ploited through use of the data we create.
Th e colonial drive for extermination is concealed in ways too subtle 
even for the masters of the social quantifi cation sector to recognize. Con-
sider Amazon’s MTurk, mentioned earlier. Th e platform that essentially 
launched the gig economy was named aft er the Mechanical Turk, an eigh-
teenth-century chess-playing automaton that became somewhat of a sen-
sation in Europe. Walter Benjamin described the contraption as follows:
It is well-known that an automaton once existed, which was so constructed 
that it could counter any move of a chess-player with a counter-move, and 
thereby assure itself of victory in the match. A puppet in Turkish attire, 
water- pipe in mouth, sat before the chessboard, which rested on a broad ta-
ble. Th rough a system of mirrors, the illusion was created that this table was 
transparent from all sides. In truth, a hunchbacked dwarf who was a master 
chess-player sat inside, controlling the hands of the puppet with strings.88
Th e fact that the automaton represented a Turk was anything but acciden-
tal, since as Jonathan Gil Harris points out, there is a long European tra-
dition stretching back to the Middle Ages of producing Muslim-looking 
puppets or homunculi to suggest that Islam is an artifi cial or fake religion 
and that its adherents are incapable of autonomous thought or action.89 
By reclaiming this imagery, MTurk unconsciously implies that exploitable 
humans can perform machinelike functions behind the scenes, and that 
the “puppets” doing this work belong to a subhuman category that can be 
exploited and economically marginalized.
What the 4X’s Will Mean to Digital Natives
Imagine a product designed to enforce the long-distance economic dom-
inance of one group over another, a product that creates passivity and de-
pendence on the part of those who consume it, that can be used to destabi-
lize the economic and political relations within a society, and whose usage 
entails an exploitative chain of transnational dimensions. Th e fact that we 

The Coloniality of Data Relations 
109
could just as easily be talking about opium or the latest app from the social 
quantifi cation sector suggests how much things have not changed in colo-
nial relations over the last two centuries.90
Around 1800, Britain was consuming a lot of Chinese tea and other 
Chinese products and was therefore becoming increasingly indebted to 
that country (while goods fl owed from China to Britain, considerable 
amounts of silver fl owed from Britain to China). In order to fi x this trade 
imbalance, Britain decided to try something diff erent. Instead of the terri-
torial colonization they had practiced in India and the Americas, the East 
India Company was mobilized to attempt a fi nancial conquest of China 
through the trade of a highly addictive drug that “targeted the biology 
of the Chinese population.”91 Since opium could not be grown legally in 
China, the East India Company moved all of its production to India, be-
coming a monopsony for the poppy plant: “If a peasant decided to be in 
the business of producing opium, he had no option but to deal with the 
Company. . . . Th e entire output of the drug would have to be handed over 
to the Company through a contractor at a price determined unilaterally 
for the year.”92 Two wars later, the Chinese had been forced to open their 
territory to trade and had ceded Hong Kong to the British, and the East In-
dia Company had saturated the market with the drug, devastating Chi-
nese society. By 1825 the opium trade was generating enough funds to pay 
for all the Chinese tea Britain consumed, and on top of material commod-
ities the British were taking large numbers of indentured laborers from 
China (“coolies”) to work in their colonies.
Th e products of the social quantifi cation sector do not have such visible 
and dire eff ects, but we must still question the ways in which they are al-
tering social fabrics and widening inequalities. Although not exactly nar-
cotics, some of the products generated by the Cloud Empire are notorious 
for their addictive and exploitative nature. Consider the teen drama Skam, 
a social media series that started on Norwegian public TV and is now a 
very successful Facebook franchise airing in the United States, France, 
Germany, and Italy (and watched all over the world by millions of teenag-
ers). Skam did not invent the use of personal surveillance as a mode of so-
cial interaction, but it defi nitely promotes and rewards it by encouraging 
viewers to stalk or “play detective” with fi ctional characters on Facebook 

110 
Chapter 3
and Instagram as a way to drive the narrative forward (Instagram, cur-
rently a very popular platform with young people, is owned by Facebook). 
Th e fact that Facebook can create realistic profi les for fi ctional characters, 
complete with histories and timelines that can be modifi ed by the corpora-
tion to augment credibility, illustrates Facebook’s ability to manipulate re-
ality for profi t. And the illusion proves too hard to resist for many. Events 
in the drama unfold almost in real time and are highly localized; for in-
stance, characters post updates about getting ready to attend a concert just 
as the actual concert is about to take place. Characters also comment on 
real current events as they unfold, and viewers can respond and interact 
with the characters, which leads many viewers to assume the show is real, 
at least at the beginning.
Th e result is a fi ctional drama inserted into the nonfi ctional social me-
dia realities of teens in a way that risks becoming highly addictive, consid-
ering that young people already spend about nine hours per day consum-
ing media. And the formula is very successful. Th e US launch of the series 
was viewed 7.4 million times (compared to 2.3 million views for a typical 
teen TV show such as Riverdale).93 Skam is a global phenomenon beyond 
the countries in which it plays and even beyond Facebook (clips from the 
Norwegian version were viewed in China 180 million times). Furthermore, 
it is promoted without any advertising, essentially through word of mouth. 
Th e marketing, in other words, is done by users themselves (although “in-
fl uencers” are hired by Facebook to promote the show to their peers). Th e 
designed addictiveness of the show is an attempt by Facebook to retain 
young users at a time when many are spending more time on platforms 
like YouTube. Skam’s ability to create addiction in vulnerable audiences, 
reorganize reality for profi t, reduce social life to social media life, derive 
value from the resources of users, and mobilize global markets makes it a 
good example of data colonialism in action.
How can such invasions into our social lives be countered? Th e project 
of challenging data colonialism can and must draw inspiration from de-
coloniality, the study of the legacy of colonialism as it continues to shape 
modern social relations. Territorial and data colonialisms represent both 
a continuity and a disruption within capitalism, and as decolonial move-
ments have shown us, the responses must equally take into account the 

The Coloniality of Data Relations 
111
past while going beyond it to imagine alternative presents and futures. If 
we fail to do that, the term digital natives (generations who have always 
grown up with the internet) starts to take on a more sinister meaning: 
those whom data relations have dispossessed.
From Counterhistories to Counterpresents
In their responses to historical colonialism, postcolonial studies have 
helped us frame counterhistories, or alternative versions of history that re-
claim elements erased by Eurocentrism. Similarly, a decolonial approach 
to data can help us frame counterpresents, alternative understandings of 
our current social realities that allow us to see ourselves as more than mere 
inputs for capitalism.
In order to articulate these positions, what are needed are methods for 
denaturalizing the logic of data and critiquing data colonialism. We must 
then use the results of those methods to reimagine diff erent forms of so-
cial and economic relations and connections outside of Western notions of 
modernity. Th e project of creating these alternate versions of modernity is 
what Enrique Dussel calls a “worldwide ethical liberation project”94 that 
challenges the universalism of a Western form of reason. In essence, cre-
ating counterpresents implies engaging in media practices that question 
how notions of “progress,” “civilization,” or “innovation” are equated with 
data relations as conceptualized by corporate interests. Creating counter-
presents would also mean reclaiming the agency of the colonized data sub-
ject. Th e colonial project granted subjecthood to dominated individuals, 
but it did not grant them equality.95 Counterpresents would allow the sub-
jects of data colonialism to imagine a diff erent worldview in which they 
can locate themselves as fully autonomous actors, beyond data’s “horizon 
of totality”96 and with a fully recognized right to challenge the progress of 
data colonialism.
An important reason for undertaking all of this urgently is that data 
colonialism is a period of transition. It is not here to stay; its patterns sim-
ply announce an emerging order that is yet to come. As discussed in chap-
ter 1, historical colonialism served as a prelude to modern industrial cap-
italism. Th e eighteenth-century abolition of colonial slavery solidifi ed the 

112 
Chapter 3
British empire’s transition in the nineteenth century to a new form of im-
perialism based on liberal values such as free trade. Th is in turn allowed 
the empire to reimagine itself at the center of a global network of com-
merce in manufactured goods—the beginning of what we would recog-
nize today as modern capitalism.97 In short, historical colonialism was not 
just about systematic and global extraction and appropriation but about 
reimagining those things as progress and enforcing a new world order in 
which colonizers could continue to rule with decreased (yet still preva-
lent) levels of violence but also with increased legitimacy. Th ey would rule, 
in fact, by disavowing violence and declaring themselves the defenders of 
human values. In light of this history, we must reassess recent statements 
made by commentators following the Cambridge Analytica scandal ex-
pressing dissatisfaction with the corrupt data extraction system but assur-
ing the public that it can be reformed and salvaged so that the march of 
progress may continue.
In the next section of the book, we continue the analysis by looking at 
data colonialism not just as a comparative template but as a specifi c or-
der of extraction, as a particular process for producing knowledge that re-
defi nes the social world and circumvents our capacity to act autonomously 
in that world. We turn, in other words, to the new social order that is being 
built all around us through data colonialism.

115
The Hollowing Out of the Social
A self-adjusting market . . . could not exist for any length of time without 
annihilating the human and natural substance of society. It would have 
physically destroyed man and transformed his surroundings into a wilderness.
—Karl Polanyi1
Know your customers better than they know themselves.
—Website for Tresata (a customer intelligence management ﬁ rm)2
AI brings new opportunities for social construction.
—China’s “Next Generation Artiﬁ cial Intelligence Development Plan”3
4
IN THE EARLY 2010S, Uber executives treated attendees at their parties to their 
“God view” of all Uber’s cars tracked across the surrounding city. As 
part of the spectacle, they showed locations of currently active passen-
gers; sometimes, for fun, they removed passenger anonymity. It took three 
years for news of this to reach the journalistic mainstream.4 Most inter-
esting about this story is neither the fact of surveillance power nor Uber 
executives’ reveling in it—aft er all, surveillance power is integral to data 
colonialism. Th e most interesting thing about this story is the version of 
social knowledge that it implied: an all-seeing, all-encompassing knowl-
edge at a distance, based on the synthesizing capacity of an algorithmic 
system. Th ere is a vision here of how the social world becomes newly know-
able when data extraction is a basic mode for generating economic value. 
In this chapter, we ask what sort of social world is being built as a result 
of data colonialism. What will count as social knowledge in that world, 
and what older forms of social knowledge may drop out of the picture? 
Furthermore, what do those changes mean for social inequality and so-
cial justice?
Th e challenge that data colonialism poses for social life and for criti-
cal social research is entirely new and disturbing. Because this new colo-
nialism’s mode of operation involves producing the materials from which 
information, and ultimately knowledge, are made, its operations cannot 

116 
Chapter 4
be insulated from how we understand the worlds we share, from our so-
cial imagination and even our politics. Data relations generate value in the 
very same movement in which they redescribe and remap the world, fus-
ing knowledge production and value extraction. Because this challenge is 
new, our goal in this chapter is to delineate the types of problems to which 
the practices of data colonialism give rise. We cannot possibly be compre-
hensive in our coverage of how this is playing out on a global scale. Inevi-
tably our narrative will give most weight to the places, such as the United 
States, where critical scholars and activists have begun to regularly pro-
test about the disturbing consequences. But we will fi nd enough examples 
from other places, including China, India, South Africa, and Sweden, to 
suggest that the problems are global in reach. Wherever you are reading 
this, we are confi dent you will fi nd echoes of the strange new claims, un-
covered in this chapter, to know the social world through data.
As a way into this complex topic, we consider social knowledge forms in 
the North America and Europe of the nineteenth and early twentieth cen-
turies. Th ere is a special reason for this comparison. One of the most pow-
erful challenges to economics’ detachment from the social world was made 
by the historian Karl Polanyi. In the 1940s, Polanyi rethought how market 
societies came into existence. Th e advent of industrial machinery changed 
everything, requiring long-distance markets to supply the parts that kept 
machinery moving and suffi  cient customers to buy what machines pro-
duced. Since markets are oriented to exchange for gain regardless of scale, 
the expansion of national markets across every sector of life severely dam-
aged local social relations; far from being natural, human life organized 
exclusively around markets proved almost unlivable in  seventeenth- and 
eighteenth-century England, the fi rst economy to industrialize, as older 
ways of organizing resources (for example, the family workplace and the 
local market) were pulled apart.
Polanyi concluded that “a market economy can only exist in a mar-
ket society,” which must be created through “highly artifi cial stimulants 
administered to the body social.”5 Th is happened in the nineteenth and 
twentieth centuries through what Polanyi calls a double movement; fi rst, 
a profound institutional reorganization made markets (in particular in la-
bor, land, and fi nance) into social realities, turning “all transactions . . . 

The Hollowing Out of the Social 
117
into money transactions”;6 second, over time, a countermovement of com-
pensatory mechanisms emerged to control market relations and make 
them socially livable.7 Key developments were the regulation of labor, land 
markets, and the fi nancial sector.
Polanyi’s analysis has provocative implications for today.8 As he makes 
clear, the market transformation that data colonialism involves will not 
succeed by itself: it will require its own social transformation that, initially, 
is likely to be violent, or at least dislocating. At the core of any such so-
cial transformation will be “the commodity concept.”9 Capitalism, to reap 
the benefi ts of data colonialism, must make the social domain into a mar-
ketized space whose every point has value and is available for commodity 
exchange. Data relations, and the new forms of “knowledge” to which they 
give rise, are the key means to this.
Th e nineteenth-century countermovement assumed there was still an 
outside to the economy, a readily understandable world of social strug-
gle from which economic forces could be challenged. But under data co-
lonialism, building on the previous advances of neoliberal politics, capi-
talism begins to imagine away any outside to the economy. Its distinctive 
forms of social knowledge describe a social world that is literally coexten-
sive with economic life. Th is is what we meant in chapter 1 when we said 
neoliberalism (the injunction to treat social processes as though they were 
markets) may soon become unnecessary as a result of capitalism’s new re-
liance on data relations (which literally turn social processes into mar-
kets). As the social domain becomes colonized by data relations, the social 
world gets hollowed out as a site of critical agency.10 Instead of “social rela-
tions [being] embedded in the economic system” (they already have been 
now for two centuries, as Polanyi showed), social relations become the eco-
nomic system,11 or least a crucial part of it, as human life is converted into 
raw material for capital via data.
Th e value of data colonialism’s extractive processes depends on the 
comprehensiveness of the data generated. As a result, and certainly not by 
accident, a new form of knowledge emerges that appears to cover the whole 
of the social world, but only because no part of that world is exempt from 
processes of data extraction. Th is new social knowledge begins to over-
ride older forms of social knowledge. In making a historical comparison 

118 
Chapter 4
here to North America’s and Europe’s nineteenth century, we have no wish 
to romanticize the fi erce social and political confl icts of that era, still less 
to romanticize the term social.12 What is new today is not the quantifi ca-
tion of the social or its measurement but the depth at which datafi ed social 
knowledge conducts its operations and how the resulting social knowledge 
is (or is not) accountable to the social actors it describes.
Th e social quantifi cation sector is fast building its own social knowl-
edge. Th at knowledge is commercially controlled, generally opaque in 
its production, not open to public debate, and thoroughly oriented fi rst 
to capitalist drives before it is oriented to the interests of government. 
It shapes everyday actions quite diff erently than did earlier forms of so-
cial knowledge. Th e result, as we already hinted in chapter 1, is a diff er-
ent type of social order in which the agency and control of corporations is 
enhanced and that of individual citizens is reduced and sometimes even 
erased. Th e story we tell in this chapter remains, however, only one aspect 
of how the social quantifi cation sector is shaping society. Also important, 
for example, are the commercial—indeed, blatantly discriminatory—dis-
tortions built into the everyday knowledge that individuals obtain through 
their online searches13 and the consequences of the social media platforms 
for everyday sociality.14 We do not minimize those developments but seek 
to uncover here a general dimension of data colonialism’s transformation 
of the social world that has rarely been surveyed.
Th ese developments are masked by the ideology of datafi cation and 
the corresponding myth of Big Data.15 We need to peer back through Big 
 Data’s one-way mirror16 and ask what is going on with the construction of 
social knowledge today, as data colonialism expands across the world. As 
preparation, let’s explore further that historical comparison with the nine-
teenth century.
A Brief History of Social Quantiﬁ cation
Th e role of numbers in shaping our understanding of the social world is 
easily overlooked. But as the leading historian of statistics Th eodore Porter 
wrote, “Th e credibility of numbers . . . is a social and moral problem. . . . 
Power must be exercised in a variety of ways to make measurements and 

The Hollowing Out of the Social 
119
tallies valid.”17 Th e measurements and tallies required by data colonialism 
are industrial in scale, even if much of their operation is hidden from view. 
A history of how, under very diff erent conditions, social numbers came to 
transform nineteenth-century accounts of the social world will provide a 
useful comparison.
Th e notion of “society” is not natural; it had to be constructed at a cer-
tain time and place.18 Th e nineteenth century’s (indeed, also the early 
twentieth century’s) construction of society emerged out of what Max We-
ber called “the peculiarity of modern culture, its calculability.”19 Th e his-
tory of that period’s new forms of measure and statistical calculation has 
been told oft en, so we will focus only on the most salient features for un-
derstanding today’s social knowledge.
Th e philosopher Ian Hacking has given an elegant account of how in 
the early nineteenth century, the centuries-long assumption of a hierarchy 
of individuals marked as socially distinct at the moment of birth began to 
be replaced with accounts of diff erentiated human behavior in something 
called “society.” Th at account was based in measuring groups and indi-
viduals by reference to a statistically calculated “norm.”20 While disputes 
raged for decades about the scientifi c meaning of the statistical norm and 
the reality, or abstraction, of the “normal man,”21 the transformation of 
the understanding of human variation was dramatic. Not only were people 
counted, but since counting requires categorization, new ways of “making 
up people” emerged.22 From practices of counting and comparing num-
bers, the discipline of comparative statistics developed, aimed at demon-
strating the relative strength and wealth of nations and doing so in public: 
earlier state-held numbers, generated for tax and other purposes, had re-
mained, at least until the early nineteenth century, within the vaults of the 
state.23 And it was states (even if through separate agencies), not private 
corporations, that collected information such as a population’s size and 
health. Indeed, the state’s right and duty to count its population by census 
was enshrined in article 1, section 2 of the US Constitution as a means of 
recognizing diversity within the population.24
Th ese new practices of counting generated “an avalanche of printed 
numbers” in Europe and the United States between 1820 and 1840.25 Talk 
about human beings became routed through statistics about national so-

120 
Chapter 4
cieties rather than through the abstraction of human nature. Th e idea that 
human behavior could vary in regular ways between nations enabled “the 
confusion of politics [to] be replaced by an orderly reign of facts.”26 Vari-
ous actors (not just states but campaigning reformers too) began using sta-
tistics to off er rival measures of the well-being of populations. As French 
data historian Alain Desrosières describes, discussion about poverty in 
Great Britain was transformed by new statistics on unemployment, health, 
and housing.27 Society itself—its dynamics and possibilities for positive 
transformation—became something debated in public, with the state be-
coming accountable for data collection and, over time, also for addressing 
the problems revealed through those numbers. In 1911 the category of so-
cial class was for the fi rst time incorporated into the UK national census; 
meanwhile, health statistics were the subject of lively debate in the medi-
cal profession.28
Dry details perhaps? Every process of abstracting knowledge from 
every day life needs practical tools for formulating it in public as well as 
devices to disseminate it. Th is “concrete history of abstraction” is of enor-
mous signifi cance for understanding nineteenth-century Western poli-
tics and social reform.29 Numbers, and the statistical science that devel-
oped through them, enabled a model of social control, with the statistical 
norm operating as an instrument of normalization, within a wider vision 
of “government from the social point of view.”30 Th is was the period when 
the modern psychological disciplines and the practices of social care and 
urban policy developed.31 Statistical knowledge brought with it, over time, 
more complex mechanisms of description, what historian Dan Bouk calls 
“data aggregates” such as “charts, tables, maps, or even algorithms.”32 For 
example, Charles Booth’s London poverty maps (prints of which can still 
be seen on the corridors of the London university where one of us works) 
provided a tool for managing neighborhoods as part of the wider regula-
tion of social life.33
Th ese social uses of numbers were a crucial site for contesting power. 
An emerging social state aimed at the betterment of all created “experts 
of the social” with new types of professional authority.34 A key dispute 
within statistical science was whether “the norm” (for example, the norm 
of average family size or income) was a real-world reference point around 

The Hollowing Out of the Social 
121
which human variation actually turned or an abstract mathematical point 
that random variation implied.35 As Hacking writes, “Normality” emerged 
“to close the gap between ‘is’ and ‘ought.’”36 Science apart, statistics’ emer-
gence as a forum for debating “the social” did not escape contamination 
by more sinister dreams of managing life—indeed, the evolutionary pros-
pects of the human race. Th e most scandalous example was eugenics, the 
pseudoscience of managing births to secure better genetic outcomes for 
the overall population. Here the apparently objective science of num-
bers merged with the racial hierarchies between peoples that had already 
shaped colonialism for centuries.
So far, so familiar, you might think, but diff erences may prove more 
crucial than similarities here. Looking back, fi ve points seem distinctive 
about nineteenth- and twentieth-century forms of social knowledge.
First, the key actors in developing social knowledge and social statistics 
in this earlier period operated, with few exceptions, at the state’s initiative 
(an exception would be the data-gathering of the commercial insurance 
industry). It was not until the 1970s and 1980s in the United States that 
large private companies (marketers) acquired a data-collection capacity to 
rival that of the state.37 As a result, the data collectors of that earlier period 
necessarily faced some requirements for public accountability in how data 
was collected, categories adopted, and results applied.
Second, the forms of discrimination that resulted from data collection 
were also largely public—and visible as such—resulting, for example, in 
disputes discussed by historian Dan Bouk about insurance premiums with 
US commercial insurers.38 With relatively few variables in play and cal-
culation tasks far less complex than those of today, the reason for some-
one’s higher insurance premiums (oft en their ethnicity, gender, or “sta-
tistical pasts”)39 was clear enough, and the correlation crude enough, to 
be publicly challenged. In the nineteenth-century United States, African 
Americans succeeded in lobbying for adjustments in insurance-industry 
practice.
Th ird, the search for statistical generality in no sense required an aban-
donment of the human individual. One of the most intense debates of 
nineteenth-century intellectual history was about whether statistical laws, 
operating at the level of the whole society, were compatible with individ-

122 
Chapter 4
ual free will. Some, like the French social theorist Adolphe Quetelet, in-
sisted the answer was yes; others, like the British historian Henry Buckle, 
insisted the answer was no, with popular culture (Charles Dickens in his 
novel Hard Times) weighing in to mock statistics’ mechanistic view of hu-
manity.40 Statistics’ signifi cance for human self-understanding was de-
bated in public. Perhaps this is unremarkable in itself, but it is sharply dif-
ferent from today’s development of Machine Learning tools for computing 
the social world, largely unobserved and entirely under the control of com-
mercial corporations.
Fourth, social knowledge’s role in the wider management of popula-
tions competed with other framings of its role: social reform, public justice, 
economic use of scarce resources, and emerging principles of democrati-
zation. Sometimes the resolution of these overlapping claims was disas-
trous, as in Nazi Germany, South Africa, and other explicitly racist states, 
although on other occasions it was not. Th ere was, however, no question of 
social management being reduced to or confused with purely economic or 
political goals. Th is was the force of the “invention of the social,” as Niko-
las Rose calls it.41
Fift h, and this feature followed from the fourth, was the possibility of 
developing publicly accountable measures to deepen the description of the 
social against economic and other competing modes of description. Th e 
invention of poverty, for example, as a social, not moral, providential, or 
economic, category—as something based in the unequal social distribu-
tion of resources and opportunities—shows how a social dimension to our 
common knowledge can make a political diff erence.42
Let’s bear these points in mind as we consider what’s distinctive about 
social knowledge under data colonialism.
Social Quantiﬁ cation for Data Colonialism
As Th eodore Porter put it, “Quantifi cation is a technology of distance.” 
Some distance is inherent to the abstraction involved in producing all 
quantifi ed knowledge of the social. Such distance is more than a distance 
from one’s subjective opinion—practices of quantifi cation also involve a 
social separation, the development of “forms of expertise and power rela-

The Hollowing Out of the Social 
123
tions” that allocate the power to quantify to some actors and not others.43 
It is easy to forget “the social conditions in which science is possible,” as 
French sociologist Pierre Bourdieu once noted,44 but that is exactly what 
we must not do in the era of the God view.
A Continuous Private Capacity
Th e quantifi cation of the social in societies with large marketing sectors 
(North America, much of Europe, China, Japan, Korea, and to a lesser ex-
tent Brazil and India)45 is the privileged production of private business, 
even if state power looks on with close interest. Reversing the earlier pat-
tern in which the corporate sector relied on the state’s statistics,46 social 
quantifi cation today is principally a capacity of the commercial sector, 
with states the dependent users. Only in this era did it become imaginable 
that a government might, as the United Kingdom did in 2013, fl oat the idea 
of abolishing its census and relying instead on privately acquired data.47 
For an authoritarian market-state such as China, however, there is nothing 
paradoxical here. Th e growth of a commercial social quantifi cation sector 
is part of China’s wider vision of a modern social order. Meanwhile, the 
“public-private surveillance partnership” is a feature of most contempo-
rary states.48
Underlying this shift  has been a colossal growth of computing capacity 
in private business since the 1980s, linked not just to massively increased 
data processing capacity within the marketing sector and the new data 
brokerage sector49 but also to the vast computing networks necessary to 
manage commodity chains in the “global factory.”50 As part of the general 
growth of consumption and competition for market attention,51 corpora-
tions began from the 1970s to invest in tracking entities (human or other-
wise) linked to short-term transactions, from stock identifi cation systems 
to credit-card-transaction histories.
Th e rhythms and scope of the resulting new social knowledge are 
highly distinctive. In the predatafi cation era, the state “enjoyed a unique 
combination of legal and moral authority to carry out statistical inqui-
ries,”52 but its exercise was restricted by the frequency with which it could 
approach its citizens for comprehensive data (for example, a ten-year cen-
sus) and by the number of permanent categories it could impose (Social 

124 
Chapter 4
Security number, passport number, and so on). Th e commercial data col-
lection of our times is continuous and on myriad dimensions.
Opacity, Not Accountability
Today’s forms of social quantifi cation present to citizens a very diff erent 
face than that of predigital data collection by the nation-state. For sub-
jects who interact with it, the social quantifi cation sector’s actions are ex-
traordinarily complex, highly distributed, massively comprehensive, con-
tinuously updated, and, for these reasons, almost entirely opaque.53 Social 
quantifi cation is contestable by individuals or groups only with the great-
est diffi  culty.54 Th is is the challenge of “the black box society,” in which, as 
legal scholar Frank Pasquale puts it, “the spaces of our common life that 
are supposed to be the most open and transparent are being colonized by 
the logic of secrecy.”55
Th e continuity with the nineteenth- and twentieth-century European 
state’s attempt to make society more “legible” is misleading.56 Unlike the 
Charles Booth poverty maps of London, no one today can print and put on 
their wall even a simplifi ed map of how Facebook categorizes the members 
of a small town or a how a credit rating agency diff erentiates the customers 
on its books. Social quantifi cation today produces myriad microcategori-
zations, but these are privately controlled and largely inaccessible to pub-
lic view. Th e social quantifi cation sector exists not to make society gener-
ally more legible (that is, readable as and by society as a whole) but to give 
corporations special and private access to particular forms of knowledge 
from which economic value can be generated. It is these privileges that gi-
ant monopoly/monopsonies such as Facebook and Google can exploit.
Th ere is a strange asymmetry here. Anita Gurumurthy, head of In-
dian civil society organization IT for Change, writes that “as the citizen 
becomes more and more legible to the state, the state becomes more and 
more opaque to the citizen,” although we might add corporations to the 
state in that observation.57 When the goal of data extraction is the capital-
ization of human life, we should not be surprised that the resulting knowl-
edges have at best an ambiguous public status.
Opacity is also a practical consequence of operations. Data is collected, 
processed, and purchased so that particular actors can do particular 

The Hollowing Out of the Social 
125
things. Th e computing complexes available to corporate and state actors 
today are capable not just of automatically tracing the relations between 
large numbers of variables and categories but also of fi nding patterns in 
massively large data sets in which no order appears to exist. Underlying 
the much-hyped Big Data is a new model of knowledge called Machine 
Learning. Both are oft en referred to under the heading of artifi cial intelli-
gence; AI is currently a huge focus of commercial and government invest-
ment worldwide.58
How does Machine Learning work, in broad terms? Th e calculative 
power involved in today’s social knowledge is massively greater than that 
employed in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries; it also operates on 
diff erent principles. Whereas the earlier social knowledge was built from 
specifi c calculations performed on so-called structured data (for example, 
entries in statistical tables and databases), today’s social knowledge can be 
built from unstructured data, drawn directly from the traces left  in the 
fl ow of everyday life. Th e structure of the data has to be found through re-
peating and gradually refi ning initial “rules” (guesses) for how to catego-
rize those traces. New rules of categorization are generated in the course 
of applying those initial rules. As a result, the signifi cance of the analysis 
is nonlinear, “emergent . . . , [and] consisting of previously unknown pat-
terns and relationships.”59 Th e end product (the knowledge generated) is 
not explicable in terms of rules at all; it is just a complex correlation that 
emerges from a calculative process operating at many diff erent levels.60 As 
such, the operations of data analytics are necessarily opaque, and no one—
not even the engineers who run the process—can account exactly for how 
that knowledge was generated.61
Prediction, Not Explanation
Some, such as Wired editor Chris Anderson, turn this opacity into a posi-
tive. Anderson argued controversially in 2008 that Big Data (the principle 
that says N must be all) undercuts the basic idea that historically underlay 
statistics as a science: that of formulating and carefully testing hypothe-
ses to establish precisely stated correlations and, where possible, causal re-
lations between variables. To imaginary defenders of older social knowl-
edge, Anderson responded:

126 
Chapter 4
Out with every theory of human behaviour, from linguistics to sociology. For-
get taxonomy, ontology and psychology. Th e point is that they do it, and we 
can track and measure it with unprecedented fi delity. With enough data, the 
numbers speak for themselves.62
Instead of nineteenth-century statistician Poisson’s “law of large num-
bers,” we have in the early twenty-fi rst century a project whose goals ap-
pear to undermine any science: perhaps the old method of science—hy-
pothesize, model, test—is “becoming outdated.”63 Th e new approach is 
simply to process all data extractable from social life in order to generate 
discriminations from which value can be optimized.
Big Data practice is in fact considerably more complex than Chris An-
derson’s cartoon picture. N may well not be all, or anything like all, for 
many producers of social knowledge, not least because this data is com-
petitively harvested. No one corporation has access to the all, and few, if 
any, are willing to give up their share of that all to build a collective data 
pool, although corporate data sets are sometimes shared on a limited ba-
sis. In the infi nitely large domain of data extraction, each company has 
a very particular vantage point tied to the functionality and market po-
sition of its data-gathering platform. Yet these limitations do not prevent 
Machine Learning (always based on N = very large) from stimulating a 
new social epistemology. Machine Learning relies on repetitive process-
ing—made possible by the newly abundant computing capacity—to gen-
erate reliable predictive proxies for processes whose causal dynamics are 
not themselves understood. Take any aspect of the social world, even ones 
for which we currently lack a causal model, and simply generate a proxy 
for it; there is no limit to what might work as such a proxy, and indeed the 
vagueness as to what is a “proxy variable” is a problem in legal proceedings 
that increasingly rely on them.64 So data scientists may ask: Could visual 
cues in Google Street View scenes be proxies of the likelihood of nearby 
crime? Could patterns in the distribution of more-expensive car models in 
Google Earth pictures be proxy demographic variables (income levels, rel-
ative poverty/wealth)? Th e temptation to pursue such proxy hunts is con-
siderable, especially when public census data is costly and only intermit-
tently collected.65 Th e scope for social experimentation that data relations 

The Hollowing Out of the Social 
127
provide to parts of the social quantifi cation sector is huge but has some-
times proved controversial.66 Privacy concerns may act as a constraint, 
but, if so, China’s assumed lower sensitivity to privacy concerns works as a 
market advantage for its AI industry.67
Collect Everything
If Big Data reasoning relies on the predictive power that comes from repet-
itive processing of unstructured data, this data can be generated, directly 
or indirectly, from whole populations. It no longer relies on the carefully 
constructed samples of the general population on which classical statis-
tical knowledge relied. Th is new model of knowledge requires collecting 
data continuously, so that N might as well be all.
Why is that? One reason we have already given: whereas nineteenth- 
and twentieth-century smart sampling assumed data collection was ex-
pensive and diffi  cult, Machine Learning’s challenge is basically not cost 
but time (how fast can a potentially infi nite series of automated attempts 
at pattern recognition produce a usable proxy?).68 Since it is the size of the 
data set (N) over which processors calculate that determines the quality 
of the proxies generated, there is no reason to stop collecting data. On the 
contrary, one must always try to gather more. Th is technique can appear 
on the ground as little more than wishful thinking, as this employee of the 
Los Angeles Police Department put it: “All we’re doing right now is, ‘Let’s 
just collect more and more and more data and something good will just 
happen.’”69
Why in any case would a competing actor hold back from collecting 
more data about a human subject when it can do so? Th e goal of most con-
temporary data collection is not the production of shared knowledge (with 
some important exceptions, such as the discovery of a cure for cancer or 
the better understanding of response to crisis). Where, as with the Chi-
nese state, a knowledge interest distinctive from commercial competition 
becomes involved, its goal is the processing of all inputs to the social pro-
cess that might aff ect its orderly nature, so again: why stop data collection, 
and why stop trying to infl uence behavior on the basis of data collected? 
Government and commercial actors intersect around what French legal 
scholar Annette Rouvroy has called “data behaviourism.”70 Social knowl-

128 
Chapter 4
edge becomes whatever works to enable private or public actors to modu-
late others’ behavior in their own interests (not disinterested social knowl-
edge but social capture).
Th is, in turn, aff ects what counts as social knowledge. Potential in-
puts that are not machine readable become irrelevant, since the goal is al-
ways to increase N, the aggregate of what can be counted as data. Mean-
while, data subjects are generating material for machine reading all the 
time. We are constantly encouraged to act in ways that stimulate further 
counting, gain us more followers, and achieve better analytics.71 A certain 
vision of social truth emerges here, expressed by Jeff  Malmad, a market-
ing executive, who says, “Th e Truth will be present in everything. You’ll 
know every thing about yourself and your loved ones if you opt in.”72 Th is 
“Truth” is not the truth about society at which nineteenth-century statis-
ticians were aiming—it is a branded, tethered, contract-specifi c, only con-
ditionally sharable, personally targeted truth that is both the reward and 
price of continuous connection.73
An Intimate Knowledge
What is actually personalized in this new social knowledge is the fi t to 
commercial targeting.74 Th e fi t is intimate. As Bruce Schneier puts it, data 
colonialism today off ers “a very intimate form of surveillance.”75 Tracking 
provides an “auto-fi tting mould,” in Deleuze’s prescient phrase from three 
decades ago.76 Th erefore, why not, as PricewaterhouseCoopers note in their 
2014 report on “Th e Wearable Future,” imagine a world of universal wear-
able processors, linked up to a commercial tracking and messaging system, 
in which “brands could even tap body cues to tailor messages”? Th at world 
would provide marketing opportunities without limit: “Sensor revealing 
that you’re thirsty? Here’s a coupon for smart water.”77 Or as a marketing 
professional more bluntly put it, “Treat your customers like dogs.”78
Th ere is a deep paradox here. Although quantifi cation is a technol-
ogy of distance, today’s data relations increasingly strive to erase the dis-
tance between the social actor’s body and the precisely targeted sensor sys-
tem that serves it (or more accurately, that the body serves). Wearables 
are likely to be only the start; a Swedish biohacker predicts that “all of the 
wearables we wear today will be implantable in fi ve to ten years.”79 Th e 

The Hollowing Out of the Social 
129
gathering and processing of personal data and its conversion into a tar-
geted marketing off er (here’s a coupon for smart water, since you’re sweat-
ing) will all have happened before we could refl ect on any of it. But a real 
and important distance will remain: the distance comprised by the power 
of the social quantifi cation sector against which individual actors cur-
rently have little or no agency. Th ere is a divergence here from social cate-
gorizations as we have known them in the past. As Ian Hacking explained, 
the distinctive feature of social categorizations, at least until the era of Big 
Data, was that they were interactive—they operated as categories with 
which people could interact and negotiate as they were used on them.80 
Humans can interact with today’s algorithmic categorization processes, if 
at all, only derivatively, through an indirect sense of what data might have 
already done to them.
Th e new social knowledge is designed to target “measurable types” 
among individuals81 but not to refl ect, let alone understand, a social world 
in which groups of human subjects live and refl ect together. We do not 
need to romanticize the social narratives of the nineteenth and twentieth 
centuries to realize that something important has gone missing here. At 
the most basic level, what is missing is consent. As Julie Cohen puts it, con-
sent to the terms of data collection is somehow “sublimated . . . into the 
coded environment.”82 In addition to consent, choice also gets subsumed 
by “Big Data’s decision-guidance techniques.”83 And if consent and choice 
are bypassed, so too implicitly is the person with a voice whose refl ections 
might have contributed to our understanding of the social world.84 With 
so much discriminatory processing controlling how the world even ap-
pears to each of us, this new social knowledge gives human actors few op-
portunities to exercise choice about the choices off ered to them. Th ere is 
something disturbing about this for human freedom and autonomy and 
for the human life environment that is being built here.
Playing the Data Game
Yet people must go on living in the social world. Th ey need to act, inter-
pret, and orient themselves for action; they must be present to others; and 
they need to fi nd information and resources. All these ways of living in 
the world are crossed by data relations. We are becoming used to being 

130 
Chapter 4
addressed as documentation, as data, as the bearers of the selective de-
scriptions that databases require. We accept as factual much of the data 
that computer processing of our tracked activities generates (anyway, what 
would it be like to operate with total skepticism?).85 Th e sheer usefulness 
of many of the functions that data tracking and data processing support 
helps to integrate them into the fl ow of daily life.86
Reputation is one example. Many of the accepted infrastructures for 
valuing people today are managed by platforms and are driven by those 
platforms’ incitements to action and the types of data they do or do not 
value.87 Insofar as we care about our reputation (and few people don’t), 
we are continuously oriented to what counts as reputation for platforms. 
Th ere are in fact many soft  incitements toward datafi cation, including our 
habits of counting our followers or likes88 and making sure we click on 
a friend’s latest post. Such soft  incitements are formalized in marketers’ 
strategy of gamifi cation. Gamifi cation makes data extraction playful but 
far from formal—as with games such as Pokémon Go whose playing re-
quires the revealing of location and other data.89 Gamifi cation, as the pres-
ident of loyalty marketer Points puts it, creates “a relationship of exchange 
where consumers are . . . incentivized to share more of themselves: their 
time, their attention, their information, and ultimately their loyalty.”90 Or-
acle’s Gamifi cation Guidelines break the model down into stages that in-
clude not just “feedback mechanisms” and regular “progress indicators” 
but broad design features to stimulate “larger goal and reward states” and 
“longer-term engagements.”91 In a similar spirit, NaMo, the social media 
app dedicated to Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, encourages users 
to “earn badges” by competing “to do tasks.”92
Some might respond that it is not human beings as such that are the 
objects of data tracking and nudging. In contemporary data relations, the 
subject is targeted under conditions that need not involve her naming or 
even her certain identifi cation: people are rather “probabilistically defi ned 
customers,” reached through a process of “singularization” instead of true 
personalization.93 You will be uniquely identifi ed by multiple corporations 
using diff erent sets of data features, each suffi  cient to prompt an action, 
whether a diff erent price or suitability for this or that message. Data schol-

The Hollowing Out of the Social 
131
ars call these sets of data points our “data doubles.”94 As management the-
orists Cristina Alaimo and Jannis Kallinikos note in an analysis of retail 
fashion platforms, data doubles are the building blocks for new “social ob-
jects” that enable corporate actors to refi ne their infl uence on users. Media 
platforms such as Netfl ix are based on structuring content production and 
marketing around the data doubles produced through relentless harvest-
ing and processing. Th e resulting user clusters are not people but “quan-
titative derivations of an engineered experience.”95 One example is the 
“communities of other members with similar movie and TV show prefer-
ences” that Netfl ix says it is isolating in an increasingly global strategy of 
data harvesting.96
But there is nothing comforting about this. Even though the new so-
cial knowledge is produced through operations that bypass human beings, 
it is actual human beings who are tethered to the discriminations that such 
knowledge generates.97 Based on algorithmic reasoning, it is a real person 
who gets sent to jail, refused health insurance, or off ered a favorable price 
in the supermarket or an opportunity for social housing. Indeed, the gap 
between the uncertainty of cause and the certainty of personal impact is 
what makes algorithmic power so unnerving. As Virginia Eubanks puts it, 
“You get a sense of . . . an electronic eye turned towards you, but you can’t 
put your fi nger on exactly what’s amiss.”98
Let’s turn now to the wider presentation of the social world that results 
from the operations of the social quantifi cation sector.
Caching the Social
From the point of view of the social quantifi cation sector, the new datafi ed 
world brims with possibilities of agency. We might even say that the sec-
tor has gained a social world, bifurcated from the one that social actors can 
see but massively more tractable to commercial modulation. Data aggre-
gates, for those who produce the new social knowledge, are a live reality99 
on which business advantage depends. Th e underlying human subject and 
her perspective on the world remain, much of the time, irrelevant to this 
process of knowledge extraction.

132 
Chapter 4
Everywhere a Data Cache
Almost every time we do something online, and sometimes when we are 
offl  ine too, a small data packet for later use is grabbed via infrastructures 
of connection. Let’s call those packets “caches.” In computing, caches are, 
as Christian Sandvig notes, stores of content that are held so as to be avail-
able for later use; an important practical application of the term cache 
is the stored version of a video on a local server, available when a local 
customer wants to download it for streaming.100 Th e gathering together 
of data caches and their processing into more useful material generates a 
live-streamed vision of social reality for the social quantifi cation sector’s 
institutional players.101 Such social caching is data colonialism’s extractive 
dynamic in action.
Th e retail domain provides good examples. Joseph Turow tells how, in-
creasingly, US retail marketers are targeting highly localized, just-in-time 
marketing messages and incentives to shoppers as they move around stores 
and adjacent spaces. Recently, marketers have started messaging people 
aft er they have visited a store with a connected mobile device (so-called 
outdoor retargeting).102 Fashion retailing is a particular area of growth: 
“smart garments” enable the tracking of consumer behavior in exchange 
for the enhanced convenience of the “smart-shop dressing room,” in which 
the coolness of sharing shopping information with friends may well out-
weigh the creepiness of being followed even as one undresses.103
Th e goal is to cache the social at every available opportunity and then 
store the cached fragments for use in later targeted messages, off ers, or ads. 
Th e offi  cial justifi cation given by the marketing industry for this deep-
ened personal tracking is not economic advantage but personalization. Be-
cause it is now standard to send marketing messages to people’s personal 
devices, it is argued that those messages need to be personalized—that is, 
adapted to what available data suggests that person wants right then and 
there. But the logic is circular, and there is no obvious way out of the cir-
cle for the consumer. Increasingly, products (from expensive cars to regu-
lar consumer goods) go on transmitting information of marketing value 
about their usage and user aft er purchase. Th e goal for marketers becomes 
the “persistently connected product” that maximizes revenue per user 

The Hollowing Out of the Social 
133
throughout its life.104 Marketers describe this personalization as “one-to-
one communication” and “one-to-one dialogue.” Yet there is nothing dia-
logic about the individual’s emerging relation to capitalism or the continu-
ous caching of social life on which it relies.105
Social caching’s role in producing knowledge is likely to increase in 
scope, and not just in retail marketing. Intelligent Personal Assistants 
(IPAs) around the home provide a subtle form of social caching. On the 
pretext of taking on the drudgery of daily life—updating shopping lists, 
ordering takeout, and so on—products such as Amazon’s Alexa (embed-
ded in the Echo and Echo Dot devices), Apple’s Siri, and the Google Home 
suite of devices off er personalized attendance in return for new opportu-
nities to archive personal data. Users are encouraged to treat the assistant 
as their interface with the world of information, which involves archiving 
whatever instructions the user gives for machine-learning purposes. Th e 
data security implications are unclear (already one US court in Arkansas 
has ordered Amazon to hand over Echo recordings in a trial).106 We need 
to consider not just what the IPA stores but also its interactions with apps 
on the user’s other devices.107
Th e routinization of tracking devices—for example, to track weight 
loss—makes an important contribution here. To quote two people in a 
study of users in the UK East Midlands, “When asked why she decided 
that 1400 calories were the right limit, she explained ‘Because that’s what it 
[the app] tells me’; and ‘I’ve put the trust in the app.’”108 Even if this banal 
trust in data-hungry devices seems harmless, there is the risk of function 
creep: the more we become used to tracking as the natural way to fi nd out 
what to do in our personal lives, the more likely we will be to accept track-
ing as the infrastructure for knowledge in areas of our lives in which we 
have long expected less control, such as work.109
Th ere are indeed plenty of hard incentives to submit to data relations: 
lower insurance premiums, access to workplace health insurance available 
only to employees who accept tracking of their health, or perhaps the un-
availability of household goods that can function without connection. We 
have yet to see how far governments will make submission to data rela-
tions a precondition for access to various types of services or entitlements. 
In chapter 1 we noted the social credit system seen by the Chinese govern-

134 
Chapter 4
ment as its route to “the modernization of social governance.”110 Mean-
while in India, the Aadhaar identity-card system is being made a require-
ment for access to welfare services, tax dealings, and even the online 
booking of train tickets.111 Th rough the operation of social caching, we are 
increasingly becoming data subjects whose responsiveness to data signals 
is expected, even taken as virtuous.
IoT = LAC? (Operationalizing Life’s Annexation to Capital)
Th e business opportunities from innovative extensions of social cach-
ing are multiplying, oft en in alliance with the state. Consider the cam-
eras with linked data analytics now off ered in the United States by Axon 
AI (formerly Taser) to replace law enforcement offi  cers’ crime-scene re-
ports; as one investor said, “Taser wants to be the Tesla or Apple of law en-
forcement.”112 Even in formal democracies, resource-strapped states will 
take advantage of these apparently risk-free methods for delegating their 
knowledge of hard-to-reach areas of the social world to algorithms.
A larger pattern begins to emerge, part and parcel of the Cloud Empire. 
Continuously caching the social enables corporations and all forms of au-
thority to gain the sense that the social world, or at least selected slices 
of it, can be continuously streamed just for them—not for their entertain-
ment but to enable that world’s modulation or management in their inter-
ests. When the CEO of Shotspotter, makers of algorithmically processed 
surveillance mechanisms for the law enforcement sector, was asked to dis-
close his company’s data to the US public, he responded that it would be 
like “taking someone else’s Netfl ix subscription.”113 So social caching is 
more than an academic metaphor: it is the practice that de facto—and, 
increasingly, de jure—authorizes the privileged viewpoint on human life 
that corporate power claims for itself in the era of data colonialism. Just as 
historical colonialism installed numerous extractive and other privileges 
for mining, trading, and other companies, so too data colonialism brings 
legibility privileges for the social quantifi cation sector over the lives of data 
subjects.
We are not saying that all uses of social caching are bad or misguided. 
Some uses of social data, perhaps by civic or public institutions, may be re-
sponsible, modest, and oriented to organizational self-refl ection.114 At the 

The Hollowing Out of the Social 
135
same time, the normalization of data extraction as the general means to 
monitor the world reinforces the “desire for numbers” (provided they are 
machine readable). New forms of professionalism and expertise around 
data capture are reshaping the world of work under data colonialism.115 
Before the internet, however, as Bruce Schneier notes,116 data sources 
about social life were limited to company customer records, responses to 
direct marketing, credit bureau data, and government public records (and, 
we might add, insurance company data on their insured). Now, a varied 
universe of data collectors and services within a complex web of data pro-
cessing functions extracts data from everyday life at a depth far exceeding 
that found in earlier forms of social knowledge.
It is not that historical types of data collection have disappeared. In-
deed, their activities are being reconfi gured through datafi cation. Car in-
surers are now relying increasingly on continuous surveillance devices in-
stalled in cars that tie reduced premiums and other rewards (and possibly 
even penalties) to the data collected about the driver’s performance. An 
example in the United States is Progressive’s Snapshot program.117 As the 
Snapshot website puts it, “Snapshot is a program that personalizes your 
rate based on your ACTUAL driving. . . . Th at means you pay based on 
how and how much you drive instead of just traditional factors.”118 Th is 
form of personalization gives insurers enormous leeway to vary the cri-
teria on which premiums are adapted to behavior; Snapshot’s website lists 
diff erent criteria for each US state. Snapshot also collects usage data from 
the phone on which its app is installed, although it claims that it does 
not “know who you’re calling” (the metadata, however, is no doubt still 
useful in combination with other gathered or acquired data). Note the 
moral gloss given to this new, more intimate relation between individual 
and corporation. Th e Shared Value group of insurers, which includes the 
South African company Discovery and its product VitalityDrive, claims to 
change “individual behaviour through incentives for fi tness and healthy 
eating.”119 Beneath the inspiring words is a clear-eyed focus on what Dis-
covery calls “the behavioral nature of risk.” Once insurers’ risk becomes 
defi ned as principally about the insured’s ongoing behavior (not occasional 
accidents), the relationship of insurer to insured becomes one that requires 
tracking. But do insurers’ commercial interests really make them good life 

136 
Chapter 4
trainers? Th ere are signs—even in the United States, which leads this de-
velopment—that many now fi nd this particular type of trade-off  unaccept-
able.120 Unacceptable or not, data relations are already becoming for many 
a compulsory dimension of both labor and life.
Human inputs are only part of the territory that data colonialism seeks 
to annex to human capital. Machine-to-machine connections signifi cantly 
deepen the new web of social knowledge production. Consider the fast-
growing Internet of Th ings (IoT). Th e goal is clear: to install into every tool 
the capacity to continuously and autonomously collect and transmit data 
within privately controlled systems. Cisco predicts that by 2022, machine-
to-machine connections will be 45 percent of all internet connections.121 
Since machines can communicate with each other continuously, as hu-
man beings cannot, we can expect within a few years that the everyday 
world will have become a communication space in which human beings 
are minority participants and interpersonal communication a mere sub-
set of what gets profi tably tracked. Th e language of capture implies an un-
ending series of territorial expansion: from the Internet of Th ings to “the 
internet of medical things,” from “the internet of services” to “the internet 
of everything.”122
Actors in the data sector are not shy about pursuing these opportuni-
ties for behavioral infl uence. Indeed, as one marketer notes, “One of the 
major value-adds for businesses implementing IoT solutions is the behav-
ioural data they unlock. . . . Businesses should be able to segment who is 
using an object in order to accurately contextualize its usage.”123 A report 
on “Th e Internet of Th ings: Opportunities for Insurers” noted that insur-
ers could “use IoT-enriched relationships to connect more holistically to 
customers and infl uence their behaviors.”124 It is easy to imagine how the 
evidence of our home life transmitted by fridges, heating systems, and the 
like could license external judgments and discrimination—all without our 
knowledge or ability to comment. As Canadian political economist Vin-
cent Mosco puts it, “Th e commodifi ed self is a contested terrain in busi-
ness battles that are only just beginning.”125
Th e Internet of Th ings provides the perfect cover for converting all 
streams of human life into raw material for capitalism, in the process cap-
italizing everything and everyone. Simply put, the Internet of Th ings oper-

The Hollowing Out of the Social 
137
ationalizes the capitalization of life without limit. We can also capture the 
Internet of Th ings through the lens of colonialism. Whereas the extrac-
tivism of historical colonialism “relat[ed] to the world as a frontier of con-
quest—rather than as home,”126 data colonialism brings extraction home, 
literally into the home and the farthest recesses of everyday life.
The New “Social Theory”
All models for information processing involve some grid by which they 
imagine the social world (think of an examination system and its catego-
ries of grades). But, as Bernhard Rieder shows in an important analysis 
of Google’s PageRank algorithm, practices of computation cast a particu-
lar type of shadow on the social world, imprinting it with their own “the-
ory.” Because computers can only process “ideas that can be made com-
putable,” a computer model’s selection of what it can count shapes how 
that computer “meet[s] the world.” It is socially signifi cant that Google 
tweaked its PageRank algorithm early on so as to give more weight to re-
mote links than might be given otherwise. Th e result, in Rieder’s view, is “a 
largely conservative vision of society” that interprets content based on ac-
cumulated total linkages, downplaying intense new patterns of linkage.127 
Th e important point is not the details of Google’s constantly changing al-
gorithm but that each soft ware system—and every interface built on that 
soft ware—embeds decisions that encapsulate a particular “theory of the 
social” on which that soft ware’s functioning relies.128 Th e wider conse-
quences of this new social theory need to be understood.
Executives in the social quantifi cation sector, whether or not they 
planned to, are becoming social theorists, or at least trying to sound like 
them. “Th ank you for believing in this community,” wrote Mark Zucker-
berg in his full-page apology in British Sunday newspapers on March 25, 
2018, in the wake of the Cambridge Analytica scandal. But behind the 
bland term community lay a lot of background theorizing. Certainly ex-
ecutives’ habit of speaking like social theorists did not start in the past de-
cade.129 Just before the 2012 Facebook international public-share off ering, 
Zuckerberg claimed that Facebook is “a fabric that can make any experi-
ence online social.”130 In 2010, he had already dubbed the 2007 invention 
of the social graph (Facebook’s way of mapping the network connections 

138 
Chapter 4
between users) “our way of explaining the phenomenon we thought was 
happening in the world.”131 When Facebook’s open graph (which aggre-
gates people’s Facebook networks with the wider data Facebook gets from 
“likes” and via its plug-ins) was launched later in 2010, Zuckerberg specu-
lated more broadly:
We believe that eventually almost all apps are going to be social but in the 
world there’s a natural spectrum from behaviors that are really naturally so-
cial to ones that aren’t and the ones that are naturally social are going to be 
the ones that turn into social apps. . . . [On] the other side of the spectrum are 
things that are really sensitive and private like health care or fi nance that I 
think there probably won’t be social apps [for] for a long time. 132
It is impossible that, as a skilled designer, Zuckerberg was unaware of the 
amount of technical engineering needed to construct this new social map, 
yet he talks as though Facebook’s engineered model for extracting social 
data provides a window directly into how the social world really is and 
should be. Soft ware engineering, social theory, and social construction be-
come fused.133
Th e 2017 furor about “fake news” in people’s Facebook news feed is just 
one example of what happens when this abstracted model of the social 
world collides with the contextualized expectations of real people.
The Hollowing Out of the Social Sciences
Can the human and social sciences correct for the limits of the social 
quantifi cation sector’s emerging model of the world? Or might much of 
the social sciences already be complicit in this hollowing out of the so-
cial? Th is claim might shock those who see in “datafi cation . . . an essential 
enrichment in human comprehension” or “a great infrastructural project 
that rivals” the Enlightenment’s Encyclopédie.134 But let’s get beyond the 
hype and look at what is actually going on in the social sciences today.
A good example is the work of celebrated data scientist Alex Pentland 
at the MIT Media Lab. Pentland contributed to the World Economic Fo-
rum’s Global Information Technology Reports in 2008, 2009, and 2014;135 
his research team won the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency’s 

The Hollowing Out of the Social 
139
(DARPA) prize to commemorate the internet’s fortieth anniversary.136 In 
his book Social Physics, Pentland reaches back to the origins of sociology. 
But far from reworking classic ideas of the social sciences, Pentland’s goal 
is to replace existing models in sociology and social psychology with the 
search for “statistical regularities within human movement and commu-
nication” that can generate “a computational theory of behaviour.”137 As 
he put it in the MIT Technology Review, “We’re not where economics is yet. 
Th at will take another 100 years. But we’re moving in some very promis-
ing directions.” Th e new knowledge source is personal data, the “digital 
breadcrumbs” each of us leave as we pass through the world. Th e scale is 
that of whole organizations, even whole countries. Pentland advocates the 
wearing in organizations of data-collecting “sociometric badges” (an idea, 
as we noted in chapter 2, taken up by McDonald’s) to scoop up data that 
would otherwise be lost. His “Data for Development” program collected 
mobile and demographic data “for the entire country of Ivory Coast.”138 
Th e goal is to “really know ourselves” by understanding the social context 
that shapes decisions and desires. By “social context” Pentland does not 
mean the practical settings in which action occurs and desires have mean-
ing; instead, he means “social network eff ects” culled from Big Data.139 He 
off ers an adventure in “reality mining” fueled by data as “the new oil of the 
internet.”140
To be fair, Pentland cares about data privacy and has developed an 
“Open Personal Data Store” that separates the sending of information for 
authentication purposes from the underlying private data that enables au-
thentication, hopefully minimizing risks of reidentifi cation. But what mat-
ters more are the silences built into Pentland’s redefi nition of social sci-
ence. He says nothing about the close connections between ubiquitous 
data collection and the new direction of capitalism, and he says little about 
the familiar ways of understanding the social that this new “social physics” 
casts into permanent shadow.141
Pentland’s “social physics” presents in sharp profi le what elsewhere is 
a more diff use recalibration of social science values. A decade ago a book 
called Nudge by a behavioral economist (Richard Th aler) and a legal the-
orist (Cass Sunstein) shot up the reading lists of government advisers 
around the world. Th e nudge is a basic way of infl uencing actions by subtle 

140 
Chapter 4
prompts and signals. Whereas critics quickly saw Nudge as a way of lock-
ing in market-oriented behavior, Th aler and Sunstein claim that the nudge 
is just a tilting of the “choice environment” that helps individuals reach 
the outcomes they would want anyway “as judged by themselves.”142 But 
how many times does an environment have to nudge you before it starts 
to govern what you want?143 Sunstein’s claim that Nudge was always about 
enhancing individual “autonomy” carries little weight when the nudge is 
continuous, systematic, and opaque. Th e nudge is also a useful technique 
for data colonialism, generating at scale not the gentle subtlety Th aler and 
Sunstein intended but the force of what legal scholar Karen Yeung calls the 
“hypernudge”: dynamic and interactive behavior modulation enabled by 
continuous connectivity and continuous data fl ows.144
Nudge’s guest appearance in social science is just a token in the con-
temporary battle over economics’ explanatory status. Behavioral econom-
ics emerged in response to an impasse over the model of rational-choice 
actor that mainstream economics has assumed for so long. Behavioral 
economics insists that alongside utility maximization the human subject 
has another dimension, less rational and more impulsive (in the jargon 
these are called, respectively, “System One” and “System Two”).145 Behav-
ioral economics is having signifi cant infl uence in the broader marketing 
profession, at least in the United States. As Anthony Nadler and Lee Mc-
Guigan argue, behavioral economics, through its selective emphasis on the 
less conscious, less refl ective side of brain functioning, “refi ne[s] market-
ers’ existing conceptions of human nature,” which have always sought to 
tap into the irrational. Such a model of the human subject, when combined 
with intense data collection, creates the possibility of “persuasion profi l-
ing”: data-driven persuasion that targets specifi c cognitive biases that mar-
keters have tracked in data from their target groups.146 It was persuasion 
profi ling that proved so controversial when it came directly to light in the 
Cambridge Analytica scandal in March 2018. Underlying persuasion pro-
fi ling is a crude biologism. Michal Kosinski, the psychologist whose work 
inspired Cambridge Analytica, said recently that “I don’t believe in free 
will” since a person’s thoughts and behaviors “are fully biological. . . . Th ey 
originate in the biological computer that you have in your head.”147

The Hollowing Out of the Social 
141
Neuroeconomics goes further, using brain science to dismember the 
model of individual cognitive functioning on which mainstream eco-
nomics relies.148 Our concern here is not defending mainstream econom-
ics’ model of human rationality but rather noticing the tendency among 
mainstream economics’ critics to move ever further away from social ex-
planation as previously understood. Neuroeconomics aims to identify the 
“biological variables which have a large infl uence on behavior and are un-
derweighted or ignored in standard [economic] theory.” Biological evi-
dence is presented to show that economics’ concept of preference (the ra-
tional actor making choices in the market) must be disaggregated into “the 
output of a neural choice process.” Biology here means brain imaging. A 
leading proponent, Colin Camerer, states that “technology now allows us 
to open the black box of the mind and observe brain activity directly.”149 
Th ere is no social dimension to this explanatory universe, just data read-
ings. Whatever the emptiness of neuroeconomics as social explanation,150 
it has growing infl uence in applied domains such as neuromarketing. 
Neuro marketing too relies on direct use of neuro imaging,151 hoping to un-
derstand directly the “inner workings” of the brains of consumers without 
resorting to the “subjective reports” on which market research was previ-
ously based. Th e diffi  culty of collecting neuro images without bodily inva-
sion has imposed a practical limit on developing neuro marketing research: 
some marketers see neuromarketing’s claims as unrealistic.152 Nonetheless, 
it points toward a possible integration of neuroscience and marketing that 
bypasses the speaking human subject.
Meanwhile, in the medical sciences there is evidence that an analogous 
compression of explanatory logic is occurring. Medical and social inter-
vention is increasingly oriented to so-called biosensors: relatively simple 
bodily signs that are treated as proxies of underlying biological processes 
or medical reactions, thus bypassing “eff orts to identify biological or envi-
ronmental causes” that consider human subjects in the context of that en-
vironment.153 Here too, the social is being indirectly displaced.
Against this background, there is perhaps no irony when machine-
learning techniques are increasingly referred to as “neural,” as though 
they were part of a brain; it has been common practice for some time to 

142 
Chapter 4
call large banks of parallel processing computers a “neural network.” We 
can catch here an echo of the 1960s debates about “mind as machine,” a 
myth whose intellectual thinness does not stop it from having a robust 
aft erlife.154
How is critical work elsewhere in the social sciences, say in sociology 
and socially oriented humanities, positioned to respond? Not well, neces-
sarily. Anthropology and qualitative sociology that still listen to the voices 
of individual social actors are so fundamentally opposed to this new social 
knowledge that they risk looking in the other direction as the new model 
steals up on the social world. No concerted response seems yet to have 
emerged from qualitative social scientists and humanities-based research-
ers to neuroeconomics or other applications of neuroscience.155 Other 
critical work has registered the new “social knowledge” but in ways that 
sometimes risk undercutting the notion of the individual refl exive agent 
that the new social knowledge is only too happy to bypass. It is paradox-
ical when Bruno Latour, one of the founders of the wonderfully illumi-
nating perspective on human beings’ relations with technology called Ac-
tor Network Th eory, writes that “purposeful action and intentionality may 
not be properties of objects, but they are also not properties of humans ei-
ther. Th ey are properties of institutions, apparatuses.”156 Whether this is 
plausible as an account of human purpose or intention, it is hardly help-
ful to those who want to defend the role of human agency in our under-
standing of the social world. Meanwhile the renewed popularity of early-
twentieth-century sociologist Gabriel Tarde’s concept of “brain memory,” 
which he assumed operated directly between brains in collective contact, 
would seem to concede important ground to neuroeconomics. In fact, 
brain memory is just one of a number of concepts popular even in criti-
cal writing on contemporary power that are distinctly ambivalent in how 
they treat human beings’ refl ective agency.157 One writer on data even cel-
ebrates a shift  in what it means “to produce a truthful account of the world 
. . . no longer about hidden truths . . . or psychological depths, but rather 
about aff ect and behaviour.”158 Virginia Eubanks concludes that “the pre-
sumption that human decision-making is opaque and inaccessible is an 
admission that we have abandoned a social commitment to try to under-

The Hollowing Out of the Social 
143
stand each other.”159 Th e behavioristic reduction of human experience to 
what can be tracked serves the capitalization of life perfectly.
Th ere is, however, one bright note: the rise of critical information sci-
ence that seeks to systematically establish the distortions woven into social 
caching’s presentations of the world. Th ere is now an emerging movement 
for algorithmic justice, which has raised awareness of many specifi c issues. 
Th e critical movement within data science concerned with “Fairness, Ac-
countability and Transparency” has regular conferences, and a number of 
universities have focused programs for investigating how algorithms cover 
the social domain.160 More generally, an important intersection between 
critical information science, legal theory, and social theory is opening up 
the question of how the social qualifi cation sector presents the social world 
for action by powerful institutions.161 US civil society has generated some 
eff ective campaigning. For example, ProPublica’s demonstration that it 
was straightforward to build implicit racial exclusions into housing adver-
tisements led to Facebook adjusting its practice on monitoring ads.162
But the playing fi eld for this crucial work is hardly level: as we write, 
a legal case is going through the US courts in which researchers from the 
University of Michigan and Northeastern University are challenging the 
constitutionality of the US government’s interpretation of the Computer 
Fraud and Abuse Act that prima facie would block researchers from run-
ning fairness tests on how platforms present the world.163 Th e defense of 
earlier reference points to social knowledge and critical social research 
risks becoming engulfed in the disturbing trend in many countries toward 
political authoritarianism.
Discrimination by Design
Th is economically driven transformation of social knowledge has major 
consequences for the distribution of resources in the social world—that is, 
for questions of social justice.
It is not enough to condemn today’s “advances” in social knowledge for 
not caring about human subjects. Critique must begin from the fact that 
what now passes for social knowledge is produced through social relations 

144 
Chapter 4
that have entirely diff erent power implications from those that underlay 
earlier forms of social knowledge. Today’s social knowledge is produced 
principally through privately controlled data extraction whose goal is to 
discriminate between social actors for economic advantage. Algorithms 
help “fram[e] problems” and provide the classifi cations on which broader 
social diff erentiations are constructed. But “many classifi cations are now 
embedded in markets,”164 a notable example being credit rating systems. 
Data-driven social classifi cations have profound consequences for the fair-
ness or otherwise of the social world. Indeed, various entrenched features 
of the new social knowledge incline it toward enhancing not justice but 
inequality.
Dataﬁ cation in the Justice System
“Just because you haven’t been arrested doesn’t mean you haven’t been 
caught”: a Los Angeles Police Department detective is speaking here not 
about a legal spying operation but about the banal act of noting whether 
someone’s name has frequently been searched for in a police data sys-
tem.165 Of course, “to classify is human,”166 but the problem is the sorts 
of power relations in which today’s data categorizations unfold. Th e so-
cial quantifi cation sector exercises considerable power but has few, if any, 
incentives to make that power transparent (for example, by revealing how 
an algorithm is “tuned” to weigh one kind of error as more to be avoided 
than another).167 Th ere is no competitive advantage either in fairness or in 
avoiding social harm, but there is an advantage in using data discrimina-
tions to infl uence behavior more eff ectively than competitors do (for ex-
ample, by playing on people’s “pain point,” as one marketer put it).168 So 
why expect the discriminations that the social quantifi cation sector makes 
“under the hood” to be motivated by fairness? But unless they are, data 
classifi cations are likely to go on producing social harm with cumulative 
eff ects that will be extremely hard to track.169
Th is is especially worrying in spheres of social management, such as 
the law, crime, and social services, in which decision-making is increas-
ingly relying on algorithmic processes that are outsourced to commercial 
data operations. Soft ware is being used by police to predict reoff ending and 
crime distribution in a number of countries (especially the United States 

The Hollowing Out of the Social 
145
and China, with experiments reported in Israel, Canada, the Nether lands, 
and the United Kingdom). In the United Kingdom, algorithms are being 
used by cash-strapped local governments to assess which children need 
protection from child abuse.170 Powerful new networks are being built to 
“connect devices, apps, and people for more than half of the [US’s] major 
city police agencies,” with Axon AI being a leading network provider and 
Palantir (the company of Peter Th eil, a Facebook board member) being a 
leading provider of analytics soft ware.171
What are the eff ects on the ground? US legal theorists Robert Brauneis 
and Ellen Goodman researched the use of algorithms in US social services 
departments. Th ey found a toxic mix of complex calculative processes 
(protected by soft ware developers’ legal privilege) and on-the-ground 
deals to protect the algorithms’ workings from accountability even to gov-
ernment. And yet it is these same processes on which the authority of de-
cisions about people’s life chances supposedly rely—processes that identify 
areas of high crime risk for resource allocation or that “[identify] child wel-
fare cases with a high probability of serious child injury or death.” Brau-
neis and Goodman found that a state authority in Alaska “ha[d] no access 
to the algorithm [on child welfare] that generates the risk assessments and 
none to the process by which the algorithm is generated and adjusted.”172 
Even US criminal courts have diffi  culty in accessing the algorithms un-
derlying law enforcement practice (something that increasingly concerns 
US legal commentators).173 It is disturbing, meanwhile, to read from a re-
cent study of US courts’ use of COMPAS soft ware that untrained work-
ers on Amazon Mechanical Turk “are as accurate and fair as COMPAS at 
predicting recidivism.”174 Opaque algorithms even risk “hollow[ing] out 
the decision-making capacity of public servants” by creating a distance be-
tween public servants’ decisions and the evidence-gathering processes on 
which those decisions rely.175
Th e larger implications for the management of law, crime, and policing 
are as yet unclear.176 Th is radically privatized production of social knowl-
edge compares poorly with the historical processes for generating social 
knowledge discussed earlier in the chapter.177 Th ere are growing concerns 
in the United States that, whatever else it is, algorithmic processing can-
not be a substitute for human judges’ discretion exercised on behalf of the 

146 
Chapter 4
state.178 In February 2018, the European Commission for the Effi  ciency of 
Justice launched a review of the ethics of using algorithms in justice sys-
tems. Meanwhile, a very diff erent vision is emerging in China, that of an 
“intelligent court” that will use “cloud computing, big data, artifi cial in-
telligence . . . to promote modernization of [the] trial system and judge-
ment capability.”179 Contested or not, a new version of social governance is 
emerging from the daily operations of data colonialism.
Unjust Governance by Proxy
It is not just that many instances of data discrimination occur far from 
the contexts in which the original data collection was authorized and its 
meaning shaped. Data’s very exchangeability depends on abstraction and 
“the stripping away of narrative” that “facilitates the . . . insertion of num-
bers in new locations and their adaptability in new contexts.”180 Once in 
circulation, classifi cations can generate not just fi rst-order but “second- 
order corrections,” indeed, corrections in any higher domain without 
limit. Th ose “corrections” shape the life chances of human subjects. When 
a person gets categorized as a high-risk loan recipient in one context, it is 
likely to aff ect how they are categorized in other contexts.181
Such lateral recategorization aff ects people very diff erently depending 
on their status. Disadvantaged groups, such as poor mothers, have always 
had little control over how state agencies gather and exchange informa-
tion and judgments about them.182 Social caching, however, is a powerful 
but only partly guided new weapon for steering social evaluation and so-
cial change, very likely in the direction of greater inequality. Th is has ma-
jor implications for how the social world is governed.
Th ere is fi rst the problem, already noted, that decision makers may not 
understand their data sources. Th e increasing use of data streams with in-
suffi  cient contextualization in government decision-making through so-
called dashboards has provoked concern in the United Kingdom.183 Th e 
problem is deepened by the distinctive way that data generates knowledge 
through Machine Learning. Data processing generates proxies—regular 
correlations that stand in for other variables of social knowledge—out of 
which larger models of the world to be governed are built. Th e whole point 
of proxies is to black-box a more complex social domain while facilitat-

The Hollowing Out of the Social 
147
ing intervention. When an insurer assumes that driving aft er midnight 
equates to choosing to take more risk even if a person’s working conditions 
require it or when algorithms treat geographical areas as proxies for levels 
of crime risk, complexities on the ground become unreadable. 184
Th e result is what Israeli legal scholars Niva Elkin-Koren and Eldar 
Haber call “governance by proxy,”185 a way of stopping talk about those fea-
tures for which proxies stand in. Th is can be dangerous. When patterns in 
current data are assumed to be reliable proxies for future events that may 
(or may not) happen, preventive action will be authorized whose neces-
sity, by defi nition, never gets demonstrated. Th e counterfactual—what if 
no preventive action had been taken?—simply falls out of the picture.186 
And what, as Solon Barocas, Kate Crawford, and colleagues ask, of the 
processes that generated the proxy in the fi rst place? If they are shaped by 
patterns in the so-called training data through which Machine Learning 
generated its proxies, then the nature of those patterns becomes impor-
tant. Th ere is no such thing as neutral data: training data drawn from and 
refl ective of an already highly unequal world (for example, data that re-
fl ects patterns of racial discrimination and racially linked socioeconomic 
inequality in the raw facts of where people live) risks hardbaking those in-
equalities into new interpretations and judgments.187
Th e solution cannot be just transparency. Machine Learning’s iterative, 
nonlinear operations, as noted earlier, make transparency in any literal 
sense problematic.188 Th e problem lies with proxy logic itself, which aims 
to reclassify the social world and its actors via adequate substitutes for cat-
egories that really are meant to structure the social world, such as the cat-
egory “should not be given a loan” or “should have benefi ts withdrawn.” 
Machine learning requires a bridge from its judgments that links them re-
liably back to that world, and that bridge is only as good as the processes 
that originally generated the algorithms.
Th ere is a bigger danger too. If lack of accountability to context is be-
coming a principle of the new social knowledge, then this serves data co-
lonialism (the mutual implication of human life and digital technology for 
capitalism) rather well. Abstraction means removing from view the tex-
tures of social life that might otherwise provide the reference point for so-
cial actors to hold social knowledge to account. Above all what risks being 

148 
Chapter 4
hollowed out by the new social knowledge is the space from which hu-
man actors could once imagine themselves with a license to speak truth to 
power. When the social world, in all its possible layers of action, thought, 
and expression, becomes merely an input to capital, the once resound-
ing Foucauldian principle that for every power there is resistance starts to 
ring hollow. At best, data colonialism will be accountable through its dis-
guises—disguises such as personalization or self-knowledge whose role is 
to entice people into data relations.
Older concepts of social explanation, based not on tracking sentiments 
and connections but on evaluating the wider context of people’s lives more 
broadly (or even asking their opinions!), risk being cast into shadow by 
data colonialism’s new social knowledge. How will concepts such as pov-
erty, which in the nineteenth century emerged from sift ing many statisti-
cal analyses, survive in competition with proxy logic? According to Mar-
ion Fourcade and Kieran Healy, older rationales for giving the poor “more 
favourable terms because they were poor” have now in the United States 
largely been replaced with “the idea . . . that the terms of credit ought to 
depend solely on one’s prior credit-related behaviour,” as tracked by nu-
merous data processes.189
Th is is not the fi rst time in history that numbers have trumped voice, 
but what if the social narrative that might have corrected this has been un-
dermined too?190 Voice—the unmodulated, nonpredictive accounting of 
experience, once valued as part of social life—is by design excluded from 
Big Data analytics. People’s refl ections on the world are unlikely to be part 
of the data that makes up their data doubles. Th e capacity for voice does 
not easily scale, and that is its point.191
But the threat to voice is not the greatest danger that data colonialism 
poses to the quality of the social world. What if governance by proxy pro-
vides an eff ective way of deepening the poverty, deprivation, and discrim-
ination that voice might want to protest about? US policy expert Joseph 
Jerome writes that “most of the biggest concerns we have about big data—
online discrimination, profi ling, tracking, exclusion—threaten the self-
determination and personal autonomy of the poor more than any other 
class.”192 Th is is for many intersecting reasons. First, as already noted, the 
poor have always been more vulnerable to surveillance, and the collection 

The Hollowing Out of the Social 
149
of data has been more prejudicial to them. Th e poor are also less likely 
to have the ability to take control of their personal data, whether through 
lack of bargaining power (if your power is low, opting out of system de-
mands is really not an option), exclusive reliance on a smartphone for con-
nection, or poor literacy. Second, though, the historical tool for governing 
the poor (“guilt by association”) is ideally suited for the era of social me-
dia, when platforms’ data about people’s associations is already being ana-
lyzed to make decisions about awarding jobs, credit, and university places 
and to predict who is most likely to commit a criminal off ense.193 And 
yet it is particularly hard to unpick the contribution of social media data 
in decision-making—for example, in relation to employment.194 Th ird, 
Big Data collection is already fueling the creation of algorithmic catego-
ries perfectly suited to target the poor for predatory marketing of prod-
ucts, such as emergency loans, likely to enhance their poverty and vulner-
ability (categories such as “Fragile Families” and “At Risk Populations”).195 
Fourth, since it requires money and skill to contest errors in vast opaque 
data sets, the poor are particularly unlikely to be able to challenge any un-
fairnesses that emerge from all of the above.
A social world governed by proxy and informed by social caching is 
perfectly arranged, in sum, to ensure what Th omas Pogge called “politics 
as usual”: the continued exploitation of the poor.196 If so, the social con-
sequences of data colonialism are likely to converge with the legacies of 
historical colonialism that, in many countries, have not only sustained 
poverty but skewed poverty and general disempowerment toward eth-
nic minorities, particularly those formed from dominated colonial popu-
lations.197 Th is is where the scandalous evidence that algorithmic sorting 
reinforces racialized discrimination198 takes on an even more disturb-
ing long-term implication. Could data colonialism’s technical tools be the 
means to lock in ever more securely the unjust settlement of historical co-
lonialism in supposedly postcolonial societies?
Data extraction—data colonialism’s basic mode of operation as the im-
plication of human life and digital technology for capitalism—is the me-
dium for a “savage sorting” of the social world. Or as Douglas Merrill, 
Google’s former chief information offi  cer, put it, “All data is credit data, we 
just don’t know how to use it yet.”199

150 
Chapter 4
A Rising Injustice
Let’s return for a moment to Karl Polanyi’s vivid account of the social un-
folding of industrial capitalism. Data colonialism, it is clear, still awaits 
its countermovement: there is as yet no major change in social thinking 
or government policy to challenge its cruelties, as those of industrial cap-
italism were challenged in the nineteenth century. Recent calls for more 
openness about data practice off er only the very start of this change.
If no resistance is forthcoming, the capitalization of life is destined to 
reconstruct Hobbes’s “state of nature”—a battle of all against all—via an al-
gorithmic simulation that preserves, indeed stimulates, social appearances 
while regrounding them in capitalism’s general drive to profi table extrac-
tion. Th e process will be heavily disguised. Popular narratives of “smart-
ness” (for instance, the smart city) are an example: in the smart landscape, 
there are only connected individuals, natural and willing targets of com-
mercial messaging and sources of commercially useful data, functioning 
within the larger cycle of capitalized life.200 Everyone else is by defi nition 
invisible. As smartness starts to drive urban regeneration, it will become 
harder to hold on to the forms of knowledge lost through the capitaliza-
tion of life. New urban environments will emerge, such as the proposal by 
Google’s Sidewalk Labs for downtown Toronto’s waterfront district, built 
on personalization (“really smart, people-centered urban planning”) and 
iron corporate control of the “intelligent signals” generated by a datafi ed 
environment.201 To have a chance of resisting this, we must hold onto ear-
lier forms of social knowledge: voice, public accountability and the pub-
lic value of social understanding, visibility rather than opacity, contextual 
social explanation, and above all a concern with the role of these values in 
challenging injustice.
Recall that the whole trajectory of data colonialism started out from 
the banal fact that to function, computers must capture data about their 
changes of state.202 It is a curious irony that B. J. Fogg, a leading devel-
oper of unconscious behavioral infl uence through online choice architec-
tures, named his new science of intervention “captology.”203 Knowledge 
by capture, infl uence by appropriation. When the cutting edge of social 

The Hollowing Out of the Social 
151
knowledge is a tool kit for achieving power at scale (or what Walmart more 
comfortingly calls “personalization at scale”),204 then the stakes of the so-
cial-knowledge game just got higher and its potential contribution to so-
cial justice more tenuous.
Data colonialism’s new social knowledge generates a deep form of in-
justice in the very construction of the social and political domain. Philos-
opher Nancy Fraser calls this sort of problem “meta-political injustice”:205 
justice in who or what counts as someone to whom or something to which 
questions of justice apply at all. One way to open up these issues is eth-
ics. As Tristan Harris, one of Fogg’s former students and a founder of the 
Truth About Tech campaign in the United States, asked, “What responsi-
bility comes with the ability to infl uence the psychology of a billion peo-
ple? Where’s the Hippocratic oath?”206 As yet, we simply don’t know.
But ethics must start out from an understanding of the self. What if the 
boundaries of the self too are under sustained attack by data colonialism? 
If so, we may require philosophical resources to identify with precision the 
violence that data colonialism does to the self and, by extension, the social 
world as well. Th at is the topic of the next chapter.

This page intentionally left blank 

153
Data and the Threat to Human Autonomy
I’m not going to work under conditions where I’m treated like a child, a child 
who doesn’t have enough [sense] to know when to go to bed and when to get 
up; or when to stop and rest while rush hour trafﬁ c clears and then proceed 
when rested and safer.
—US truck driver1
Surely the most wretched unfreedom of all would be to lose the ability even to 
conceive of what it would be like to have the freedom we lack, and so dismiss 
even the aspiration to freedom, as something wicked and dangerous.
—Allen Wood2
5
WHAT DOES IT MEAN to be human—to remain distinctively human—in the 
twenty-fi rst century? A decade and a half ago, it still made sense for one 
of the United States’s leading privacy advocates, Philip Agre, to assert that 
“your face is not a barcode.”3 But in May 2018, the black rap artist Don-
ald Glover, a.k.a. Childish Gambino, released a video that went viral called 
“Th is is America.” As the song fades, he sings, “You just a barcode.” Th e 
chasm between these two sentences says much about the recent trajectory 
of poverty and race relations in the United States, already touched on in 
the last chapter. But it also opens an even larger story about the violence 
that data colonialism does everywhere to the core human values of free-
dom and autonomy.4 Th at larger story is the focus of this chapter.
“Transport is becoming a data business,” says Hakan Schildt of Swed-
ish truck company Scandia.5 Yet driving a truck used to symbolize the type 
of work that brought a certain freedom, at least for its male workforce. Th e 
fi rst quote at the beginning of the chapter is the voice of a driver inter-
viewed by Karen Levy about the impact of the Electronic On-Board Re-
corders (EOBRs) now installed in many US trucks. Clearly, he is troubled. 
A trucker from the same study went further and insisted that “any piece 
of electronics that is not directly hooked up to my body cannot tell me 
[when I am tired].”6 But other employees have been “hooked up” to de-
vices that monitor at least their external movements for more than a de-

154 
Chapter 5
cade (for example, store and distribution-center workers of the UK super-
market chain Tesco).7 If the second trucker’s imagining comes true, it will 
not be his body telling him he is tired but a calibrated data system linked up 
to the bodies of a whole workforce. Th at system will monitor working bod-
ies through their contracted activities and much of their off -work activity, 
using the latter as evidence for judging the former. Th ere is a long history 
of surveillance at work, disproportionately aff ecting low-paid jobs and dis-
advantaged populations, but the intimacy of monitoring in today’s datafi ed 
workplace is without historical precedent. It fi ts well, however, with the co-
lonial approach to social knowledge that chapter 4 uncovered in which in-
dividual refl ection and voice matter little, and only aggregated data counts.
What are the implications of all this for human life? Th e second quote 
at the beginning of the chapter off ers a clue, capturing chillingly the fate 
for all of us to which the fi rst quotation points. Th e source is a leading com-
mentator on nineteenth-century philosopher Georg Wilhelm Frie drich 
Hegel. Hegel was unique among European Enlightenment philosophers in 
anticipating moments of breakdown when social formations based on cer-
tain values come to be organized around practical goals and institutions 
that directly undermine and oppose those values. Th e result is the deepest 
form of alienation.8
Could data colonialism be ushering in such a confl ict for all its sub-
jects?9 If so, how might we begin to confront it? Can philosophical con-
cepts such as autonomy help us formulate what is going wrong? Or is 
the term autonomy (so oft en used metaphorically now for, among other 
things, IT systems, weapon systems, and even cars) itself at risk of being 
appropriated by data colonialism?
Although the term autonomy raises its own complexities, we will fi nd it 
more useful than freedom. Th e term freedom gives no hints as to what free-
dom is for, whereas autonomy specifi es the desired state that is its goal. In 
a strong form,10 it involves, as the German philosopher Beate Rössler puts 
it, an actor being “self-determined”—“able to act in accordance with de-
sires and actions which are authentically hers.”11 Th ere remain many ways 
of specifying what self-determination actually means, and some versions 
of autonomy have, without question, become associated with the Western 
colonial project. It will be important therefore to hold onto a notion of au-

Data and the Threat to Human Autonomy 
155
tonomy that is not a form of aggressively individualistic self-rule but rather 
refers to the socially grounded integrity without which we cannot recog-
nize ourselves or others as selves. Only gradually will we move toward the 
question of privacy,12 the term through which debates over autonomy nor-
mally reach a wider public. In doing so, we will focus less on the many in-
terpretations and extensions of autonomy and more on the idea at its core: 
the self’s minimal integrity, or boundedness, without which the self would 
not be a distinct site of experience at all.
Before we explore these questions, let’s be clear about what drives the 
problems that data colonialism causes for human autonomy. Complex 
power relations are involved, as we have seen, but for simplicity’s sake 
let’s call the root cause “surveillance.” We must immediately note that 
our standard image of surveillance—a person, generally representing the 
state, watching or listening in to the full stream of another person’s life—
is unhelpful for various reasons. Today it is generally corporations, not the 
state, doing the tracking. Th e medium of corporate tracking is unlike a 
human sense (seeing or listening). It is, instead, the accumulation of data 
from multiple sources, what scholars have called “dataveillance.”13 At any 
one point in time, the surveiller is unlikely to have a full “picture” of the 
surveilled; only over time and through aggregation does a suffi  ciently de-
tailed picture accumulate to motivate action.14 Finally, as noted in chap-
ter 4, the target of surveillance is not the whole person but rather a mon-
tage of data doubles that probabilistically identify a real individual. Yet it is 
that real individual who is tethered to the discriminatory actions taken on 
the basis of the data gathered. And it is because of the consequences of this 
tethering that we must retain the term surveillance15 even while acknowl-
edging that its connotations derive in part from historical forms of track-
ing very diff erent from today’s. Th e reason both traditional surveillance 
and datafi ed tracking confl ict with notions of freedom derives from some-
thing common to both: their invasion of the basic space of the self on be-
half of an external power.
Th e notion that surveillance in this extended sense does damage to hu-
man life does not depend on a property claim. Th e argument is not that 
the data extracted from me is already my “property” or “possession” and 
as such must not be appropriated by another. For until the act of extraction 

156 
Chapter 5
there was no boundedness to the information relating to my life stream—
as we have noted many times, data itself is not raw material. What previ-
ously was just part of the fl ow of my activity becomes separately identifi -
able and so potentially transferable only through the act of extraction. Th is 
transformation has nothing to do with whether the individual is already 
identifi ed. Rather, since life (like land in Karl Polanyi’s historical account 
of industrial capitalism) is not the sort of thing that is naturally commod-
ifi ed, data requires for its creation institutional processes of extraction and 
demarcation, from which potential commodities can be generated.16
Th e issue with continuous tracking therefore goes much deeper than 
whether by some appropriate legal fi ction we do or do not cede ownership 
of data to the individuals to whom the data relates.17 Th e issue goes deeper 
even than the damage done by particular discriminations that fl ow from 
the data’s use, discussed in chapter 4. Th e deepest problem is the violence 
that the very fact of data collection through surveillance does to the min-
imal integrity of the self. We derive this latter notion from the concept of 
autonomy.
Th e self’s minimal integrity is the boundedness that constitutes a self 
as a self. Oft en that boundedness is experienced in defending a minimal 
space of physical control around the body, but it can also be invaded with-
out physical incursion—for example, by acts of power that intimidate, 
shame, harass, and monitor the self. By “the space of the self” we mean the 
materially grounded domain of possibility that the self has as its horizon 
of action and imagination. Th e space of the self can be understood as the 
open space in which any given individual experiences, refl ects, and pre-
pares to settle on her course of action.18 Hegel describes this space as both 
external and internal, like a circle that never-endingly turns in on itself. 
Th is, he says, is what makes “the free will . . . truly infi nite, for it is not just 
a possibility, a predisposition; its external existence is its inwardness, its 
own self.”19 It is this continual interplay between internal and external, self 
and other, that enables the deeply social understanding of the self that, as 
a philosopher, Hegel advocated.20 From this understanding of the self, we 
salvage some ideas in this chapter as tools for challenging data colonial-
ism. Whatever the problems associated with Hegel’s profoundly colonial 
view of history and his ambiguously conservative view of the nineteenth-

Data and the Threat to Human Autonomy 
157
century state, Hegel is unique among European philosophers in seeing so 
clearly the social grounding of philosophical concepts such as freedom.
Insight into this social concept of freedom (or autonomy) is not unique 
to Hegel, however, if we look to philosophical traditions outside Europe 
and North America. Argentinian-Mexican philosopher Enrique Dussel’s 
philosophy of liberation has as its goal the need to articulate a concept of 
human freedom from outside the West’s power centers. Freedom, for Dus-
sel, is the substance of a person with “all its uniqueness, its proper indeter-
mination, its essence of bearing a history, a culture; it is a being that freely 
and responsibly determines itself” and so is always situated “beyond” what 
Dussel calls “the horizon of totality.”21 In insisting on a space of the self be-
yond any horizon of totality, Dussel goes one step further than Hegel did, 
explicitly defending the space of the self against any attempt of power to 
own and absorb it.
When, as in the era of data colonialism, capitalism seeks to absorb hu-
man life into an external totality—the apparently self-suffi  cient world of 
continuous data processing—it is ultimately freedom in Dussel’s (but also 
Hegel’s) sense that is at stake. Th e need to defend the minimal integrity of 
the self holds whether one advocates the individualistic freedom guaran-
teed by a competitive economic order or (as do Hegel and Dussel) a more 
socially grounded notion of freedom, based in the mutuality of social life. 
Defending the minimal integrity of the self exposes contradictions within 
capitalism’s own (individualistic) version of freedom while providing a ba-
sis to defend the social values that help us think beyond that notion and be-
yond data colonialism too.
Double Consciousness 2.0
In the hollowed-out social world of data colonialism, data practices invade 
the minimal space of the self by making submission to tracking a require-
ment of daily life, retrofi tting the self’s domain of action onto a grid of data 
extraction, a grid only minimally regulated by law.22 Th e extractive social 
relations that underlie data colonialism impose a fundamental form of dis-
possession. A continuously trackable life is a dispossessed life, whose space 
is continuously invaded and subjected to extraction by external power.

158 
Chapter 5
It has been fashionable to forget this and to feign indiff erence. Some 
question the “special” moral status of human beings and even compare 
them to ants and bees, whose collective life has certainly fascinated hu-
mans for millennia.23 Insect metaphors have long been adopted into the 
technical language of computing; we have swarm robotics, registry hives, 
and the like. Perhaps there is some force to such analogies when infra-
structures of connection enable the aggregation of human-data traces on a 
vast scale. But there is a danger in such metaphors. No one has yet shown 
that human beings are collective animals in a zoological sense; pretending 
they are may divert attention from the human costs of capitalism’s new so-
cial order.
Philosopher Luciano Floridi goes further, renaming the very stuff  of 
the self in terms of information. To him, we are not exactly humans any-
more but hybrid creatures that Floridi calls “inforgs.”24 Although Floridi 
uses this as a starting point for new approaches to the privacy of the “in-
formational body,” the convenience of the inforg concept for data colonial-
ism is obvious. Inforgs are the perfect creatures for the hypernudge to rule 
when they have been refashioned to always be open to data fl ows and so 
continuously available for modulation. But by what? Presumably by some 
form of intelligence? We could bet everything on artifi cial intelligence, but 
few have taken this step. Perhaps modulation by human intelligence exer-
cised at the collective level? US West Coast evangelist Kevin Kelly comes 
close to this when he celebrates the “technium” (his term for the supposed 
collective “autonomy” that develops from “the feedback loops in the tech-
nological system”).25 But why believe humans are intelligent at a collective 
level while ignoring or recklessly overriding humans’ ability to be inde-
pendently intelligent at the individual level?
Implicitly, a new notion of the subject is being fashioned, meaningful 
at the collective scale on which data processing fl ourishes but occluding 
older understandings of the individual subject. Confl icts between notions 
of the self characterized earlier phases of colonialism too. W. E. B. Du Bois 
called the outcome “double consciousness,” a situation in which the self is 
forced to describe itself in another’s language, one that overrides the lan-
guage in which the colonial subject might otherwise choose to describe 
herself.26 Seen from the point of view of capital, the contradiction is unim-

Data and the Threat to Human Autonomy 
159
portant and certainly not painful, because capitalism’s language generally 
wins! Seen from any other point of view (including that of most human 
subjects), something important is lost. We must name that “something” 
that capitalism is not hearing and data colonialism is not registering.27 But 
this requires philosophical resources that can salvage something from pre-
vious views of the human subject. By salvaging the concept of the minimal 
integrity of human life—the bare reality of the self as a self—28we identify 
something that we cannot trade without endangering something essential 
to ourselves. Th is “something” underlies all the formulations of privacy 
and autonomy from culture to culture and period to period.
Before we explore in more detail the minimal integrity of the self, we 
must remember that when the self’s autonomy is damaged, individuals are 
aff ected in very diff erent ways. Whereas the violence of data colonialism 
aff ects all subjects, it also off ers new opportunities for human beings to ex-
ploit each other by redistributing the resulting costs. Even if under data co-
lonialism we are all destined to become data subjects—that is, parties to 
regular data relations—what this means for one person will be very diff er-
ent from what it means for another. We are not simply talking here about 
the diff erence it makes whether you are a chief executive of a data extrac-
tion platform or its most junior employee. Th ere is unevenness also in how 
the consequences of datafi cation are distributed.
As we noted in chapter 4, the poor are likely to be particularly disad-
vantaged. Digital platforms, apps, and sensors provide infrastructures for 
seamlessly installing data-derived performance monitoring into all as-
pects of work, but they are being installed most energetically in lower-
status and low-wage work. Employees such as truck drivers or warehouse 
workers already have continuous surveillance installed as a basic feature 
of their lives. Th ere may soon be no workers left  in those sectors who re-
member what it was for their bodies and their every action to be unmoni-
tored.29 In higher-status jobs, the intensity and continuity of surveillance 
may be limited to aspects of the recruitment process in which a candidate’s 
social media history is now pored over. In today’s “fi ssured workplace,” 
those in powerful positions will seek privileged control over who is sur-
veilled (and how much) and who is not surveilled. Social power may come 
to mean, in part, being a net controller of the benefi ts and costs of surveil-

160 
Chapter 5
lance, just as under industrial capitalism management power meant con-
trolling the fl ow of knowledge and information that made up work.30
Th e consequences of how people are surveilled and evaluated will also 
vary depending on how much a person’s role retains zones of discretion. 
Being “judged by results” means something very diff erent if you are a call-
center worker tracked from moment to moment (in real time and/or ret-
rospectively) rather than the director of a stock-exchange-listed company 
or university professor judged by end-of-year results. Direct, on-the-body, 
moment-to-moment surveillance and correction is likely to be closely cor-
related with lower status.
People are also diff erently placed to repair the costs infl icted through 
surveillance systems. Imagine the costs when every object, most processes, 
and much of one’s work and other life opportunities are managed through 
automated monitoring. You may need to buy a new tool when its built-
in tracking system breaks down; you may need to fi nd alternative sources 
for education, health care, or insurance when denied them on algorith-
mic grounds; or you may need to correct inaccurate data held about you in 
a system—for example, a credit rating. People’s ability to bear those costs 
will depend, as ever, on a preexisting (likely unequal) distribution of re-
sources. And the more opaque the processes of data sorting are, the more 
resources will be needed to contest them eff ectively.
Th e threat that data colonialism poses to the minimal integrity of hu-
man life is therefore both a universal issue aff ecting everyone and the 
driver of new forms of social and economic inequality between people. Th e 
two are connected. Data colonialism enacts at scale a major change in how 
power shapes the life-space of human subjects: this is the universal issue. 
An immediate consequence is that individuals, institutions, and systems 
acquire the means to discriminate against and dominate others in new 
ways. But to have a chance to deal eff ectively with this more specifi c prob-
lem, it is essential to grasp the underlying universal problem, which is the 
goal of the rest of this chapter. Once again our survey of the problems data 
colonialism poses for human life will not pretend to be comprehensive but, 
at most, suggestive.
We will certainly not be claiming that all forms of damage to the space 
of human autonomy are the same. Th ere is a world of diff erence between 

Data and the Threat to Human Autonomy 
161
slavery’s direct and violent ownership of bodies and minds and the more 
indirect forms of surveillance and dataveillance that characterize contem-
porary data relations. Still, they have something crucial in common. We 
seek to identify what that is, building on excellent work done by many au-
thors in sociology, communications, and legal theory, including Mark An-
drejevic, Julie Cohen, Oscar Gandy, Karen Levy, and David Lyon.
Data Colonialism’s Assault on Human Autonomy
It is oft en said that people, in rich countries at least, have made a trade-off  
between their privacy (or some aspect of it) and security of service, eco-
nomic benefi ts (such as “personalized” prices), and convenience of con-
nection. But the evidence is that, at least in the United States, people feel 
resigned and powerless to infl uence invasion of privacy.31 Th is does not 
mean people think that issue is unimportant. A 2015 Pew study found 
that 93 percent of US adults surveyed thought it was important to be in 
control of “who can get information about them,” with 90 percent feel-
ing that it was important to control “what information is collected about 
them.”32 Meanwhile, there is evidence of rising concern about data privacy 
in Southeast Asia, according to a Financial Times survey.33
Our argument, however, tries to go deeper. Th e minimal self-integrity 
under threat is not the sort of thing that human beings can trade without 
losing touch with what constitutes them as selves rather than as inputs to 
a collective intelligence or information-processing system. Two senses of 
self are in play here.34 Capitalism affi  rms, for sure, the uniquely identifi -
able reference point on which all notions of the self hang (it is, aft er all, this 
bodily subject whose market potential gets traded in proxy form). But at 
the same time, capitalism invites us to lose control over a core element in 
the content of that identifi ed self whose continuity (and change) we value 
with time. By installing automated surveillance into the space of the self, 
we risk losing the very thing—the open-ended space in which we contin-
uously monitor and transform ourselves over time—that constitutes us as 
selves at all.
In the face of this, we fi nd, as already suggested, a surprising ally in 
a deeply compromised fi gure: the philosopher Hegel, who fascinated the 

162 
Chapter 5
critics of both capitalism and colonialism (Marx and Fanon). Hegel is 
known for his theory of “world-spirit,” or Geist, in terms of whose unfold-
ing he interpreted the whole of history. One might therefore have expected 
Hegel to be an ally of Big Tech; it was, aft er all, Ray Kurzweil, now director 
of engineering at Google, who wrote that “the singularity will ultimately 
infuse the universe with spirit.”35 But Hegel was a complex philosopher 
and also one of the most searching investigators into the nature of hu-
man freedom. In the words of his main interpreters, Hegel saw freedom as 
“possible . . . only if one is also already in a certain (ultimately institutional, 
norm-governed) relation to others.” In other words, freedom is actualized 
through our social relations, which means that the loss of freedom is actu-
alized through distortions in social relations. Th is argument, for the fi rst 
time, opened up philosophical thinking to sociological evidence and, at its 
most radical, acknowledged that at particular historical moments, institu-
tional forces may come to undermine the inherited values and norms that 
govern social relations. When this happens, people start to feel themselves 
“part of a practice that has either gone dead . . . or requires of [them] fur-
ther commitments incompatible with others necessary within some form 
of life.” Put bluntly, when our form of life starts to confl ict with our under-
lying values, “the lives in a form of life become uninhabitable.”36
Th is is just the sort of normative crisis that a character in a recent novel 
by US author Don DeLillo sees playing out today:
[Th e] world . . . is being lost to the systems. To the transparent networks that 
slowly occlude the fl ow of all those aspects of nature and character that dis-
tinguish humans from elevator buttons and doorbells. . . . Haven’t you felt it? 
Th e loss of autonomy. Th e sense of being virtualized. All the coded impulses 
you depend on to guide you. All the sensors in the room that are watching 
you, listening to you, tracking your habits, measuring your capabilities. All 
the linked data designed to incorporate you into the megadata.37
Something, in other words, is going wrong with human autonomy. But, 
you might ask, isn’t the notion of autonomy (the self’s ability to govern its 
own life, deriving from the Greek words autos for self and nomos for law or 
rule) itself problematic? What self is really able to rule itself, independently 
of others and of institutions? Haven’t doubts about the sovereignty of the 

Data and the Threat to Human Autonomy 
163
individual self driven the popularity of behavioral economics that we dis-
cussed in chapter 4?
Crucially, however, it is not that notion of autonomy (or freedom) that 
Hegel defends. For Hegel challenged Western notions of liberal individu-
alism in a key respect, insisting that freedom (freiheit), his preferred term, 
is always grounded in social processes, in which individuals interact with 
and depend on each other. As we have seen, the notion of the minimal 
integrity of the self goes far beyond Hegel. Th e integrity of the self that 
makes choices in a complex world is essential to most liberal notions of 
freedom. It is implicit in the concept of humanity’s “species being”38 that 
underlies Marx’s theory of alienation. Th e self’s minimal integrity is essen-
tial also to Dussel’s philosophy of liberation conceived precisely to oper-
ate beyond the dominance of Western models of power. How else indeed to 
conceive of a human life beyond the defi nitional power of the West except 
by building on what Dussel calls the “natural substantivity of a person,” 
the basic “fact that each individual is distinct and not merely diff erent”?39
Let’s explore, then, what sorts of problems data relations pose for this 
fundamental core of autonomy: the natural substance of the person.
Data Risks
When an external power uses data against a person’s interests, there are 
clear potential harms to the subject and her ability to control her sphere of 
action. Th ese harms can be considered on various levels.
First, there are direct harms through the use of data. We most com-
monly think here of the state as the important external power—the state 
that exercises surveillance power to terrorize its citizens or, in more sub-
tle ways, undermine their interests. But equally important is corporate 
power. Th ere is no reason to assume that a corporation, unless specifi cally 
checked from doing so, won’t use the personal data it collects or buys in 
its own interests and against an individual’s interests. Many forms of per-
sonal data are the source of validly competing interests: when individuals 
insure against risks to themselves, the interests of insurers and insured are 
oft en, quite legitimately, opposed. Th ere are risks of data being misused 
from which individuals need protection; all the corporate and policy liter-
ature about Big Data acknowledges this point in some form.40

164 
Chapter 5
Automatic data collection poses a danger to autonomy at a second, 
deeper level, not because its actual uses are always harmful (indeed, some 
might be benefi cial) but because the possibility of harmful use distorts the 
space in which individuals live and act. Th is is what some writers call the 
“chilling” eff ect, which is the impact that the power to collect and hold data 
on a large scale has on individuals’ ability to think of themselves as free ac-
tors.41 Political theorist Quentin Skinner’s comment on the Snowden rev-
elations is decisive: “Not merely by the fact that someone is reading my 
emails but also by the fact that someone has the power to do so should they 
choose leaves us at the mercy of arbitrary power. . . . What is off ensive to 
liberty is the very existence of such arbitrary power.”42
Th e chilling eff ects of corporate watching in practice are so far less 
clear, but they must be taken seriously. To see why, we must go beyond fa-
miliar debates about the authoritarian state or about whether trading part 
of our autonomy for wider benefi ts (for example, greater security and the 
massive convenience of connectivity) is worthwhile. Th ere is a deeper is-
sue toward which the “chilling” argument points: that the constant watch-
ability of our every thought and action by external forces changes the fi eld 
of power in which we exist,43 transforming a supposed order of individuals 
into a collection of living entities plugged into an external system.44
Dataﬁ cation and the Space of the Self
Th is takes us to a third and more fundamental disruption to autonomy. 
What if capitalist data relations trouble the very basis of autonomy, the 
minimal boundedness that underlies the very possibility of being a self? 
What if datafi cation, not just potentially but in principle and by design, in-
terferes with the self’s space of movement that is its “own”?
Dave Eggers’s fable, Th e Circle, highlights this deeper problem.45 Th e 
Circle is a corporation that is something like a hybrid of Google and Face-
book. Eggers’s concern in the novel is not that the Circle, which seeks to 
gather all human data into a seamless “circle” accessible to individuals us-
ing just one password, will use that data for bad purposes. Neither is it how 
the power relations involved in continuous data sharing impact the fami-
lies and friends of Circle employees (the chilling eff ect just discussed). Eg-
gers reserves his sharpest criticism for the impact on employees who work 

Data and the Threat to Human Autonomy 
165
inside the corporation and so benefi t from its power. Two characters, a 
keen young recruit (Mae) and her more experienced mentor (Annie), each 
want to live a life that harmonizes with the surveillance practices on which 
the Circle’s business model depends. Th ey want to but cannot—at least not 
without a sanity-threatening struggle. At risk is not just the ability of these 
characters to direct their lives but their basic sense of themselves as selves: 
the minimal integrity without which they fail to be selves at all.
Th is comes out clearly at a point in the novel when a senior Circle em-
ployee criticizes Mae for hand-writing an entry in her diary about a walk 
she took down to San Francisco Bay (a typical unstructured individual 
pleasure). Th e employee says, “My problem with paper is that all com-
munication dies with it. It holds no possibility of continuity [. . .]. It ends 
with you. Like you’re the only one who matters [. . .] but if you’d been us-
ing a tool that would help confi rming the identity of whatever birds you 
saw, then anyone can benefi t. [. . .] Knowledge is lost every day through 
this sort of shortsightedness.”46 Th e problem was that Mae chose to re-
fl ect her experience “only” back to herself rather than relay it to the Circle’s 
data pool. Her choice of recording technology (paper versus smartphone 
or tablet) and the refusal to connect to wider data systems that this choice 
implied, is interpreted back to her in moral terms when Mae is told that 
“knowledge is lost every day through this sort of shortsightedness.” Th e 
senior Circle employee who criticizes Mae believes that there is no space in 
which an individual is free to refl ect on herself that is not already a space 
over which her corporation, acting in the name of social knowledge, has 
right of access.
Eggers captures here the fallacy at the heart of dataism. Using the cover 
of the self’s continuing moral obligations, data evangelism overrides the 
space of the self from where it faces others. Th is is the space, as Rössler puts 
it, in which “processes of self-description, self-defi nition, self- discovery, or 
indeed self-invention” take place, all of them “dependent upon a person 
bringing herself face-to-face with herself in conditions in which she can 
really be sure that she is protected from the eyes of anyone else.”47 Th e lib-
eral philosopher Charles Fried had anticipated the problem when in 1970, 
with what would now be a primitive surveillance technology in mind, he 
imagined a parolee kept under constant and total monitoring in case he 

166 
Chapter 5
commits another crime; is this, he asks, consistent with any notion of free-
dom? Fried argues no, because such an arrangement overrides the basic 
element of interpersonal trust fundamental to human life: trust that re-
spects the independence of the other person, as an other person, to make 
his own errors. If trust, he argues, were just a matter of risk management, 
we would probably delegate it to “cheap and effi  cient surveillance,” but 
“man can’t know he is trusted unless he has a right to act without surveil-
lance” and so prove he is worthy of trust.48 Th is is exactly the sort of trust-
less social order toward which data colonialism is taking us. Here China 
shows the way most clearly. As Jack Ma, founder of Alibaba, put it, in “the 
political and legal system of the future . . . bad guys won’t even be able to 
walk into the square,” because their every movement and action will have 
been watched.49
In response, we must recall that there can be no genuine self (no mutu-
ality between selves) without the self having a space that is its own. Th e self 
must control what passes through that space and whether it “ends with” 
the self or not. It is this space of minimal self-integrity that concentration 
camps and torturers through the ages have tried to crush. It is this space 
whose integrity, in less violent but equally persistent ways, becomes collat-
eral damage in the growth of data-driven capitalism.
Capitalist data relations redraw the boundaries around the subject’s 
space of action and refl ection, dismantling the eff ective limits on which 
depends the very possibility of a self that can trust itself and others. When 
we strip down autonomy to this minimal space whose integrity is neces-
sary for the self to be a self at all, we touch on the roots of the many and 
varied forms that privacy takes across the world and that human beings 
have defended throughout history.50 Th is is the philosophical and practi-
cal core of contemporary debates about privacy. Privacy, according to sur-
veillance expert David Lyon, is “a pivotal concept that helps to throw light 
on what is wrong with mass surveillance.”51 Privacy is a matter of the self’s 
minimal integrity whose necessity persists beneath all cultural construc-
tions. But before we can return to the question of data and privacy, we 
must make one more point about the philosophical roots of the approach 
to autonomy we are taking.

Data and the Threat to Human Autonomy 
167
Defending the Space of the Self
“Freedom is this,” Hegel wrote: “To be with oneself in the other.”52 Prob-
ably no phrase of Hegel’s captures what is ethically troubling about data 
colonialism better than this statement. It is the possibility of being “with 
oneself” and with no other thing or self that underlies all specifi c forms of 
freedom. And it is just this that capitalism is bent on dispossessing under 
data colonialism. Hegel could never have imagined that this minimal in-
tegrity would be routinely threatened, least of all by the wider system of 
property relations on which capitalism is based. But today that is the con-
tradiction between values and power that we are living.
Hegel’s position was that for any person to be “free,” he must have ac-
cess to an “external sphere of freedom” that defi nes him.53 Th e term exter-
nal is curious, since it includes anything “external to my freedom,” that 
is, external to my free will, including even the “goods” of “my body and 
my life,” the substance of my self.54 Two points are crucial: fi rst, that these 
goods are and must be “exclusive”; and second, that this right to exclusiv-
ity is “inalienable”: it cannot be given up without giving up on the self as 
such.55 It is this space that continuous surveillance over time damages by 
entering it persistently and insistently, oft en if not always with a view to 
modulating its behavior.
Working under the infl uence of the European ideology of possessive 
individualism,56 Hegel calls this space of freedom a “property,” a property 
that is inalienable and nontradable. But we can challenge data colonialism 
in a way that does not depend on possessive individualism by reformu-
lating Hegel and defending the minimal space without whose bounded-
ness the self would not be a distinct self at all. Th is is the space from which 
the self listens out and experiences the world. We fear the moment when 
that space is ruptured; George Orwell’s novel 1984 provides the most fa-
mous example of this in literature.57 Hegel himself discusses slavery as an 
external capture of this space and insists on “the slave’s absolute right to 
free himself.”58 Continuous surveillance of the self from the outside is not 
as absolute and violent as slavery—it does not amount to the direct trans-
fer of all control of the self’s space of freedom—but it unquestionably vio-
lates that space.

168 
Chapter 5
The Illusion of Autonomy through Self-Measurement
Why is data colonialism’s threat to this most basic component of auton-
omy not the subject of daily angry protest? Th e most fundamental reason 
is not ideology, or even the fetishism of data discussed in earlier chapters. 
Th e reason is that, as part of the reshaping of social knowledge described 
in chapter 4, autonomy itself is being reconfi gured by capitalist data prac-
tices. Data relations are becoming the means to a supposed new autonomy, 
bringing into confl ict two aspects of the self, as subject and as object, while 
co-opting precisely the socially grounded notion of freedom (autonomy) 
that Hegel defended.
Evangelists of technological connection such as Kevin Kelly see things 
diff erently. In his recent book Th e Inevitable, he names tracking as one of 
the twelve dimensions of technology’s transformation of society. By attrib-
uting this transformation to “what technology wants” (the name of his pre-
vious book), Kelly seeks to quarantine today’s profound transformations 
from ethical critique. His goal is to help us “work with [technologies’] na-
ture, rather than struggle against it.”59 Th e entire edifi ce of data colonial-
ism and capitalist data relations is obscured by this rhetorical move. For 
Kelly, datafi cation on capitalism’s terms provides a new form of autonomy, 
because all human costs have been shift ed off -balance-sheet. Or rather, the 
balance sheet that might have tallied the costs to individual human be-
ings has been replaced by a collective settlement in which the whole spe-
cies supposedly wins. Extreme though positions such as Kelly’s are, they 
have considerable infl uence at the level of daily practice.
“Know Thyself” through This Device
Consider the plethora of data-based devices for “self-tracking” champi-
oned by the Quantifi ed Self movement.60 Th ese devices encourage three 
of the levels of data relations outlined in chapter 1: capture, continuous 
connection, and data release. Since it is the abstracted, commodifi ed form 
of data relations that binds us into capitalism, it hardly matters that self-
tracking relations are oft en voluntary.61
What are the larger transformations at work here? Consumer activity 
has rarely been exempt from some form of observation, even in the tradi-

Data and the Threat to Human Autonomy 
169
tional open-air market. But the decisive shift  came in the 2010s with the 
convergent growth of social media platforms, connected mobile devices, 
and ever more sophisticated “smart environments” that made possible 
something close to “autonomous” surveillance.62
We are increasingly told that human beings need to track themselves—
for example, to maintain their health. Self-surveillance mirrors the retail 
and work landscapes of continuous tracking described in the last chap-
ter. You may buy an Apple Watch or iPhone for all sorts of reasons, many 
unrelated to health, but if you do, you will have easy access to a health 
app that integrates data about your activity, sleep, mindfulness, and nu-
trition.63 Continuous automated data collection can be justifi ed for the 
social benefi ts that data relations supposedly involve. When self-trackers 
celebrate their “community,” they do not mean the community of corpo-
rate managers who profi t from the data stream they generate but the un-
seen constellation of users encouraged by those corporations to openly 
share their experiences of self-tracking. Self-tracking is oft en a social pro-
cess,64 and that social aspect may, of course, be meaningful, just as our 
uses of social media are. Th ere is a link here to the wider value of “shar-
ing” in contemporary culture. As Nicholas John points out, what is most 
striking about sharing as a metaphor is the extendibility of what is to be 
shared: from thoughts and pictures to information sources and life his-
tories to everything and anything. Sharing our lives has come to imply a 
broader value of “openness and mutuality” but at the risk of mystifying 
the communities we supposedly form online.65 In a world in which we are 
constantly induced to share personal information, data collection becomes 
part of a social life within which, somewhere, we assume that autonomous 
subjects still exist.
Can we rely on ourselves to judge whether sharing key portions of our 
personal data proves, on balance, to be “productive” for us and not just 
for the platforms? Th ere is evidence that we are oft en unable to make this 
judgment,66 but our confusion is certainly benefi cial for the corporations 
that depend on our sharing. As John puts it, “Sharing produces the data 
that constitutes the hard currency of Web 2.0 business.”67
“Know thyself” is one of the oldest ethical maxims, but it has been used 
to market self-tracking devices ever since the days of the humble bath-

170 
Chapter 5
room scale.68 As life becomes capitalized, “know thyself” morphs from 
philosophical principle to profi t center. No doubt specifi c knowledge can 
be gained from some forms of self-tracking, and there is much to be gained 
sociologically in better understanding how individuals use such technolo-
gies.69 But what in the long run constitutes valuable self-knowledge here—
valuable for whom? Th e goods generated by capitalist data relations are 
profoundly ambiguous. Th ey off er us, apparently, the chance to be more 
autonomous—in the sense of regulating ourselves more intensely—but at 
the cost of submitting to an external data system whose functioning re-
quires the integration of its devices permanently into the space where, un-
til now, we imagined we were truly, and only, ourselves.70 Th ere is no limit 
to the freedom that the social quantifi cation sector seeks for its delegated 
agents, as Microsoft  CEO Satya Nadella comments on the digital personal 
assistant, Cortana: “It will know your context, your family, your work. It 
will also know your world. It will be unbounded.”71 Th e resulting forms 
of self-refl ection and community exchange are, as Taina Bucher puts it, 
“force-relations,”72 relations with external entities and processes that inti-
mately expose us to the economic forces of capitalism.
Even when we choose to install apps such as Foursquare and thus share 
data about where we are, the background data aggregation that goes on 
through Foursquare’s API is largely outside end-user control. Foursquare, 
at least until the introduction of the European Union’s General Data Pro-
tection Regulation, had tended to treat information, for example, about the 
web pages accessed through the app and users’ locations “as non- personal 
information” except when required otherwise by law; Google’s location 
API operates, however, without any need for user participation or knowl-
edge.73 Yet such data acquisition is off ered as an enhancement of “experi-
ence,” echoing the personalization doublespeak that retail marketers use 
to justify their intrusion into consumers’ lives.74
Philosophical Challenges to Self-Quantiﬁ cation
Let’s imagine, however, that self-quantifi cation’s proponents call Hegel’s 
notion of freedom to their aid. Couldn’t Hegel’s social reading of free-
dom (autonomy) allow us to argue that the self’s development today re-
quires tracking devices as a way to enable selves to “determine the aims of 

Data and the Threat to Human Autonomy 
171
their own actions”?75 We might counter by asking defenders of datafi ca-
tion to deny that some measure of control over data relations is important 
for autonomy,76 and indeed the Quantifi ed Self movement has been ready 
to cede individual property rights in data.77
Th e real problem with the Quantifi ed Self and similar visions, how-
ever, goes deeper. For Hegel, it is the refl ective relation to oneself that is es-
sential to the development of a free will. Th erefore, a free life needs to be a 
self-suffi  cient life in which “nothing from outside, nothing not-me, deter-
mines my actions.”78 Hegel does not deny—indeed, he emphasizes—that 
the individual lives a life that is not free from external constraints; it is a 
life lived through mediations (lived “in the other,” as Hegel puts it). But at 
the core of freedom for Hegel (the core of autonomy, in our terms) is the 
notion of an inner life that remains under one’s own refl exive control. Th is 
inner life is what enjoying one’s “right of subjectivity” means.79 Th e very 
thing Quantifi ed Selfers and the social quantifi cation sector see as a ben-
efi t (that our moment-to-moment existence is understood better by exter-
nal data processing systems than by us) collapses the space of subjectivity 
in which the self enjoys its freedom.
Th e problem is not that we have relations with external systems or that 
we delegate certain actions to those systems. We have done both through-
out modernity and with increasing regularity and intensity; such pro-
cesses are rightly the object of the self’s refl ection.80 But contemporary 
data relations involve more than just relations; they involve systems that 
insinuate themselves within “the self’s needs, desires and other choices.”81 
Th is is what Hegel in his discussion of free will called the problem of arbi-
trariness. Th e data infrastructure on which the self-tracker relies to aug-
ment herself contains elements and dynamics that are troubling because 
they are arbitrary, driven by goals that are not hers, and operate in ways 
that remain largely opaque and so can never be refl exively integrated into 
her goals.82
Th ere was something deeply paradoxical in the proposal of a marketer 
of body sensors at the Digital Health Summit in January 2014: “Our cars 
have dashboards, our homes have thermostats—why don’t we have that for 
our own bodies?” Natasha Dow Schüll’s comment is acerbic: “Instead of 
aspiring to autonomy, they wish to outsource the labor of self-regulation 

172 
Chapter 5
to personal sensor technology.”83 Th e attempt at self-regulation (or self- 
legislation, as Kant and Hegel called it) is basic to what a self is84 and so 
cannot be delegated to algorithms without giving up on the basic fabric of 
the self.
An unease with such an unacceptable deal may explain why many self-
trackers give up aft er a while. Some ex-self-trackers report losing their 
“ability to self-regulate.” Other testimony suggests unease that “getting 
good data” had become the overriding driver of submission: “From a men-
tal health point of view, one of the things I realized about myself was that 
I was only really happy when numbers were trending in the right direc-
tion.” In Hegel’s term, this person felt he was not really “with himself” in 
the data, only emotionally tied to the stimuli that the system generated. A 
self-tracker can fi nd herself genuinely puzzled about whether, as one put 
it, self-tracking got her “closer in contact or further away from [herself] 
and the world.”85 Here, the externality introduced by data relations into 
the space of the subject emerges in the self’s sense of feeling “further away” 
from what, until then, had seemed closest: the space of the self.
Parallel doubts are emerging in people’s sense of dislocation when 
they fi nd platforms’ algorithmic processes refl ecting back to them an im-
age that jars with their own sense of self.86 One response to Facebook’s 
“algorithmic errors” is to start acting diff erently for Facebook’s algorith-
mic gaze—to “obfuscate” its view,87 perhaps by sending signals that con-
fuse the system. But this only risks entering the loop of self-counting more 
deeply, evading the question of whether the relentless conversion of hu-
man action into data is itself desirable.
Capitalism knows no limits to the expansion of its datafying logic. 
Apps are a key means whereby capital extends that logic even further. So 
too is the fashion among some so-called biohackers to embed microchips 
under their skin, whether to replace ID cards or for other purposes.88 Can 
philosophy help us imagine limits here? Would we be relaxed, for example, 
about an app that compared our personal processes of creativity against 
established measures of creative inspiration? Can we imagine installing an 
app or a chip that measured whether one was really in love with someone? 
Or an app that compared the depth of one’s grief for a loved one against 
the grief of others for the same, or for a diff erent, person? When exactly 

Data and the Threat to Human Autonomy 
173
does our expanding submission to the self’s datafi cation come up against 
something that we feel we must be protected from at all costs? As yet, we 
do not know. Th e risk is clear, however: that since we have no choice but 
to go on acting in a world that undermines the self’s autonomy, one con-
sequence is that we may progressively unlearn the norms associated with 
it. As the second quotation at the beginning of the chapter head suggests, 
data colonialism’s subjects may come to unlearn freedom in time.
The Personal Data Appropriation Spectrum
We are not denying that some measurement practices might fulfi ll a 
greater good and thus be something individuals and groups could choose 
for themselves. Th e health and education domains provide useful, if con-
trasting, examples.
Medicine—that is, preventative health care—off ers a complex case in 
which we can certainly imagine making collective decisions to have our 
personal medical data gathered, provided it was in anonymized form. 
Th e UK Labour Party’s Digital Democracy Manifesto from 2016 imag-
ines something like this, and why not applaud Harvard’s Laboratory Sys-
tem Initiative, which uses Machine Learning to identify patterns in obser-
vational data systematically missed by even the best doctors?89 When the 
cure for a major disease is the issue, who would deny that science needs 
more data in order to avoid the “consent bias” whereby those who agree 
to release their data are untypical of the general population?90 Th e histori-
cal medical data of the whole population of Iceland was pooled in this way 
under an arrangement with the US’s Department of Health and Human 
Services.91
Th ere are issues here for sure. What does it mean to obtain the consent 
of a whole population (in Iceland, the data deal was done in secret, with-
out consulting Iceland’s citizens explicitly, which proved highly controver-
sial)? Barbara Evans, a leading scholar of health and data law, argues that 
we need elaborate processes for collective management of data gathered 
in this way.92 Th e risks increase when we realize that frequent claims that 
medical data is securely anonymized may be unreliable.93 Under any polit-
ical system, the security of health data must depend on how far its collec-

174 
Chapter 5
tion can be insulated from market dynamics (since values such as patient 
confi dentiality are not, aft er all, market values).94 Health data is, in any 
case, quite specifi c and highly contextual. A proposal for everyone to sub-
mit to continuous collection of all their health data would be very diff erent 
in its implications for the self’s minimal integrity than would be specifi c 
individuals sharing specifi c health data for a specifi c benefi cial purpose. 
Legal scholars fear that it is exactly such large-scale aggregations of health 
data that risk escaping the legal protections that have long been integral to 
medical ethics and law.95
Th e collection of genetic information (the complete data set of an indi-
vidual’s genome) raises even more disturbing questions. Philosopher and 
physician Daniel Sulmasy argues that a person’s genome is not just any 
personal information but information that is “partly constitutive of who 
and what [a person is].”96 To lose control of such data would already be to 
lose something of oneself. As Gina Neff  and Dawn Nafus put it, “Th ere is 
only so much of oneself that a person can alienate away”97—without, that 
is, ceasing to be a person.
Even if the immediate problems of health-data sharing could be solved, 
other issues remain. What is there to prevent data originally collected 
for the purposes of preventive medicine or science from being reused to 
meet the commercial interests of the pharmaceutical industries? When we 
turn to health-related data (fi tness monitoring and the like), the problems 
multiply. Such data is generally exchanged without the intense confi den-
tiality safeguards normal in the institutional-health sector. And what is 
health-related data anyway? A highly rated start-up in the health-app sec-
tor,  Ginger.io, which markets various forms of automated digital health 
monitoring, reserved the right back in July 2016 to collect a wide range of 
“User Interaction Data” including, bizarrely, a comprehensive list of phone 
metadata.98 Th e chief technologist of the US Federal Trade Commis-
sion Latanya Sweeney discovered in a study of twelve apps and two wear-
able devices that together their “information was transmitted to no less 
than 76 diff erent third companies.”99 Indeed, gathering one’s own health- 
related data may not be a leisure option but a requirement of one’s employ-
ment, so what is there to prevent its non-anonymous use by that same em-
ployer, or at least the chilling fear that this might happen?

Data and the Threat to Human Autonomy 
175
In the education sector, by contrast, the principle of confi dentiality is 
less heavily ingrained, and the logic of automated data collection operates 
with fewer initial constraints. Few roadblocks exist to stop intensifi ed sur-
veillance of students through datafi cation, and education has always in-
volved monitoring in some form.100 So-called adaptive learning is today 
being off ered by commercial providers as a “personalized” advance on the 
education of the predatafi cation era. Older, pre–Big Data education is de-
picted now as a “factory-model” under which all children had to receive 
the same content in the same manner (IBM Education), impeding “a delib-
erate and continuous approach to the improvement of learning and teach-
ing” (Pearson).
In a recent report, Pearson Education employs the metaphor of a “dig-
ital ocean” to capture this new approach, which can record every “fl eeting 
experience” of individuals for monitoring, processing, and evaluation.101 
Th e costs of continuous surveillance are not even acknowledged here as 
a risk. Unlike in the case of health care, personalized surveillance is pre-
sented as inherent to the educational process, not just necessary (as mar-
keters say) for its further “personalization.” It is not that privacy is exactly 
forgotten; rather, the monitoring needed for personalized data collection 
and storage is not acknowledged to be surveillance at all but instead of-
fered as the basis of a new “digital citizenship”:
Real-time monitoring is not about policing kids. Rather, it’s about provid-
ing opportunities for mentorship, teaching and learning. . . . Th is allows stu-
dents to be responsible, safe and good digital citizens—both in school and out 
in the world.102
Th e links between continuous surveillance and the education of children 
are so deeply naturalized here that the panoptic notion of teachers us-
ing continuous real-time monitoring is presented as neither chilling nor 
threatening. On the contrary, it is a selling point, giving teachers “a full 
bird’s eye view of the entire classroom” (Impero Education), which enables 
them to “immediately intervene in a highly personalized way” (Black-
board). Data collection is imagined to “create a virtuous circle of real-
time data that solves issues relating to student leavers lacking necessary 
skills.”103

176 
Chapter 5
But again, what if the educational-tracking data on particular children 
becomes aggregated with other data, or even traded by the system pro-
vider aft er the student has left  the school or university? What would the 
implications of this be for education, which is understood as a period of re-
hearsal for adult life? Even more fundamentally, what is happening here to 
the space of imaginative freedom that education has long been thought to 
be?104 In the brave new world of datafi ed education, surveillance becomes 
not the enemy, but paradoxically the guarantor, of educational freedom:
Th e idea [of digital monitoring] is to allow students the online freedom they 
need to grow, learn and survive in a digital world, with the safety net of key-
word monitoring to protect against the risks.105
Yet this new model of “more personalized education”—the mantra of the 
leading developers of AI in education, such as Pearson—assumes a peda-
gogic relation that at no point allows the young subject to go unsurveilled. 
Th e new model is praised in hyperbolic terms: “One to one human tutor-
ing has long been thought to be the most eff ective approach to teaching 
and learning (since at least Aristotle’s tutoring of Alexander the Great).”106 
But it is being developed with absolutely no attention to the power issues 
it raises or to its consequences for young human subjects and their basic 
autonomy.
Across the health and education sectors runs a common danger, that of 
the uncontrolled reuse and aggregation of data sets that, even if still anon-
ymized, risk dismantling the functional boundaries within which these in-
stitutions were until recently organized. Th is new “ecology” of data collec-
tion and processing, far from enhancing individual freedom, risks off ering 
ever more personally targeted forms of control and management, driven 
by system imperatives that human subjects cannot fully know or control.
Legal Battles for the Self’s Minimal Integrity
Can anything be done to challenge any of this? One place to look for help 
might be the law. What is law’s perspective on data colonialism’s threat to 
the integrity of the self?

Data and the Threat to Human Autonomy 
177
Privacy is a protected term in most legal jurisdictions. For that reason, 
privacy seems the most practical route for defending the self against the 
incursions of data colonialism. But the growth of data relations, the inser-
tion of surveillance into every conceivable moment of life, and the huge 
growth in the privatized capacity to aggregate, process, and rework per-
sonal and other data pose huge challenges, especially if privacy is con-
fi ned to the negative understanding of the term (mere freedom from inter-
ference) on which liberalism and capitalism have oft en relied.
Some business fi gures celebrate this, arguing that publicity, not pri-
vacy, is becoming the default setting of our lives online, as though that 
settled everything; “we,” it is implied, have already “moved on” from out-
dated notions such as privacy.107 Here, more cautiously, is a White House 
report from 2014 to which many authoritative experts contributed:
Th e physical sanctity of the home’s papers and eff ects is rapidly becoming an 
empty legal vessel. Th e home is also the central locus of Brandeis’ “right to be 
left  alone.” Th is right is also increasingly fragile . . . [as] people bring sensors 
into their homes whose immediate purpose is to provide convenience, safety, 
and security.108
If the contexts of data use are becoming irreducibly blurred, then one im-
portant early proposal to update privacy for the data age—Helen Nissen-
baum’s argument that privacy is always based in more specifi c “informa-
tional norms [of] contextual integrity”109—is no longer suffi  cient to stem 
the tide. Indeed, Nissenbaum herself has recognized that the links be-
tween corporate data use and “a subtle erosion of autonomy” go beyond 
contextual norms.110 So how can we build a stronger legal framework for 
challenging data colonialism?
Abandoning the concept of privacy here would be a fundamental mis-
take, since it still retains some reference to the minimal integrity of the 
self. Privacy, as leading US privacy campaigner Marc Rotenberg argues, 
remains “an extraordinarily powerful and comprehensive human-rights 
claim.”111 But what would eff ective protection of privacy look like within a 
broader challenge to data colonialism? Th e route to legally protecting the 
self’s minimal integrity, as defi ned in this chapter, is long and complex.

178 
Chapter 5
The Historical Legacy of Privacy Protection
Th ere is a growing global debate about whether the existing frameworks 
for regulating data processes need strengthening and about how this might 
be done. Some see little hope for any practical intervention that could halt 
the expansion of market forces, but such pessimism can be understood as 
the symptom of neoliberal culture’s success in enforcing the dominance 
of market reference points,112 particularly in the United States and United 
Kingdom. Th e increasingly popular business argument that data collec-
tion is so pervasive that it should be exempted from legal regulation, and 
regulation should be focused entirely on use (an argument Helen Nissen-
baum calls “Big Data Exceptionalism”), refl ects that US market context, 
though it also echoes much global business rhetoric—for example, from 
the World Economic Forum.113 It is possible that the fallout of the Face-
book/Cambridge Analytica scandal has fatally undermined this position, 
but this as yet is unclear.
Here the historical legal context in the United States is interesting. Le-
gal scholarship has for more than a century debated the need to protect 
the physical, communicative, and virtual space of the self. Samuel War-
ren and Louis Brandeis in the late nineteenth century proposed a “right 
to be let alone” in response to the incursions of the yellow press and early 
paparazzi.114 Th is “negative”115 form of liberty was extended in the twen-
tieth century to connect with “positive” forms of liberty such as informa-
tional privacy and decisional privacy—respectively, the right to control 
over one’s personal information and over the process of one’s decision-
making.116 Capitalism’s broader drive to extract value from personal data 
is clearly in tension with such inherited notions of privacy and the philo-
sophical values that underpin them. While recent claims in Big Data dis-
course that individuals do not own data about themselves seek to muddy 
things, they cannot resolve this tension.117
Th e United States lacks a comprehensive legal regime for regulating 
data ownership or, indeed, privacy more generally,118 with the US Consti-
tution throwing up confl icting signals. Th e Fourth Amendment may im-
pose limits on the ability of corporations and states to invade the space 
of the individual, if not on single occasions, then, according to the so-

Data and the Threat to Human Autonomy 
179
called Mosaic theory, through a cumulative series of actions.119 Accord-
ing to many commentators, however, its usefulness remains uncertain and 
highly contingent.120 Meanwhile, the famous First Amendment, which 
guarantees freedom of speech (compare article 10 of the European Con-
vention on Human Rights), has recently been interpreted by the US courts 
to protect data-gathering and data use themselves as forms of corporate 
free speech.121 It is clear, therefore, that regulatory action is needed to sup-
plement the US Constitution. A major potential advance in privacy pro-
tection would have been the FCC’s rules extending the protections of the 
US Communications Act to broadband providers. Th ese rules insisted that 
customers “must be empowered to decide” how providers may “use and 
share their data.” But they were repealed by Congress in 2017, and the pos-
sibility of reviving them is uncertain.122
Major legal innovation is needed if we are even to begin to address 
the consequences of data colonialism, and here the legal traditions of the 
United States and Europe are diff erently placed.
Reinventing the Law of Privacy?
US constitutional lawyer Neil Richards off ers one route to clarifying the 
issues, claiming that the First Amendment already provides protection for 
something like the minimal integrity of the self, even if in little-noticed 
form. He argues that if the First Amendment protects not just freedom 
of speech but freedom of thought (for example, freedom of religious be-
lief), then it must also protect the practices from which thinking freely 
emerges (for example, our rehearsals of ideas, as when reading a book).123 
To be implemented, however, it would require a shift  in US legal practice 
to make corporate actors fully accountable in relation to US constitutional 
rights.124 In any case, “intellectual” privacy does not capture data colonial-
ism’s challenge to freedom of the intellect and to the self’s basic integrity 
in all its aspects (not just intellectual but also perceptual and aff ective). 
Given the current political turmoil in the United States at the federal level, 
the best hope would seem to be state legislation, such as California’s 2018 
Consumer Privacy Act, which passed despite opposition from big tech.125
Th e European legal tradition off ers a more fundamental challenge to 
data colonialism. Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights 

180 
Chapter 5
already recognizes privacy (including privacy of what it quaintly calls 
“correspondence”), but the question is how this should be interpreted for 
an environment in which “correspondence” hardly captures the scale of 
data-gathering that is built into every transaction and action in connected 
space.126 German law provides a basis for going further. Since World 
War II, German law has recognized the “right to personality,” that is, pro-
tection for the free development of individuality. Th is right derives directly 
from Hegel’s and Kant’s concept of freedom127 and is set out in article 2 
of the German Grundgesetz (Basic Law).128 Without the security of such a 
right, German legal thinking argues, the citizen is not able to exercise “un-
biased participation in the political processes of the democratic constitu-
tional state.”129 It is no accident that such a principle was established in 
Germany in the wake of World War II and the collapse of Nazism. What an 
irony that it is now, in the age of apparent internet freedom, that this anti-
chilling principle fi nds echoes in wider debates about data rights in Europe 
and beyond!130
Th e European Data Protection Legislation (known as the General Data 
Protection Regulation, or GDPR), which came into force in May 2018,131 
and which the recent California law partly mimics, off ers the most signif-
icant legal challenge so far to the discourse and practice of data colonial-
ism. Th e very fi rst sentence of the GDPR challenges the idea that markets 
and technologies have made privacy irrelevant in the age of Big Data. It 
states that “the protection of natural persons in relation to the processing 
of personal data is a fundamental right.”132 Th e GDPR requires data collec-
tors to give an ordinary-language account to every user of what data they 
hold and for what purpose. Th is approach assumes that lack of such in-
formation damages the underlying right of each person to control her in-
formation boundaries, hence the need for an immediate alert when any 
activity potentially breaches those boundaries. Th e GDPR’s practical re-
quirements interrupt the supposed “naturalness” of data collection from 
individuals by requiring individuals to be informed of what is going on 
with their data.
It remains unclear, however, whether this will disrupt data colonialism 
in practice. Th e GDPR changes the rules under which data colonialism op-
erates but leaves unchallenged the commercial purposes for which data is 

Data and the Threat to Human Autonomy 
181
collected. Th ere is also a question about the limits of the “informed con-
sent” principle on which the GDPR relies; this principle is dependent on 
how situations of consent are confi gured in everyday life.133 It is hard to 
see how this, or any similar general framework that we might imagine,134 
would challenge an environment in which consent to data collection and 
processing is overridden by the bargaining power of employers or insur-
ers. Meanwhile, it is super-powerful incumbents such as Google that are 
arguably best placed to bear the costs of adjusting their business to GDPR 
rules.135
Caveats also apply to the legal framework for internet regulation known 
as the Marco Civil, which was developed by Brazilian civil society and gov-
ernment in the year following the Snowden revelations. Th e Marco Civil 
challenged US hegemony over the internet’s regulatory structure and in-
corporated the right to personality as a fundamental principle, but it re-
mains at the level of principles, not detailed regulation.136
Perhaps it was naive to expect the legal institutions of market societies 
to be the site at which general resistance to capitalism’s expansion could 
take practical form. In China, where data platforms have emerged in close 
alliance with the state, there are signs of the state intervening to insist on 
some privacy standards,137 but at the same time, it is well-known that plat-
forms consistently give the Chinese state access to their data. We should 
not forget, however, that the law was a site of extensive confl ict over how 
industrial capitalism’s early excesses could be corrected (this confl ict oc-
curred as part of the double movement that Polanyi analyzed, discussed 
in chapter 4).138 And there is no doubt that geopolitical battles over com-
peting regimes of privacy and regulation of data fl ow—for example, be-
tween the European Union, the United States, and China—could be a ma-
jor factor in how data colonialism develops on a global scale over the next 
decade.139 Th erefore, it is worth digging a little deeper into contemporary 
debates in legal theory to see whether they help us expose the normative 
contradictions within capitalism that data colonialism generates.
Privacy and the New Contradictions of Capitalism
Two complex problems overlap here. Th e fi rst is the radical reconfi gura-
tion of how personal data collection works practically under data colonial-

182 
Chapter 5
ism in a way that far outstrips how the legal concept of privacy has tradi-
tionally been confi gured. Th e second problem concerns the philosophical 
depth at which privacy needs to be rethought in response to these new 
practical challenges. Th e later philosophical issue will take us back to the 
chapter’s philosophical starting points.
Today’s environment of data collection and processing far exceeds in 
complexity, continuity, and depth the single violations that were once un-
derstood to threaten a subject’s privacy. If data colonialism works through 
an “ecology” of data collection, as the social quantifi cation sector consis-
tently tells us it does, then any response must be environmental too.140 
Driven by private corporations much more than by states, today’s “au-
tonomic smart environments,”141 as Dutch legal theorist Mireille Hilde-
brandt calls them, are saturated with automated agents that have the power 
to shape the contexts in which human agents can make choices. So perva-
sive is this shaping and so unpredictable to human beings are its outcomes 
that the social environment stops being formed through mutual expecta-
tions between people and becomes driven exclusively by the goals of data-
driven manipulation.142 Th is unsettles the individual freedom of choice 
that is core to all liberal notions of privacy. How then can privacy be re-
thought to answer this deep challenge that the long-term capitalization of 
life throws up?
One route passes through the language of human rights. We might 
look for individual rights deeper than the right to privacy, such as the right 
not to be deceived.143 But it is unclear how this would work in an envi-
ronment that is continuously deceptive, in the sense of not fully disclos-
ing its processes and goals. A better alternative, proposed by various legal 
scholars, is to move beyond traditional liberal framing of privacy toward 
a relational understanding of privacy.144 Th is relational approach sees pri-
vacy as a feature of the mutuality of social relations, a condition that must 
be collectively sustained if selves and others are to fl ourish at all. Th is ap-
proach fl ows directly from the socially grounded approach to the minimal 
integrity of the self that we found in Hegel and Dussel. Th is approach also 
emphasizes not just control over one’s process of making choices but also 
second- order control: the ability to manage to some degree one’s choices 
about choices, that is, one’s values.145 Th is is precisely the level of freedom 

Data and the Threat to Human Autonomy 
183
that is damaged, as Hegel predicted, when a social order starts to be or-
ganized around practical principles that no longer fi t with the values its 
members thought were theirs.
Even within this relational (and profoundly social) interpretation of 
privacy, however, there are complexities. All values, such as privacy, are 
socially negotiated.146 But there is something distinctively complex about 
privacy and, specifi cally, the importance of privacy to autonomy (under-
stood as the capacity to “fi nd one’s own good in one’s own way”).147 We 
cannot fi nd that path if we lose the “breathing-room” in which to develop 
as our selves.148 In what entity or process exactly are these new, more so-
cial notions of privacy or autonomy themselves grounded? Some suggest 
that “the self has no autonomous, precultural core” to be defended,149 but 
if values such as privacy and autonomy are entirely relational, containing 
in themselves nothing essential, then what entity exactly is it “whose” au-
tonomy is to be protected? Today’s new practices and norms of data collec-
tion and processing are themselves surely social and cultural contexts too, 
but that does not mean that something fundamental for human beings is 
not at stake in the damage data relations do to privacy.
Although there is no essential form that privacy or autonomy takes 
across all cultures,150 each form must always, as we have emphasized 
throughout this chapter, involve a minimal notion of the self’s integrity. To 
be “with oneself” means to be refl exively engaged in one’s process of de-
velopment without—and this is Hegel’s crucial emphasis—the direct in-
terference in that refl ection of any other entity and its goals. Th is notion of 
autonomy is too deep to be traded away for local gain or temporary conve-
nience, perhaps too deep even to be formulated as a right. Th e underlying 
core of autonomy is what grounds the possibility of selves having anything 
like rights that protect their integrity in practice.151
Th ere remains, however, a deep paradox that both Julie Cohen and Mi-
reille Hildebrandt note: that practices of data colonialism are potentially 
eroding the very notion of the rational, refl exive, law-respecting human 
subject on which the legitimacy of law itself depends. Meanwhile, courts 
in various countries have become early adopters of algorithmic process-
ing, and much of the power to regulate infringements of autonomy is now 
delegated to commercial platforms,152 with dangerous practical and nor-

184 
Chapter 5
mative implications. In the age of datafi cation, legal institutions need to 
defend some version of the principle of autonomy for their own survival.
Toward a Larger Vision
Data colonialism works to dismantle the basic integrity of the self, dissolv-
ing the boundaries that enable the self to be a self. It is the self in this bare 
sense that must be salvaged from data colonialism, using all available legal, 
political, and philosophical means.
Th is makes the stakes of our argument very clear. None of the ideals 
desired in today’s societies—their democratic status, their freedom, their 
health, or otherwise—make any sense without reference to an autonomous 
self in the minimal sense defended in this chapter. Autonomy in this ba-
sic sense is the core value underlying any human social order that has the 
potential to be good. Yet, when all the complex detail of data practices has 
settled, it is this value that is being threatened today, not by technology it-
self but by the mutual implication of life and technology for capitalism that 
we call data colonialism.
We can go further. Moving decisively away from individualistic no-
tions of autonomy, freedom, and privacy, we can argue that the datafi ed 
social governance and incursions into the self’s minimal integrity dis-
cussed in part II of the book together constitute an environment that is 
toxic for human life. Th e way forward lies less in the detail of legal regu-
lation and more in defending an ecology of human life that connects with 
the visions of those who have resisted colonialism and capitalism for cen-
turies. Exploring this is the task of the next and fi nal part of the book.

187
Decolonizing Data
Anti-colonialism has been economically catastrophic for the Indian people for 
decades. Why stop now?
—Mark Andreessen, Facebook board member1
6
THE BIG TECH BACKLASH, we are told, has already begun.2 Even before the erup-
tion of the Facebook/Cambridge Analytica scandal, there were signals of 
a growing willingness of regulatory bodies, especially in Europe, to chal-
lenge the great powers of data colonialism (for example, Google and Face-
book). But the Cambridge Analytica scandal provoked a crisis of higher 
intensity: instability in tech-sector share prices, a popular movement (on 
social media, of course) to #leavefacebook, calls in the mainstream press 
to learn again the lesson of how the nineteenth century restrained the raw 
injustices of early capitalism (shades of Polanyi), and even an editorial in 
the Financial Times that entertained the case for “everyone . . . to leave 
Facebook.”3
Time, you might say, to step aside and let the more enlightened forces 
of capitalism fi x the problem, with the help of robust regulation. Th at ap-
proach would certainly chime with the long-accepted myth that historical 
capitalism solved the problems of historical colonialism. Data extraction 
would in this view be at worst a “cryptocolonialist system”4 whose dispos-
sessive violence is manageable and can be kept hidden from view.
But this response risks missing the bigger picture entirely. Suppose reg-
ulators did tame the raw force of data colonialism into a more measured 
pattern of data extraction. Suppose that users generally did become less 
trusting of data corporations’ motives, puncturing the more obviously self-

188 
Chapter 6
serving ideologies of the social quantifi cation sector (for example, the no-
tion of Facebook’s “global community”). Suppose that Facebook or even 
Google’s data harvesting power was opened up to various forms of public 
use and benefi t.
What these changes still would not touch would be the strategy of data 
colonialism as a whole to build a new social and economic order based 
on data appropriation. Untouched also would be the basic fact stressed 
throughout this book that capitalism’s data-driven order is being built 
globally, not just in the West. It is an order that has behind it the full force 
of the world’s two most powerful states (the United States and China), who 
are competing for leadership of the social quantifi cation sector and its AI 
hinterland.5
It is this larger narrative of transforming life through data that we are 
told is impossible to halt, because it is driven by a “technological momen-
tum” that is “inevitable.”6 Th e notion that datafi cation is inevitable is, as we 
noted in chapter 1, a myth of data colonialism. But how to resist it? In this 
fi nal part of the book, we try to wrest the narrative back from those who 
celebrate this transformation, and we question whether data colonialism’s 
emerging social and economic order is what human beings actually want.
Our Argument So Far
Before we think more concretely about what is at stake here, we need to re-
view all the strands of our argument.
In part I of the book (chapters 1 through 3) we laid out the building 
blocks of our argument. Aft er we introduced in the preface the basic idea 
of data colonialism and the social quantifi cation sector that drives it, we ar-
gued in chapter 1 that what is going on with data is best understood through 
a double process of renewing colonialism and expanding capitalism.
Colonialism is about appropriation; whereas historical colonialism ap-
propriated land, resources, and bodies, today’s new colonialism appropri-
ates human life through extracting value from data. We uncovered the ba-
sic features of data colonialism: the processing of ever more personal data, 
the universalization of logistics as a mode of management, the datafi ca-
tion of most aspects of labor, and the creation of data relations that draw 

Decolonizing Data 
189
us into arrangements whereby data is gathered and value extracted from 
it, regardless of whether we are at work or somewhere else. Platforms play 
a key role in making our participation in data relations seem natural, but 
pressures at work and elsewhere also play a part. We argued that underly-
ing these was something even more fundamental: the drive to capitalize 
human life itself in all its aspects and build through this a new social and 
economic order that installs capitalist management as the privileged mode 
for governing every aspect of life. Put another way, and updating Marx for 
the Big Data age, human life becomes a direct factor in capitalist produc-
tion. Th is annexation of human capital is what links data colonialism to 
the further expansion of capitalism. Th is is the fundamental cost of con-
nection, and it is a cost being paid all over the world, in societies in which 
connection is increasingly imposed as the basis for participating in every-
day life. Th e resulting order has important similarities whether we are dis-
cussing the United States, China, Europe, or Latin America. Th e drive to-
ward this order is sustained by key ideologies, including the ideologies of 
connection, datafi cation, personalization, and dataism. Th e result is not a 
new type of capitalism but certainly a new means by which and a new scale 
on which capitalism is operating; this result transcends earlier diagnoses 
of neoliberalism or the social factory and may, in the long run, provide the 
basis for an entirely new mode of production.
Chapter 2 outlined how, from the workings of the social quantifi cation 
sector and the adoption of its products, the Cloud Empire came to be, how 
it works, and what its emergence might mean for citizens, workers, and in-
dividuals. Th e monopsony/monopoly power of giant digital platforms and 
the huge growth of the social quantifi cation sector in its many forms were 
discussed in their global dimensions. Th is growth is aided by various ex-
tractive “rationalities” that together make the capitalization of human life 
feasible. Th e result is a rearrangement of life so that it is confi gured di-
rectly under the “hand” of capitalist management and its infrastructures 
of connection; the goal is, literally, to annex life to capitalism. It is the ab-
soluteness of this ambition to order a world made tractable to capitalism’s 
operations that gives data colonialism its simplicity: the mutual impli-
cation of human life and digital technology for capitalism. A capitalism 
without limitation, obstruction, or remainder. A capitalism that encom-

190 
Chapter 6
passes every scale of human life (across space) at every layer (in depth) of 
individual and collective experience, all unfolding without limitation or 
interruption (in time).
Chapter 3 looked back at all these changes through the reverse mirror 
of historical colonialism’s long trajectory of oppression. Datafi cation today 
represents a new phase of colonialism, as the concept is normally under-
stood. But this new phase also represents continuities in terms of the strat-
egies for extraction that colonial powers employed in the past. Instead of 
the appropriation of cheap natural resources and cheap labor, the new co-
lonialism is premised on the “natural” availability of “cheap” social data. 
As corporations engage in new forms of exploration, expansion, exploi-
tation, and extermination, a new capitalist mode of production emerges 
(just as industrial capitalism emerged during the colonial era to replace 
earlier tributary modes of production). Because we are only at the start of 
this new colonialism, we cannot be sure what this mode of production will 
eventually look like. We can, however, borrow from postcolonial and de-
colonial thinking tools to articulate not just counterhistories but counter-
presents, or alternative understandings of contemporary social orders. 
Th ese counter presents will allow us to challenge, within a radically new 
global distribution of colonial power, the version of modernity and the 
model of human knowledge that dataism has inherited unproblematically.
In part II of the book (chapters 4 and 5) we looked at the consequences 
for social and individual life that fl ow from data colonialism and the new 
capitalist order it is unfolding. Th e result, we argued in chapter 4, is a new, 
datafi ed social world, in which earlier forms of social knowledge that had 
in various ways been under public production and control become deval-
ued. A new “social knowledge” emerges that lies entirely under corpo-
rate control. We call this “social caching.” Th is “God view” of the social 
world, though parceled out among many corporations, coalesces in a cor-
porate social imaginary that justifi es new ways of governing everyday life 
for the benefi t and convenience of corporate power (think of insurers’ ex-
panded power to demand self-tracking as a condition of service). In state-
led market societies (for example, the People’s Republic of China), a simi-
lar process is dubbed the “modernization of social governance.” However 
framed, the transformation of publicly oriented government into “gover-

Decolonizing Data 
191
nance by proxy” has profound implications for societies’ power relations. 
Th is new social order relies increasingly on hidden forms of categoriza-
tion and discrimination, implemented at many layers of an automated 
process. New forms of injustice inevitably result: even accidental discrim-
inations remain opaque to subjects and system operators alike and so are 
likely to go uncorrected. But datafi cation also provides the perfect cover 
for older forms of inequality and discrimination to be reproduced and am-
plifi ed. Th e voice of individual citizens becomes hard to hear in the re-
lentless drone of data-fueled power, as an older public knowledge gets out-
sourced to corporate processes.7 Meanwhile, much of the social sciences 
has aligned itself with this devaluation of social knowledge and so pro-
vides a poor site from which to resist data colonialism.
Th e consequences of data colonialism for individual freedom and au-
tonomy are just as serious, as chapter 5 showed. Whereas specifi c human 
subjects face danger from the new social hierarchies that are being built 
through managing extracted data, all human subjects face a threat to the 
minimal integrity of the self from data colonialism’s reliance on ever- 
expanding mechanisms of surveillance and tracking. Lower-status work 
brings higher exposure to surveillance, with zero discretion, while higher-
status work enjoys more protection from surveillance and greater discre-
tion. Th e general social exploitation to which data colonialism gives rise 
is inseparable from particular battles against data-driven injustice. At the 
heart of both general and specifi c battles is the need to salvage the self’s 
autonomy in some form—what we called the “minimal integrity of the 
self”—not as a luxury for the few but as the key term around which re-
sistance to data colonialism’s social order can start for everyone. It is ex-
actly this minimal integrity on which continuous exposure to corporate 
monitoring and data collection intrudes, thus harming it irreparably. Al-
though legal frameworks have in some cases made important challenges to 
the norms of data colonialism, they are insuffi  cient to eradicate the dam-
age that data colonialism does to human autonomy.
To sum up, the problem and challenge of contemporary data practices 
is neither data nor simply the particular platforms that have emerged to 
exploit data. Th e problem is the interlocking combination of six forces, 
unpacked in the previous chapters: an infrastructure for data extraction 

192 
Chapter 6
(technological, still expanding); an order (social, still emerging) that binds 
humans into that infrastructure; a system (economic) built on that infra-
structure and order; a model of governance (social) that benefi ts from that 
infrastructure, order, and system and works to bind humans ever further 
into them; a rationality (practical) that makes sense of each of the other 
levels; and fi nally, a new model of knowledge that redefi nes the world as one 
in which these forces together encompass all there is to be known of hu-
man life. Data, in short, is the new means to remake the world in capital’s 
image.
Tactics Are Not Enough
So what next? Many have been tempted to say that the way forward is more 
of us ditching our social media accounts.8 But in the face of a new capital-
ist order, “boutique” forms of individual resistance must be inadequate. 
Data colonialism is a collective problem.
Inadequate too are collective versions of those individual responses 
that select only part of the problem to reform. For a new order is just that: 
a comprehensive and eff ective way of organizing everything that cannot be 
opposed by people thinking or acting “otherwise” in this or that context. 
It is not enough to opt out of the bits of data colonialism we don’t particu-
larly like.
But confronting data colonialism as a whole is seriously inconvenient. 
Th at is because data colonialism’s model for organizing things underlies 
countless business models and everyday resources. Th at is why, as Mark An-
dreessen inadvertently implied (in the chapter’s opening quote), the point 
of opposing colonialism was never immediate economic success. Worse, 
over the past two decades, billions of people have started to organize much 
of their personal lives around the infrastructures of digital platforms and 
other services that depend, or seem to depend, on seamless fl ows of data.
Th e problem of inconvenience drives the temptation toward partial so-
lutions—for example, the idea that we just need better networks, perhaps 
networks with an element of public purpose or, indeed, that we should fol-
low big tech’s own proposals for how to use their products in ways that en-
hance “digital wellness.”9 “Better” data-driven networks will not save us, 

Decolonizing Data 
193
however. For by attempting to reform a particular network within a wider 
system of platforms, we are not challenging the foundations of the system 
but merely fi nding alternative ways to replicate it. Th ere is a danger here of 
repeating the error of those early nineteenth-century political economists, 
mocked by Polanyi for their “mystical readiness to accept the social conse-
quences of economic improvement, whatever they might be.”10
Resisting an emerging social order must mean being realistic about 
the necessity of sometimes using, hopefully to our own ends, the means 
that that order provides to us. Nineteenth-century workers used markets 
to purchase books, take trains and carriages, and hire meeting halls while 
forming new types of associations that seriously challenged the power of 
markets. We need to think carefully about what in the twenty-fi rst cen-
tury might be equivalent uses of today’s infrastructures of connection 
that, on balance, take more from those infrastructures than they give up 
to them. But this is where things get diffi  cult. Smart analysts of political 
movements for major economic and social change have realized for some 
time that the benefi ts (of scale and speed of mobilization, for example) that 
come from commercial infrastructures of connection such as Facebook or 
Twitter exert a heavy price. Th e fact that communication systems of estab-
lished power extract something from those who want their campaigns to 
be heard via those same systems is no surprise. But how do we make any 
progress when our target is precisely the wider economic, social, and polit-
ical order built through our use of those same systems?
It is no part of our argument to suggest that people should instantly 
and completely disconnect from the infrastructures of connection that 
have been built over the past two decades: we could not have written this 
book across two continents without using email and the internet! Hun-
dreds of millions of people have adapted their lives in response to the ex-
istence of platforms, and much use of social media and data processing 
is productive and well-meaning. But if the larger outcome of data infra-
structures’ use of us is a wider order that over time dismantles human au-
tonomy, there can be no neutral use of those tools; there can be no ben-
efi ts from the use of platforms that don’t at the same time reproduce, at 
root, the very power we want and need to oppose. We certainly respect 
the valiant attempts of developers to create platforms and search engines 

194 
Chapter 6
that do not rely on the centralized collection of data,11 but they cannot by 
themselves amount to a rival ecology of social networking and informa-
tion tools. Here the depth at which data colonialism’s social order operates 
hits home. Data relations do not off er a space of freedom separate from 
capitalism but are rather the means whereby capitalist relations are formed 
and extended—literally, as we connect.
We must acknowledge that we are, most of us, deeply complicit in the 
order of data colonialism, whether we like it or not. Remember that it was 
only in the present era—and based on today’s emerging grid of surveil-
lance and data extraction—that a social and political order on this truly 
global scale began to be imagined at all. It is therefore the very idea of a 
comprehensive and integrated life order achieved through the processing 
of data that must be abandoned, on the grounds that its rationality is cor-
rosive of human life itself. As that new order builds a diff erently confi g-
ured life around it, the goal is to imagine the most radical opposition to 
its order while inevitably continuing to live in and with it. Th at said, there 
are many specifi c proposals that may be of use, even if they can never be 
suffi  cient.12
Take, for example, proposals for media literacy. Th ere is an emerging 
industry dedicated to advising us how to better deal with social quantifi ca-
tion technologies: Take breaks (unplug)! Talk to your kids about it! Change 
your privacy settings! We do not deny that media literacy may have some 
benefi ts in the immediate term, but we should not pretend that media lit-
eracy is a means to resist data colonialism; at most, it enables us to live 
more at ease with it, thus normalizing it for the longer term.13 Worse, like 
all notions of literacy, media literacy relies on the virtuous “disposition” 
of the subject, which misses how the new order works to dismantle the au-
tonomy of the subject. In any case, media literacy soon comes up against 
some practical limits. When US sociologist Janet Vertesi applied her me-
dia literacy by leaving no data traces during her pregnancy, she found ba-
sic economic activity increasingly diffi  cult, until, fi nally, her husband’s 
attempt to buy cash vouchers to pay for a baby stroller on Amazon was ar-
bitrarily blocked by a store algorithm.14
Another important area of agency is regulation and legislation. Th e 
European legislation on privacy (the GDPR) represents a serious practi-

Decolonizing Data 
195
cal challenge to the details of data colonialism’s existing business mod-
els. As a result, parts of those models may get reconfi gured and rerouted, 
and the principle of obtaining consent for personal data use is at least now 
being embedded as a norm of daily practice, even if opportunities to re-
fuse consent to powerful platforms of convenience oft en remain highly 
constrained. But even a broken-up and redistributed order of data power 
is still an order. Th e problem, as always, is bigger: how to live diff erently, 
knowing what we know and having seen the off er of a datafi ed order, with 
its benefi ts and costs.
Still another area of intervention is civic activism. Without a doubt, 
some types of protest (the provocative hacktivism of Anonymous, for ex-
ample)15 are radical enough to challenge, at least temporarily, the legiti-
macy of large-scale power built through data. But the disruption that 
hacktivism brings to its targets always risks spilling over into a general 
disorder that damages those who would otherwise support it. Hacktiv-
ism cannot be a generalizable model for living with data power; if general-
ized, the result would be a data war whose consequences are incalculable. 
Other forms of activism, though avowedly local, may yet be important ex-
emplars of change. Inspiring examples of resistance will come from places 
some of us don’t like or in forms we fi nd inconvenient, and that’s prob-
ably a good thing. Some neighborhoods are banning Airbnb (in Detroit, 
for instance), putting other public values above platform profi t and short-
term consumer convenience. A Muslim cleric in Indonesia declared selfi es 
haram, saying, “If we take a selfi e and upload it on social media, desper-
ately hoping for views, likes, comments or whatever—we’ve fallen into the 
OSTENTATIOUS trap.”16 But the fatwa backfi red: thousands of reaction 
selfi es promptly posted under the hashtag #selfi e4siauw (the name of the 
cleric). One day, however, another fatwa against a social media company 
may come along, and people will take it as a battle cry; maybe whole com-
munities will start to feel that particular platforms are no longer for them.
Th is and similar endeavors are being explored by artists, scholars, and 
activists from within emerging fi elds such as postcolonial digital human-
ities and indigenous digital studies.17 Such work can provide a window 
onto a diff erent space, what First Nations writer and academic Leanne Be-
tasamosake Simpson calls a “productive place of refusal.”18 For Simpson, 

196 
Chapter 6
a place of refusal is productive if it generates a “grounded normativity,” a 
place from where we feel entitled and empowered in a sustainable way to 
say no to what we are told is “necessary” and yes to what for now seems 
impossible. But the danger is that such solutions are accessible only to cer-
tain groups, not to everybody. Aft er all, vulnerable populations may lack 
the choice to refuse the networked systems of surveillance through which 
come their opportunities for work and fi nancial support.19
Our point is certainly not to negate the value of such experiments in 
resistance to data colonialism. But if we already know that as partial ac-
tions they cannot be suffi  cient, we must set our sights higher; we must de-
velop a wider vision of resistance, a vision for connecting with one another 
on diff erent terms that might provide possibilities for solidarity with resis-
tant data subjects, wherever they are. Who knows, aft er all, where data co-
lonialism’s great wall will break in the end?
A Decolonial Vision for Data
What is at stake when any of us try to refuse data colonialism? What 
would it mean to articulate a vision of how individuals, communities, and 
nations can know themselves other than through the tools of data colo-
nialism? A vision that rejects a rationality that claims to bind all subjects 
into a universal grid of monitoring and categorization and instead views 
information and data as a resource whose value can be sustained only if lo-
cally negotiated, managed, and controlled. We might call this a socialism 
of data because of the primacy it gives to social choices over data, but this 
is not a vision for a global socialist data-state; we must certainly reject the 
vision of an integrative social order exemplifi ed by the data-driven market 
socialism of China today.
Defending the Ecology of Human Life
Capitalism has always sought to reject limits to its expansion, such as na-
tional boundaries. But now, as not only human geography and physical na-
ture but also human experience are being annexed to capital, we reach the 
fi rst period in history when soon there will be no domains of life left  that 
remain unannexed by capital.

Decolonizing Data 
197
And yet this seemingly inevitable order has a fundamental fl aw from 
the perspective of human subjects. Th at fl aw is its incompatibility with a 
diff erent kind of necessity, the most basic component of freedom, which 
we call the minimal integrity of the self. Th e emerging colonialist and cap-
italist order is therefore, under whatever disguise it operates, incompatible 
with every political structure built on freedom, including democracy in all 
its forms, liberal or otherwise.
Vision and imagination become the most practical starting points 
when we are faced with a social transformation so large, so ordered, and 
so multilayered. We need a vision that does not turn its back on the fu-
ture but asserts the possibility of a diff erent future, a vision that does not 
subordinate human autonomy to system autonomy.20 We will suggest here 
some practical steps toward this reimagining of our relations to data and 
data colonialism, a potential new social imaginary about data and our re-
lations to data.21
How does this vision start? It begins by rejecting in principle the prem-
ises of the new social and economic order and, for example, insisting at ev-
ery opportunity that corporations—indeed all actors—who use data can 
do so legitimately only if that broad usage is based on respect for the hu-
man subjects to whom that data refers and for the goals and awareness of 
those data subjects. For it is not just individuals’ right to control their data 
that is at stake if we don’t reject data colonialism’s premises, but also the 
freedom of social subjects to exist without being tracked, indeed, the right 
for everyone to live in a world that still holds the possibility of freedom for 
human subjects in general. Defending this possibility of freedom means 
defi ning, more fully than we have done so far, the danger that data colo-
nialism poses to human life.
Th e order of data relations relies on the unlimited possibilities of data 
processing generated by the infi nite connectivity of the contemporary 
world. Data relations rely on removing all limits to data appropriation and 
thus building an expanding, knowledge-based social and economic or-
der. From simple starting points (computer’s data capture, the connect-
ability of computers, and the information processing and monitoring that 
together they enable), institutions and systems are acquiring the capacity 
to govern life in a completely new way. But is this a good way of order-

198 
Chapter 6
ing life? What power relations does it bring with it, and how can they be 
moderated?
It is fi rst essential to grasp, as noted in chapter 4, that under data colo-
nialism what is extracted for value from social life is not incidentally but 
intimately linked to the production of knowledge about social life. Resist-
ing data colonialism draws us inexorably into the sorts of epistemologi-
cal questions (about what constitutes knowledge and what its precondi-
tions are) that we might normally delegate to philosophers. What sorts 
of data should be collected? What sorts of data should be combined with 
what other sorts of data? When do we need to impose a limit on algorith-
mic decision-making? Our answers to these questions will shape the social 
worlds in which we live over the coming decades. We can go even further: 
because order is the basis of all forms of life, the social and economic or-
der being built through data colonialism raises questions about the future 
of human life itself.
It is important also to reject rather than accommodate the forms of 
ideology surrounding data that were identifi ed in earlier chapters. Th e un-
limited targeting of persons by marketing messages is not personalization. 
Th e pursuit of continuous automated surveillance does not really bring the 
democratization of health or the educational promotion of digital citizen-
ship. It is not true that limits to connection are always bad or that fl ows 
of information must be “seamless”: what if particular forms of data fl ow 
cause harm (it is easy enough to think of examples)? We should also re-
ject the implication, in metaphorical claims that data creates “ecologies” 
or “ecosystems,” that data processing is somehow natural.22 Certainly, data 
gathered in vast accumulations across many sources may have a complex-
ity comparable to known ecosystems, but that does not mean that such 
processes are natural or must be left  unrestricted, let alone protected and 
legally endorsed.
Th is reimagining of our existing relations to data is much more than 
saying no. Rejection of the idea that no obstructions must be allowed to the 
fl ow of data can be formulated positively as the affi  rmation of what Janet 
Vertesi calls the principle of seamfulness.23 Th is is the idea that, instead of 
prioritizing the seamless movement of data, transfers of data must fi rst al-
ways be responsible and accountable to those aff ected by that data; other-

Decolonizing Data 
199
wise, such transfers should not proceed. To put this at its simplest: if data 
can cause harm, as we know it can, and if individuals and institutions still 
care about avoiding harm, then the principle of seamfulness in relation to 
data is surely more “natural” than seamlessness!
Affi  rming seamfulness as a positive principle suggests also the wider 
possibility of building a whole set of ecological principles that would chal-
lenge the naturalness of data colonialism’s so-called ecology. Th ese would 
include defending the possibility of autonomous human agency and hu-
man relations, on which data practices have relentless eff ects. If, as we saw 
in chapter 5, dataism’s principle that every life process should generate data 
through permanent connection and openness to monitoring and surveil-
lance damages the integrity of the human self, then it is the latter principle 
(the self’s integrity) that should be affi  rmed, and not dataism.
Th e growing confl ict between data’s supposed ecology and such under-
lying human values is not just a clash of values; it is itself a clash of ecol-
ogies. Data colonialism proposes a connected world that appears to know 
itself through its absolute connectability and through unfettered data 
fl ows between all its points (whether living or not). Indeed, dataism claims 
to fi nd a higher force than human life, the force of information processing 
or algorithmic power, which appears to know human life better than life 
can know itself. But this ideology clashes with a much older vision of how 
human life should be, an ecological view of human life, unchallenged un-
til very recently, which assumes that human life, like all life—whatever its 
limits, constraints, and defi cits—is a zone of open-ended connection and 
growth. Th is view of human life understands life (my life, your life, the life 
of the society we inhabit) as something that fi nds its own limits as it contin-
uously changes and develops, even as forms of human power seek to man-
age and control it.24
Refl ecting on the meaning of the term ecology enables us to take this 
point further. Th e order of data colonialism damages the minimal integ-
rity of the self as a space of self-relation. Yet human beings’ possibility of 
being “at home” with themselves depends on having access to that space 
of the self. Th e damage done by data colonialism is therefore ecological 
in its nature and not just in its scale. Recall the ancient Greek roots of the 
word ecology: the task of gathering together a home (legein + oikos).25 Th e 

200 
Chapter 6
social order of data colonialism is, in a precise sense, an antiecology that 
disrupts the basic space of human autonomy and conviviality in a process 
that might be compared to what biologists call “dysbiosis.” Th is is the op-
posite of the successful forms of interdependency between life forms that 
we call “symbiosis.”26 Data colonialism disrupts the ecology of human life 
not for some higher purpose but in the name of pure instrumentality: to 
support capitalism’s drive to profi t.
Insisting on boundaries to the continuous fl ow of data (the principle of 
seamfulness) means insisting that human reason should always be able to 
impose limits on that fl ow, because data’s goal should ultimately be to serve 
human, not artifi cial, life. Nothing we have argued in this book rules out 
the search for social uses of data that genuinely remain under the control 
and monitoring of citizens themselves. We have instead off ered ample evi-
dence that the emerging social order built from seamless data fl ows in the 
interests of capital is becoming toxic to human beings through two means: 
(1) the highly targeted but almost entirely opaque forms of inequality that it 
authorizes in the name of greater social knowledge and resource effi  ciency 
and (2) the uncontrolled surveillance of human life on which it is premised. 
External systems for seamless data processing provide the means for power 
(states, corporations, and powerful alliances between the two) to achieve 
ever more fi ne-grained and integrated forms of discrimination.
Th e principle of seamfulness therefore becomes a potential tool for re-
sisting social worlds that are less accountable, harsher, and characterized 
by ever higher levels of inequality, mistrust, and despair. It also alerts us 
to the danger that without seamfulness, the social costs that data colonial-
ism generates will simply be passed down to the most vulnerable, quite 
possibly on the basis that they somehow “deserve” it, exactly the form of 
“moral behaviorism” that has for two decades characterized neoliberal so-
cieties. Indeed, we already see signs of punitive connectivity and punitive 
data extraction emerging as the dark side of data seamlessness.27 All the 
while, the new social knowledge generated by algorithmic processes is si-
lent on these problems, notwithstanding the best eff orts of critical infor-
mation science. In daily life, the winners in the data game will go on reap-
ing the benefi ts while fi nding their success largely opaque too. Th eir path 
through life will just be smoother, more empowered, and more seamless.

Decolonizing Data 
201
Here, as Boaventura de Sousa Santos has noted, questions of “global so-
cial injustice” become “intimately linked” with questions of “global cog-
nitive injustice.” Capitalism’s grip on the world, through the mechanism 
of connection, creates a new modality of injustice, indissolubly both so-
cial and cognitive, that is derived from data processes.28 Data colonial-
ism’s true violence is to make human beings the objects of external con-
trol through data, together with everything that, until now, has passed for 
their lives’ interior.
If this is the challenge human beings face over the longer term, how 
should we begin to address it?
A Different Rationality
At this point, two questions—about social/political order and rational-
ity—risk becoming knotted together. We must disentangle them.
Th e answer cannot be to reject order. Human life, like all life, is sus-
tainable only on the basis of a certain degree of order that conforms to the 
physical and psychic needs of human beings. Whereas the word order has 
acquired certain negative connotations within the ambit of Western ratio-
nality, as something implying imposed structures, it can also mean “bal-
ance,” as in harmony, and benefi cial forms of interconnectedness and liv-
ing well together. Order is the abstract term for many elements of human 
life we are truly thankful for: routine, expectation, the security of know-
ing that people generally act as they say they will. But one must always ask: 
Order for whom? Order on what terms?
If justice is any part of quality of life, we can ask whether data colonial-
ism’s order is compatible with human quality of life. Th e philosopher and 
economist Amartya Sen has deeply challenged the dominance of main-
stream economic thinking and its divergence from basic considerations of 
ethics. At the core of Sen’s challenge to economics’ narrow instrumental-
ism—and the political thought that mimics it—is his insistence on the ac-
tual complexity and variety of human reasoning. How can human beings 
exercise freedom of choice in societies in which processes of discrimina-
tion and opportunity segregation operate in an algorithmic shadow zone? 
Any account of freedom starts, for Sen, from the question of whether daily 
life gives to an individual “the actual ability . . . to achieve those things that 

202 
Chapter 6
she has reason to value.”29 Economic thinking, he argues, assumes away 
much of the complexity of individual reasoning, just as do the hollowed- 
out models of human agency in much contemporary social science (as 
we saw in chapter 4). Sen argues that we need a better and more inclusive 
model of human rationality if we are to avoid endangering “the conditions 
and circumstances that ensure the range and reach of the democratic pro-
cess.”30 Could data science, and the wider “science” of Big Data, be in need 
of a similar challenge?
Th ere is in fact a lot at stake in our conception of rationality. Th e Pe-
ruvian decolonial theorist Aníbal Quijano proposes a much broader cri-
tique of the European paradigm of rationality/modernity than Sen does.31 
Having seen throughout the book that the rationality of datafi cation is to-
day more global than European and is as celebrated in China as elsewhere, 
we might wish to downplay Quijano’s emphasis on the term European, but 
this does not make his broader analysis any less profound.
It is necessary to extricate oneself from the linkages between rationality/mo-
dernity and coloniality, fi rst of all, and defi nitely from all power which is not 
constituted by free decisions made by free people. It is the instrumentaliza-
tion of the reasons for power, of colonial power in the fi rst place, which pro-
duced distorted paradigms of knowledge and spoiled the liberating promises 
of modernity.32
Th e method and goal, then, is not to abandon the idea of rationality (or 
order) but to reanimate it in terms of diff erent values. What is needed is 
an “epistemological decolonization” that “clear[s] the way for . . . an in-
terchange of experiences and meanings, as the basis of another rational-
ity which may legitimately pretend to some universality.” Th e goal is not 
to abandon rationality, order, or even the claim to universality but to reject 
the highly distinctive claim to absolute universality that characterizes Eu-
ropean modernity.
We reach here the core of what is wrong with data colonialism’s order: 
its vision of totality. Connection—a potential human good in itself—is al-
ways off ered today on terms that require acceptance of a totality, a sub-
mission to a universal order of connectivity. Data colonialism is, aft er all, 
not the only vision of human order—indeed, of the human uses of data—

Decolonizing Data 
203
that is possible. But its way of “covering” the world—of compelling us to 
believe there is no other way to imagine the world unfolding and becom-
ing known to us—is part of its power and its danger. Data colonialism pro-
vides a “horizon of totality” (in Enrique Dussel’s useful phrase) that it is 
diffi  cult but essential to resist and dismantle.
We must hold on to a diff erent vision of order. An order that under-
stands humanity in a nontotalizing way, that rejects the equation of total-
ity with sameness and the imposition of one reading of how the world and 
its knowledges should be organized. Quijano’s voice is inspiring in this 
respect.
Outside the West, virtually in all known cultures . . . , all systematic produc-
tion of knowledge is associated with a perspective of totality. But in those 
cultures, the perspective of totality in knowledge includes the acknowledge-
ment of the heterogeneity of all reality; of the irreducible, contradictory char-
acter of the latter; of the legitimacy, i.e. desirability of the diverse character 
of the components of all reality—and therefore, of the social. Th e [better, al-
ternative] idea of social totality, then, not only does not deny, but depends on 
the historical diversity and heterogeneity of society, of every society. In other 
words, it not only does not deny, but it requires the idea of an “other”—di-
verse, diff erent.33
Th e West’s much heralded liberal “pluralism” has always, as Quijano ex-
plains, ruled out the pluralities that it found inconvenient.34 Th e ideolo-
gies of data colonialism are no diff erent, insisting that the whole world—
every part of the social world, on every possible scale, and at every possible 
layer of meaning—can be organized in accordance with a single integrated 
scheme or totality that categorizes all people, acts, and possibilities singly 
and in opposition to one another. Th ere is no empirical test that could ver-
ify this vision of social knowledge: it has authority only by virtue of being 
imposed on a world reconfi gured to its own image. As we learned in chap-
ter 4, measures “recreate social worlds.”35
Th e practical starting point for resistance to data colonialism at last 
becomes clear. It is to articulate a vision that, against the background of 
Big Data reasoning, will appear counterintuitive to many, a vision that re-
jects the idea that the continuous collection of data from human beings is a 

204 
Chapter 6
rational way of organizing human life. From this perspective, the results 
of data processing are less a natural form of individual and societal self- 
knowledge than they are a commercially motivated “fi x” that serves deep 
and partial interests that as such should be rejected and resisted.
It may help here to listen to those who have fought for centuries against 
capitalism and its colonial guises. Leanne Betasamosake Simpson re-
fl ects on rationality but from the perspective of human meaning. She af-
fi rms a meaning that “is derived not through content or data or even the-
ory . . . but through a compassionate web of interdependent relationships 
that are diff erent and valuable because of diff erence.” Why diff erence ex-
actly? Because only by respecting diff erence do we stand any chance of not 
“interfer[ing] with other beings’ life pathways” and their possibilities for 
autonomy.36
Living with an Intimate Enemy
It is diffi  cult to imagine any general adjustment more likely to interfere 
with human life than the continuous tracking and nudging that is data co-
lonialism’s basic practice. Th e sheer intimacy of contemporary corporate/
state surveillance (the depth to which it penetrates and messes with our 
lives) makes it particularly hard to resist: resisting such an intimate en-
emy37 must seem, at least at fi rst, like giving up part of ourselves. If and 
when we collectively decide to dismantle our attachment to Facebook, for 
example, it will be a messy operation. It is, aft er all, the minimal integrity 
of the self, the very space in which each of us has the possibility of exist-
ing as a self, that must be restored to integrity now that it has been dam-
aged. Th at will take work, and we must be very clear about the principles 
that will guide us.38
Th ere is no place in this alternative rationality and vision of social or-
der for the default collection of data or its collection under vague forms of 
consent.
Th ere is no place for the reuse of data for purposes not consented to by 
those to whom the data refers.
Th ere is no place for systems of, and approaches to, data collection that 
are not specifi cally chosen by human subjects to meet purposes that they 
too have chosen.

Decolonizing Data 
205
It is time to call out the contradiction between capitalism’s current 
business models (based on default data harvesting) and the value of free-
dom that capitalism’s representatives claim to espouse.
Th ere is, however, nothing nostalgic about our argument. Nostalgia is 
pointless under data colonialism, since there is no unchanged point of or-
igin to which we can return. Dreaming otherwise misses entirely the sig-
nifi cance of the data-driven order that has been carefully, if only so far 
partly, built over the last two decades. It is a diff erent future that must be 
created.
A Vision for Data Subjects Everywhere
So far this is still an abstract vision, but it is important to try to make it a 
little more concrete. Resistance to data colonialism does not mean gestures 
made for eff ect (such as quitting Facebook) that leave the order of data 
colonialism intact. But it does mean saying no to practices that normal-
ize the order of data colonialism in everyday life. We need to fi nd ways of 
collectively unsettling our identifi cation with data colonialism’s require-
ments. Power is always social in the end, so discovering new powers of re-
sistance must emerge from the social world too.
Th at means off ering a vision that can be useful to the sorts of colonized 
data subjects we have invoked in the course of the book, and many oth-
ers besides: the truck driver angry at being directed and overseen by the 
tracker placed on his dashboard; the Amazon warehouse worker whose 
every movement is pushed and tracked through a voice-picking system; 
the family who must face the illness of loved ones without essential health 
insurance but with no idea why they have lost their hard-earned protec-
tion; and the First Nations activist who enthusiastically adopted social me-
dia platforms only to wonder what, by the same token, she has given up.
How should we think about the emerging social space from which re-
sistance begins? In an earlier book, one of us introduced the concept of the 
“paranodal”39 as a way to think about how we can disidentify from the so-
cial pressures of digital networks. Looking at a network diagram, what is 
rendered visible are the nodes and the links connecting those nodes. Th e 
space between them would seem to be barren, unconnected, a great use-
less void. But this space is not empty. It is inhabited by multitudes who do 

206 
Chapter 6
not conform to the organizing logic of the network, whether by choice, by 
accident, or by exclusion. Th is paranodal space is the space that lies beside 
the node and beyond the rationalities that bind nodes together.
If the order of data colonialism depends, in the end, on connection 
(the act of being “plugged in” to networked infrastructures of connection), 
then it is only when we inhabit the paranodal space, standing to one side 
of the nodes of digital connection, that decolonized ways of thinking and 
acting can emerge. Since digital isolation is becoming increasingly impos-
sible to enact, paranodality off ers a model for being outside the network 
even while remaining formally inside (redefi ning therefore what it means 
to be eff ectively “inside” the network). It is not a matter of saying no to 
Facebook but saying no to data colonialism and no to the rationality of the 
whole Cloud Empire. Saying no to Facebook only perpetuates the illusion 
that the rest of social life has suddenly thereby been decolonized when it 
hasn’t. Saying no to the Cloud Empire by contrast acknowledges the total-
ity that must be rejected but denies the legitimacy of that emerging order 
as a whole while admitting our continuing complicity in the practical rela-
tions of data colonialism.
More positively, it also means intensifying the pleasures of sociality 
(solidarity, even) that not even datafi cation has been able to suppress. One 
reason we all fl ocked to social media platforms originally was because they 
reminded us of the joys of collectivity at a time when mass media seemed 
to off er only individualistic isolation. Th at pleasure risks being extin-
guished now as we become ever clearer that social media outlets are man-
aged by vast commercial interests. But we don’t need to forget everything 
that has been learned during our time on digital networks. We can develop 
forms of solidarity that extend what we have learned online but turn them 
toward values that are no longer aligned to data colonialism.
Recall for a moment some of the actions whose partial nature we criti-
cized earlier: media literacy campaigns, withdrawal from this or that plat-
form, and legislation requiring data companies to actually obtain some-
thing like consent for using personal data. What if we approached them 
not merely as individualistic acts or as technical fi xes but as part of a col-
laborative attempt to build a diff erent social world than the one data colo-
nialism promises us? Acquiring media literacy might then include citizens 

Decolonizing Data 
207
learning to help one another become less reliant on systems whose nega-
tive eff ects we all know. Withdrawing from a particular platform might 
involve learning with others how to distinguish between forms of forced 
coordination that benefi t platforms and forms of collaboration that genu-
inely benefi t people and then, on the basis of that understanding, building 
new communicative forms that prioritize the latter over the former. Legis-
lating for a better data environment might involve going beyond attempts 
to “tame” data companies and affi  rming positive principles on the basis of 
which future social uses of data could be organized for collective benefi t 
and not corporate privilege.
In short, we need a way to tie together the isolated acts of resistance and 
technical fi xes we have criticized so far and organize them into a larger 
project for dismantling data colonialism by collectively acquiring knowl-
edge about its manifold manifestations and the alternatives they suppress. 
What is at stake here is the possibility of new ways of knowing and orga-
nizing our shared world that support rather than undermine fundamen-
tal shared values. We develop this possibility in the next and fi nal section.
Tools for Common Knowledge40
Th e Indian anthropologist Arjun Appadurai recently made an important 
call to rethink research beyond the walls of academia. He proposes that we 
think of research in terms of the “right to the tools through which any cit-
izen can systematically increase the stock of knowledge that they consider 
most vital to their survival as human beings and to their claims as citi-
zens.”41 Could the perspectives we have brought together in this book—
critical internet studies and computer science, decoloniality, and critical 
social theory—converge to help build for all subjects of data colonialism 
some tools and opportunities to investigate how the artifacts and ideolo-
gies of the Cloud Empire come to bear on their lives? If so, we might have 
the beginnings of a social laboratory for disentangling our communicative 
and social practices from the profi t-seeking motives of corporations. Call 
it, if you like, a new kind of research project, but it would be one with deep 
continuities to previous decolonial research projects that questioned who 
generates new knowledge and who or what that knowledge is for. Th ose 

208 
Chapter 6
were not research projects for a narrow elite. Paulo Freire’s pedagogy of the 
oppressed, Jorge Sanjinés’s cinema with the people, and the various exper-
iments of what is loosely called Participatory Action Research42 tried to re-
imagine research as a decolonial tool, a tool in the hands of the subjects of 
colonial oppression.
Gayatri Spivak once famously asked, “Can the subaltern speak?”43 Sim-
ilarly, today we might ask: Can data colonialism’s subjects speak up against 
the structures that dispossess them? An affi  rmative answer is possible if we 
take seriously the temporal dislocation that postcolonial theory grasped so 
well when it defi ned itself as an “active transformation of the present out of 
the clutches of the past.”44 Except that today the dislocation is subtly dif-
ferent. Even though we have explored the roots of data colonialism in the 
past, the debates started here must address the kind of future that is al-
ready being created in the clutches of the present. Th is, incidentally, is what 
distinguishes the universalizing involved in our argument from the uni-
versalizing that colonialisms have helped shape, indeed, the universaliz-
ing that underlies the whole vision of Big Data. Decolonizing data means 
speaking now from the position of data’s colonized and imagining a com-
mon future for humanity beyond the contemporary project to reduce hu-
man life to the inputs and outputs of data processing. Th ere is a key role, as 
Raewyn Connell points out, that theory’s generalizations can play in chal-
lenging what is presented to us as data and thus “reveal[ing] the dynamics 
of a given moment of history.” Th e strength, however, of theory’s general-
izations depends on the extent to which they can link back to the specifi c 
contexts of human life that data practice wants to write over.45 Th is vi-
sion for a collective process of research—this project for thinking together 
in multiple contexts about what data colonialism means for human life to-
day—is more political, more interdisciplinary, more practical, and less re-
spectful of the boundaries of academia than are the domains supposedly 
leading the way in engaging with data, such as the digital humanities.
Research on data colonialism cannot take place exclusively in corpo-
rate research labs or corporate-funded universities. It needs to be accessi-
ble to everyone and from everywhere while avoiding essentialisms about 
who can or cannot engage in it; we are addressing a collective problem 
for humanity, aft er all. Borrowing from indigenous methods of inquiry, 

Decolonizing Data 
209
as Linda Tuhiwai Smith46 proposes, the project of thinking collectively 
about what it would mean to decolonize data relations can draw citizens 
and groups into a variety of tasks: reframing (shift ing the terms of dis-
course about what data is for), restoring (reclaiming forms of well-being 
eroded by data relations), naming (articulating new worldviews that resist 
datafi cation), gendering (uncovering the hidden and not-so-hidden poli-
tics of gender self-determination in data transactions), protecting (identi-
fying the social arenas that should exist beyond datafi cation), and creat-
ing (channeling creative collectivity to form new social relations around 
and beyond data). Each of these tasks remain oriented to social goals, not 
the goals of the corporate infrastructures that underlie data processing.47 
In short, critical research on data colonialism requires new ways of using 
and sharing data that, as Aníbal Quijano says, “clear the way for new inter-
cultural communication, for an interchange of experiences and meanings, 
as the basis of another rationality which may legitimately pretend to some 
universality.”48
Decolonizing data’s role in explaining the social world means rejecting 
the assumption that only data can explain data—that is, that only quanti-
tative methods based on Big Data methodologies can accurately describe 
the world from now on. While it should not reject the idea of gathering 
data as such (for example, for clearly defi ned social purposes), the evolving 
project to think together about the consequences of data colonialism must 
insist on close attention to those “aspects of social life that remain unseen, 
unheard, uncounted or unacknowledged within prevailing understand-
ings of capitalism,” as Johnna Montgomerie argues.49 Put diff erently, our 
understanding of the social world needs to be rescued from a narrow un-
derstanding that equates it with large data sets and abstract models with 
“only fantastical links to actual human experience or observation.”50 Th e 
resulting social knowledge will be complicated and perhaps diffi  cult to re-
solve into a single neat perspective, as with much research carried out on 
the ground about the uses of digital media or of countermapping technol-
ogies by indigenous populations.51 But that is precisely its strength. Aban-
don our willingness to listen to this complexity, and, as Virginia Eubanks 
warned, we abandon our “social commitment to try to understand each 
other.”52 Th e project of thinking about data through listening to the ex-

210 
Chapter 6
periences of others can benefi t from both successes and failures, many of 
them far outside the corporate mainstream.
As an example of the kind of research we are envisioning, consider 
the Algorithm Observatory that one of us is building. Part media- literacy 
project and part citizen experiment, the project’s goal is to give the general 
public simple and accessible resources to understand how social-comput-
ing algorithms categorize us (fi nd it at algorithmobservatory.com). Th ese 
tools can be used to engage critically with the technologies that are shap-
ing our daily lives in profound—but not always transparent—ways. Al-
though at the time of this writing the project is only in the prototype stage, 
focusing exclusively on Facebook advertising algorithms, eventually the 
Algorithm Observatory will allow anyone to design an experiment involv-
ing any social-computing algorithm. Th is is because the site does not re-
quire direct access to the source code (which corporations are unlikely to 
share with the public) but instead relies on empirical observation of the 
interaction between the algorithm and diff erent kinds of volunteer par-
ticipants. We off er this project as an example of what thinking together 
about the consequences of data colonialism within and outside the univer-
sity might look like.
Th ose who formulate critiques, such as the ones contained in this book, 
are oft en asked how to solve the problems they have identifi ed. Although 
solutions to problems that have taken centuries to unfold must necessar-
ily be partial, incomplete, and tentative, this is indeed our most concrete 
proposal: that anyone who feels dispossessed by the Cloud Empire should 
have opportunities and spaces to participate in collective research about the 
shared problems that data now poses for humanity. Where will these spaces 
emerge? We cannot exactly know yet. But we do know that the decoloniza-
tion of data relations will require an explosion of creativity in many places 
and networks. What it does not require is a central blueprint or unifi ed vi-
sion of an alternative “order.” How else can an emerging social order and 
its power structures be challenged at each step of the way?
Th e Cloud Empire’s myth that the only way to harness new social re-
sources is to surrender to platforms’ control of how and where we make 
knowledge, organize resources, or even just express solidarity and connec-
tion must be unlearned, and even more rapidly than it came into being. 

Decolonizing Data 
211
Recent infrastructures of connection have facilitated new forms of collec-
tivity, but this does not mean that we must accept the forms of exploitation 
that are indissolubly tied to the data relations associated with those infra-
structures. If we disown the corporate dream that the world’s rich diver-
sity can and must be ordered for profi t, we may fi nd that other forms of 
connection are possible.

This page intentionally left blank 

213
Postscript
Another Path Is Possible
TO POWERFUL INSTITUTIONS, the forward path of development that in this book 
we have called data colonialism seems so clear and so necessary that peo-
ple tend to accept it as though it was the future already told back to us as 
settled history. Or, as Microsoft  CEO Satya Nadella expressed it, “We ret-
rofi t for the future.”1 Indeed, we have become used to social media plat-
forms telling us the story of our future (their future!), and until recently, 
their narratives of global community seemed comforting to many.
But as we have seen, there is a darker side to the social quantifi cation 
sector, whose narratives of the future are just as bold. In its March 2017 
annual report, Axon—previously Taser International—announced a strat-
egy for “creat[ing] connected technologies for truth in public safety.”2 A 
month before, Taser had renamed itself aft er its video camera/AI division, 
Axon AI. Axon exemplifi es well the new social knowledge that is emerg-
ing from the Cloud Empire and its growing economic power. Th ink of it: 
a stun-gun manufacturer now makes a quarter of its substantial income 
from data analytics and cloud services that maintain automated cameras 
and bypass human interpreters. Hear the note of triumph in the words of 
Axon’s CEO: “To the world at large: it’s time for change.”3
Axon’s triumphal rise is just a small part of the increasing datafi -
cation of the US law-and-order sector, which is, in turn, just part of the 
wider transformation of social governance and individual self-governance 

214 
Postscript
in the United States and many other nations. Governed this way, the so-
cial world stops being a space of dialogue and debate, let alone of demo-
cratic change, and becomes what the data industry calls a propensity and 
probability spectrum,4 governed by knowledges that are largely in corpo-
rate hands. Yet this huge social transformation, as noted in chapter 6, is 
only part of the global battle for leadership of the social quantifi cation sec-
tor and AI generally. Such momentous national interests and global fi nan-
cial investments are involved that it makes sense to assume that this gen-
eral path will extend at least into the foreseeable future. It also makes sense 
to assume that the economic and social inequalities associated with these 
changes will overlap with an even deeper inequality in who and what can 
infl uence the terms on which we come to know the world around us. Th is 
is the twinned legacy of data colonialism and the capitalism that is emerg-
ing from it.
More bluntly, we can see the road of data colonialism marked out ahead 
across the social landscape that data relations are steadily hollowing out. 
But the concept of the paranodal helps us grasp that there is also a space 
on the side of that road5—an unmarked space that is not yet a path (or any-
thing), headed nowhere in particular except, we can imagine, away from 
data colonialism. Th is side-space is where we must start to affi  rm a new 
direction of travel based on a diff erent rationality and based on diff erent 
possibilities for order and security, for solidarity and human organization. 
A space in which we feel no reason to bind ourselves into relations that 
achieve only what capitalism wants (stable processes of data extraction). 
A space in which we can recover the idea that human beings might know 
themselves and choose the relations that organize their lives without dele-
gating this choice and that knowledge to an algorithm.
It would be the worst sort of irresponsibility to conclude fatalistically 
that the path toward data colonialism is already fi xed. Is our only choice 
really to downsize our freedom to fi t the datafi ed future that is coming? 
Th at choice is surely intolerable, and there is nothing dignifi ed in staying 
silent about it.6
Rather than silence, it is better, as we stand to the side of data colonial-
ism’s road, to affi  rm what we know: that the minimal integrity of the self 
cannot simply be delegated or outsourced to automated systems; that the 

Another Path Is Possible 
215
new social order being built through data will produce patterns of power 
and inequality that corrode all meaningful practices of freedom; and that 
these contradictions with important values can still, for now at least, be 
seen for what they are.
Th e representatives of data colonialism try to convince us that there 
is nothing hollow in our assent to their order, that we are choosing famil-
iar values of connection and human solidarity when we choose this data-
fi ed social order. Th ey tell us that we need to go on connecting with and 
through them. But that is a ruse. Th e ruse depends on inducing human be-
ings to forget ways of living that were left  behind when we came to spend 
so much time servicing the social quantifi cation sector.7 We are, all of us, 
part of the ruse. Th e greatest threat that data colonialism poses is that, in 
time, it works too well for us to want to live any other kind of existence, so 
that our complicity in losing hold on the possibility of freedom becomes 
complete.
Th e path away from data colonialism will start when we reclaim the ca-
pacity to connect that human beings have always possessed, and we decide 
that today’s costs of connection are neither necessary nor worth paying. 
Th e struggle is a global one: it matters for humanity as a whole, not just for 
market democracies, and it confronts capitalism as a whole, not just social 
media. Th e shape of the path is uncertain, but this book has tried to imag-
ine at least its starting points. Th e path will form when, individually and 
collectively, through rediscovered lines of connection, human beings fi nd 
a place and a strength from which living uncolonized by data seems not 
just right but something they would always have chosen.
