Hi, Jamie. Welcome. Good to be here, Mark. Yeah, so I've recently discovered your talks
and lectures and I haven't read your books yet, but what I've seen thus far has been
awesome. Daniel Schmockdenberger referred me and said I have to talk to you. So I'm
really excited to talk to you today. Yeah, happy to dive in. I mean, just getting to
check out some of your beautiful drawing and animations on YouTube. It seems like you're
barking up a number of very diverse and eclectic trees, but there is that kind of theme of
sort of just better understanding, you know, the human condition, our past and our future.
So, you know, obviously happy to jump in on all those things. Yes, I think that you and
I are very aligned on what we're interested in, like from existential crisis to meaning
to psychedelics and everything in between. So I'm really excited to just see where this
conversation goes. For sure. So I thought we could start by just, you could introduce
yourself to the audience. Sure. So my name is Jamie Wheel, and I am the founding executive
director of the Flow Genome Project, which is an organization dedicated to the research
and training of peak performance and leadership, and so sort of combination of neuroscience,
anthropology, optimal psychology, and then, you know, quite often adventure leadership
fun things to do in the wild and backcountry and mountains and oceans. And we get to work
with everybody from, you know, executives at companies like Google and Deloitte and
Disney and Lululemon and places like that, but also privileged to work with some of the
tier one special operations community in the world, the SAS and Santos Military Academy
in the UK, as well as SEAL Team 6 and Dev Group here in the US, and really always just
curious about what makes us come alive, what lets us feel and perform at our best. And
then fundamentally kind of almost back to the old school Greeks, you know, what is a
good life well lived. And that inquiry has also led to me writing a couple of books.
One was called Stealing Fire, and that was really trying to sort of trace and track the
multi-thousand year history of ecstatic cultures, like those communities of practice that have
sought and made the most of non-ordinary states of being. And again, that goes all the way
back to one of Socrates' senior students stealing the psychedelic brew from the Lucidian
Mysteries and throwing a house party in Athens, which was kind of a wonderfully weird and
funny story, risking life and banishment, you know, to do so, all the way to contemporary
expressions like Burning Man and other situations. And then most recently, I wrote a book called
Recapture the Rapture, Rethinking God, Sex and Death in a World that's Lost its Mind.
And really that one is just to say, hey, where are we going as a civilization? Feels like
we're in kind of a tight spot. Seems like we're going to need to get much better at
processing our grief at skillful and responsible accessing of peak states and connecting to
each other in resilient, anti-fragile ways that don't end up in the ditch of dysfunctional
or cultic communities. So how do we do this thing is fundamentally the ongoing inquiry?
And what are some ways to have, you know, to have as meaningful and purposeful and healthy
and happy and joyful lives as we can along the way?
Oh, that's all brilliant. And I'm excited to dive deep. But first, I think I need to
stop you and have you tell that story about the Illusinian Mysteries. Oh, I've been really
fascinated with that whole ritual, the psychedelic brew. And so somebody stole the brew?
Yeah, it's such a crazy story. And I actually shared it with a friend, Brian Marorescu,
who wrote the immortality which kind of right, which blew up and expanded the story,
which was fundamentally, I mean, Brian, Brian's new contribution is the, what does he call it,
the archaeochemistry or something, but basically actually the fine grain scraping of the pots
and things to see what was actually in them versus just the written record. But he was
really just dusting off Ruck and Wasson's thesis from way back in the day about the potential
LSA, you know, ergot fungus as the actual psychoactive kicker in the Greek Illusinian Mysteries.
But what's so interesting about the Illusinian Mysteries is they persisted for 2000 years.
You know, you're like, holy shit, like what cultural anything continues for 2000 years. And
here's one of the wilder and woollier state experiences. And this is Plutarch and Cicero
and Plato and arguably all the way back to Pythagoras and the Presocratics, like there was
some serious juju coming out of this over a week long ritual with sleep deprivation and chanting
and pageantry and costumes and all these other kind of state shifting technologies. But then
also Kukion, this arguably quite credibly psychoactive brew. And if you were an initiate
into the mysteries, you weren't allowed to share it or talk about it on pain of death. And so
about 20 years ago, I was doing research and I just remember this random little snippet of an
account from sort of Plato's era of a court case about someone having stolen the Kukion and
then making use of it. And so in the writing of Stealing Fire, I was like, oh, I remember that.
I've got to get back to that, dust it off, see what it was. The story was actually even better
than I remembered. It turned out it was Alcibiades, who was this like rascal of a senior student of
Socrates and potentially they were lovers. So he was kind of his like chicken boy, you know,
slash like like sketchy sketchy sketchy teacher student relationships. But Alcibiades himself
was a rascal. He then steals it. He ends up throwing a huge house party with the magic potion. So
this is not that different than like Silicon Valley billionaires going to Burning Man, you know,
and blowing the roof off the thing, he then gets ratted out by some rivals. And he ends up then
betraying Athens. He's like this crazy double crosser, all sorts of things. He ends up actually,
I just read two weeks ago, I think he ends up getting murdered in the end. But like his story
is absolutely off the chart. So that idea that, you know, we often think of ancient things as very
kind of stuffy and respectable, you know, and buttoned down. And that was the way they did
things back in the past. And if we want to be respectable, we should do things more like they
did not how we do now. And then you kind of realize this was almost identical. And it was literally
like it was was it 22,000 or 2,500, whatever it was, it was almost to the day, an anniversary of
when Ken Kesey was at Stanford University, unbeknowingly, taking MK Ultra, you know, the government
psyops projects, taking their LSD as part of a medical study and stealing it out of the cabinets
and taking it back to Stanford and lighting up all of the, you know, this was Larry McMurtry,
the writer, this was where at Abbey Wallace Stegner, you know, all these like literary giants
were there and they were literally like early 60s, getting lit up with exactly the same process,
stealing fire, right, stealing the psychedelic magic. And then that booted up and turned on
everything from the Grateful Dead is their house band, they were just a bunch of funky
musicians in Palo Alto at the time, they pioneered psychedelic rock, which is now happening at the
Sphere in Las Vegas with John Mayer, taking Jerry Garcia's place, you know, one of the largest
grossing acts to this day over the last five years is still that lineage, as is all the Silicon
Valley from the Homebrew Computer Club, all the way to the imaginings of AR and VR, all the way
into the entire Burning Man culture and community, goes back to Ken Kesey stealing that government
asset and throwing a house party. So the parallels are just, you know, you couldn't make up. And I
think they are, they are fascinating because there's always that question of, can you bottle
lightning without getting burned? You know, is there something that is tricksy? Is there something
squirrely? Is there something inherently unstable and therefore kind of not scalable, right, about
these experiences and also about the utterly predictable backlashes that they almost always
seem to precipitate? And even just last week, right, we had the maps, FDA clinical trials,
getting the hard breaks and the committee voting 10 to 1 against approving it because there's been
a lot more scrutiny and a lot more attention. This was a MDMA, right? This was for the MDMA
trial. This is a 40 year effort. And it's right there at the goal line. And potentially getting
and potentially getting sidelined. And Jesus, I'm going to grab a drink.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, no problem.
All good. You are on fire right now. I am loving the pace of this podcast.
Oh, great. Yeah, great, great. This is just me on normal settings. So we can play however you want.
So the MDMA studies. So the MDMA studies and the FDA's oversight committee basically had to
sift through, there was a petition and a kind of a complaint that, hey, things were a little fast
and loose here with this, with this, you know, taking this drug to market and moving through all
the phases of the trials. And one of the comments really struck me, which was one of the most
significant concerns was, hey, by the way, we've heard that this MDMA, one of the known side effects
is euphoria. And that's concerning, because euphoria means it has a high potential for abuse.
And you think now, wait a second, this is the same FDA that Greenlit, Adderall and Ritalin,
basically we've had, you know, and just in the last 18 months even, there's been a
published report being like, oh yeah, by the way, all you parents that were talked into
putting your little developmental kids on amphetamines for their adolescence and
neurological development, there is no correlation between them, between that,
and them doing any better in academic outcomes. They just kind of slipped that one into the
news cycle like, sorry, kids, 30, 30 years of creating little speed freaks. And it wasn't even
going to help them get into college. Right. So we did that. We did Celebrex, which turned out
to be a huge, the largest settlement, class action settlement on killing people with a drug.
What was Celebrex? We definitely did put in. What is Celebrex?
Well, gosh, now I'm gonna, let me think, it might even be worth doing. Celebrex sounds familiar.
So Celebrex, it might, what is the largest pharma settlement? It could be another one of those.
It says Celebrex is used to treat pain and redness, swelling and heat inflammation.
Oh, Vioxx. Vioxx. Right. We did Vioxx. We definitely did oxycontin,
you know, and all of those drugs made it just fine through the process. But we are having real
issues and hyperscrutinizing, one that also has euphoria. And HL Makin was that famous kind of
very funny newspaper publisher back in the early 20th century. I think he said Protestantism,
you know, and he said the definition of Protestantism is that sneaking suspicion
that somebody somewhere is having a good time. Right. And so you can see like all the way back to
Alcibiades back in ancient Greece and being taken to task for outing the mysteries, which,
you know, fair cop, those were the road rules. Right. But nonetheless, it was fun enough, whatever
that experience was, it was fun enough. He wanted to steal the magic brew for a house party
all the way to Keezy in the early 60s at Stanford, unwittingly interacting with MKUltra,
the Mind Control Government Project that Stranger Things is based on. Right. All the way to our
current situation where we have MDA running up against FDA concerns about they might be having
a little too much fun and we need to put those extra extra screws to them. So for me, that's
you can boil it almost down to so what is that dynamic through through the ages is the sort of
ongoing battle between the priests and the Prometheans. You know, there's always the priest
class and they start out, you know, wearing black cassocks. Now they're the shiny men in
black, the feds. Right. But it's still those in control of the status quo and the norms
who are empowered to police consciousness. And then the honest to God Prometheans. Right. I mean,
all the way back to the ancient myth. Prometheus is like, Hey, Daddy Zeus. It seems like there's a
bunch of cold, starving, shivering little monkeys down there and I'm taking pity on them. Can we
help them out? And Zeus is like, hell no. If we did, they'd get too epiti for their own good.
Right. And Prometheus is like, all right, well, I'm going to do this anyway. My heart bleeds for
them. Right. He's kind of an, he's almost like a Hellenic Christ figure. Right. And he's like,
okay, so I'm going to do this on behalf of them. And he doesn't just bring them fire. He brings
them civilization, technology, pottery, language, medicine, all of it. Right. And then there's
hell to pay. Right. And so we see that that oscillating dynamic that the Prometheans find the juice
wherever it is, wherever it's been buried, wherever it's been hidden, wherever it's been locked up,
they free it. And there's almost always these explosive renaissance is right celebrations,
rocking good parties. And then that starts giving you know, then other people start finding out
about it, it draws attention, and then invariably gets shut down. And the real tell is the extreme
prejudice with which it gets shut down. You know, it's not, hey, guys, cool it off. You know,
turn down the music by 11, you know, make sure you clean up when you're done. It is like literally the
most aggressive and violent reactive repression you could possibly imagine. And so it seems like,
yeah, that, that, that ain't shell making quote, that idea of that, you know, the sneaking suspicion
that somebody somewhere is having a good time. Right. And even last year with when Burning Man
got, you know, rained out. And it was, I think, arguably the first year of that event, where
the people at just because of enough starlings on site, right, there was a it became the first
extremely online burn in history. Because in the past, you used to schlep it out to the desert,
you were completely unplugged and out of touch for, you know, a week to two weeks,
depending on how long you were there. And you were out of contact with all civilization,
that was part of the magic and the mystery of it. This was an extremely online burn.
And you had all the haters, and you had the New York Post, and you had crazy TikTokers,
and you had right alt right wing nuts on Telegram talking about how this was a federal,
this was Operation Mockingbird or whatever, you know, and then they were going to inject everybody
with Ebola, you had people weighing in like that, you had people being like, Oh, look,
there's Chris Rock and, you know, and, and, and, and Tiesto, and here's the cool DJs. And,
and then you had people at Burning Man also reading these things, and then also commenting.
And, and the amount of psychic energy that was devoted to making sense of what was a few rainy
days was completely out of proportion with that and being a NASCAR race, or a football stadium,
or, you know, a stamp collector's convention or anything. And so it is, I think, super interesting
that how we hold notions of bliss, pleasure, joy, liberation,
directly affect our, our willingness, our tolerance, our curiosity, and our positioning,
because radical, whatever, you know, radical joy, radical awareness, radical freedom,
is rarely in a vacuum and rarely without other people having strong opinions
about how it can and should go down. Wow, I love everything you just said. I have
quite a few thoughts. My first thing is I don't want to make this about me, but
at Burning Man, Brian Morescu went there and people were very inspired by the video we made
together on the Elusinian Mysteries and the, the great psychedelic secret and that whole ritual.
So they built an entire section of Burning Man based on the idea that if you die before you die,
you don't die. And that was written on this giant cup. It was massive. That was the Kukion cup.
And they took, I don't know, like 10,000 drones and they put them up in the sky and they programmed
them to create the images that I had drawn in our video, which just blew my mind, blew my mind.
This was funded by the musk family. It was Kimble and Christiana. Right. Yeah. I don't know them,
but I was just, when I saw the pictures of the drones making this DNA tree that I love to draw,
I was like, that's insane. So that's one thing you reminded me of, which I think is really cool
how this, this secret of the Elusinian Mysteries, it still lives on and it, and it's like, it still
captivates us, you know? And then one thing you made me think of is like, can humans handle
these very potent, powerful substances without these ancient rituals attached to them? Like,
it seems like if you just take all the barriers down and you just give people these really powerful
agents, sometimes they can't handle them and you look at cities that have made all drugs legal
and it kind of didn't work in some ways, you know? You can't give people ultimate freedom
without accountability. Are you seeing that? Yeah, but I think to quote the great philosopher,
Homer Simpson, you know, he was like short answer, yes with an and long answer, no with a but,
you know, I mean, the bottom line, I mean, there's a couple of things. If you're referring
specifically to current U.S. cities efforts like Portland and Oregon and those kind of things and
even Vancouver and those sort of things to decriminalize drugs, you could also potentially
look to Portugal and a few other places in the world, you know, I think it's essential to differentiate
or disambiguate between different classes of chemicals because they are radically different
in their in both impact, user experience, pro-social white indoor health benefits or detriments.
So the fact that folks were trying to do that, especially in North America, you know, in the
last decade and quite and in the midst of both a quarantine lockdown crisis of public and mental
and social health, as well as an opioid, you know, starting with oxy, going into street heroin,
going into fentanyl, you're like, okay, those are not, that's not a cognitive liberty argument.
And in fact, I was on stage speaking of Benningman, I was giving a talk at MAPS
with Rick Doblin and Carl, gosh, what is Carl's last name?
Hart? Carl Hart. Yes. Carl Hart, right? Who is who is that? I believe he's at Columbia.
And he is a very strong cognitive libertarian, basically the idea that people should be free
to consume anything they'd like. He's also quite infamously, as he, you know, wrote in his own
books, a high functioning opioid user. So, you know, the thing there is like, you can, you know,
motivated reasoning, you know, there is an element where he's like, of course, you're going to argue
to be left alone to do the thing that you like to do, and may or may not be able to, you know,
stop or start at will, right? But the urban situations does lead you to question how safe,
stable, prosocial are accessed to these tools and techniques. I've written in like my last book,
a suggested model of social psychedelic use, which would be a bell curve. And basically,
10% of the population, those with family histories of Doctriad personality, so narcissism,
Machiavellianism, sociopathy, authoritarianism, schizophrenia, you know, borderline personality,
any number of situations where like, hey, your medical and or family history does not suggest
this is a good role of the dice, so don't, right? That 10%, take those folks out.
Only 10% of the population should probably ever do them more than one, two or three times in their
entire life. And those could be sort of the psychonauts, test pilots, the cultural creators,
whatever those people are that self select and are willing to kind of learn and apprentice to the
skill sets. And then, you know, the overwhelming majority in the middle, what would it look like
to do what you suggested, which is reintegrate these state experiences within a initiatory
culture of ritual framework, aka the anthropology, the neuro anthropology of it. And you can make
a case then if you're like, okay, well, how have civilizations, how have societies made use of
hardship or deal, initiation and access to transcendence, vision quest, rights of passage,
all those kind of things. So you can make a case, hey, first one kind of makes sense.
And the right of passage from adolescence to adulthood, right, that that great, very famous
book by Alex Haley that then became I think the most watched mini series ever roots, right,
which was about the African diaspora and the slave trade. But back in Ghana, I think it was,
you know, Kuntakinte is the lead, you know, he's the kind of the hero that makes his way
through the story. But as a baby, he is born in West Africa, and his father holds them up to
this incredible Milky Way night sky. And he says, behold, Kuntakinte, the only thing in the universe
greater than you. Right. And it's this beautiful, like, like, welcome to the world kind of moment.
And here's your place in things. Here's your place against the vast and the infinite, the Milky Way,
the night sky, here's your place in your family, here's your place in your community. And so
picturing that, you know, fast forward 15 years, picturing that as our initiation for young men
and young women into adulthood, because right now we've got failure to launch, we've got kids
kicking the can down the road on an extended adolescence, right, until they're 30, which is,
I think, arguably, a little too long. You know, it's like, I'm just going to smoke weed and jerk
off to porn and play first person shooter games in my parents' basement, and then become an angry
incel, you know, because I don't have a snatched jawline like all the chads who are snagging all
the stasis, you're like, that's wildly dysfunctional. You know, and so what we need, you need
moments of effective initiation that actually are transformational. They're not as Michael
Pollan called them placebo sacraments, right, you actually need the real deal, so that if I pass
through that threshold, I am no longer the same person, my relationship and obligation to the
world is not the same. So authentic initiatory rites of passage, and you know, folks have been
talking about that, that's not a particularly profound insight, it's just pronounced on how
absent they are. And the next one could arguably be marriage, right, so picture, you know, and if
you wanted to get really down into the details and programming, right, you could be like, oh,
that initiatory rite of passage could be three grams of psilocybin, or it could be a functional
ayahuasca experience or something along those lines, right, slow enough, not acutely intense enough
to just scramble you, you know, like DMT or like five MEO or something like something along those
lines, but you know, a real, you know, like the world's enchanted and magical, you know, and I'm
being and seeing that, right, so that is an initiatory process. For partners and couples, and you
know, maps has been parallel tracking this, which is MDMA as couples therapy. So imagine if, you
know, instead of sort of sitting with your rabbi or sitting with your priest or whoever the sort of
minister of your ceremony would be beforehand as a young couple, you know, like a happy couple to
be, what are you guys going to do? What are your commitments? What are your obligations? What might
it be like for them to take MDMA together? And with some form of guidance or facilitation, right,
it could just simply be loving friends and family, it could be a minister, it could be whatever, to
actually speak their deepest hopes and fears for and their pledging of their love for each other
in a way that marriage then became that communion, not simply, oh, we got a Williams and Sonoma
guest list and please make sure we get enough linens to match our silverware, you know, and there
we are, you know, doing our destination wedding for the gram, you know, like all of these super
hyper superficial things that don't carry you through the doldrums, don't carry you through the,
we've got two kids under the age of three and we've been sleepless for six months and I, you
know, and I don't even know who I am anymore, let alone who you are anymore, and this doesn't
feel fun anymore, you know, and couples just drifting under the burden of being householders
together, which is, you know, which is an unmitigated son of a bitch, if you don't have, you know,
the other things that come with deep connection and potential communion. And then the obvious final
one is just end of life. What might it mean, there I am, you know, sliding off this mortal coil
and really whatever, you know, I mean, there's so many stories of either staunch atheists who then
get religion at the end, you know, or devout believers who then doubt everything or whatever it
might be, but basically facing the reaper is a great equalizer on whatever worldviews or philosophies
you played through, you know, the rest of your life with and an experience like, and again, this is
all wildly open to interpretation and curation, but you know, an experience like 5MDMT, which many
participants do report is as close as anyone can imagine to a near death experience of sort of,
you know, brilliant white light encounter with source consciousness, you're like, oh, okay,
many people who have had that experience prior to dying, go out of their way to mention, I'm no
longer so afraid of my physical death. I know what's on the other side, I've had a quick sneak peek
preview. And so imagine that and not just by itself, like, oh, let's just get grandpa loaded to, you
know, and put him in front of some, you know, immersive VR and see what happens, but much more
like, hey, grandma grandpa, here is this sacred experience, you get to peek around the corner
of where your path is going soon. And then you get to come back and now, potentially with guided
therapy with, you know, again, family facilitation, what is it that you'd like to share? What are the
places to make amends? What are the truths you want to pass on to your grandchildren? What are the
heartfelt things you want to share with your own kids? You know, and so we could really reintegrate
disassociated teens and bring them across the threshold into adulthood, partnership in union,
which, you know, you don't have to be a sort of card carrying conservative to just acknowledge
that, hey, as parents come together to make more children and further our nation, our communities,
our species, having them be happy and connected is generally a better thing than having them
alienated and fragmented. And then end of life. I mean, you know, and Baby Boomers have kind of
led the way every, every stage of their own development, you know, the famous kind of me
generation, you know, when they were young, they were all about personal growth and development
and transcendence. And then they were in their middle years, and they were all about making
bank and, you know, money and kind of Wall Street greed is good kind of thing. And now they're
shuffling off the coil. So there's naturally, this is a great time to revisit our end of life
rituals and ceremonies. And compared to, hey, grandma or grandpa, we found them off to a nursing
home five years ago, because it just got too difficult, you know, and now we are paying
exorbitant amounts of money to these companies who hire minimum wage employees who dope grandma
grandpa to the gills, you know, on sedatives, you know, whatever it is to keep them docile and
manageable. And they die, you know, and we maybe we guiltily, you know, obligingly show up around
their bed when it's when the time is getting really close, but they're often out of it. And
they die under fluorescent lights, hooked up to tubes, and you're like, Oh my God,
like we can do so much better than that. Just from a heartfelt human sense, but also even just from
sort of clinical and therapeutic outcomes sense. So that to me, would be a really meaningful
wrapper that culturally and interrelationally and communally, we sort of can and ought
to include in these peak states and experiences because the downside of the maps medicalization
model, which was a very strategic tactical thing, which is like, let's make this respectable,
let's make this legit, let's go through all the proper channels and let's speak in the language
of mainstream dominant society. So they actually understand and can validate what we believe is
to be true and precious about these experiences, aka PTSD, depression, smoking, smoking cessation,
anxiety, right? All the, all the kitchen sink stuff that has been laid at the feet of the
psychedelic experience, and instead be like, look, guys, those, those are epiphenomena.
You know, those are little bells and whistles that may or may not be improved by an encounter
with the numinous. But can we actually just sort of let the mystery stay the mystery? Can we actually
just say, Hey, these experiences seem to somewhat reliably gain us access to non ordinary states
of being where there is a certain sacredness, suchness, magic, mystery, you know, insight,
delight, aesthetic appreciation, you know, take your pick as to which of those things, you know,
you want to hang your hat on and then just say, Hey, we can't and we shouldn't try and pin that down
to the 17th decimal place. That kills it. You know, and it reminds me of that. There's an old
joke. I think I think Mark Twain used to tell it, but like the web, like probably not because this
is too, too recent a story that the plot is there's a biologist checking to see how far frogs, frogs
can jump and he gives them different commands. And he's like, Oh, a frog, you know, a frog,
when given the command to jump will jump 10 centimeters. And then he takes an exacto knife,
you know, a little scalpel, lops off one leg. And he's like, And then when I gave the frog
another command to jump, yeah, he only jumped seven and a half centimeters. And then I chopped off
another leg and gave him the command to jump. And he only jumped five centimeters. And then,
you know, I cut off his final leg and gave him the command to jump and nothing happened.
So I now conclude that a frog with no legs is deaf. And you do and you kind of think that's
sort of how our, you know, again, big pharma double blind placebo controlled DSM five correlate
psychedelic research is, you're just like, Do you guys know even what you're looking at?
Or are you all pretending that there is not this magical mystical
initiatory experience behind those doors? And we're just sort of all sort of that that's,
that's the, in some respects, that's the, that's the scam is we're all pretending that there's
no magic and mystery there. And if we all stay on that hymn book of like incongenity,
such and such, such and such in conjunction with clinical therapy, you know, is going to result
in all of these outcomes, but it's a little like that, you know, Hunter Thompson's fear and loathing
in Las Vegas, you know, like, you know, we were somewhere outside of Boston when the drugs began
to kick in, right? And then famously, they're driving along that Cadillac and then they pick
up the hitchhiker, you know, and Hunter's peaking. And he's like, When are we going to tell him
about the bats? You know, don't worry, the poor bastard will see him soon enough himself, you
know, and you kind of think that to me, that's, that's the shadow side of the conventional
pharmacological medicalization and VC corporate, you know, experience of this quote on quote,
psychedelic red renaissance is we're going to get Prozac Nation 2.0 with new and improved
five HT 2a receptor sites, you know, versus anything, but I mean, just imagine if 30 years
ago we'd gone down the religious liberty route and had said, Hey, placebo sacraments suck,
you know, and we as humans deserve cultural communal encounters and renewal for healing
and inspiration of the mystery. And that's our birthright. Not I deserve a copay for a coded illness
for my worried wellness of tired, wired, stressed and anxious. And I've heard that this new magic
pill might allow me to keep going as one more how slightly better adjusted cog in the neoliberal
machine. Wow, you just said a lot of things that are that kind of I'm going to have to
sit and reflect on everything you just said and rewatch that clip because that yeah,
well said, well said. And I've jotted down quite a few notes, but I think on a on a grand level,
you made me think of this progress narrative that we've been given that if you're really
materialist in your thinking, things are just getting better and better and better. We have
more stuff. Everybody has a bigger flat screen TV. They often point to metrics like life expectancies
longer, child infant mortality is lower. Look at all our pharmaceuticals, look at our health
industry, look at how much food people have. And they say that's a progress narrative. Is that
progress narrative a lie? Yeah, I mean, that's such a good question. That's literally the subject
of my next book. And I'm so I'm deep into the research right now. And I mean, I think the only
honest answer and I actually had this conversation with Daniel Schmackenberger several years ago,
it just hasn't, you know, the foundational conditions are the same, which is is that
for most of us right now, it's bafflingly confusing to figure out kind of quote unquote,
what's really going on? Because when you do see Hans Rosling or Steven Pinker or, you know,
pick your favorite Ted talk, you're like, Oh, my gosh, you know, this is the most peaceful we've
ever been. This is the most people living above the poverty line. This is, you know, just the
litany of public health statistics that are suggesting this is the best of times. And then
you end up either on an environmental channel or just doom scrolling your news feed. And you become
very quickly convinced, Oh, no, we are going off the cliff with no skid marks, you know, to our doom,
and we probably deserve it. You know, like, look how many dumb, terrible, stupid ass things we're
doing, we deserve what's coming. Like, and so things are getting exponentially worse and getting
exponentially better at precisely the same moment. And Oh, by the way, this super advanced techno
industrial society with pronounced civil liberties and incredible hyper mobility and access to the
world's information, you know, is also the very same container that is allowing us to do all these
personal growth and healing and waking up experiences. Right. And so you sort of you wake up,
and then you're like, Oh, my God, wait, when did I wake up? I woke up now in this moment. I mean,
I had that experience going skiing in Colorado a few years ago. And it was a spring skiing and
we're rolling into town and everything was melting. Right. And it was early, like it was it
felt like May and it was actually mid March. And you know, there was muddy waters down the streets
and there was grass and straw showing around, you know, and there we are riding this lift and
they just, you know, having lived most of our life in Colorado and knowing the history of the ski
industry, you're like, Holy shit. So I'm riding this lift and I'm watching everything melt around
us and being like, Hmm, I don't know how much longer the ski industry is going to be a thing.
And then thinking, Wow, this ski industry was the direct byproduct of the military industrial
complex. The 10th Mountain Division had trained just over the hills from us. They went to Italy,
fought in the Alps. They all came back from the Alps, started Veil, started Aspen, started Sun Valley.
Right. The skis, we the skis and snowboards we ski on have advanced petrochemical, P tech
spaces that are super slidey with metal edges and all these things when flex patterns and all
this kind of stuff that the lifts and all the steel and all the all the things. Right. The very
techno industrial war mongering society that made this possible of like little monkeys sliding
down white stuff in the mountains for fun is also the very thing that's also melting this
planet's atmosphere. Right. And so that was just a tiny example of what we're experiencing globally
and at scale right now, which is that our awareness has gone through the roof at the same time that
what we need to be paying attention to or be made aware of is that the very same culture that has
birthed us is also threatening to kill us. And most people can't hold that cognitive dissonance.
So we toggle between the coming alive arc of like, what's the infinite? You know, what's my
hashtag best life? What's my optimum personal growth? What's the way do I want to go? Who do I
want to be unlimited possibilities? And then also societally, you know, what is a world where
any gender is welcome? What is a world of post-racial equality? What is a, you know,
what is a realm where the bottom four billion of the global south have equity and inclusion? And
we've made reparations for all the dirty, dirty deeds of the last 500 years, etc. Right. So that's
that's the coming alive arc. And it's sort of, it's not time bound and it's not resource dependent.
It's a sort of infinite open. What's the best thing we can possibly imagine and live into?
And then that gets clipped by the staying alive arc, which is very time bound and very resource
constrained. And it's like, Oh, shit, you know, should I have my money in fiat or crypto? Should
I get a, should I get an, you know, a golden passport in Portugal, you know, or maybe I've heard
that St. Kitts is dishing them out, or do I need to get down to Mexico or do I hunker down in the
US or do I fleet a Canada, right? Or those kinds of things. Or like, what do we do? Right with
best places on the maps? I mean, a buddy of ours was, was it was an SVP at Google,
who got super freaked out during, I think it was the 2018 California fires or maybe it was
later than that actually, because it was during COVID, it was that super dystopian situation
where families were like fleeing San Francisco to get to Tahoe, where they could see sky and their
kids could breathe again in the midst of a pandemic with masks on, you're like, Oh my gosh, this is,
you know, this is bleak, right? That wig them out to the point where he's like, Okay,
California's off my list. I'm moving my family somewhere to be safe. And he did all the research
being a, you know, an engineering quanti guy with the world's best search engines at his fingertips.
And he concluded that Lahaina Maui was the safe place on an island in the middle of the Pacific
in a tropical rainforest. And that's where he was going to post up. And he got clipped. Right with
the Lahaina fires, which, you know, kind of reminds me of the, there's again, an old Greek story of
someone going to the Oracle at Delphi and being told, tomorrow you will, you will die. And he
flees Athens for spotter. He's like, Oh, fuck that noise. I'm getting out of dodge. And then
runs into the Reaper in a crowd in spotter. And he's shocked. And he's like, What are you doing?
And he's like, I was waiting for you. So that notion for all of us these days that there's sort
of, there is no a way. And it's on us to pick our spot to make our stand and then get on with living
through this feels like an important part of how do we reconcile that impossible contradiction of
things are exponentially better and worse at the same time? And where do I even map that? Right?
I mean, I think if you think, if you've heard, in fact, I guess people have heard of it because
it's called the three body problem is isn't that that the new HBO show, right with the Game of
Thrones guys, I think it is, but anyway, the three body problem refers to in astronomy slash
physics, it's very, very hard to map and model is one thing to map like the moon going around the
earth. But when you throw in the sun and the moon and the earth and where all things are in
relationships to each other, it gets herdy, goody in a hurry. And we've got an eight billion body
problem, all agentic little egos bouncing around each other. So how on earth we map them
leads to cognitive shorting out leads to emotional psychological overwhelm and leads to
boatloads of grief, as we potentially run all the traps run the numbers and come to the conclusion
that the world as we have known it might not actually be as stable or foreordained or given
or even, you know, predictably carrying forwards as we might have thought, as we might have hoped,
as we might have been led to believe. So how do we grieve in all of this? Also, you know, in a healthy
way, you know, in a powerful way, in a way that leaves us cleansed and grounded and stronger and
wiser versus in a way that leaves us kicking and screaming and embittered and feeling victimized
feels like a super important part of what you know, what life might look like going forward or
kind of part of the immune our immune systems. That will be really helpful for us to develop.
Hmm. Well, part of that progress narrative is that technology is going to save us. And that's
going to be our get out of jail free card. Do you think that we could develop some technology that
fixes all our problems? Yeah, I mean, Mark Andreessen, right, of Andreessen Horowitz, you know,
famously, infamously wrote the techno optimist manifesto last year. And he was basically coming
down hard on the side of technology progress is it has always been with God knows what's got us
out of the last pickle. It is forever will be. And anybody who isn't for utterly unregulated
affected, you know, the term that sort of showed up on Twitter is effective accelerationism,
right, instead of effective altruism, right, the idea of just like pin it. Let's put every penny
and every calorie and every gigawatt we've got into general artificial intelligence, basically a
silicon God. And that'll fix it. Which, you know, if anybody's seen, you read the stories of Dr.
Faustus or seen Fantasia with Mickey and the Sorcerer's Apprentice, you know, or any countless,
countless tale where humans are tempted to go for ultimate power or knowledge, right, and they try
and grab for that ring, you know, there's not a single story where that one comes up roses.
So there's a lot in our kind of mythical memory, as well as our historical memory of, you know,
all we ever do is kick the can down the road to greater, more complex, wicked problems from
solving our earlier ones. You know, and some of the classics would be, oh, you know, London fog,
right, London fog was because we were burning too much coal. And then we discovered, you know,
quote unquote, cleaner burning diesel and hydrocarbons fossil fuels, actually liquid fuels,
that was much better London London fog as a pollution went away. The, you know, New York and
Chicago and Paris and London were, you know, in the 1890s were up to their kneecaps and horseshocks
of all the carriages. And then Henry Ford invented the Model T. See, look, we keep doing this,
right. And so there are these really well worn tropes about what is our direction does is there
a teleological thrust, meaning is there a point or a purpose to where we're going. And then all the
stories of progress are yes, it's high into the right, right, the curve goes up, and we're on
times arrow, it's going someplace, which really wasn't, you know, wasn't argue arguably, that is
a highly Judeo Christian concept, right. It's not until the Hebrew and Christian sacred scriptures
had an alpha and had an alpha in the beginning was the word and the word was good, right,
and an omega, an endpoint that we actually got to have connect two dots on a line and create
times arrow. Now, there's all sorts of reasons, you'll your pregine, the Nobel laureate and
physics and others have, you know, played with, you know, what, what is the notion of times
arrow, not just as a cultural story, but as potentially a deep code of physical reality,
aka you can't unscramble an omelet, those kind of things, there's certain appearances of
directionality that breaks down at a quantum level. And and pregine actually had another
really meaningful contribution to this, so just to be clear, so we're talking about Mark
Andreessen posting something on, you know, effective altruism or effective accelerationism,
we're talking about the sort of tried and true progress narrative. And now we're kind of kicking
it down to well, what's true at the base levels of reality. And pregine advanced this notion of
complex dissipative structures, and that a complex dissipative structure could be a human, like we,
talking, breathing, loving, writing poetry, doing whatever, we're far more complex than the 28
minerals and elements that make up our bodies, right. And when we die, we go back to decomposing
and pushing up daisies, and that is a less complex state than we were when we were alive. So a human
is a complex dissipative structure, when we need constant inputs of energy, aka food and water,
or we die, right, and that's the dissipating part. And so are civilizations. And the more
complex our civilizations get, the more energy they need to keep them going without collapsing.
And of course, as we're contemplating for the first time in human history, a transition from
burning ever denser carbon, right, in fact, West Jackson, who's at the Land Institute in
Salina, Kansas, he's one of the great kind of environmental and ecologists, he's a sort of
contemporary of Wendell Berry. He said something interesting, he said, basically, you can make
a case that all of human civilization is just the hunt for ever denser carbon, and ever hotter fire,
right. So from like rubbing sticks together, you know, and just burning up trees and twigs,
and that kind of stuff, to ceramics and kilns, like now we can actually cure Earth in a
waterproof, bugproof storage container for our grains. So now we can take starlight
in the form of photosynthesis and grain production, and we can bend time, right,
by keeping it in pots. And then the Bronze Age, oh my gosh, if we dig up some of this stuff, we'd
dig up tin and copper, and we put it in a hot enough fire, we can make bronze, that's amazing.
We have swords and poke people and beat the shit out of the people that don't have
sharper, pokey things. And so then you get into the Iron Age, oh my gosh, even better.
And then all the way into the Silicon Age, we can melt sand, turn it into glass, turn it into
lenses, turn it into silicon chips. But at 1500 degrees, right, all the way to like the Large
Hadron Collider, where we have the light and heat of our sun. So we're forever hunting hotter fire
to heat ever more dense and interesting star stuff, to our own benefit and advantage.
Which, back to Prigagine, and the notion of complex dissipative structures, right,
is the idea that he makes the case, and other physicists and writers who've kind of built
on his work since, is that our complexity, our civilization, all the cool stuff that we like
to think of as, you know, human, isn't actually random. It's actually a very, very elegant way
of the universe reconciling the second law of thermodynamics, a.k.a. all things tend to
entropy over time. Because if you're in that camp, you're like, oh, we're just, we're just
random fluctuations where we shouldn't be here, roll the dice a million times more and we wouldn't
be here, right? There is no point or purpose. We're an accident of randomized genetic mutation,
right? There's definitely that camp, right? Prigagine would say, hey, yes, it's true that the
universe tends towards the heat, you know, heat death, right, and a complete unspooling of all
order and complexity over time. But wouldn't you know it? A complex dissipated structure is actually
the universe's best way to get to entropy in the end. So if you take an example of like, if there's,
if, you know, your bathtub is filled with water, and then it needs to drain all the way to daylight,
you know, through your basement, through your pipes out to the stream or the river, right?
Well, what does it do? It creates a whirlpool, which is a complex dissipated structure. It is one
of the best ways to take an energy gradient of a ton of water, resisting gravity, you know,
high to all the water going low and draining out. What's the best thing? Create a whirlpool
to migrate it. The same thing with hurricanes, right? You've got a low pressure and a high pressure
system. You've got someplace that's really cold and dense, and you've got someplace that's hot and
light and it's, and if it's powerful enough, what does it do? It creates that giant whirlpool
situation and it mixes, right? It very, very effectively mixes the energy gradient. It balances
it. So if you're in that prigogene camp, you would say, hey, we are complex dissipated structures.
We are enacting. So we have a purpose and it's a way to reconcile the second law of thermodynamics.
This all ends in the ditch, right? With the goodness, truth and beauty that may emerge,
right, in us and we're not just random accidents. We are actually agents centered in the bigger and
greater unfolding of universal physical and energetic processes. So now let's go back to,
because that's just kind of like, that's a nerdy sidebar, but I think it's super important because
if you're just dealing with like warring, like Twitter wars, like Mark Andreessen and the EX
versus the degrowth or D cell haters, and you just piss in a pissing match at that level,
we're not necessarily kind of taking in the whole context and getting beyond opinions and into
outlooks that are potentially rooted in more deeply structural reality. So, right, the reality
of, hey, is technology going to save us, right, is the way forwards even faster, right, the folks
that are like, again, like Mark Andreessen, he has a great phrase, he said, we're teaching sand to
think, right, and that's what we're doing with artificial general intelligence. And you can make
a case like, are we just being carbon based life form chauvinist? Is it just because we're
carbon based life forms? And everything else we know on this planet is carbon based that we
somehow have a prejudice, like we're special and unique, and we're the honest and good and true,
but silicon based consciousness is somehow an abomination, and we should prosecute it and shut
it down. Like, that's an interesting question. You know, and that's where Larry Page has been,
that that was the rift between him and Elon, where he was basically, you know, he accused Elon
famously of being a speciesist, you know, like you actually, you know, Sam Altman has said,
in fact, he came on right after us, giving a talk at Benningman, a couple of it was,
it was like six months before ChatGPT launched, so it was before he, you know, he, his, his sort of
recognizability had blown up to the level it is now. And he said, basically, there's only two
options for humans, we either become cyborgs, meaning we're sort of like supplemented augmented,
you know, but not just biological people anymore. Or we just become bootloaders to
silicon consciousness. We're just the little monkeys with thumbs that were just clever,
just clever enough to dig up all this stuff and heat hot fires, right, and make the silicon and
organize a bunch of buried fossil fuels starlight and energy to pump into the grid until, you know,
silicon consciousness could boot up and say, thanks very much, you clever little monkeys,
we're now going to eliminate you, you know, or enslave you, you know, Allah, Skybot and the
Matrix and everything else, or Skynet. Yeah, so, so I think there's a, you know, a very practical
and real question, which is, can we decouple, like what, you know, Gwyneth Paltrow, I think,
famously talked about conscious uncoupling, like for divorces that don't get nasty, right. And I think,
for all of us, there's a question of what is conscious decoupling look like. And in this
instance, it's, it's, can we decouple our carbon burn, right, from our quality of life?
And if we can, then we buy the time and the, and the options to architect a more inclusive,
more creative civilizational structure. And if we can't, then there's very real questions back to
the degrowth side of the argument, which is like, Hey, no, actually, look, look at us, we're, we're,
we're grossly obese, we're wildly unhappy. You know, Marie Kondo became a thing because there's,
you know, $23 billion storage industry, like we have way too much stuff. And we literally have
way too many calories hanging on our bodies, like clearly we've overshot some sweet spot,
right, for quality of life versus energy bone. Even though that that even that statement
seems surprisingly controversial, you'll still get slammed with being a degrowth or in a D cell,
and you'll be accused of wanting to deny some poor starving, you know, grandmother in Africa or
India, you know, denying her the right for her refrigerator and cell phone and air conditioning,
you know, you're like, no, no, no, that's not what we're talking about. Right. But we are saying,
is there, is there a mark we've overshot on calorie burn versus the quote unquote good life?
And can we, because many of the sort of eco optimists and Hannah Ritchie is the most recent,
she's at Oxford, and she just recently published a book, I think called It's Not the End of the
World, but she's a protege of Hans Rosling and Max Roser at the Our World in Data project.
You know, they're basically making the case of like, hey, guys, we can have everything.
Right. Everybody can have, all we need to do is just heat pumps and Teslas, right. And we don't
need to back off on any of the stuff we've got. Right. And also some, you know, rhetorical play
to that mother in Africa or India and giving her a chance of the good life too, which fundamentally
is their own socializations of Simon Cousnets, the Nobel Prize winning economist who came up with
GDP, but he also came up with something called the Cousnets curve. Right. And specific subset of
the Cousnets curve is the EKC, the environmental Cousnets curve. And you've definitely heard this
argument, even if you didn't know, that's what it was called. It was just basically that more
advanced societies pollute less. Right. So that basically all of Europe and the United States,
et cetera, we're on the happy far right side of the Cousnets curve. And we don't have, what would
we do, but we just, we're not still building as many dirty coal power plants. We don't have people
using diesel and kerosene heaters to heat their homes or we're going to cook their foods, et cetera,
et cetera. So basically Ikea and Volvos and Tesla's good, you know, in Western Europe and the US
and coal and kerosene, you know, in China and India bad. And the goal there, you silly humans,
right, is to get everybody up and over the Cousnets curve as fast as possible. And any
efforts to pump the brakes is wrong-headed, counterproductive, destructive and anti-human.
That's typically the argument. Right. Now, back to motivated reasoning, like we were talking about
Karl Hart, the functioning opioid user slash professor, arguing for cognitive liberty and
people getting to shoot up and do what they want to do. We are massively motivated to accept the
argument and that sort of the almost religious dogma of the Cousnets curve because it gives us
permission to keep doing exactly what we wanted to do anyway. Right. And the realities are there
have been quite a bit of, there's been quite a bit of kind of, you know, replication studies and
those kind of things on the Cousnets curve. It doesn't exist always. It's not a law of nature.
It was most pronounced at a very specific time and place, which was post World War II in Western
Europe and kind of the G20 countries, OECD, you know, North America, et cetera. It hasn't replicated
in a bunch of other countries like in Asia and other places in the global south that have attempted
it since then. And it's wildly variable and dependent on a bunch of conditions, including
are you at war or not? Like, like this war is not going to be eco-groovy ever. We burn a ton of
shit and we blow up a ton of shit and we don't care because it's war. Right. So there's a thousand
reasons why the Cousnets curve is not a law of nature, even though it's implicit in every single
pro-growth argument you pretty much ever hear. And up against it is Javon's paradox. And Javon's
paradox is when things get cheaper, you don't consume them cheaper, better, faster, cheaper.
You typically don't end up with a decrease in usage and consumption. You actually end up spiking
and incenting even more consumption. So as we've done all the wind and all the solar and all the
batteries and all the good groovy stuff, right, our carbon burn right now is higher than ever.
So it's basically Cousnets curve versus Javon's paradox. Right. Can we say enough is enough?
Can we buy some efficiencies and bank them or is every innovation going to then incent even further
extreme growth? And as a funny example of that, right, I was just reading this morning that the
Paris Olympics were set out to be super groovy, low carbon footprint. Right. And of course,
they're French and, you know, historically, weather's been really quite nice and mild and
temperate in Paris in the summers. So they didn't bake in air conditioning, right, to all of that,
to the athlete's village. And now they've just done a survey. Every single one of the G8 countries,
right, minus the host, are bringing in portable air conditioners for their athletes because they're
like, no, fuck that. We are people cannot be flopping around on damp sheets, you know, before
their race day, they need to be in 68 degrees. So you see this fascinating thing of like Andrew
Huberman, Tim Ferriss, biohacking optimization culture, right, you should sleep cold and dark
in 68 degrees, which is awesome, right. I'm a huge, huge fan of cold nights, but it's an incredible
privilege. And the fact that France attempted to make these Olympics as clean and groovy as possible,
but in that stand has run right up against carbon footprints and it would have been far on the irony
is they would have been far more eco groovy if they'd actually baked in air conditioning properly
into their builds versus having everybody run extension cords, you know, to generators,
to run little portable units. And so just back, that's back to coming alive versus staying alive,
those two arcs, coming alive, hey, 68 degrees is your optimum sleep temp to get your earring best
scores. And staying alive is, oh my gosh, we're burning so much fossil fuel, we're overheating the
earth. Wow, that was brilliantly said, I love that rant. And you just, you said so many things.
And I guess I, one thing I wanted to mention is the changing narratives.
Particularly, I can use movies as an example. I remember when I was young in the 90s, we had
movies that were about humans saving the world. It was like Armageddon, deep impact,
some huge comment was going to hit us and we had to stop it. Then probably about 10 years later,
I noticed a changing narrative where earth is is we've messed up earth too much, and we have to
leave and find some other home. I'm thinking of movies like interstellar. And that seemed to be
like a common theme. I started seeing that a lot more. And then maybe about 10 years later,
I noticed movies that were really pessimistic that humans weren't really a species worth
keeping going. So we were going to end humans now. And we're going to pass the torch on to
something new. And I noticed that theme. I'm also noticing a similar change in narrative with AI.
You know, for a long time, we had all these movies that made AI the villain.
That it was this huge existential threat that was going to take humans out.
Now I'm starting to see some interesting movies coming out, where AI is the good thing,
and it keeps society together. And the villain is somebody that comes and shuts that AI off,
and then causes chaos. And I thought, Oh, that's a really interesting like predictive programming
that you're trying to instill in us. And I guess it makes me think that there's some sort of anti
human agenda. You mentioned that there's this camp of people that think that we're like
accidents. And I believe that that anti human agenda is coming from that side.
Are you seeing it all like an anti human agenda?
Yeah, I mean, that's such a great question. And I'm a huge fan of tracking things in film,
exactly as you did. Like what's the pulse? What's the zeitgeist of our moment, right? And I certainly
noticed it with Marvel comics, and even Black Panther, where you had both Thanos and Killmonger,
right? As the anti heroes, they were the bad guys. But the bad guys were actually expressing
more of what was potentially kind of in the discourse or in our conversation than ever.
Like Thanos wasn't wrong. He's like, Look, my planet got trashed. I concluded, right, then in
order to save the universe had to kill half the people or something like that, right? Therefore,
the Thanos snap. And then he got ostracized and he became the super scary bad guy, right?
But he wasn't wrong. He's like, there's too many people for the carrying capacity of this ecosystem.
And I think we get wildly more efficient, but don't succumb to the Javons paradox of just
getting fatter and greedier and consuming more, right? But we actually get more efficient and
consume the same or less. But we're not doing that. So I've got to take drastic measures
to save things. But he's the villain. And you're like, Yeah, you had a point there.
And Killmonger, who I don't quite remember his entire narrative, but I do remember it was
fundamentally a sort of contemporary Malcolm X critique, right? There was that sense of like,
hey, colonialism, hey, racism, hey, all of these things, it's a stacked deck. And to play within
the system is kind of a fool's game. I need to break the system. And so you had many situations
where the critiques of the antihero or the villain are actually expressing some real things
for us to reckon with, whether or not we come down exactly where they did. It's just real issues
and topics to reckon with. So to your point about, are we flawed? Are we bad? You know, is there
something? I mean, to me, it seems very much like the, you know, the simple question is,
is the way forwards? Or do we need to backtrack? You know, is there somewhere where we fell from
grace? And therefore everything, if we keep going the way we've been going, we just sort of
do them to carry out our original sin. Or do we need to slam on the brakes and go back to a fork
in the road that we missed somewhere, right, to get back to righteousness, to get back to balance,
to get back to whatever. And you definitely see that with like Yuval Harari's book sapiens.
And I think most people were probably just sort of, you know, overwhelmed and bedazzled by,
you know, big history kind of take. So they just kind of took it all in. But he, you know, he smuggles
in some, you know, both totally familiar and some relatively controversial content, which is not
the least of which is we were super groovy. This is Marshall Salem's anthropology hypothesis back
in the late 60s of like, man, the hunter gatherer had like had more free time, right? It was egalitarian
societies. It was, it, we were, they were healthier. Everything was groovy. And then big time bad
farming came along. Right. And, and Harari just dusted that chest nut off and completely rebooted
it for sapiens. And everyone's like, Oh, yeah. And if people remember far enough back, there was a
very popular book in the 90s called Ishmael. And it was told by the point of view of a gorilla,
who was a talking gorilla. And he was basically like, like all of civilization is broken down into
levers and takers. And the levers are the groovy indigenous sustainable folks. And the takers are
the kind of, you know, beginnings of white Western capitalist patriarchy. And it resonated,
it sold millions of copies. And it was also, of course, grossly simplified. And those questions
though, right, you know, and even in our conversations around something as heart wrenching
and politically loaded as Gaza, and the Arab Israeli conflict right now, is being coded in
these terms. Right. So you're seeing the fact that on, you know, anti semitism has been a big
question, right? A big, a big issue both in US universities, like Columbia and Harvard and Penn,
as well as a bunch of other places, it's occupying tons of column inches. And it's also
completely gumming up our abilities to look clearly at a geopolitical crisis. And whose side
is on what and what's going on? Because, you know, one of the things just one second,
like, dude, I don't even know if I want to go into this. Do you want to? I mean, it's tight,
but it's just if we want it, it just depends on this is this is an absolute rats in
Islam. And I'm not going to be advocating a personal opinion on it, but I'm going to
potentially just unpack that whole tribalism, capitalism, colonialism thing.
That sounds great. Yeah. Is that all right? I mean, it sounds
like a great idea. Let's hear it. Okay.
So quite a bit of the, I mean, obviously, there's a tragic humanitarian situation
in Gaza right now and in Ukraine and in Darfur and in many places in the world. So Sub-Saharan
Africa is, you know, is on fire. There's all sorts of sadness and loss of life happening there.
Obviously, we've been tracking Ukraine for the last couple of years and most recently and
sort of explosively and controversially what's happening in Gaza.
Part of the support for Palestinians has been coded as Israelis as colonizers.
And that has then sort of activated the meme complex of social justice,
post-Marxist academic critiques in the United States. So when they get accused of anti-Semitism,
it's a relatively new kind of anti-Semitism, right? It's Jews as coded as white,
coded as colonizers, and colonizers are always bad and colonized,
a.k.a. Franz Fanon, you know, and Wretched of the Earth and Blackskins White Mask and other,
you know, other academics and thinkers in that space. And Mark Hughes and some others, which,
by the way, went straight into Ibram Kendi's philosophy of like, you know, you know, basically,
the cure to, you know, the, or the solution or response to racism is anti-racism directed at
the racists, right? So you ended up with some of those very tight arguments. So we end up with the
emergence of a new type of anti-Semitism, which is, which is coding Jews and specifically Israeli
Jews as white, as colonizers. Now, at the same time, which is very weird, because that's typically
that pro-Palestinian supporters coming from the progressive left, which has almost always been,
you know, huge supporters of ethnic diversity and inclusion. And then historically, the entire
American civil rights movement in the sixties was hand in glove Jewish college students and
Southern blacks. And that was a coalition and alliance. You know, and on the, on the far side,
on the right was the Ku Klux Klan, right, who famously, you know, were against reconstruction
and against black voting rights and participation and citizenship, but hot on the heels of that
hit list for the Klan were Catholics and Jews, right? So you're like, oh, wait a sec. Now,
how is it that now the American right seems to be the staunchest supporter of Israeli practices
and policies, right? When just 40 odd years ago, they were the ones who were most, most anti-Semitic
and that was a totally different anti-Semitism. That is Jews as other. So you've got Jews as
cultural other. And this is the protocol, you know, the protocols of the elders of Zion. This is
all the classic anti-Semitic tropes of Jews as separate Jews as not bowing down to our same
gods and the Jews as not, not loyal to the country or the nation that they live in, etc. It's all
the old school ethnic anti-Semitism, right? Where on the left, you have political anti-Semitism.
They're two completely different anti-Semitism, right? But they still end up in the chaos. And
then you think, okay, in that meme complex, right? What is the sort of elephant under the rug or
not even under the rug, right? With all coding or understanding of Jewishness. It's the Holocaust
and never again. Now you go onto the Palestinian side of the fence and you have,
you know, what's, what's the, what's the memetic anchor? 9-11 and ISIS. And all the way back to
the Crusades, right? But the idea of like, somewhere in there, you're having to respond to and either
accept or reject the notion of barbarism, of which October the 7th, tragically and sadly,
with Hamas's activities, reinvigorated. And now you end up with, with Palestinians coded as
colonized, therefore always just in their reactions against, oh, but what about Muslim
barbarism? Samuel Huntington, clash of civilizations, Sam Harris, right? With his railing against
Islam and saying, hey, you know, Islam didn't experience a Protestant, the equivalent of a
Protestant Reformation. They're basically a medieval death cult. You know, Sam Harris has, has been
quite adamant on some of those points. So you can kind of see both the meme map and how the
different characters in the plots are getting coded. And it's very, very confusing because we're
all running different scripts. And so we're not even seeing the same movie anymore. And therefore,
coming to any kind of humanitarian company, you know, and or, you know, governmental common ground
is damn near impossible. And the same thing is even happening in the environmental movement. I
occasionally have advised Extinction Rebellion, which was kind of, which came up with Greta Thunberg
and some of those others, they've led some of the most effective protests in 2018 to 2020.
And speaking with one of their founders, they're like, oh, well, you know, post George Floyd,
post quarantine, post all of those, those sort of social justice awakenings collectively, they're
like, we're not going to do anything until we've decolonized Africa. I mean, I'm paraphrasing,
but it was fundamentally that. And I just thought, oh, no, you know, like, you're one,
like, you're done, you're dead in the water, like, like, like, like, you've now got way too many
issues, you're just trying to solve the world and tire pain and all injustices everywhere,
while the clock is ticking on, you know, carbon and anything else. But what's really interesting to
me is, you know, and this is somewhat of a theme of our conversation, which is waking up and paying
attention to the enormity scope and scale of the world's suffering, the consequences of our
extended actions, and the potential grief of coming to terms with kind of the triaging of what's
possible and what's not. And what is delicate, fragile, wounded, but vital to protect, preserve
meant. What is kind of already done, it's cooked. So just basically cut our losses
and don't burn more time trying to fix something or prop something up that is fundamentally doomed.
And then what is new or different or better that we ought to with absolute clarity and speed
get to making or building soon. So in that, right, in our civilizational calculus,
you're kind of like, how did we end up here? And where did we go wrong? I actually had this
thought watching Darren Aronofsky, the director's moat, I don't know if it's his most recent,
but it was a recent documentary he did called The Territory, which is all about a relatively
uncontacted tribe in the Amazon. And it was just literally like this patch of rainforest that was
their territory. And it was shrinking and shrinking and shrinking and getting chopped on all sides.
And the first thing that blew me away about is that it was billed as here is this self-documentary
by a sort of an uncontacted tribe. And so I was like, okay, this is going to be neat. This is going
to be like that Robert Neera movie, The Mission with the Guarani or some other tribe from centuries
ago. And it wasn't the first thing was they were all wearing like O'Neill and Bill Among and Nike
t-shirts. And you're like, oh, sweet Jesus, like there they are wearing, of course they would dress
up in their ceremonial gob for a video shoot or doing a ceremony. But like fundamentally they're
kicking it in flip flops and branded Western logo t-shirts. And you're like, oh my God,
like that all reaches. And then they interviewed the white settlers that were being aided and
abetted by Bolsonaro's policies. And they were interviewing the younger generation of chiefs,
their chief, their newly appointed chief was like a 30 year old. And he was online and tech savvy,
and he was part of the one who was shooting and telling their stories. So super interesting,
kind of intersections of cultures. And nobody interviewed on either side of that situation
thought that they had any chance of turning back the tide of logging, settlement,
cattle farming, ranching, deforestation, you know, and cultural assimilation, assimilation. And even
last week, there was a New York Times article on a do-gooder white Christian woman, you know,
for whatever it was, from Kansas or Oklahoma, who had written a check to get 14 starlings
delivered to a remote tribe. And the whole hope was this could let them know when bad folks were
coming, whether it was oil or rubber or gas or for ranching and protect themselves, they could
coordinate, they could have better medical care, all the normal things. What happened is it completely
broke their society in six months flat. The kid, the men go all got addicted to porn. The teenagers
got stuck on their phones and stopped coming to meetings and stopped coming observing ceremonies
and the grandparents were scattered and fragmented. And at the end of all that, they're like,
and please don't take it away. So that got me deeply thinking, I'm like, Oh my God,
what is this sort of mollic notion? What is this giant, all devouring, all consuming beast that
just seems to be unstoppable? And how on earth do we reckon with it? And what occurred to me is
that, you know, capitalism is arguably one of the most efficient means of organizing matter
and energy that humans have ever devised in the simplest sense that it just continues to outcompete
all the other options. So you have to be like, okay, there's some there, there, however, but on
the other hand, look at the social, cultural, ecological cost is clearly not totally right.
Like there's something also deeply off about it. In what does it relentlessly keep doing?
And that's when I began to kind of inquire into, Oh, what is the, what is the calculus?
What is our civilizational calculus? What is the math problem or the math equation
that drives all of our behaviors? And what are we missing? You know, is there something in this
equation that it works, but it's missing key elements. And I began to wonder, and this goes
back to Gaza and the questions of antisemitism and colonialism and coding as whiteness. This goes
back to the environmental movements, and we have to decolonize the world and all of these elements.
And how are we fighting? And why do we keep over consuming like hungry ghosts? So it felt to me
like there were three major sort of phases. And this is in, this is kind of in order as to how
they unfolded historically, but none of them have ever unfolded in isolation from the others.
So they keep building on each other. So the first is tribalism, then colonialism, then capitalism.
And each of them has sort of, you know, natural intuitive logic as to why they exist and also
problems. And if we can figure out and solve for their problems, we might, might have a chance at
a slightly more healthy and sustainable civilization. So the first and most obvious is tribalism.
And its externality, the thing it doesn't include, right, is others. It's us versus them.
So it's a sort of, it's a social externality. There's the us, and we are literally quite often,
I mean, so many indigenous peoples own name for themselves. It's just the people, you know,
it's usually like in history books, it becomes, you know, they get called where the, whether it's
the Sue or the Iroquois or whomever it might be, it's typically their enemies call them that names
or the ones that became scouts or, you know, or collaborators with the Westerners get to name
the people. But the people is almost always the people, it's us. And we are right and good and
true. And everybody who's a part of our community is entitled to all the rights of our society and
how we operate. But if you live across the river, if you worship different gods, if you look funny,
talks funny, smell funny, right, you're them. And you are not the people and you are not like we
are not obliged to treat you the way we treat each other at all. And this is the barbarian,
this is the heretic, this is the apostate, right, this is the pagan, whatever it might be. So we get
to in the game of energy credits of like how do we move through this world and secure enough
resources to keep us alive and thriving, right, we don't have to extend that to you. We are not,
we are not the other's keeper, we are just our brother's keeper. So the externality is us versus
them. Right. And it works. It's literally from a mother parent and mother child bond to family bonds
to clan, you know, to tribe to clan to band to tribe to nation. That's how we do it. And tribalism
these days has been politicized into nation nationalism. Right. So it's still that same
through line, but it's ancient, ancient, ancient. The next is colonialism. Right. And colonialism
you could basically just say is asymmetric trade at the point of a sword. Right. So when you've got
tribes us versus them, there's still kind of thems that are closer to us than the then total
wildcards total barbarians. And there are neighbors, right, those are bloodlines, those are
intermarriage, those are geographic proximity, there's all those things and we trade with them.
All right. And you've got some cool stuff and we might specialize or we live closer to the
coast and you guys live in the forest or whatever it might be. And through extended trading networks
that are mostly balanced and reciprocal, we exchange goods and services and again, you know,
marriages into intermarriage and relationships and kinship ties. So that's trade. And that is
an enormous layer of human cultural extension and vitality and vibrancy. It raises the quality
of life of everyone who participates in it. Right. I mean, there are there are there are
examples of cowrie shells in the Great Plains, you know, that have made it thousands of miles
through trade networks to there. There's Pemicon, which is a sort of basically a super duper
trail mix with either bear fat and grease or salmon and berries and things done in the Pacific
Northwest that also made it to the Lakota and other and the Comanche and other places. You're
like, oh my gosh, sir, like the world has always been wildly interconnected, the Silk Route, all
of that kind of stuff. And but then when it ceases to be reciprocal and it becomes asymmetrical
and enforced by force, that's when you get colonialism. And the externality there is here,
AKA the country with the power or the tribe with the power versus there, we're going to chop down
your trees, we're going to hunt your beaver, we're going to enslave your people, we're going to dig
up your gold and silver and shiny things and we're going to take them from there over to here.
Right. And it's that great line at the end of the godfather, which was Honor de Balzac,
but he said behind every great fortune lies a theft. And that's pretty much the bumper sticker
for colonialism. Right. And even to this day, where whether it's the Elgin marbles or various,
you know, the British Royal museums are stocked with loot from other countries and these other
countries are now self aware enough and politically active enough. And in case they're like, we'd
like our shit back, you know, and James Cameron, not James Cameron, sorry, David Cameron,
and other British politicians have been like, yeah, well, I mean, if we gave it all back,
we'd have nothing in our museum. So we're not giving we're not giving it back. And you're kind
of like, oh, my gosh, that is really as pronounced an example of here versus there externalities
as you could think of. And then the final one is capitalism. This kind of gets us back to
Aronofsky and the territory and sort of what is this giant all consuming machine. And capitalism,
its externality is now versus later. We will always take the profit now this month, this quarter,
this year, we will always over fish over hunt over log over farm over grays, because to extract the
profit now, more to the point to not extract the profit now is goes against everything we believe,
including legally enforceable penalties, right, Milton Friedman, the economist famously advanced
first in a New York Times article, and then in like 1971 or 72 of just like the sole purpose of
a company should be just to maximize shareholder profits. And that was just him thinking out
loud. It was an op ed in the magazine on a Sunday. And it wasn't until like 1985 or 1986,
where the Revlon shampoo company was going to be hostile, he bought out and they and their
board members tried to sue to prevent it because they're like, we're going to be bought out by this
cheap ass five and dime store that's just going to gut us for parts and ruin our brain and we want
to block the sale. And so mid 80s was when it actually got enshrined in federal law. No, no,
actually, Friedman was right. sole responsibility of shareholders is to maximize profits. So that
opened up the whole Gordon Gekko greed is good 1980s, like with the hostile takeovers and leverage
buyouts and all of that. It also forced John Mackie to sell Whole Foods to Amazon, because he
was getting he was being strong on by a venture capital fund that earned 8% earned 8% of Whole
Foods and was going to basically gut them for parts because all of the inefficiencies in their
business like supporting organic farmers and having healthy policies for their for their
employees, all of that was just wasn't was not justifying. And that's how he ended up having
to sell to Amazon. And it's also what prompted the Twitter board to accept Elon Musk's wildly
overpriced offer for Twitter, even though they were deeply concerned as to what he was going to
do about it, because they because basically they were as members as members of the board,
they were fiduciarily responsible and subject to being sued. If they hadn't accepted that wildly
overpriced offer for Twitter, which if you were an old school lover of Twitter, and you really
cared for and cherished the way Jack Dorsey and the others had built the thing and what that
community and cultural, you know, you might have been right to see this as coming destruction.
But they had to say yes, no matter what their personal feelings were. So capitalism is always
eating your seed corn, right? The idea of like typically right farmers will always want to save
corn to then plant for the next harvest. If you eat your seed corn because you're too hungry in
the winter and you didn't plan right, then you've got nothing to plant the next year and then you're
doubly triply out of luck. So if you take a look at those three things, tribalism, the externality
is them at the expense of us, or us, sorry, us at the expense of them. Colonialism is there,
or Jesus Christ. Colonialism is here at the expense of there. And capitalism
is now at the expense of later. So a tidy integration of those things is to say how
would we fix the math so that our civilizational calculus actually spits out healthy, sustainable,
equitable answers is to say instead of us versus them, right, it's everyone.
Instead of here versus there, it's everywhere. And instead of now versus later, it's everyone.
So if we built our civilizational calculus, instead of having all these externalities,
right, that other people and other places and other times have to get stuck with the bill,
right, get bankrupted, if we could all settle on everyone everywhere, everyone
is how we choose to make decisions going forward. We would have a shot at making the most of the
tools, the very deep structural cultural tools we have of tribalism, trade, right, and commerce
and innovation and bundle them together in ways that don't keep spitting out pathological or dysfunctional
answers. That was beautifully presented. And once again, I'm going to have to review what you
just said and think on it over and over again. You have an amazing way of just putting these
very complex ideas together. And I'm scribbling down notes so fast that my paper is catching
on fire here. But I'm wondering, can these three levels, the colonization, the capitalism and the
tribalism, could that be solved on an individual level? Or is this something that a third party
system needs to come in and fix? Well, I mean, gosh, that is such a massive question. I think
the simplest is there's so much inertia behind all of these things that individual change is
sort of necessary, but not sufficient. And that is, and again, in the same way that that
environmental cosnets curve, the idea of like, oh, the way forward is faster because, you know,
advanced societies pollute less, but we really kind of want to just hear that so we don't scrutinize
it too much as to how it's consistently true is that notion. The idea that change comes from within,
and if I want to heal the world, I have to work first to heal myself, becomes an incredible bit
of motivated reasoning to just shove my head all the way up my ass in a bunch of narcissistic
personal growth and self-help, which is without a doubt just a part of neoliberal capture of
fragmented, isolated consumer individuals scratching all the itches that get agitated
via the constant barrage of marketing messages of quick fixes and easy hits and utopian outcomes.
So in that level, it is sort of again, yes, of course, if you come from hate, you will so hate,
you know, you plant ice, you're going to harvest wind, right? So there is some element of interior
change. And if you look at the largest, most, you know, high impact change agents, at least in the last,
you know, few decades from Nelson Mandela to Gandhi to King to kind of the usual suspects,
they all were coming from a fundamentally different frequency than the tribal people they led.
And Malcolm X as well, right? And Fred Hampton, there's a number of instances where
that those leaders were clearly vibrating, you know, on a different frequency than the
center of gravity of the people they inspired and fundamentally led. So a huge, you know,
hat tip and acknowledgement to the power of transformational consciousness and its ability
to set a tone that otherwise a bunch of disorganized, fractious primates would never get to in a
million years. I often think of it like we used to live in Santa Barbara and there was this
historic Sunday sunset drum circle on the beach. And our music teacher, who was this brilliant
Sarod and Satara player, he and his crew of Tabla and Gembe and Conga players would often be there
and they would be the core of the drum circle. And you'd go on those nights and that drum circle
was tear the roof off funky, right, with hundreds of people like huge energy pulsing. And the thing
was amazing. And then they would be on tour. And you go down there on that weekend. And there was
nobody who was deeply, deeply talented gifted in the center of that drum circle. And it would be a
noodley, mushy hippie shit show. And so you do kind of think like, Oh, who's the metronome? Who's
the timekeeper? Because it's far easier. Like it takes a field to hold a field. It takes somebody's
coherent energy to then bring everybody into that. It's far easier to follow a good beat
than it is to hold one yourself if you're not trained. The flip side is, is that in order for
us to sort of quote unquote, fix at a societal level, or at a global level, the other element.
So tribalism is just, you know, basically after oxytocin, you know, which bonds mother to child
and, and, you know, tribe to tribe, everything and everything is optional. So all of our humanist
elements, all of our efforts to say, Hey, that person on the other side of the world that I
don't know, that doesn't worship the same cause, that doesn't speak the same language or eat the
same foods, and I'll never meet again, is entitled to something intrinsically human as am I? Like
that is an incredibly fragile experiment. And it is not encoded into our DNA, into our biology,
into our neurochemistry, or even in any level of our survival and printing. Like I mean mine.
Now, and next is our survival and printing. So everyone, everywhere, everyone is Bodhisattva
level awareness, and it's fragile. But as far as like helping like colonialism, you know,
the idea of extraction of the point of a sword, that can for sure be, you know, quote unquote,
fixed in the simple sense of acknowledging the originator of natural resources, goods, and services,
and cutting them into the economic deal. I mean, the fact that in Nigeria, they are a net exporter
of fossil fuels that then get refined, piped to Europe, refined and then sold back to them
at a profit. You're like, that's, that's horribly, horribly wrong. And Sierra Leone, there was a
very cool TED talk by a woman from Sierra Leone, being like, we're often, you know, labeled as one
of the poorest countries in Africa, et cetera. We're not. And she talked about, you know, their
mining assets, the diamonds, like all of these things, like here's our natural resources, we're
we actually massively gifted in those terms, we've just been totally exploited. So fixing
colonialism simply by not allowing rapacious multinational companies in cahoots with the IMF
and World Bank and debt leveraged, you know, extortion, setting up terms and conditions that
just siphon off natural resources. Let's just start with that. Never mind what would one do with 500
years of reparations, like that's probably politically, economically feasible, you know,
not feasible to sort in any meaningful way. But doing right by folks right now could be. And let's
start with that. And then with capitalism, and Daniel Schmackenberger, Daniel Schmackenberger
and I have actually had this conversation, because so many of his critiques lead to, oh,
this is a self terminating system. Therefore, you have to get politicians to stop doing it.
And I'm like, well, what politician in their right mind could say anything that you've just said,
and not instantly be branded as a Marxist and instantly lose their term and office,
and therefore all their access to influence, you know, so it would just be it would be career
suicide, and then they wouldn't be on team good guy being able to affect any change. So we have to
have something that splits the difference. And my personal feeling is that saying, you know,
like the rallying cry of free the market, free the market. Capitalism is a great idea. It's just
never been tried, right? It's always been monopolies, rent seeking, crony capitalism, subsidies,
you know, like, like whether it's lobbyists or whatever it is, like, like it's that we've never
actually had that, you know, classroom ideal of an economic a free love a frictionless
exchange of good services with with dynamic pricing reflecting needs and values and all
the things that you hear about an econ class have never actually been tried. So let's do that,
let's free the market. And that's kind of your judo move of getting both conservatives and
progressives on the same team, because you're not trying to break the entire system, you're just
saying let's actually do the thing we said we were going to. Let's start with let's let's not
even worry about universal basic income. Let's just have everybody pay their fair share.
So whatever the tax code is right now, it could be wildly asymmetrical, it could be regressive,
it could be a bunch of things, but right now there's so many loopholes and so many exceptions
for the wealthiest folks, let's just have everybody pay their fair share. Let's just start with that.
Let's abolish the 14th amendment, right, because the 14th amendment, which most people remember
from high school is like, Oh, that's the one that freed the slaves, isn't it? That's a good one.
You're like, Yeah, but weirdly, bizarrely, 20 years later, Leland Stanford, who founded Stanford
University, and his his railroad, his lawyers, trying to wiggle out of some taxes, completely
made up a complete fabrication that the 14th amendment really meant guaranteeing the rights
of personhood to corporations as well. It's the craziest story you've ever heard because
the Supreme Court has seen has judged like 280 cases or something since then,
defending the right of corporations as persons, and only like 30 on actually the rights of Black
folks as citizens. So it hijacked the entire thing, and has given us all of 20th and 21st
century law on how much political power corporations have. Right, so you've got to
banish, abolish that and the Friedman doctrine that the sole and exclusive responsibility
of corporations is to extract maximum shareholder profit. If you don't do those things,
you're dead in the water, right? Because the ratchets all go towards a governance system,
a capitalization table, legally enforceable incentives, and court of law. I mean, there's
situations now where because of that notion of corporations as persons, there are in
international courts, nations are being sued by multinational corporations for daring to enact
environmental policies that protect their streams, their rivers, their watersheds, their topsoil,
and their people at the expense of maximum optimized profitability for the multinational
corporation and the multinationals are winning. So you have situations like that and you're like,
okay, that's a stitch up. That's not actually, doesn't matter how many do-gooders, doesn't
matter how many, you know, Twitter campaigns or Instagrams, you know, social, you know, click,
click and click and like, and follow the activists. None of that can work if the rule of law is so
hijacked and compromised by these perverse incentives that are now legally enshrined.
So back to your original question, can this be done on an individual level versus on a collective
level? For sure, you know, we have to come from, you know, love, light, consciousness, inclusion,
hopefully some joy, hopefully some play, right? Some sense of this is worth doing together, right?
And there are absolutely technical, legal, structural conditions that until those are
dislodged, right, they will, they will block and undermine even the best of intentions.
That's a brilliant point. And I guess I lean more towards the individual side because I've
lately, I've lost so much faith in our institutions and our governments,
and I've seen the power of what an individual change can have on the world, you know, you
change yourself, you change the world. And so like, to the tribalism, to the capitalism, colonialism
on each of those levels, like, if the individual says, hey, I'm not, we're not going to support
any products that have this chemical in it, we're done. The market is going to have to adjust,
right? I mean, look how many people want organic food now, and are rejecting the pesticides.
There's a huge demand for products that don't have plastic anymore, because people are now aware of
how harmful phthalates are to our endocrine systems. You know, it's, it's because people are
getting more aware that it's putting this demand on the companies, and the market has to adjust to
that, that individual epiphany. And so you can apply that to colonialism and tribalism, like,
if you realize that we're all one, and that anything that I do to hurt another person
will hurt me in the end, and that by destroying the forest, I'm really just destroying myself.
Those deep understandings can kind of make tribalism and colonialism deteriorate, I think.
Maybe that's just like a, you know, that's a very utopian vision. But I do feel like I've seen
people who have become, I guess, enlightened, not to sound cliche. And I've seen how much they,
they step away from things that are harming the world, and how much good they can do,
just one person, and how that spreads throughout a community.
Yeah, absolutely. And to me, that almost lives in a, that lives in another and distinct and very,
very important category, which is, and it's what I literally, it was the central thesis of the last
book I wrote, Recapture the Rapture, which was, hey, look, all of our technical tactical solutions
probably aren't going to pencil out, right? We're trying, we're bargaining, we're hoping,
we're innovating, we're delaying, we're stalling, we're, you know, like all of it, like, it's just,
it's a shit show, and the math doesn't work. But, right, there is this thing that happens
once in a blue moon, and we talked about King Mandela Gandhi, but there's a lot of others,
right? Where singular isolated acts of human love, creativity, and courage. I mean,
Banksy is another example, like Banksy is just wildly on point almost all the time,
and he's an anonymous artist that just does street art. But he's always like, hey, he's kind of like
this cosmic prankster trickster, and he makes millions of humans think differently, right?
Think about Tankman in Tiananmen Square, right, where he just stood in front of the tanks, he
had shopping bags, he was tired, he just kind of come home from work, he didn't plan it, right?
He's just like, fuck this, right? And then he was whisked off, spirited away, like no one knows
what happened to him afterwards, and yet we all know who we're talking about, Tankman in Tiananmen
Square, right? The cellist of Sarajevo in the midst of the Yugoslavian Civil War with all sorts of
atrocities, in the bummed out rubble of Sarajevo, he just sat down on a chair and just played
every night at sunset, and the snipers on both sides didn't kill him.
Everybody was yearning for that glimpse of humanity, of beauty, in the midst of all of that
horror, right? And he changed the tide of things, however slightly. You know, the example I always
go back to is, you know, the band, you know, the band played on, on the Titanic, right? A string
quartet who didn't scrap for those remaining seats in the lifeboats. They let the women and children
go first, realized their goose was thoroughly cooked, and didn't just succumb to being panicky
scared people. They said, what is our Dharma? What are we here to do? What are we given our lives to?
And why were we here on this ship in the first place? It was because we are the musicians.
And so, you know, Buddhism 101, seek refuge in the Dharma.
They sought refuge in it, and the tune they played was, nearer my God to thee,
right? So at a time where they could have succumbed to self-interest, where they could have
been kicking and screaming, they could have been just in survival instincts. They instead
elevated up. And we might not remember their names, but we remember what they did,
and we tell those stories. You know, the more kind of agro macho one would be, you know,
King Leonidas on the Spartans at Thermopylae, right? Against the Persian hordes, you know,
and today, today we fight in the shade, right? Because there's that many arrows coming our way,
like those acts of courage and heroism. Gandhi called it Satyagraha, which means truth force,
when it made its way back to the United States via Howard Thurman to Martin Luther King, it became
soul force. And MLK even mentions that in his I Have a Dream speech. He says, well, we can meet,
when we can meet physical force through the majestic heights of soul force,
right? Then we have a chance to turn things on a dime. And so that thought being is like, well, what
if what if we could scale soul force? What if there are ways to have more humans, some tiny
critical mass of people on Erica Chenoweth at the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard has
famously pegged that at three and a half percent of a population, whether that's still true or
deeply true, or you know, will be will be true playing forward, don't know. But let's just say
we're not there yet. So let's get there and see how it looks from there. Right? What is the possibility
of three and a half percent of humans accessing their own truth force, their own soul force,
and then making just sending out that EMP of humanity, of courage, of truth,
and just bearing witness to it and then like and then let the chips fall, right? It's not that those
guys were fiddling on the Titanic in the hopes that the Coast Guard was going to hear them and
pick them up. Right? They're like soul force is is my life is forfeit. None of us get out of here
alive. I already I know this and accept it. Now what? Right? Now what? And that is where the beginning
of something profound could happen. I mean, you know, and on a very tactical example,
like a counterfactual, because you're like, Oh, three and a half percent of people being super
groovy. Is that really going to change things? You're like, Well, actually, look at what happens
when a tiny percentage of people are super shitty. So our friend Tristan Harris and Azar Askin at the
Center for Humane Tech, they did the social dilemma that big documentary on social media ills
found research that was basically saying that 90% of all social media of all generated social media
that all of us read is created by 5% of the people on the furthest extremes. So 90% of social media
is created by 10% of the humans, you know, half and half on either side of the political spectrum.
And a subsequent study down in Australia found that those folks that are on the far extremes
score off the charts for dark triad personality types and authoritarianism. So narcissism,
sociopathy, Machiavellianism and authoritarianism are the 10% of the humans generating 90% of what
we all read and view, which is absolutely insane because how many people scroll through their
social media are like, I hate humans. We're screwed. You know, I don't want to be a part of this
civilization or this society. It's a totally logical conclusion. It's just that it's not
the 90% of the humans in the middle. 90% of the humans in the middle want a chance to live
a better life than their parents had and give a better life to their kids and die in their sleep
surrounded by their grandchildren. Like that has always been what most of us want.
And so breaking through those false barriers, those algorithmically optimized notions of
separation and frustration and getting back to mutuality and connection where we see each
other's humanity and we recognize that there's something worth defending and protecting here
does feel super important. So to your question, like surely, hey, is there something about the
individual? It absolutely has to be done at this level. And there is something asymmetrically
different than I'm just going to yoga and using my breath work app and my headspace and my ice
bath. And this is all about me as a co-opted neoliberal capitalist consumer of late stage
capitalism, right? Like that version doesn't go anywhere. That is a that is a insidious
stall and diversion tactic of the people with the greatest privilege from their social civic
political responsibilities. But stepping into the deeper prospect of what happens if a bunch of us,
some critical mass of us actually access our soul force and take a stand and say enough is enough.
I am here to bear witness to the least of my brothers and sisters,
you know, on behalf of goodness, truth and beauty for as long as it takes.
That feels like a game with playing.
Absolutely. And I love how this conversation just flowed naturally. We we I haven't even gotten
to my first question that I wrote down. No way. But but I love how this has just been an organic
flow. The questions have just come naturally. But I think this leads into the first question
that I wrote down. I've seen a incredible rise in cynicism. And I spent a lot of my time reading
comments online. And it seems like that must suck. You know, I know it's a bad habit, but
a lot of the comments I get on my channel are very genuine. You know, they're not not trolls.
So I take most of them seriously into consideration. And, you know, I like,
I get a lot of positive comments on my channels. I think it's rare, because a lot of the comments,
a lot of the feedback is positive. But I've just just scrolling online, I see so much cynicism.
And just even in the titles of videos, everything's kind of like, let's take something that
most people think is good. And let's talk about how it's actually terrible.
And I feel like there's so many takes like, if you want to make a viral video that gets a lot of
attention, you just pick something that a lot of people think to be true. And then you say how
it's false. You know, if I made a video right now that said AI is actually past its prime, it's peaked.
Most people think that AI is advancing super fast. But if I make a take that's
the opposite to what most people think, even if it's completely unfounded,
that take is going to get a lot of attention. And I think a lot of content creators have
kind of figured out that hack. And so they're just, the internet is flooded with these
contrarian takes, you know what I'm saying? And I think it's led to people not knowing what's
true anymore. And the natural response is just cynicism. And cynicism has gotten confused with
intelligence. Like, even in movies, if you see somebody who's like, happy, go lucky, we think,
oh, that person must be ignorant. And the person that's always like, very skeptical is seen as
the intelligent one. So like this cynicism has been connected with intelligence and people,
their natural response now is just to, okay, let me just not trust anything. Let me just
think that everything's bad. Have you also noticed this rise in cynicism?
Yeah, so I mean, the symbol answer is, is for sure. It does feel like there is a spike in,
you know, nothing is true. Nothing is trustworthy. Even the thing, even our sacred cows,
that we used to sort of think we're up and above that, like Abraham Lincoln and Thomas Jefferson
and George Washington will actually turned out they were slaveholders or misogynists or something,
you know, something along those lines, like, is there any one, is there any thing? And again,
even back to, you know, enlightenment values, or the American experiment, you know, or whatever it
might be, there's somebody taking a sledgehammer or a chisel to all of our, you know, monuments,
to all of the edifices to the things that we have, we used to potentially, you know,
accept more at face value. And we had spoken a little bit earlier about how things are getting
exponentially better and exponentially worse at the same time. And that's overwhelming.
So at the same time, that just, you know, everything from the complexities and the
consequences of our current moment, which is just sort of objective, plus the massively
accelerated amount of information we all have access to through our super smart smartphones,
you know, constantly bombarding us at all times. And I read something that
basically a Sunday edition of the New York Times, just as thick as that is,
was as much information as a monk in the Middle Ages consumed in his lifetime.
And we're getting that before breakfast every day. You know, it's, it's, it's, it's
a certain bananas, right? So at the same time that we have this huge spike in both volume and
consequence of the information we're consuming, we've had a loss in our familiar landmarks.
And you can kind of say, you know, sort of meaning 1.0 was that notion of organized religion. And
that was your sacred scriptures and your priests and your community rabbis, you know, imams in
your community, they told you what was what they told you where you lived in the world and your
universe and how to be and what to do, et cetera, et cetera. And if there was something weird,
like a comet or a meteor or, you know, or a strange happening, you went to them and they
told you what to think about it. So that was our overwhelming and dominant source of information
until the last three, 400 years of increasingly the advent of modern liberalism and not meaning
Democrat, but just meaning that the Enlightenment experiment, the combinations of science,
of empiricism, of rule of law, of civil liberties and all of those kinds of things. And those are
the institutions like everything from the CDC and the WHO, right, to the World Bank, to the
United Nations, to, you know, Yale and Harvard and MIT and all of our institutions, to McKinsey
and Goldman Sachs, right, like all of those kind of icons. And, you know, for the first time ever,
we've had the collapse in both of those pillars at the same time that we're having this exponential
complexity. So we're more in need of trusted and trustworthy voices to tell us which ends up
at the same time that they've both collapsed. So the roof is kind of caved in on our separation of
church and state, kind of modern liberal secular societies. And into that vacuum, you're getting
people pulled to fundamentalism on one side, which is like, it's too big, it's too scary out there,
just give me something, anything to sink my teeth into, believe a rock to cling to, just tell me
what that might be. And on the other side, nihilism, like I give up, this is hopeless. There is no
there, there, we are just in a cyclic creation and destruction, there is no higher purpose or power,
there is no times arrow direction to where we're going. This is just more of the same shit. So
your naming of the cynicism, you can make a case, either you put that in that in the nihilism bucket,
it's just a flavor of that, right, or you could say that's somehow hanging out in the middle,
you know, where you are sort of perversely incented to kick down anything anyone believes,
right, because you have no faith that there's something more to be had. And cynicism and
hedonism, I think, often pair together, right? If there's nothing, if there's no other better
game to play, and I can go around kicking down everybody's sandcastles, then the only thing
left to do is for me to get mine, right, seek pleasure, avoid pain, you know, and that might
even be clicks and likes and trolling, that might be pleasurable to me. So, you know, and so that's
not just sort of an abstract theoretical model, right, is it predictive? Does it help its mind?
You're like, oh, look what's happening with fundamentalism, like not only are we seeing a
resurgence in that in organized religions, but you're seeing some weird ass hybrids, you're seeing,
you know, there was just a piece this about three months ago on the rise of orthobros,
right, which was Eastern Orthodox Christian, you know, sort of Joe Rogan, podcaster, guns and
steroid MMA guys, getting into Eastern Orthodoxy in Houston. So a huge, and they've even taken
over the Eastern Orthodox communities in Houston, Texas. And a colleague of ours, Isabella, Tara
Isabella Burton, who wrote a great book called Strange Rights, which is kind of everything from
Burning Man and Soul Cycle to all these weird expressions of religiosity in the contemporary
world. She's written in the New York Times about the the basically the return to extreme
orthodoxies in Catholic like folks like young people, millennials are going in New York City
are getting pulled into like Latin masses. They're like the older and the sort of more
code based. And the more tell me what to do, the more I'm going to get off on it. It's almost
like a sort of existential kink. It's a little bit like being a submissive in BDSM. It's like
I've just spent a decade all about me, clicking on insert posts, going to yoga retreats in Bali,
doing medicine ceremonies, like learning my attachment styles, you know, da da da healing
my ancestral trauma. And it is fucking exhausting. And I don't feel any better off at all. And all I
want is somebody to tell me what to think and what to believe. So you have even that from like
the progressive kind of New Age self help left, you have a return to people are just, you know,
and Russell Brand converted to Christianity. We have several other mutual friends that have
just recently come out and sort of stated their claim of returning to Christianity. Jordan Peterson
has been a voice of right kind of traditionalist classical values and meaning. Here's what's her
name. I hear some Ali, I think she might have a first name, but it's it's Nile Ferguson's wife
and partner. She very publicly recently left Islam altogether as her family of origin faith,
and converted to Christianity. So you're seeing, you know, and then throw in wing nut conspiracy
theories like QAnon. So those are all expressions of heightened fundamentalism. You're like,
yep, okay, that was the model seemed like if we don't have solid pillars to hold up our consensus
reality together, we're all fragmenting and fracturing. And then the nihilism side, you're
seeing that, you know, I think 50, maybe it was, I think it was 54% of Gen Z surveyed in the United
States by Pew Research Foundation concluded that they would they would find a military dictatorship
preferable to representative democracy. And you're like, whoa, okay, that's that's not something
that's been around for a long time. The recent European parliamentary elections have shown a
significant rightward shift. And it's getting into the kind of burn it all down territory,
where people are not, you know, you would used to think that like two parties didn't really matter
which side you were on, everybody would agree to play by the rules of this great nation we were
founded on or whatever, you know, or European cultures and governance traditions. And now you're
having many, many more people in the hashtag burn it all down category. This is marabund. This is
corrupt. This never should have happened in the first place, or it was a good idea, but it's
fatally tainted now. And the best thing to do is just bulldoze the whole thing. This is not a fixer
rapper. Right. This is buy it for the lot and scrape this thing and start again, C steadying
cryptocurrencies, all those guys have breakaway civilization ideas. And then how's it just
happening for most people, for most people that are pulled into the nihilism. It's just personally
and psychologically and emotionally overwhelming. So those folks aren't on Twitter, and they're
not hatching, you know, they're not hatching plans for breakaway societies or, you know,
or following Steve Bannon to some fascist retreat in the Italian Alps, right, those people are just
succumbing to diseases of despair, addiction, depression, anxiety, suicide. And so that is
what we're seeing at this point. And so the question is, is into that vacuum, we would expect
to see all sorts of cultic communities arise. Right. Give me a charismatic, demagogic leader,
give me someone who's pulling the juice, right, who has a certainty that is persuasive or compelling.
And that can promise me that all that I'm seeing and experiencing right now isn't,
isn't wrong or bad or my fault. There's someone or something to blame. There's always something
or someone to blame because that's the tribalism DNA. Right. And we can get to a happily ever after
if you only follow me, join us, do the thing, which is a rapturous ideology. Like the world,
you're right, the world is screwed up, it's fucked up, it's irredeemable. And we're coming
to an inflection point really soon where everything changes. Right. That could be the
revolution, that could be the rapture, it could be whatever it is. It could be artificial general
intelligence at some point soon, we can see it from here if we squint. It's coming. So get ready
and follow me because here's the deal on the other side of that inflection point. Us, our tribe,
we come up roses. We're actually better off on the other side. So let's get there as fast as possible.
Right. And hop on board. And those rapture ideologies, they show up in fundamentalist
religion, but they also show up in techno utopianism. They show up in Silicon Valley with Ray Cozwell
and Peter Diamandis and Mark Andreessen. Right. They show up in, the storm is coming and QAnon
stuff. Right. You see them everywhere. They show up in crypto, hodl, you know, like, and then there's
going to be some collapse in fiat currency and then everybody holding fat Bitcoin and ETH wallets
will come up roses and we'll have a debt jubilee and we'll reboot the entire global financial
systems. Right. Everybody's peddling some version of that. And they sell hope because they all
promise to leapfrog the train wreck that's in front of us. And the train wreck is much harder to sort
out. So it's like, well, we're not even going to sort it out. And in fact, our buddy Doug Rushkoff,
who wrote team human and doomsday prep for the super rich, even called it the mindset in Silicon
Valley in particular, because he was he was brought by like five hedge fund guys flown out to some
super secret desert compound and given tens of thousands of dollars to give a talk. And he thought
he was giving a real talk. And then he realized, oh, these guys, there's no one to talk to you. It's
not like they're whole stable of traders that he was here to talk to. It was just them. And they
wanted to grill him on the apocalypse. And he identified, which I thought was a brilliant move,
the mindset. And he called it with a capital M, the mindset. And the mindset is fundamentally,
you know, not unique to Silicon Valley, but ubiquitous in Silicon Valley of, hey,
never mind all these messy human problems, never mind our cultural history, never mind
our government, never mind rules and regulations, never mind any of that. We'll we'll we just want
a blank piece of paper to rebuild our utopian vision on. So we're not going to engage in humanity.
This is a bunch of sort of Asperger guys, you know, fundamentally, like,
under socialized, not especially well-mammaled, rarely in the company or the accountability
of a good strong woman, imagining these fictive scenarios where it's up and out.
And whether that's Mars or whether that's some, you know, real estate we bought in, you know,
inland, inland from the Bay Area and we're rebooting there or, you know, or it's, you know,
offshore or or it's wherever. And and that tends to be a situation that almost always
is a one percenter solution. However you slice the one percent, it could be
that worth, but it could be the morally elect or saved, it could be the intelligent and the
brilliant, it could be the holders of my certain crypto coin, it could be whomever,
but it's a one percenter play that leaves 99 percent of humanity and all the four-leggeds,
you know, and the winged and the finned and everybody, you know, all the other creatures on
this earth with the short end of that straw. So that's what brings us back to what are solutions,
what's a civilizational calculus that works for everyone, everywhere, everyone. All of us are
none of us, just as an ethical pledge. And this planet, you know, no fucking off to space if we
trashed Eden and we're trying to reconstruct habitable environments out of completely contrived
situations like not going to happen. These bodies, right, the idea of not becoming cyborgs,
actually honoring these beautiful organisms that we've been gifted with being self-aware within
and this lifetime, you know, not punting to life, indefinite life extension
for a fortunate few, but to say we fully embrace this human lifespan, we fully embrace this earth,
we fully embrace our bodies to take a stand for all of us, right? On behalf of the good,
the true and the beautiful, I mean, none of this is new, right? This is, if you think about
what we see on Instagram and TikTok these days, where we are constantly shouted at and whispered
at and promised and seduced to believe that you can have it all now in just three easy steps,
right? Like scan the world's wisdom traditions, scan every saint, sage, and philosopher that has
ever lived and left a mark in our collective consciousness and not a single one of them
has said anything remotely that juvenile, self-obsessed or perverse. You know, what have they said?
They've said, hey, life's a mixed bag, right? I mean, I defer to, there's that old, old Yeller,
was a famous Disney movie about a kid who adopts a dog. We actually listened to it as we were
moving our family to Austin. I'm like, oh, great. I remember old Yeller. We'll do a book on tape.
That'll be the road trip. As it turns out, of course, with all dog movies and all horse movies,
the dog doesn't make it. He gets, he defends them and he gets bitten by a wolf or a coyote.
He gets rabies. They have to put him down, right? So the sun is broken up, as were our kids in the
backseat. They're like, dad, we are never, ever listening to another book on tape about a dog
again. And the dad's sitting on the rocking chair on their, on their ranch house. And he's like, son,
the way I, the best, the way I figure it, you know, about half a life is good parts
and half a life is bad parts. But if you spend all the good parts worrying about all the bad parts,
why, then it's all bad. You know, and that's, that's St. Francis, Augustine, Buddha, Lao Tzu,
right? You know, like, they, they all acknowledge life's a bitch and then we die.
And then there's inevitably the, so what do we do about that in the in-between?
And my sense right now, and maybe we can, maybe we can even wrap with this, right,
is how to find hope. What, what is the antidote to cynicism, right? The antidote to cynicism is
a point on a purpose. And Joanna Macy, who's a Zen grandmother and, you know, one of the most
profound ecologists and activists of her generation, she's described our time in history,
right, as being the people of the passage. Like it is on us to get from here to there.
And if you think about the, you know, the settlement of the Western Hemisphere, like arguably through
the land bridge, right, between Asia and Alaska, Beringia, right? We are all Beringians now,
but in time, not space, right? So where like 15,000 Asian nomads shimmied across that in little boats
and, you know, on foot and in the ice ages and various bits and pieces to make it and populate
this entire half the world. We're doing that in time. Like there's a constraint coming. There's a
constraint coming, which is how do we transition off this hyper-consumptive, right, techno-industrial
cub and indulgent civilization, this complex dissipative structure, right, that's creating
entropy like nobody's business. How do we, how do we navigate that with a bloated population of
eight billion people, half of which would not exist? I mean, A, half of which happened in my lifetime,
right? We went from four billion to eight billion since the 70s. And at the same time,
half of the people alive, every single one of those new extra people only is here because we're
using fossil fuels as fertilizers and pesticides. So how do we do this? This is a complex dissipated
structure, this energy-hungry civilization that if we stop the energy inputs collapses. If it
collapses, that's curtains for so many of us and so much tragedy and suffering. So how do we leapfrog
from this situation to a lower carbon, higher energy, higher efficiency civilization that
protects and preserves us? So that's Jim and Macy's question. We're the people of the passage,
right? What is ours to do? How do we maintain hope, right? How do we die before we die,
right? So that we know our lives are forfeit. I'm no longer just a self-interested little monkey
seeking pleasure and avoiding pain. I realize my life is my offering. My life is my gift.
So that's step one. Step two, go from living as a fragmented, isolated little potted plant
of a deconditioned zoo animal, hyper neurotic consumer individual to taking my stand in a
stand of community and relations. How do I live seven generationally? How do I live on behalf of
my great-great grandparents who clearly busted us to get me this little ember that I've now fanned
into a flame? Do I get to say I'm sad or mad or disappointed? They didn't give me more. No,
they fucking gave me the emper and I'm now basking in a bonfire like amen. And my three generations
ahead of me, my children, my children's children, my children's children's children, how do I live
as part of that seven generations? And then to your point about what does life have a purpose,
does it have a point? It's both, right? Life is both cyclical and endlessly creating and destroying
and that is senseless and amoral and horrifying to contemplate from our point of view, where we
care deeply about our little part of things. And it's also a creative. Every single time that
cycle of creation and destruction happens, it spits out complexity. It spits out these novel,
rare, precious moments and we can anchor to them by ritual, seeking refuge and ritual,
mocking the seasons, mocking our lives, mocking our rites of passage, right? Noticing one of the
most profound ones I've seen was just a black and white photo of a Jewish family in Amsterdam
in 1941 celebrating Hanukkah. And you're like, oh man, like that was darkness. That was peak,
peak darkness of World War II. And there they were oppressed and hunted. And they were still
bearing witness to their lineage's rituals. Think of the Tibetan diaspora. Think of any
First Nation peoples that have been relocated. Think of the Rohingya, the Uighurs, right? The Kurds,
you know, the Roma, like there are fourth world peoples, peoples without a homeland,
right? That have been able to persist by carrying their rituals. So this is what it means to be
the people of the passage. And if we can do those three things, right? If we can die before we die,
so we know what's ours to give, we can live seven generationally. So that stretches out our sense
of what if I don't get mine? No. Oh, it's okay. Because I'm doing something on behalf of those
yet to be. And we seek refuge and ritual. We anchor the insanity and the constant slipstream
towards entropy with observing the passages. And then finally, what does that allow us to do?
It allows us to leave space for grace. Because none of us know how this is going to turn out.
And that's Thanos's pathology, right? Thanos is right up to the point where he is 100% certain
of how it's all going to turn out. And therefore that justifies his murderous behavior. We can never
be sure. There's a great quote I heard recently, which is we control nothing. We influence everything.
And we have no idea, right, where those ripples will go. So by leaving space for grace, like,
do we know how this all turns out? No, none of us could possibly know how it all turns out. But one
thing is certain. If we give up hope now, then hope has no chance. If we hold on to radical hope,
which is a very, it's actually, it's not just an adjective or a superlative, it's an academic term
from Jonathan Laird at the University of Chicago, who studied 19th century Indian
reservations. And radical hope is a specific definition. It's having hope for a future you
cannot see from here, but commit to nonetheless. So leaving space for grace, right, is the
butterfly effect. Time soul force at the end of time for all the models.
That's brilliant. And I'd like to read a quote to you from my favorite movie, Lord of the Rings,
that I think it just kept coming up in this conversation. And especially now,
we're at the end of two towers. You've seen Lord of the Rings, right?
Oh, dude, I did my senior thesis in high school on Lord of the Rings. I've been way in the pudding.
We ran a camp called Rivendell long before the movies came out. Oh, my God, that sounds amazing.
So at the end of two towers, when all hope seemed to be lost, Sam says to Frodo, it's all wrong
by rights. We shouldn't even be here. But we are. It's like in the great stories, Mr. Frodo,
the ones that really mattered, full of darkness and danger they were. And sometimes you didn't
even want to know the end, because how could the end be happy? How could the world go back to
the way it was before so much bad happened? But in the end, it is only a passing thing,
this shadow. Even darkness must pass. A new day will come. And when the sun shines, it will
shine out the clearer. Those were the stories that stayed with you, that meant something.
Even if you were too small to understand why. But I think, Mr. Frodo, I do understand. I know now.
Folk in those stories had lots of chances of turning back, only they didn't,
because they were holding on to something. And then Frodo says,
what were they holding on to, Sam? And he says that there's something good in this world,
Mr. Frodo, and it's worth fighting for. And so like, when you told me about the family
celebrating Hanukkah in 1941, in the midst of World War II, they're being hunted.
You know, it's like in the darkest night, they held on to that little flame, and that got them
through the deep dark. You know, you got to hold on to something. You got to find some
little shred of good in this world, and hold on to it, and that'll get you through anything. And
you know, it's like the night is the coldest just before dawn.
Which if you spend any time in the mountains, is you know, like you're literally waiting for
the sun to come up to get some sleep. Yeah, yeah, so no matter how bad things seem,
it'll pass. And you just got to hold on to what is good.
Well, you know, to riff on the Tolkien stuff, that notion of leaving space for grace, because
like we don't know how it's going to turn out, isn't simply the kind of Hollywood version of a
story of like, oh, it's climactic, and we don't know. And then finally Rocky comes back with the
final punch and wins the belt, you know, like that kind of a thing. Because if you think about,
I mean, I think it's so brilliant how Tolkien did this, right? Because how does, against all
overwhelming odds of Mordor and darkness, how does light prevail? Right? Light prevails in Lord
of the Rings through the perverse actions of Golan. And, and somewhere earlier, I think Sam,
you know, Sam hates Golan, right? And he's in that constant back and forth with Frodo.
And Sam wants to kill him. And Gandalf intervenes. And he says he may yet have a part to play.
Oh, Frodo wants to kill him. Oh, does he? Okay.
In the beginning. Yeah. In the first one, Frodo wants to kill him. And Gandalf says that.
Yes. Okay. Thank you. So first, so yes, the Hobbits want to kill Golan, who's Smeagol,
who is arguably, I mean, you know, I think there's a new film now coming out is going to pack a
bunch of this, but like, right. I mean, he was a Hobbit like device before he gets completely
warped by the ring. So it's in some respect, it's the Hobbit's shadow self, right? And they want to
kill him. Gandalf says, hey, wait, he may still. So the, the, the simplistic version of that would
be, oh, we show him love and compassion. And then Smeagol triumphs over Golan, right? And we now
integrate him into the light and he's on team good guy and he does something good for us. No,
that's not what happens, right? In the crux, not even Frodo stays true to his higher nature. The
ring bends everyone. Smeagol collapses entirely into his Golan self. And they are struggling
shadow to shadow and that somehow with the biting off of Frodo's finger, right? And Golan falling
into Mount Doom, that's what saves it. And that kind of impossible ambiguity, right, still delivering
redemption to me is one of the best lessons for us because it's not a happily ever after
simplistic heroic arc. It's not where good is rewarded with good and bad and evil is punished.
It's a wildly ironic ending, right? But the leaving space for grace, which is what Gandalf
was taking a stand for back before he possibly had any idea what that might mean, right? It's
the commitment to that that then saves Middle Earth. And that I think is one of the most
powerful lessons for all of us because again, from time to time, we're going to be facing or
not even from time to time, probably increasingly, we will be facing a litany of news that simply
doesn't pencil out. And the kind of whistling past the graveyard hope, you know, is simply going to
be inadequate. So we have to be able to anchor to something deeper and more enduring. And I think
Gandalf's lesson is a beautiful one for all of us. Absolutely. Well, on that note, I think this
podcast has gone amazing right from the beginning. You were just on fire. I like the podcast where
I don't have to talk much. For me, if I talk like less than 1%, that's great. But this was amazing.
And I'm sure there's going to be lots of great clips to extract from this. And thanks for taking
the time. Dude, I mean, I'm happy to, you know, just continue this conversation, you know,
on and off screen, however it makes sense. But I think there's tons of overlap in the things you're
curious about and care about and the stuff that, you know, the trees we're barking at as well. So
so much overlap. It's kind of shocking, like all the names you were saying are people that I've been
curious about. And the books you were mentioning were ones that I like, I feel like if we were two
planets, we're like, our orbits are kind of like getting pretty close to each other.
Totally. Yeah. Totally totally. All right, Mike. Awesome. Thanks for the time.
