Today, we have an awesome guest, the creator of Baggage Claim.
Welcome.
Hi.
Hi, Mark.
How are you?
Good.
How are you?
Good.
Thanks for having me.
Of course.
I love your channel.
And I find it so refreshing.
And on Baggage Claim, you talk about cultural issues, but you take a really nice philosophical
approach to them and, you know, it's so confusing.
We live in such a time of chaos.
And to hear your take has been just refreshing as the word that comes to mind.
Thank you so much.
And I feel the same way about after school.
I absolutely love your channel, consume everything.
And I've been very inspired by how you, you have these takes where you'll draw really
good parallels without actually mentioning the particular issues that you're talking
about.
And I think in that way, you make your videos so timeless and universal.
So that's actually really been inspiring me to, to be better at doing that.
Oh, well, thank you.
That means a lot, especially coming from you, great creator.
So yeah, before we, this video will come out right after our collaboration comes out.
So we can talk about that.
But first I'd love to hear about just what were you doing before you started your channel?
Sure.
I, for a better part of a decade, I've been working in the startup space.
And so doing something completely else, that's not really where I started.
I started off as an accountant and then slowly got entered into startups.
I was inspired by my brother to move up to the Bay Area.
I used to live in Los Angeles before that and then moved to the Bay Area and really
enjoyed that aspect of sort of learning on the job, you know, at a startup, you kind
of wear multiple hats, you have to do whatever it takes.
So I learned a lot, but I kept kind of missing something.
I kept feeling like there was a part of me that just kind of realized that I was not
really meant for the job.
In a lot of ways, I'm, I wasn't really enjoying it.
It felt very forced.
I was kind of forcing myself into this particular mold of being this big exec.
I had this, you know, big dreams of, of that I was going to be this big executive.
And the more I got into it, the more unhappy I became.
And so I finally sort of got to that point, I think around the 30 mark, I've heard a lot
of people share similar stories where you stop trying to force yourself into being something.
You finally just acknowledge what you are and what you could be if you stopped trying
to force things.
And I just reached that point and I said, you know, I don't want to do this anymore.
I was fantasizing about YouTube videos.
I was thinking a lot about, uh, about, uh, you know, I was thinking in video essay form.
And I said, okay, I think it's time.
I think it's time to, to leave all that.
And it was a good time because 2020 happened, you know, all the madness that happened with
2020.
And it was a good time to take a pause and step back because everybody was kind of separated
out anyway.
So there wasn't enough distraction of the world.
And that's when I came up with the concept of baggage claim.
And it, I was motivated by wanting to talk about, uh, issues, personal issues, professional
issues, psychological issues that people might have on an individual level, but also culturally,
what are things that we can't sort of see eye to eye on?
And where can we meet in the middle?
Because things were becoming more and more polarized, more and people were getting angrier
and angrier and angrier.
And, um, being in, you know, I'm, I'm based in San Francisco.
So being in San Francisco, things just over the last 10 years just became so polarized.
And my opinions that I thought were perfectly acceptable before were suddenly completely
being ostracized, especially I had to be really, really quiet in professional settings or
people were making assumptions about how I think politically, just based on the color
of my skin or my gender.
And so I found those instances very strange and I said, this is, this, this can't be the
future of our society.
We have to be headed in a better place.
And so, and that's what really inspired me to, to start thinking about, about what I
could be contributing to that conversation.
Hmm.
So you basically got so uncomfortable in that startup environment that it pushed you to
express your creativity.
That story really resonates with me because I have, I had a similar thing where you feel
like you're just a cognitive machine and you feel like you're not being able to be creative.
And that's kind of what people are put on earth to do is be creative.
And if you're not doing that, you, you just, you feel completely inauthentic and it's almost
like you have a psychological death.
And so now are you doing a baggage claim full time?
Yes.
Full time.
And so just, you know, what you said, I also found that so much of my work, because I never
really thought of myself as a very creative person.
Even though I used to write a lot of stories when I was a kid, I just didn't think of myself
like that.
And my role just became sort of babysitting a lot of people, making sure that they did
their job.
That kind of became my everyday job was, Hey, can you make sure that people meet their deadlines?
And I found that to be such a strange idea that there was no self governance for a lot
of people and they would find reasons to justify not getting their work done.
And, and I was just going around chasing things down and, and people, people were very kind
about, you know, pushing this narrative that I'm, oh, I'm the woman who gets shit done.
You know, that was kind of the tagline under my slack was, you know, she gets shit done.
And, and yet I found, well, why, why am I doing that?
Is that really helping people at the end of the day?
Is that actually contributing anything positive?
I just felt like a, I just felt kind of like a fetcher of sorts.
So, you know, it's, it's what you're saying.
It's that psychological death because you're actually not being as productive as you could
be.
Well, you are definitely getting shit done on your channel.
Yeah.
So I've been really hyper focused on the issues that you talk about on your channel, because
movies in particular seem to be at the center of the culture war now.
Yes.
And it seems like our modern movies have been overtaken by some sort of rot within.
And I've been really into channels like critical drinker and nerd Roddick and your channel.
And I'm curious to know like your answer is just why are modern movies failing to connect
with audiences?
I think, honestly, analyzing that question ends up answering a bigger question around
what's wrong with society in general.
And it could be perfectly summed up with we are caught up in this pursuit of the overly
simplistic approach.
I think if you think about the appeal of going the simple route is because it's possible
today because of the advent of social media.
So if I have a particular opinion, if I take it online, I could put that out there and
immediately get likes, whatever that opinion might be.
So I can build up a reputation pretty easily by minimal effort and just say things that
are particularly popular or, you know, rile people up, whatever, whatever my base level
goal might be.
And that sort of thinking has really translated into movie making because to make a good movie,
it takes a lot of work.
It takes so much effort.
And this is something Chris Gore talked about.
He and I were messaging back and forth about this a couple of weeks ago.
And someone who wrote for his website Film Threat talked about that there's this perception
that movie making is actually really simple and anyone can do it.
And there's like a form of jealousy, but also this marginalization of the effort.
And there's not that realization that to put something together, that's a good narrative,
you know, good structure, good, a good heart to it, good dialogue even takes a lot of thought,
takes a lot of experience, a lot of consternation, a lot of collaboration to come up with something
like that.
And that's not really the approach that modern writers that have gotten into these writer
rooms because they meet certain diversity criteria.
They don't think like that.
And a lot of the identity politics is rooted around that belief that ability is not really
something that can be achieved through effort.
Ability is inherent to your experience or, you know, you're the color of your skin.
So for example, and I was talking about this on NerdRotix channel last week that there's
that belief that a woman who checks certain boxes has something really unique to say.
Because if you I don't know if you know, but Disney released a new TV show called Echo,
and it's it hits it's like the intersectional gold mine, so to speak, because the main character
Maya is a woman, she's indigenous, she's deaf, and she is an amputee.
So she just hits so many, you know, checked boxes that all the people have to sort of
step back and bow down and say, you know, this woman's going to offer us an understanding
that's going to be so unique that nobody's ever, you know, could could even perceive what
she might have to say or if she, you know, if she can't speak but represent.
And that is just such a falsehood of belief that we are all so individually unique.
It's that idea of saying like everybody's special and such a and everybody has such
a unique thing to do.
The thing is everybody has value to add, but we are a lot more similar than we are different.
What makes a story good is when it speaks to universal truths that hit close to home
that can actually, you know, they actually get to your heart, not because you look a
certain way or you you you have a certain background, but it's because of the universal
human experience.
And this past weekend when I was watching I was watching the behind the scenes for Lord
of the Rings, which is the greatest trilogy of all time created of all time.
And I love watching the behind the scenes more than even sometimes watching the movie.
I like watching the behind the scenes because it shows you the Herculean effort that a lot
of people put for a better part of 10 years.
And if you look at the entire sort of like vast variety of like production and cast from
top to bottom, everybody poured their soul into that that piece of work.
And I love seeing that because that's what art takes.
As you know, you know, that's what art takes is that it takes almost everything out of
you for you to create something beautiful, something that a lot of people can identify
with. And I don't mean identify in the identity perspective.
I mean, from the humanist experience perspective, and you see that that, you know, Peter Jackson
set the tone of the main push behind that whole project.
And everyone followed suit, all the production people, all the artists, you know, they even
thought about that the cultural significance of what it means to be from Rohan and how
significant horses would be and where, you know, farmland would be placed.
They thought about all those little details versus what would it be like for Gondor?
I mean, that's how how much that they really put put thought into that.
And it showed, even if you didn't catch every little detail, it showed in the project as a whole.
And it transformed all of their lives, the art and their their willingness to engage
with that art, transform their lives, but it transformed so many millions and millions
of people watch that and continue and will continue forever to watch that and be
transformed for it by it.
And I don't enjoy that movie or that story because there's, you know, a brown
girl who's happens to be Indian and an immigrant and is, you know, has has black hair
and is nearsighted is in that movie.
What value does that add to me?
You know, and it's a very that's a very narcissistic perspective to say, I need the
hero that's accomplishing great things to look just like me.
That's such a that's such a surface level way to engage with a movie.
But that's what modern movie makers really expect.
And what is that?
It comes back to that same idea.
That's the easy thing to do and say, you should enjoy this movie because the
heroine looks like you.
And that's what the entire promotion for Echo was exactly that.
It was our main character is deaf.
Our main character is deaf.
It's she's indigenous.
She's this.
She's body positive.
She's this.
It's just all these little things that are so easy to do is the main promotion of
that TV of that TV show.
But the actual value that's that someone might be able to get to see a story that
transcends time, that transcends space, but speaks to that human experience of what
does it take to do something really hard?
Lord of the Rings, what does it take to do a really difficult task?
And how does it change you?
How does it, how does it, what does it mean to go up against evil?
And how can that evil touch your heart and almost destroy you, almost kill you in
that process?
I mean, that's the human story that a lot of people connect with.
And so I think that's really the problem is that there's not that willingness to
do the hard thing because there's a lack of recognition that that it's even
worth the doing.
It's like, just take the easier route.
Just go for representation.
And that's, and there's a whole group of people that are reinforcing that
perspective amongst those writer rooms.
Wow, you just said it all.
You just hit so many different things that I want to talk about.
Um, and I think at the core of it, the, the writing is, is really falling off a
cliff and they don't have anything new to say.
They're not telling any new stories.
They're not speaking to these universal truth.
And perhaps that's why they're so focused on these materialistic identity
things, because if you take that identity aspect away from it, what is it?
It's just an empty, there's nothing behind that.
So perhaps that's why they are pushing that so hard because that's the only
new thing they're bringing to the table.
Otherwise it's like, well, why are you making this movie that nobody asked for?
We're making it because the genitalia of the new care of the main character is
different.
That's why we have to remake this $300 million movie.
And it's like, okay, I guess if it's that important to you, I guess it's worth
remaking, but I love that you spoke about Lord of the Rings because that's
my favorite movie by far.
And I think I've literally watched that same behind the scenes video and I
can't watch Lord of the Rings without pointing out like, you don't want to
watch Lord of the Rings with me because I'm going to be like, Viggo Mortensen
broke his foot in this scene, you know, he broke his toe.
That's the first thing I thought I was like, you know, I think the same thing.
Yeah.
Like, did you know?
Yeah.
Yeah.
I'm in the same way.
Lord of the Rings is so deep and so good.
It's such a, it's a symmetrical story.
You have like nine members of the fellowship and then you have these nine
Nazgul who are like the shadow side of them chasing them and then you have the
good wizard and then you have the dark wizard.
And then you have like elves and dwarves that contradict each other.
And then the Urukay, the orcs are like literally dark elves.
They are like dug up from the earth and they are elves.
So it's like, it's almost like a perfect symmetrical psychological mind, the story.
It's like, there's a dark side and there's a light side.
And without the dark side, what is the Shire?
The Shire is like nothing without the dark side, but because the dark is so dark
in that story, the good is so good, you know, that the anti-hero defines the heroes.
And, um, I never thought about it that way, I never thought about it that way.
I never thought about the symmetry.
That's very interesting.
That's, and so true.
I never, I never looked at it that way.
Really good stories have great symmetry.
Like I've, I've been rewatching Breaking Bad.
And that story is very similar because Walter White is sick and he's kind
of dying, he's on his way out, but at the same time, his wife is pregnant.
She's bringing life in.
So you have this nice symmetry to the story.
You have his son in the above world, which is the, his son with his wife.
And then he has his son in the dark world, which is Jesse.
It's, um, and then every character in the dark world has good qualities.
And every character in the above world has these dark qualities, like his
sister-in-law steals, you know, everybody does these like things that you're like,
maybe they're not so good.
Maybe all the good people aren't so good.
And he's got this like shadow side that he taps into and whenever he does that,
you're like, yes, come on, Walter.
Well, I, I didn't, I never looked at that.
So that's, that's the thing I, you know, I, that's, that's amazing.
I love that.
I can see why then you appreciate these things even more, you know,
seeing the deep layers of everything.
Yes.
And, and like you were saying with, with modern movies, there, there
isn't really much thought to like the symmetry.
It's very one dimensional.
Like you see a white guy on the screen and you're like, okay, he's the bad guy.
All right.
And you don't get much more depth to that.
No, no, you don't.
And the, what you were saying, you know, you can see with the writing around the
laziness of everything, you know, taking the easy route for everything.
And, um, one of the things that I hate that, that's kind of come along
with is the amount of cursing in, in every, every single, um, script.
Because so, you know, there's some comedians that'll say, you know, I'm
going to work clean, like Will Smith is one of them.
He, he always said that he was going to work clean.
I obviously broke that cursing, like crazy during the Oscar night.
Um, but he's, he's always been one of those people who says like, I'm not
going to curse.
And, and I think with cursing, it's very easy to convey anger by just
using certain four letter words.
Um, it takes a lot of effort to convey it otherwise.
And I think that's again, one of those things that really bothers me about
like every now, you know, new TV show has cursing in it rather than actually
working with the language, the English language to create, create dialogue
that's engaging and interesting and like gives you full nuance of someone's
character and feelings without having to rely on something like that.
Which is what was nice about network TV in the past is that that's
what it kind of demanded.
It said, you can't curse.
So a lot of people, but that limitation had to make sure that they
were going to be really good at, at their mastery of the English language.
And that's now without that limitation, people just kind of go with them,
you know, lowest denominator.
Again, I know that I sound like such a, such a, you know, buddy,
daddy saying stuff like that, but I just really want to defend the English language.
Well, I, I completely agree with you because if you don't have a lot of
cursing, when, and you do have cursing, it, it really has weight to it.
I have seen that where there's certain shows where they're saying the F
word in every other sentence and it's kind of like, it just becomes a filler word.
Yes.
Kind of like the word like, you know.
Yeah.
It's in succession.
That's one of the reasons I couldn't get into succession is that every
other word was the F word.
And what I liked about, um, what was interesting about Sex and the City was
that there's a, I mean gratuitous amount of, uh, you know, sex scenes and nudity
and all this stuff.
But when it came to Sarah Jessica Parker's character, one of the things
she said when they started working on that, she said, I know it's HBO and
we can do anything, but I feel like my character being a writer should not be
cursing all the time, that when she does curse, like you're saying, it adds that
weight to it because that's the point is that she's a writer.
She's, she should be good at communicating her emotions without having to
devolve to that or resolve to that resort.
Sorry.
That's the word I was trying to think of.
And so what those times that she would say, you know what F him that like hit
really hard because that's, that was atypical for her to say something like
that, you know, I, I am a big fan of that show.
You are has, and like you were saying before, um, it has universal truths.
So you don't have to look exactly like the people in the show to get it.
And the swearing aspect, I remember the first episode of that show had the best
writing of any show I've ever seen because she asked Mr.
Big, have you ever been in love?
And he says abs a fucking Lutley.
Yeah.
And you, you're like, okay, this is not going to be a traditional romance show
because he just swore while talking about something that's very traditionally
romantic, but he just swore.
So this is not going to be that type of story.
Right.
I could go on on that show as well.
Yeah.
The writing for that show is really good.
It is incredibly good.
As good as that writing is, it's exactly the opposite when it comes to the reboot.
And just like that is so poorly written, you can just see, yeah, you can just
see sort of the evolution of, of writer rooms just from that.
Because I think it's a lot of the same people still involved, but you can just
see how the situation has really changed and, and talent has sort of devolved.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Well, I think that show got consumed by identity politics as well.
Yes.
Yes.
I mean, Mr.
Big technically is canceled.
Forget Chris Knoth, the actor who plays Mr.
Big, but Mr.
Big, the idea of Mr.
Big is unacceptable in, in today's world because, you know, he's, he, he is what
he represented everything that was emblematic of New York in the 90s, right?
Extremely kind of bigger, larger than life, uh, you know, uh, very masculine,
very sort of has his own way to everything very intrans, intransigent, uh,
and extremely, uh, rich, which is like what the whole show is about.
The whole show is about consumerism, you know, essentially it's about shoes.
It's about all the best clothing.
I mean, that was so much about it, but also about trying to find love at a time
where New York was kind of past love, right?
Past romance.
And so it's, it's interesting because now they're trying to kind of, you know,
they, they participate in all that.
And now they're trying to prove that they've evolved beyond all of it.
And, uh, you know, think that by killing off of a character, an iconic character,
they can kind of claim moral high ground.
Yeah.
I've noticed that there's been a decline of, of romance in media and just in
general, um, you can even look at like statistics with Gen Z.
Yes.
There's less romance, less children.
Um, yeah, what, what do you think that's about less romance?
I think so this is, this is actually kind of perfect to talk about because I've
been, uh, neck deep in this feminist video that I seem to be working on forever.
I started writing it in December and I'm finally, I think almost done with the
editing and, uh, what, as part of that, so the question I've been trying to
answer is like, how has feminism helped our society and how has it hurt it?
Because I think we tend to take, at least out in the open, people tend to take a
very sort of polarized view on everything.
Oh, feminism sucks or feminism is great.
What about the middle ground is kind of what I wanted to dive into.
And so as part of that, I've read a lot of the writings of, of feminist thinkers,
you know, across the 20th century.
And the one that I found that I found to be the strangest was this woman called,
uh, fire, uh, Shula myth firestone.
And she, uh, you know, passed away recently in 2012, she, but in, in the 1970s,
she was quite active and she wrote this book called the dialectic of sex.
And in that she laid out what the future needed to look like, excuse me.
Needed to look like in order for it to actually be fair for men and women.
And she was building on a lot of the ideas that previous, um, previous feminists
had had come out with, but there were a couple of points that she made.
And one of them was around, um, around men and women just being indistinguishable,
uh, physically, that they should be indistinguishable, that you should not be
able to tell, um, the difference, and that women should not be responsible
for bearing children, uh, because of the pain and anguish attached to that.
And that, um, children should be bought, born in pods, little, little, you know,
pods outside of women's bodies and that children should not even be raised
by their genetic parents.
Um, so, and that, and that the nuclear family should be eradicated.
So there, all these ideas, and this was pretty consistent with sort of other
thinkers, yes, she pushed it even further, uh, by saying that women should, you
know, should not bear children period, but there were a lot of feminist thinkers
before her, uh, starting from the sixties that were suggesting that women should
not engage in, in sort of motherhood and family and in relationships with men,
that that was the ultimate, um, feminist move was to just reject any sort of
relationship with men.
And many of them suggested then, okay, well, how do you fix loneliness?
Oh, it's like, oh, engage in lesbianism is, was sort of the answer.
Um, so it's that whole idea that women are so much happier without men and men
are just useless and get rid of them.
And, you know, they're just responsible for the patriarchy and, and, uh, up,
up, and the whole, whole, whole board by not even engaging with them.
So I think that sort of thinking has been making its way and trickling into
various parts of, of sort of the teachings that, that, you know, children go
through when they go, go through college, that they, they get indoctrinated with
this idea that it's men and it's women and we're against each other.
And, you know, there can be only one winner.
You know, you don't need to engage with the other side.
You don't need to compromise.
You don't need to find a way to work together.
You don't need to build partnerships with the other, other sex.
It's just, you know, it's going to be one winner and it's going to be women.
And I think as part of that, then you're seeing those types of thinkers, you know,
the, the, the sort of disciples of those, that sort of thinking, then entering
writer's room.
So any sort of modern writing is not about romance at all.
It's actually about domination.
So Captain Marvel has no love interest.
Her only marriage is because, you know, she's, um, she's, I think, made a political
alliance or something in the, in the new Marvel movie.
I don't know if you saw that, the Marvels.
And yeah, oh, you probably saved yourself some time and time and money.
I couldn't do it.
There was, uh, uh, uh, an extra scene.
I don't know why I'm forgetting the word that deleted scene.
There you go.
That, uh, nerd Roddick showed on his channel and, uh, in the deleted scene,
there was this like very inappropriate lesbian joke made by one character to
another, who's underage.
So it's very obvious that that, all of that sort of perspective on just cut men
out is very strong within the writers and they're just trying to insert it
anywhere possible.
And so it's old fashioned to be in love with a man and want to form a good
partnership with him.
It's old fashioned.
It's anti feminist to do that.
It's anti woman to do that.
And you see that even, uh, surface up with that, uh, Rachel Zegler interview
where she says, um, you know, there's a big focus on her love story.
And she's so sarcastic about it.
She's so irritated about it, despite she herself having a boyfriend that she
often talks about in references.
Uh, and she talks about how the prince could be completely cut from the story.
Right.
It's, it's who cares about love when there's power to be had, right?
And that's one of those things that's very interesting is that that's what.
Feminists think of the patriarchy, that the patriarchy only cares about power
and they don't care about love.
Um, and that's their, that's the very, I think very, you know, we can dive
into the patriarchy whenever, but that's a very simple, overly simplistic, uh,
understanding of how men think.
And so that's, this is their counteraction to that and saying love is a distraction.
Love requires compromise.
It requires, uh, sacrifice.
Um, so why would an individual do that, especially if we're pushing for a
very self-first perspective and philosophy in life?
So instead we should say, F love, we should go and seek power and leadership.
Yikes.
Well, it seems like the actions are driven entirely by resentment.
You know, there's no, I've heard that you're either driven by gratitude or by resentment.
And I think it's very clear that the people creating these movies are
driven by resentment now.
It's like all about what power do they lack or, you know, how they've been
wronged and it all stems from, to me, it all stems from narcissism.
Cause there's two types of narcissism.
There's the, the form where you think everybody's better than you.
So you were entitled to what they have.
You, you need to be leveled out or you believe that you are better than everybody
else and you're entitled as well.
Like both, both views lead to entitlement and that you're better than
it, you know, that you come first.
Yeah.
And so you see that in, in the way that the characters in these movies behave.
It's this resentful narcissism.
And I don't think it's really connecting with audiences anymore, because if
you're looking at the numbers, it's been like flop after flop after flop with
these huge budget films.
So they're going to either have to correct their mistakes.
So they're just going to, they're going to not be able to sustain this, right?
Yeah, absolutely.
And, um, I think they're going to keep going for some time because the thing
is wokeness and I know we'll, we'll, we'll touch on some of this stuff of how
it's going to sort of infected companies and cities later, but wokeness is, is
such, um, such an infection in that once it enters certain environments, it's
very hard to argue against.
It's very hard to overthrow and because it's very easy for people who are
willing to play that woke game, it's very easy for them to destroy other
people's reputations by casting aspersions on their character and calling
them racist and bigoted and, and those sorts of, those sorts of terms really
stick, you know, you, you say that enough, enough people say it, um, you know, it's
very destructive on an individual level.
So why would someone sort of stand up to that?
And so you just need one or two bad actors from, from a wokeness side to
kind of overthrow an entire organization.
It's really not that, not that hard because we live in a polite society.
We don't want to offend.
Uh, we're not brutes.
So it's almost like the strengths, the greatest strengths of Western society
are getting turned on itself, so to speak.
And everything you're saying about the resentment aspect of it, you know, I
think one of the best stories ever written is Groundhog Day.
And I don't know if you've watched that movie.
Have you?
I have to now.
You, and I think you'll really, I think you'll really enjoy it.
And I, you know, without giving, well, you can give it away.
I'll still watch it.
Um, yeah, I don't want to get, I don't want to ruin the experience for you,
but it's not, I mean, I think you can anticipate what the movie might be
about the second you start watching it.
But the, what's great about that movie is first of all, the premises
that this man is waking up and reliving the same day over and over.
So you must have heard that part, uh, because it's something, it's like
a fun trope that he's literally replaying Groundhog Day every day.
And he has no idea why.
And when you meet the character, his name is Phil and, you know, played
really well by, uh, Marie, right?
Yes.
Okay.
I'm so glad you remembered his name.
Uh, and he, you know, played so well by him.
And when you meet him, he is this very resentful sort of narcissistic, um,
self-aggrandizing type character and he's full of loathing.
He, I mean, for everything, for life, for the world, people around him,
his colleagues, uh, his job, everything.
And so you see him live two particular days before the repeating starts.
And when you see the second day that he lives, the one day that he
keeps repeating over and over, you realize it's actually a really
shitty day that he ends up living where he wakes up.
He's, you know, he's here in this town.
He's reporting on Groundhog Day and he wakes up.
He's at an, at a BNB.
It's a cold day.
He's rude to the person he meets outside of his room.
He mocks him.
He goes downstairs.
He's rude to the BNB owner.
You know, she doesn't know what espresso is and he mocks her for that.
He, he walks out, he sees some old man and he's who's asking for money.
And he kind of mocks him as well.
He tries to avoid this insurance salesman that he runs into who's
an old, old student from his own, own school.
He ends up getting, walking into a puddle, like a really cold, wet puddle.
And like he's just having this terrible day and he comes, he gets to his job,
he reports on it again.
He's like sarcastically reporting on this job and, and you see him play
out this whole day and it's like, what, what entity forced him to relive
this day every, like for possibly years, like people estimate that that day he
lived for maybe 10 years over and over is what people think.
Like it's like thousands and thousands of times he's waking up, but it's,
it's that we experience his experience, we experience his life for that one
sliver of a day, but you can make that assumption that that's how he was living
every single day of his life leading up to that.
And the movie, as it evolves, forces him to rethink some things because
there's just no out of sheer, you know, lack of choice.
And suddenly he switches his perspective from being sort of the super
silliest person or even hedonistic person to suddenly he's like, let me
see if I can help people because I'm here and I see what they're up to.
And suddenly he just starts helping people.
He helps the old man that he comes across.
He makes sure that he's warm and fed and he goes to, uh, he realizes that one
kid across the block like broke his leg.
So he, every time, you know, he's about to break his leg every day.
He's, he saves him and prevents him from breaking his leg.
Unlike some old women get a flat tire and he goes and spends time on that.
And that's just him helping people around the town, but he starts
learning how to play the piano and he starts learning how to ice sculpt.
And like, he starts reading French poetry and there are all these
little things he starts engaging in.
And then as a, as a result, it actually completely changes his perspective on life.
And you, so you see from in the beginning, he lives this terrible, terrible day to
suddenly the last day you see, he lives this wondrous day where he goes
around reading everybody of their misery.
And you realize that nothing has changed.
It's not, it's like the day is exactly the same.
Life is exactly the same.
It's his perspective has changed.
His effort into his life has changed.
His, how he thinks about other people has changed.
And he went from living this resentful, terrible life to actually a
very fulfilling, thoughtful life where he's looked at by other people and
respected by other people.
But whereas before people couldn't give a damn about him.
And the, the person who wrote this and the directors, they both said that they
receive so many letters from across the globe saying, this is the perfect
Buddhist movie.
This is the perfect Hindu movie.
This is the perfect Jewish movie.
This is the perfect, you know, Christian movie, because they were talking about
like what lessons that this, this movie was espousing.
And the reality is it's actually the perfect, it's perfect universally because
it could evade that basic idea that nothing you do in life is under your,
sorry, life in general, what happens to you is mostly not under your control.
It's what you, how you choose to engage with life.
That's really important.
And that idea is so universal that people across the globe are writing to him and
saying, this really spoke to me, you know, this completely connected with me.
And thank you.
And, and, and that's the point.
That's what makes a good story.
And that's what makes a story transcend time.
Is if it, if it gets to the core of like actually solving a very important question,
which is how do you find a way to live a really good life despite the endless
miseries of life, but also why then exploring why resentment is so attractive
to it, to a lot of people and everybody goes through that, right?
You could be the most optimistic person possible.
And I'm, I'm a very optimistic person.
But for the last four years, I had a very trying time.
There were a lot of things that were happening in my life personally,
including health issues and like family issues and all the stuff that it, I
could see the door, I could see the door open for me to walk through and become
this very resentful person.
It's like that, there's always that attraction, but it takes that, it takes
work to stay on the optimistic side and that at the end of the day, it just
benefits you, you live a better life.
If you engage with an optimistic perspective versus a, you know, a
resentful, sort of angry one.
Well, that's a beautiful analogy and I have so many thoughts.
And the saying I say all the time is fate is what you are given.
Destiny is what you make of it.
And I like that.
I think that speaks to two things are true at the same time.
You are a product of your environment, but your environment is also a product of you.
So when people get drawn towards that victim mindset, it's so attractive
because it says, Hey, nothing's your fault.
You're just a product of your environment.
You didn't pick your genes or your parents or where you're born.
So none of this is your fault.
And you're like, yes, thank you.
That, that is true.
And it is true.
But what is also true at the same time is your environment is a product of you.
So you can enact free will and create the situation that you want to make it.
And it all starts within your own mind.
And that's kind of why we watch that movie, Groundhog Day in the first place.
Cause if it was just him reliving the same day every day and there was no evolution
of his mindset, why would we even watch it?
That's kind of why we watch movies is to see this hero's journey play out.
You know, they start in this resentful, bitter place like Thor or something.
And then they have to learn this important lesson.
And they come out on the other side, this evolved enlightened being.
And I think that's what modern movies are missing so much is the characters don't develop.
And in so many of the scenes, nothing is lost and nothing is gained.
And you're kind of like sitting there.
Why did I even watch this?
Cause it's almost like the producer said, we need one more battle scene here.
And they just inserted it after the movie was already made.
And but, you know, nobody can die and nobody can get hurt.
So because it can't impact the later scene.
Whereas you think of a good movie, Lord of the Rings, every single battle,
every line, every interaction, something is lost and something is gained.
So you, you know, everything has weight to it.
Everything becomes important.
So yeah, that's, that's why we tune into these things to see that evolution.
Yeah, yeah, I don't know what you said.
Absolutely, absolutely agree with you.
There's no, there's, yeah, there's, there are no stakes.
And that's what's interesting about Echo is that not only are there no stakes,
there are also no morals.
You know, she wants, she wants to replace the crime boss that she used to work for.
She's this assassin.
And she, you know, she realizes that this man kind of betrayed her.
So she goes and, you know, shoot some in the face.
And now she wants to be, you know, run the ring herself.
And there's no recognition that she's gone around killing people.
There are no consequences for that, you know, there is no atonement for that.
She's not really a hero.
Um, she's only so because you're being told that she is so there's no actual
morality attached to it.
So that, and that's the other thing is that there's no sort of everything sort
of murky on that side as well.
Well, yeah, that's, that's also a sign of good story writing because the line
between good and evil is not very simple.
You know, you can't just put all the oppressors on one side and all the
oppressed on the other.
Um, the famous writer, Alexander Sultan, it's saying his name wrong, but he was
the Russian writer that was in a gulag.
He famously said that the line between good and evil runs between every human heart.
And this was very profound for him to say, because he was at the mercy of these
communist soldiers in a gulag and he was able to even see the humanity in them.
And he was able to see that people that were right next to him in the camps
were also had evil qualities.
So it's like everybody, with just a few different tweaks of your
circumstances, you could end up being that soldier at the gulag, or you could
be a prisoner, you know, it's not clear who's good and who's bad.
Right.
And I think, um, I think there was a lot of black and white perspective on, on,
you know, that could be achieved on, on the war when it came to World War II,
because of this like mass imprisonment that happened of people.
But everything that's happened geopolitically since is so nuanced that people crave,
but people crave that black and white perspective is that they, they don't want
it, you know, and I, I do too.
I'm not, I'm not pinning it just on other people.
I too wish that I could just say that person's evil and, you know, our country
is great.
And then that way I can just connect with our country's, um, national identity
and never have to question it, you know, and I can just feel safe in the
national identity, but everything is so murky, but people are often looking for
that is that who's the bad guy and I want to be part of the good guys and, and
just leave it at that.
Very true.
I think there was a point in American history where we did think that we were
the good guys and we were absolutely sure that probably after World War II, we
were patting ourselves on the back, but I think around Vietnam is when we
realized actually we might be the bad guys.
And I think a lot of that American innocence was ripped away in the 60s.
Yes.
And I think one of the things that makes me really sad is it was really
interesting to watch, uh, Robert, uh, F Kennedy juniors, uh, podcasts.
If you haven't watched, um, his talk, by the way, on Joe Rogan and Lex Freedman,
just incredible.
And he talks a lot about his father and his uncle and their assassinations and,
but also how his father and his uncle really helped prevent the war escalation,
the Cold War escalation with, uh, with Russia and the whole sort of machine kind
of what Eisenhower warned us about the, the complex industry, uh, the military
industrial complex.
Yes.
There you go.
Uh, and the obsession with, with another, starting another war, that there was
this whole machine trying to manipulate JFK into going to war.
Um, and both RFK and JFK sort of coalesced and decided to try to deescalate
it by just connecting with Gorbachev directly.
And I think RFK ended up writing a letter to Gorbachev and talking about the
importance of a future for their children.
And Gorbachev being a father himself really connected with that.
And RF, RFK Junior tells the story much better than I could do it justice.
But what I found really sad about that is that here were two men that were
thinking about rather than their legacy, cause they could have thought from the
perspective of, you know, being those presidents that are waging into war and,
and, you know, recognized as heroes and vanquishing the enemy, so to speak, and
just cementing their legacy accordingly.
And all they could think about instead was, you know, the people that, you
know, millions of Russians will die, millions of Americans will die.
And that that's more important than any individual's legacy.
And knowing that these two men couldn't be sort of bamboozled into going into
war, and there were many attempts made to convince our JFK to send troops to
Vietnam.
That was actually what RFK Junior talked about, that his, his uncle was
really resisting starting a war with Vietnam.
And that, that's when the assassination happened.
You know, and after that, LBJ, the, the vice president got promoted.
And very quickly we went into Vietnam.
So you have to wonder sort of around that.
I'm not making broad statements there, but you just have to kind of wonder what
exactly was going on there.
But that's so sad that, you know, these men looked at someone like
JFK, who was essentially in that context, the best man among them, who was
willing to think about greater good than, than their, than his own selfish
desires.
And they decided to get together and, and, you know, maybe get him out of the
job.
So that, and that's what happens, right?
You, it takes one man to stand up to something like that, to prevent
something bad like that.
But that's, that's what moral degradation looks like, is that when good
men are unable to, to do anything, to stop it, right?
You don't, you have a room of, of like smokey cigars, just driving, you know,
very sort of narcissistic, like selfish desires forward versus thinking about
the bigger picture of things.
Yeah.
Well, it seems like we're at a point where the actions of our country,
especially abroad globally, don't seem to be in the best interest of the
vast majority of citizens in America, it seems to be serving this very small
elite group who is like this puppeteer pulling the strings.
And we're sitting here like, nobody really wants to go to war.
I haven't really met a single person that was just like gung-ho about going to
war and it doesn't seem like we're getting much out of it.
And, but we're sending all these resources to other countries to keep this going.
Yet, when a tragedy happens in America, like in Hawaii, the citizens in Hawaii
are kind of left needing help and, you know, they're American citizens.
Where's their help?
Well, it's not really in the interest of these puppeteers.
So, you know, they don't really get much from helping the Hawaiian citizen.
Absolutely.
And I think this is where the self-governance aspect has really fallen
apart in society.
Like, if we have to wonder, you know, what exactly is wrong with everything
that's going on, it's the fall of self-governance.
Because laws and even constitutions, they don't actually implement anything.
You know, they set the tone, but it's an agreement that the individuals
have to maintain it, right?
So, what ends up maintaining a good society is culture.
And what ends up maintaining a good culture is self-governance.
And how much an individual is willing to do the right thing.
And so the culture reinforces that.
And then the individual reinforces the culture.
And this is, you know, the common Nietzsche line is that we have killed God, right?
And, and he predicted all the things that were to come that have happened
in the 20th century.
And I think that's where we're really languishing as a society is that we
don't know what to do with ourselves post-God.
And we're seeing, we're very, we're very quick to reject the idea of God.
And, and say, oh, that's such an antiquated idea of some man in the sky,
kind of like cartoonish perspective on God.
But once we've destroyed him, we've actually replaced him with ourselves.
And that's a terrible, on a, on a human level, that's actually terrible for us.
We, we should not think of ourselves on an individual level as the most sort
of the highest being to kind of abide by that what you do alone when no one is
looking, your, your selfish mind will say, that's fine.
You can do whatever you want.
If you have a relationship with a higher power, you would say, no,
what's the right thing to do?
And that conversation is completely lost.
And so people, people kind of, people have become more and more just out
for themselves.
It's like, I can do whatever I can, even if, you know, even if you look at a
very un-successful CEO of a massive company, you know, who's getting fired for
a job because his, his company is, you know, laying off people and doing
really poorly and yet his, his, um, you know, exit package includes a 50
million dollar bonus, right?
There should not be a law that says, Hey, unsuccessful CEOs should not be paid.
But on an individual level, if you're a moral person who says, what about, what
about this is right for me to take money for a job poorly done?
You know, and, and there's no, that sort of that cultural reinforcement nor
individual reinforcement of doing right by society.
And that's where we're at right now.
So that's why, so, and then other people look at it and say, well, if other
people are going to live for themselves, I'm going to live for myself.
So everybody's just sort of bumping into each other, living for themselves,
trying to screw each other over.
So, so we don't really know what to sort of who to answer to what to do.
And everybody's like, just get out of my way.
It's like individual first.
I don't know if I did the best job at explaining that, but.
No, you did an amazing job there.
You made me, I'm really glad you brought up that quote from Nietzsche because I've
been looking into him a lot lately.
And I think that's so relevant when you look at what's happening in, in these
like big urban cities where there's a complete lack of common belief system.
They've killed God.
And so there's nothing holding the people together.
And we like to think that we've got science now and we're really enlightened.
And we, you know, science has given us all this convenience and comfort, but
you can't get your morals from science.
You cannot get your principles from just dry facts.
And I think that's what religion does.
You know, there's good and bad with everything.
But one thing that religion does is it tells you a code of morals to live by.
And so when somebody falls in front of you and gets hurt, uh, you know,
a religious text would say you get down and you help that person.
So you know when that happens to do that.
But if you don't have that core belief system, somebody falls down in front of
you, you can kind of just look at them and say, Oh, that's not my problem.
You know, there, if I help them, what would happen to me?
You know, like it reminds me of, uh, the good Samaritan idea and being a good neighbor.
And, um, yeah, I look around cities now and I see a lot of godless behavior, a lot
of lack of morals, people are not, people don't say hello to each other.
There's a lot of disconnection and you see it manifest in like people live
impulsively, they go towards addiction and prostitution.
And then on the other side, you go to a, a temple or a very old ancient religious
site and there's pristine gardens and it's quiet and it's been preserved for
thousands of years.
And you think, okay, maybe there's something to this.
And there's a philosophical concept called a Chester's tins fence, Chester tins
fence.
Have you heard of this?
I have.
Yeah.
Well, just really quick.
It's, it's like you come up on a fence and you don't know why it's there.
You shouldn't destroy that fence until you know it's purpose.
And that's kind of what religion is.
Like we're, we're coming up to religion and we're saying, oh, let's just destroy it.
But we don't really know what its purpose is fully.
And it's been around for thousands of years.
And it's, we need to be careful if we're just going to toss it out.
I heard a quote, it's, there are two types of fools, those who take religion
literally and those who believe it has no value.
So I kind of, that, that quote really resonated cause I think you have to have
your foot in both realms.
Yes.
Because on either side, there's a very dogmatic belief, you know, and I'm going to
say something, I'm sure it's going to upset a lot of people, but, um, you know,
with the decline of religion could have been so massively avoided to specifically
Christianity in America, if Christians and Christian leaders were more willing
to accept, uh, people in, in, you know, in the gay and lesbian community and say
to them, okay, this is, you know, sort of how you, you were born, you were born.
And instead of rejecting you and calling you immoral and telling you, you know,
you're going to burn in hell, which is to say, no, you know, come into the
community, be who you are, but live morally, settle down with a person, adopt
a child or, you know, have a child by, by some other, you know, person, but live
morally and live a nice fulfilling life.
Come, come be a Christian.
Here's your path to being Christian, you know, and, and I know a lot of people
that makes a lot of Christians unhappy, that idea, because they say, well, the
Bible says this X, Y, and Z.
There are a lot of things by both the Bible says that people don't want to
live by people kind of, it's like what you're saying is like, you take it to
literally, right?
It's like the Bible also has its own limitations.
It was written at certain times.
And so there should be a willingness to understand when something is, is out of
fashion, but can be evolved to meet modern requirements.
And what happened instead, so they rejected this, this huge community and
told them that you are, no matter what your immoral, no matter what, and
completely turned them away, ostracized them completely.
And so they said, okay, well, if I'm immoral anyway, why should I live a
normal life?
You know, why should I try to engage with any of your rules?
And they completely, they were completely cast out into the wild.
And I think that's so damaging for society, because we, at some point, we
had to reconcile with that fact is that some people are gay, some people are
lesbian, you have to reconcile with that fact.
And, and that's the thing is that religion should, should endeavor to be at
the best version of people rather than this overly solidified aspect.
And same with, you know, I'm, I'm not Christian, I'm, I'm Hindu.
It's the same with Hinduism too.
Hinduism, you know, has made many attempts to reject a lot of things.
And, oh, women should do this.
And women should jump in the pyre of their dying husband.
You know, there, there are a lot of limiting things that religion do.
They have to evolve.
And I think that's where we're kind of stuck is like the, you know, like
all these old fashioned ideas that have persisted for thousands of years.
You know, why is marriage good?
All of these things, they're being upended today because everybody's like
willing to question everything.
Let's question everything.
And the problem is that a lot of people don't know how to defend it.
If, you know, it's like kind of like, if a child keeps asking you, why, why, why,
why, why, why this, why that, why do I have to eat this?
Why do I have to do that?
And then the parent just goes eventually because I said so.
You know, and, and that's sort of what society was trying to do is like, well,
you, why, why should I get married?
Everybody does it.
Just do it.
And so that those, I think we became too, we came, we, at a point that we're
willing to question everything.
We needed better answers.
And I think that's what your channel and, you know, hopefully my channel, we're
trying to do is we're trying to answer these questions of, of sort of the old
fashioned values, what value do they have to the individual today?
Because they persisted not because it's some nefarious plot to control the individual.
They persisted because they're actually good for the individual and understanding
that so that people can understand why is marriage so good?
Why is monogamy so good?
You know, there's that, that whole idea of, no, you know, human beings are meant
to be meant, meant to be, uh, you know, polygamous and that selling monogamy,
that's a very Judeo-Christian old fashioned way of controlling people, you
know, that whole thing.
And when that's not true at all, monogamy is actually so good for individuals
and it's so good for children.
And, and so understanding all of that and explaining all of that is, I think
that's the way we move forward is, um, is a non, is without relying on, well,
because God said so.
That's why you have to do it.
Instead, actually giving a thoughtful action with a thoughtful answer without
having to kind of jump it up to the big man in the sky, uh, as, as, as to rely
on his authority.
Yeah, that's, that was beautifully put.
And I've come around to see that monogamy is the best long-term strategy by
far for raising families, for long-term happiness, for living life.
And it's the simplest, for sure.
But I can see when you're young, it's hard to see that because you want to
experience everything.
And you, you know, it's like if you're a prisoner in a cell, I'm like literally
drawing this image right now, there's a prisoner in a cell and he can reach
for the keys to open the cell or he can reach for some food and get some food.
And, you know, the prisoners usually going to reach for the food.
Well, the image shows him reaching for the food because it's like we want to
reach for that, that instant gratification, that pleasure rather than
seeing, okay, what's good for the long-term.
Yeah.
Yeah, you're so, that's, you're absolutely right.
And I think as when you're young, you know, you're impetuous enough, but that's
also important to kind of explore.
Um, you don't know what you want.
You're not crystallized yet.
It's good to have a good dating history to try to see like, you know, what kind
of person's going to gel with you.
I, I'm very, uh, opposed to the idea of people getting married super young.
I'm very opposed to that idea.
I know that's, uh, a lot of people feel like that's the, the good approach
to marriage longevity.
I think, I think instead in those cases, you can sometimes hit the jackpot and
other times, you know, you were kind of 45 and you wake up and you, you know,
have to upend your whole life to say, I have to get out of this relationship.
Which is very destructive, you know, divorce.
I think honestly, hell and divorce are pretty close together.
The ideas of those two, two experiences.
And I think it's good to experience and then at some point to say, okay, now
to move forward and kind of evolve into who I'm going to be for the, for the
long haul is to, is to settle down with the person.
Yeah, I agree.
All said, um, yeah, there's a couple of other things I wanted to talk to you about.
I think now would be a good time to talk about what is healthy masculinity.
And how the femininity look like.
You said femininity without struggling.
I always struggle with that.
That's like femininity.
Yeah.
I think I even wrote it with just like, no, no, no, no, no, no, no.
Just endless.
Yeah.
Um, yeah, I, uh, I think so this is what's really interesting, right?
Because, um, with the way people think today, it's that if you, if you give a
proper definition to something people are like well they'll think about the
exceptions to that right so I want to talk about this one on a general level
because it's like that's one thing that's gone out of style is pointing out
that what are men like and what are women like it's like well some men can be
like that and some women it can be like that it's like yeah with eight billion
people there are always exceptions to everything but there's a general ideas of
and there are a lot of similarities between most men and a lot of similarities
between most women but there are always exceptions I think positive feminine
positive masculinity to me means a person that is is oriented towards
protection you know who's strong you know because men are are born to be
strong to be physically strong and I think psychologically for men engaging
with physical strength is actually really good for them and and I think that
trend of modern life that doesn't really reward physical strength is not it's
not it that's not a good thing for men I and I think encouraging men to be strong
but also dangerous and capable of being dangerous but then knowing how to be
gentle like that right balance of of dangerous and gentle which is why you
know martial arts is such an interesting endeavor for men is because they
learned that discipline of how to be really really strong but how to apply
that that strength in the right frame of mind and part of that I think is is
stoicism which is so I feel like it's such a misunderstood idea because people
often look at stoicism like saying oh if you're stoic you reject all emotion you
know you you suppress all of your emotion you don't feel anything you don't
have space to feel and I think that's completely wrong the the tenant sorry
about the sound the motorcycle sound but the tenant tenants of stoicism is to
say one of those is what you and I were talking about earlier that you can't
control what's going to happen to you you can't control what the world is
going to be like what you can control is how you react to it and whether or not
you allow your circumstances to destabilize your mind and so the
antithesis to stoicism is someone walking into a bar and the barman calls
you ma'am but you identify as as not a ma'am and you get angry and you start
throwing a fit and then you go online and start crying and and making a video
complaining about how much that hurt to hear that that's the antithesis of
stoicism and you have allowed someone else's actions to make you deeply and
happy and completely completely upend you and that's the point is that stoicism
says that are you the master of your emotions or the are the emotions the
master of you and I think that's a really important part of what it means to be
a man because men often have to do go out and do sort of the harder physically
harder things so a mastery of your emotions is really important versus let's
say for a woman which you know people might take take offense at that but the
reason it's so important with men is because men wield more dangerous physical
power so balance of mind is really important if a man loses his cool he can
cause a lot of damage to the people around him whereas a woman might just
say things right but a man could actually like really hurt some people
around him and so that's why I think the stoicism aspect is so important to
masculinity and that his orientation his like focus is about protecting that
should be about protecting the people around him whether that's his you know
wife and mother and and father and daughter and son and that's what's
really interesting one of the things I was looking into was the statistics up
around fatherlessness and there's so much negative impact of the fatherlessness
issue in our society but one of the one of the really shocking ones was that a
daughter in a fatherless home is nine hundred percent more likely to be
assaulted and and you know my my friend and I were talking about some some
random stuff we were talking and one of the things she pointed out she was like
you know when we were looking at all these Epstein things all these flight
logs and all this stuff going on she said her father said the first thing
her father said was where are the fathers of all those daughters like why are
those daughters you know all those little young girls why are they in those
situations and that's the thing is like you need a strong man to protect young
girls from other nefarious men you need a strong man paying attention to that so
I think that whole aspect of protection and children who come from homes where
they feel protected is so crucial and I think for young men having a man model
for them the importance of positive masculinity is so important because for
young men they don't learn from moms just like young girls don't learn
femininity from dads you know you need it to be modeled for you to understand
and so that's why then you know it's important to have a coach or a teacher
or someone some male influence positive male influence to tell you what's right
but also to keep you in check young boys you know test the boundaries of life and
they need someone that can challenge them a mother can't challenge them after
a certain age but a father can forever if he's if he's taking his
responsibility seriously and tell and that's one that was a really good point
that Larry Elder had made when he went on the breakfast breakfast club a couple
months ago he said you know I was never scared of the police what the police might
do to me I was scared of what my father would do to me if I if I misbehaved and
when you see the amount of youth out there you know you were mentioning kind
of the city streets issues you see a lot of youth out there that's not afraid of
the police they're not afraid of anybody and it's because the first person
they need to be afraid of was their father as the primary discipline
so I think all of those aspects are really important about that go into
masculinity that end up actually really holding society together that are really
crucial and then should I move on to femininity or do you want to pause here
that was really beautifully said and it's the masculinity issue is it has so
many sides to it yes and and you were saying that a lot of men find used to
find their place in the world through physical means you know they pride
themselves on being physically strong and for thousands of years that brought
you a lot of value into the world or that that was your way of adding value to
the world was your strength and now we're living in this modern world where
your physical strength and endurance and just like your your masculine power isn't
isn't quite as useful and so I think a lot of people are turning to like things
like martial arts as an outlet for that but still it's not like you're going to
be on the front lines doing jujitsu to defend your country right it's it's a
simulation of of an ancient art but there are less and less jobs that require
that masculine physical strength so I think that an important transition for
men is to be there as spiritual protectors now yes yes it's it's just as
important as physical protection and yeah if you abandon your children they're
not going to have that spiritual protection or encouragement or guidance
and yeah it it makes sense some some of those statistics that you just said
that yeah without that spiritual protection you could end up in some
bad situations it's a sad situation especially in San Francisco when you
walk down any street and you see these people who are engaged in drug abuse
and they're keeled over and I look at them sometimes and I feel like I mean I
know this might make it sound like I'm trivializing the situation but I often
think in movies I like make connections to certain scenes and like the
emotional resonance of things kind of help stabilize accordingly to me but I
thought of them and thought about Gollum and how you know one of the things he
says is that I forgot the feel of of the wind I forgot the taste of food I
forgot my own name and that's what it seems like to me is that they're
forgotten that they're human beings and they're willing to actually let
themselves be in this very sort of disjointed you know non-human state and
a lot of that comes from feelings of abandonment of you know the statistics
around again youths that end up you know engaged in drug abuse and running away
from home and becoming homeless are pretty heavily tied to fatherless homes
pretty heavily it's like 90% of youths that are on the street are are come from
fatherless homes and the thing is that your mother can't abandon you a mother
might that's very rare because mothers have the biological attachment we have
the benefit of that first of all child is like literally part of your body and
but there are also a lot of hormones and things that engage in bonding that are
very very strong so it's it's almost like a given that a mother is going to be
there till the day you die you know well that's a weird way to say it when you
mothers rarely see their children die what am I saying I understand what you're
saying you understand what I'm saying I'm losing my mind clearly mothers are
there through the long haul like you said but a father has a choice whether or
not to engage with his children and he can choose to walk away and when a father
chooses to walk away it actually creates such a fracture for children a
feeling of abandonment a feeling that they weren't good enough and that's a
such a common thing by the way if you see you know in any TV show there's so
many instances of characters that the father wasn't in the picture and they
have all these abandonment issues as a result you know Barney from how I met
your mother is an example of that you know Schmidt from New Girl is an example
of that it means very common and Barney when he comes across his father and
finds out that he actually has this family now and has a kid who he named
after himself you know he Barney feels so he feels so terrible he was like why
was wasn't I enough for you to do that for you to be there for me and so this
whole idea that you know it's totally fine if a child is raised by single
mothers and the reason people say that is because they don't want to hurt the
feelings of single mothers they're doing a very hard job but it's actually
so massive it's such a massive problem and and then you see them then on the
streets and you can understand why one of the you know one half of a very
important partnership that needed to make them feel like they were good enough
was missing from their lives and and they didn't know how to they don't know
how to manage life without that for a lot of people you know that's the that's
unfortunate occurrence without a father one of my most popular videos is how
childhood trauma leads to addiction by dr. Gabor mate and yeah essentially his
his theory boils down to from a young age from the moment we're born
attachment is our number one need if we don't stay attached to adults will die
so we hold that over every other value we need to stay attached to adults and we
will suppress our authenticity to stay attached and he says anytime you
suppress your authenticity is when you create trauma and the more you express
your authenticity the greater you will chase that feeling of attachment later
in life and things like heroin I've never done it but apparently it provides
that exact feeling almost that exact chemical concoction in the brain of
that attachment feeling so you see some of these addicts living in what looks
like hell on earth but they inject this drug and for however long they are
feeling like they're bathed in love they're finally getting that hug from
their parent that they've been longing for forever so that theory seemed to
really sad yeah really really sad so yeah you know there's there's two ways
to look at these people on the street you know a lot a lot of people see them
as a problem to be solved but yeah you can also look at them as they are just
the products of this environment that they didn't choose and you know if I
was in that situation would I be the same maybe you know probably right yeah yeah
I mean in that way you know you have to really count blessings right that are
given to us and and that have helped prevent us from falling down that kind
of path but to say oh I would never do that right you know but but to say like
no there there are situations that you might do that you know or I might do
that so I feel yeah I feel really sad for those people because it is such a
misunderstood problem but it's also one that there's no sort of there's no
adequate push to resolve at the moment unfortunately absolutely there's a
YouTube channel called Channel 5 with Andrew Callahan I think and he just did
a really good documentary about San Francisco and all the car break-ins I
used to live there my car got broken into six times I lived there so this
particular did they break the tiny window or did they do other things just
curious they pretty much broke every window okay including the front windshield
at one point so yeah it's very thorough experience them all so when I saw this
topic I clicked on the video with a lot of emotion like yeah we got to get rid
of these these people they're like parasites that are going around causing
chaos with no ramifications they need to be stopped and he did such a great job
reporting he finally meets one of these guys that breaks into the cars and he
follows him around for an entire day and gets to know him really well and by the
end I'm feeling really bad for this guy like he has a kid that he hasn't seen
and he wants to see him and he's he's got no options he's hooked on these
fentanyl and he's been abandoned kind of kind of like the typical tragic story
and by the end you're like my god like I could have been this guy if I was in
that situation you know you can't it's hard to judge at that point hmm wow okay
I definitely need to watch that because you know I I can have empathy and then
there are moments of frustration where I kind of find myself completely outside
of that and very angry and I think I need to recalibrate a little bit you
know yeah there's an idea that we don't have any free will that I don't fully
agree with but it there's a lot of logic to it that you know we are products of
our environment yeah all these variables go into everything is cause and effect
right and I think the value in in seeing that argument though is that you don't
hold blame on people as much as you would if you didn't know that idea because
when you see somebody committed atrocity you can kind of see alright at one
at one point this person was a baby and they just got fumbled around in the
wrong way and you you don't you don't hold that resentment in your heart
towards them yeah if you know that idea yeah of course there are lines that you
have to set and there are boundaries that have to be drawn so you can't just be
indifferent on everything right but I think it's helpful to have that idea in
your mind as well yeah you you know that completely makes sense because it's not
like they got they have no free will but there is and they need to have some
level of positive influence to at least help them see what's a good path for
them of how they can create a better life but if they never get that
opportunity how could they see it's not like we're born with any kind of
inherent understanding of good we we have we have some level of where we can
engage oh this is a good thing to do and this is not but it takes a lot of
thought and and sort of exploration to get to that it's not kind of built in
absolutely yeah well I guess we should probably round this segment out with the
feminine femininity side yes so let's do it positive femininity look like so I
think femininity is not about physical strength that's not to say that some
women aren't physically strong and if that's what they are interested in I
think femininity is about a different sort of emotional and mental strength it
takes a lot to first of all walk around as as a sort of a weaker weaker part of
society in a lot of ways if I'm just going about my day I have to make sure
I'm thinking about where I might be putting myself at risk and I have I
have responsibility to myself and my loved ones to make sure that I don't
put myself in situations where I'm at risk and in those cases it's it is this
weird relationship that every woman has with men where a man at on an empty
street dark street could be your perpetrator or your savior it could be
either you know you don't know you might either be really happy to see him or
really sad to see him and I think that one of those important aspects of being
a woman is to be very responsible and I mean and this is one of those things
that women modern women really hate this idea but there's a reason why women
mature faster is because we first of all puberty for women it means we are
inundated with a lot of negative emotion which I recall that moment and
suddenly I went from being a very happy child to very sad all the time and you
know we had our we have our initiation into womanhood that men don't have you
know we we know when we're suddenly women we have we actually have a very
strong bookend for that or sorry like I guess not a bookend but transition for
that and that means suddenly you're looked at differently you have to behave
differently you have to you have to be a lot more thoughtful and how you're
presenting yourself to the world and I think part of that is also then how you
engage with men and how you allow men to look at you this is something I feel
very strongly about but I think about it's very important for positive
femininity to be about imposing lines on with how like boundaries around how
men engage with you and and converse with you relate with you and you know
this was something that when I was growing up it was a good thing I'd
grown up on books like Pride and Prejudice and you know Emily Bronte's
books like I had I grew up on kind of very old-fashioned perspectives on on
the feminine and when I got to college and every man thought that it was
perfectly acceptable to get my affection or my time by just sending me a
you-up text was so angering that that's what passed as as modern romance and I
found it so deeply offensive that that it was perfectly acceptable that a man
could look at me like a commodity that he could get at the end of the night just
by sent you know either buying me a drink or sending me something like that
and I think forget about what anybody thinks on an individual level as a woman
you will live a much better life if you have a strong control on how people how
people how much people sexualize and commodify you and you know and this is
something I could talk about honestly endlessly but the the the biggest
difference the biggest impact is kind of how how if if you set a boundary on how
other people treat you you also end up really ensuring that you you treat
yourself properly that you respect yourself it's really easy again coming
back to that like people kind of rushing to whatever is easy today it's a
really easy for me to monetize myself on my body I could start an only fans to
tomorrow I have a YouTube channel I could tell them hey I'm starting an only
fans and I could be making money I mean I'm like whatever looking whatever but I
could do that because it's really easy for a woman to make money by commodifying
herself but does that mean that you're gonna be endlessly happy is that in
respect yourself and have healthy relationships with opposite sex or your
children or your parents absolutely not it's because you are telling someone
else that they can buy your body and that's how that's how the world is gonna
treat you they're gonna treat your body like a commodity so I think that sort of
conservative approach to how you let the world talk to you is really really
healthy for on an individual level for a woman and then the other aspect of it is
like what's your responsibility to the opposite sex let's say your husband or
your part you know your your male partner specifically we're talking about men
and women here I think men unfortunately don't have a lot of opportunity to have
an outlet for their emotion I think partly societal and partly I think it's
just how men sort of prefer to be and I think being that sort of sort of creating
that space for your husband or your boyfriend or whoever to have an outlet
and talk to you and share with you sort of all of their insecurities and fears
and and giving them that opportunity to do so without having ramifications or
like you know reputation issues or punishing them is really important
because we women are really good at that and this is something I didn't really
realize until until I was married so I you know I'm I have a brother but I
honestly didn't understand this until I got married was that you know my husband
talks to his father about his issues or he talks to me but that's but that's it
I talked to my husband I talked to my dad I talked to my mom I talked to my
brother I talked to my sister-in-law I talked to my friend I for talked to my
other friend I talked to my other friend I have endless sources of places where I
actually have an outlet for my emotions and my issues and all of that and
everybody you know receives it and says go go ahead you cry you feel it all of
that and I noticed that with my husband he he doesn't have a lot of those like
he's not he's not even willing to do that but it's like he actually doesn't
have adequate outlets for that and that's one one of those aspects I think is
really important is that if men are going to be those like spiritual
protectors like you were talking about and I love that idea that concept of
spiritual protective it's so important that they also need to have a place where
they can be weak and have an outlet for that emotion and I think that's really
important for women to do that and you know modern women hate it being told
like we need to do this for our husbands like it's like that's like you know
this absolutely loads some idea to say to a woman these days but just like men
oh women things and for us to say oh husband should endeavor to do this for
his wife that's a good thing we say oh that's a good thing yes husbands should
do things for their wives but that's the same thing is that you know we women
have responsibilities as well and I think our emotional intelligence is our
greatest strength our ability to to comfort to care for I mean that we
should not we should not reject those ideas that's that's our greatest strength
the whole the whole foundation of family is built on a woman that's willing to
build a good family but the protection and safety and ultimate success of the
family is based on a husband and his willingness to protect his family and I
think in that way is where you partner up and create this really strong connection
between the best of both sexes for you know ultimate success I was beautifully
put you keep giving me a lot to think about and I'm taking notes here I did a
video this summer to try to clarify sex and gender it was a big video and I
knew it would be risky to make but we I worked with Heather Hying and Brett
Weinstein oh what what I mean what a great partnership there so they look at
this entire issue from a evolutionary biology lens and it was really
interesting to just look at it through that lens but when you take it down to
like the sperm and the egg you have thousands and thousands of sperm
competing competing for that one egg and that translates to our behavior in the
real world men typically are more focused on what happens before
reproduction whereas women are more focused on what happens after reproduction
because they have to take care of the child whereas men so you typically see
men competing a lot more and they're fighting with with each other for a
mate and it is the woman's job to be a filter and to be selective and I think
that manifests in what we value in men and women like we it's really seen as
valuable for a man to be able to provide because that sets him competitively that
sets him out from the herd and it also shows that he could be an asset after
the child is born he can create a stable environment for that child down the
road whereas what men value in women is fertility but also a big thing that you
were speaking on that often gets overlooked is the ability to be selective
the ability to be that filter which is the ability to set boundaries and say
no and so if a woman shows that she's able to say no her value goes way up in
the eyes of men and yes that that only fans life is very alluring it's right
there it's that instant gratification and it's it can be hard to say no to it but
the second you do that you completely lose that filter that value and you can
never get it back yeah which is something you know feminism is trying to
change that so fourth wave feminism I think we're evolving past fourth wave and
into fifth wave I don't know when they'll make that declaration but I think
you know fourth wave was all about sort of DV a DEI and and actual like I think
at fourth wave they've achieved a lot of success by actually infiltrating HR
departments and writer rooms and they you know that they've gotten some level
of critical critical mass but fifth wave if we could make that argument that
we're entering that is might I lose my train of thought fifth wave like a fifth
wave do we even have women anymore or is that concept just become relative yeah
no that I think so the whole breakdown of the definition of woman really happened
at the third wave but we didn't hear about it until the fourth wave because
the the whole third wave was based on intersectionality as well as this book
that Judith Butler I always find it hard to say her name but Judith Butler who is
it who is a professor at UC Berkeley wrote this book called gender trouble
where she sort of brought to popularity the concept of gender roles you know
being something that you could jump between sorry gender and sex being
something you could jump between that it could and you know she hers she
identified as non-binary so prefers to go by a day so it really got
introduced then but what was the thing you said sorry what was the last thing
you had said right before was it about fifth wave and how we're just gonna get
so relative that we're gonna lose the definitions of everything but right
before that what was like the point I was talking about women are the filter
oh and only fans yes okay so now I cut it sorry that fifth wave is gonna is
really gonna be about finalizing this concept that sex work is just regular
work and that commodifying of the of the body is totally fine and I think part
of that is already in motion there's a lot of push for the destigmatization of
adult industry work because women are the ones you know they say that suffer
the consequences for that for good reasons as you've explained and I
completely agree with all of those which is that it's you know a filtration
system for a woman is far more important than for a man and that's the big push
that women are suffering for having to engage with the adult industry because
you know due to limited economic issue you know resources that a woman might
turn to something like only fans and then she's ostracized for the rest of her
life and that should not be allowed why is it that men are not and and when men
are the main consumers of something like that why is that not why is that not
forgiven for women or even not even considered for women and the other thing
that's going to happen is going to be the overhauling of woman you know that
idea of woman bearing children I think that's going to be the next push is
going to be that oh well we should just be relying on science to bear children
and that even a surrogate is totally fine that's going to be the next push
policy-wise which in America is a lot more lenient but in other countries it's
considered a pretty pretty difficult thing to accept because what you're doing
through surrogacy and this is something Louise Perry talks a lot about that she
talks about how you know you're intentionally breaking a very important
bond between mother and child and I'm sure Gabor Mat would have a lot to say
about that as well because you know that that there's a lot of trauma attached to
that because you know the baby the first heartbeat that he or she hears is the
mother's heartbeat the smell I mean the baby doesn't even for the first couple
for a long time doesn't even feel like they're apart from the mother right even
after being born they feel like the mother's body is their body it's like a
very deep connection that you intentionally break through surrogacy so
I think there's a lot of moral questions that people are going to try to raise
that you know the next wave of feminism is going to say no well you know it's
totally fine to farm out someone some other woman's body for for my
particular needs or your particular needs that should be totally okay and
consider a regular transaction and that's that's really what is we're
looking at is that general commodification of the female body and
and and that being totally okay well yeah if we're gonna take it to the future
trajectory yeah I think we're not that far away from AI porn and things like
that so yeah it'll yeah the the the competition may be with these AI porn
bots and that's gonna be hard to compete with because those things are gonna
have no taboos but those things will be able to go to the wildest fantasy and
beyond yeah and I don't think any human would be able to compete with that so
perhaps we're gonna go so full cycle we're gonna go all the way around or you
know every sex work is gonna be incentivized and then it's gonna be just
like we can't compete with these AI bots let's just go back to having like
peaceful civil romance yeah I'm being optimistic maybe it'll just get so
chaotic that I'm done with this I'm getting off this train yeah I I actually
think that I don't think we're headed in into a dark future I think things are
really dark now and are likely to be for a little bit but I don't think our
future is dark I think I think we're in a very difficult transition period where
we've lost that like I was saying that that man in the sky to tell us what to
do and we've overextended individual freedom so much that we feel completely
spiritually lost and now I think it's going to be about bringing things back
together hopefully but without reliance on on because God said so but instead
because this is what's good for everybody I think we're gonna build a new
morality system is what I think is going to happen because it's kind of
already happening you know the idea that porn is bad for you if if you said
that five years ago or ten years ago people would be like shut up who cares
you know no it's not and now that actually that idea is is taking hold
people are understanding why porn is so bad for you and many people are
choosing to stay away from it completely stay away from it same with
alcohol same with birth control you know birth control is just considered this
magic thing and now there's so much awareness being spread that birth
control is actually devastating to your hormones and that you should
absolutely get away from it and many people are resentful that their doctors
their primary care physicians didn't warn them about the side effects that
they could expect because a lot of people women felt suicidal on it emotional on
it still do and and then the impact on it later is is after once once you get
off of it is also pretty pretty big but again people like Andrew Huberman you
know is shedding a lot of light on stuff like that so I think we're and and even
fatherlessness now that's like a big conversation that we're having right I
think it's all sort of gone from research to entering the the general
conversation and now it's just going to spread from here and there's this whole
slice of society that's so intent upon making themselves as great as possible
and I think they watch your channels like yours they watch channels like Chris
Williamson like and Andrew Huberman Brett Weinstein and Jordan Peterson and
they they are intent upon building a good life for themselves that's you know
without caffeine or like full of workouts and and you know thinking about their
problems and not you know suppressing them it's like all these great things and
then also understanding their moral code or understanding the value of
religion I mean how many people watched Jordan Peterson's lecture on on Genesis
and then his seminar on on Exodus I mean people are engaging that without being
religious themselves and they're seeing that kind of like the Chesterton's
fence thing is that you know religion has its values you don't have to turn
into a dogmatic you know person who's going and looking down at everybody for
believing certain not believe not believing certain ideas which is what
religion really turned into for a lot of people is that it became this tool for
their ego and to beat down on other people and tell them they're going to
hell but no religion has individual value that's so that's so wonderful and I
think it's all about taking the ego out of it and I think that's going to be the
new form of morality that's going to burgeon up it's going to be an
intellectual morality and and and so I I'm very hopeful that a lot of things
are going to turn around that's that's brilliant yeah I love what you just said
and I think we've now had enough time to see the second order effects of a lot of
things that we thought were like the solutions to be all and all solutions and
now we're saying okay 20 years later what's the second order effects of all
these antidepressants we've given everybody yeah what's the second order
effects of all the ADHD medication we've given out birth control you know we're
now starting to see oh wow there you know you there's nothing no such thing as a
free lunch we know there's there's an impact there's unintended consequences
to everything so unfortunately we're still doing things right now where we're
gonna see down the line the second order effects but I think a lot of people
that are optimistic enough to be parents in this modern world are going to have
the tools now to teach their kids about second order effects instead of saying
hey no you can't do that hey don't watch porn no matter what you're not allowed
to and they say why and you're like I don't know it's bad instead of saying
that you could lay out a path and say look down the line this is how it affects
you and this is how it'll derail your entire life so it depends on what you
want if you want a family and a successful career and to be fit you can't
get derailed in this way yeah but if your goal is just to be derailed or if
you don't have a goal then by all means go down these impulsive paths yes but I
think it's having the ability to lay that out for a next generation is really
important so that they have like a healthy compass of the world because like
in Genesis the first one of the first stories it is human nature to want to
do what we're not allowed to that's like the first thing humans want to do God
puts Adam and Eve on earth and says don't eat that fruit first thing they're
gonna do is eat it so right you know maybe if he explained what happens if you
eat it they would have chosen differently yeah yeah and my husband or I
talking about that because he recently gave up alcohol I say recently but it's
been more than a year and it's funny because every time he tells people that
he gave up alcohol people say well were you an alcoholic you know it's like
they assume that you had this major problem and that's why you had to give
it up when he just realized like I just didn't feel good with it and and one of
the things he was thinking about is like oh when we have kids at least I feel
more now emboldened and empowered with with information to say why you should
not drink alcohol or have a healthy relationship with it at least but that
when he was growing up it was just like because I said so and same with me and
the ideas around modesty I grew up in a very modest household I grew up you know
and I took to it I wasn't really rebellious about it I actually felt
like it actually felt kind of natural to me to be modest and but as I grew up it
started to make sense to me and I of course tested a lot of the theories out
when I was in college because I did want to have my rebellious time but I had to
like stumble into the understanding of why me treating my body as something
that was sacred was important for my mental health and for me to actually
have a very successful relationship then in the future with whoever I ended up
with forever is that then he also knew that I had treated my body as very
sacred and wasn't so it was it took time to understand that and now and and now
you know you have writers like Louis Louis Perry explaining the ideas of why
modesty is so important or you know you shouldn't get drunk around you know
these in these like frat parties of because of what kind of impact that
might have on you and she does it all without lending to religion at all and
and if she had you know I don't think it's wrong to rely on religion but I
think people feel like religion is an incomplete answer to them and so it's
like she's instead explaining like the full path of it and bringing it back to
the individuals like what exactly happens you know if you if you engage in
in one path versus another I think we're just getting those like very detailed
answers to things yeah we're very lucky right now where we're living in this age
of we have so much access to information yes I'm so grateful to people like
Jordan Peterson who are taking all these incredible philosophers and old texts
and he's filtering it down into such an easy way to understand and same with
religious texts too yeah it's because of Jordan Peterson that I've looked into
Carl Jung and Victor Frankel and all these other philosophers that you know
you hear him mention a name enough times you're like okay I should probably
check out that book yeah and it's he's really been like well I guess you could
bring it down to like Joe Rogan Joe Rogan led me to him and then he led me to
like 20 other great philosophers and I keep going down this rabbit hole now I'm
like getting into these very obscure ancient occult type things and I'm like
wow yeah okay is this an okay time for me to tell you about a bit Bushina do you
want to do you want to talk about that yeah because I think I think it it's a
good wrap on everything as well so I told you this but I at the end of last
year went for a 10-day silent retreat it's called the Bushina where you live
like a monk for 10 days you don't you have certain precepts like morality
precepts that you have to follow for example you don't engage in misconduct
you don't lie for those 10 days you're sort of taking this oath you don't kill
anything so even if there's an insect in your room they have like a little way
for you to take it out so you don't kill the insects you're eating vegetarian
food but specifically it's through this organization called it's maybe it's called
just dhamma d-h-a-m-m-a and it follows it follows the precepts set by Buddhism
like Buddha specifically from you know centuries ago and Buddha himself
discovered this practice when he was meditating and he discovered it based on
ancient Indian texts that were sort of lost so he rediscovered this technique
and then he crystallized it into this method of 10 days of meditation that
help you achieve start to achieve sort of an understanding of your path to
enlightenment and my friend convinced me to do this I was a very very skeptical
she's been trying to convince me for 10 years but the idea of being in silence
and without any access to you know my material world felt very frightening to
me and I'm so glad I went she finally convinced me and I went and the the
whole idea is that it's actually completely free and they don't even let
you donate before you take a course so that's actually part of the mechanism
to get you into the right mindset which is that you are here with all this room
and board and and food that's being served to you is you're here on the by
the grace of other people's charity other ex-students have paid for for your
ability to be here and that alone that's that begins that sort of humility
practice to help you recognize that you need to then maybe this is a good time
to sort of rethink your approach to life because you know modern life we're
relying on ourselves we go out and about like I pay for my lunch you know
I'm I've been relying on myself for for you know better part of you know 20
years whatever so to suddenly be there on someone else's charity felt very
strange but that's how monks and nuns live right and that's what you're
engaging in you're engaging in the very simple life and you're not allowed to
talk to anybody you can't look at anybody in the eye everything's kind of
set up as like a self-service situation and the men and women are completely
separated so that you're not distractions to each other and then the
primary thing you're doing is that you're meditating pretty much for most of
the day it's like 10 hours of meditation a day and you learn a specific
meditation technique so even though you're not allowed to talk to anybody
they do have a discourse where the teacher teaches you about the system of
meditation and why it's important so you're kind of learning the tenets of
dhamma and it's a non-religious completely you know completely sort of
secular universal ideas that they talk about and they all they talk about the
the kind of what is what is the cause of everyone's misery and you know this is
something Buddhists talk about all the time which is attachment but specifically
what they talk about is this we're caught in the cycle of craving and a
versions and this was something that was really important for me because I am
actually prone to this massive iPhone addiction I mean it was bad and that was
something I realized that every time through this practice every time I was
you know writing a video for my for my channel and I would run into something
difficult some difficult part I didn't know what to write as the next sentence
immediately pick up the phone right it's because I had an aversion felt terrible
had a craving to stop the aversion pick up the phone phone is a distraction you
know and that's sort of how I've been living my life for some time now of
just using my phone as a distraction and what's amazing about Vipassana is that
you have nowhere to run you are meditating you're going inward you don't
have anyone to talk to you you don't have any distractions of modern life like
your phone like your computer but you don't even have an occupation you don't
even have a job to keep you mentally busy you just have to reconcile with
yourself and that whole forced process of that you're just sitting with yourself
is so interesting it's it's really difficult it's extremely difficult it
was like way too much time to spend with myself but the learnings out of it are
so incredible and then what you start to notice through the Vipassana practice of
the specific type of meditation which I won't get into here but it actually
starts getting all of your all those things that you've been running from it
allows it to come out it allows it to surface and it'll surface these are as
a thought or as a sensation on your body or emotion and they warn they warn you
that specific days tend to be really difficult for people and fifth day was
the first day that I noticed that a lot of people were crying around me and I
was very emotional it's like stuff just it's just there's been enough time that
you've been sitting in silence that stuff starts to really come out and that's
what the whole practice is really about is just try to recognize the misery cycle
that people tend to keep themselves in and how to release themselves from it
and it was the most transformative experience of my life it's something you
know I know you're curious about it I would highly highly recommend but that's
also why I wanted to bring it up here in case this is something that is
interesting to other people they should definitely check it out because I think
it's a very easy we live in a world where we can get every one of our sort of
immediate needs met sort of what you've you've been talking about this you know
the sketch you were talking about so it's a very hard to meet our it's very
easy to meet our basic needs it's our spiritual needs that go completely
ignored and this was a great opportunity to sort of reset my priorities like one
of the things I noticed is that I I love my family I love my husband I love my
friends and mentally I was deprioritizing them over my phone that like
there was a part of me that was irritated if someone was talking to me
because that meant I wasn't on my phone I mean that's how bad my addiction was
I mean it's really embarrassing to even say it but this thing completely helped me
see that and I felt that ache that that's what I was doing in my life and and so
it helps you sort of reset a lot of things actually understand what your real
priorities are that sounds amazing wow so that was 10 days 10 days how did it
seem like 10 days or did it seem longer seem longer definitely seem longer and I
think the first couple of days like past classially slow because the meditation
periods you know are really long and then it changes your perception of time
you know suddenly sitting because you meditate for one hour at a time just
just about and that first couple of sessions felt so long and then slowly
you're like oh one hour meditation doesn't sound that bad you know any more
and and now we keep up the practice you have to you know if you want to continue
to engage with it it's up to you but you you keep up a daily practice of it as
well but yeah I did feel it incredibly long and then especially at the end
because one of the things I just really struggled with was just missing company
it's like I'm really lonely and so I got to I think by day nine I just started
started to really like come on we're almost there almost there wow so have
you had enough time to process the experience like have you changed yes I
have I think I think there were a lot of ideas if you go let's say I think what
you might find is that there are a lot of ideas that aren't really new to you
you've been circling around them you know in your in your intellectual
endeavors just like as you know that's how I felt because I think they're all
ideas that that makes sense on a universal level whether it's Thomas's I'm
telling you about it or Jordan Peterson talking about it or Carl Jung talking
about it there are a lot of similarities in the in that understanding but there
was one final piece that felt like it was missing where I was like circling
around the ideas but that didn't mean that it had internalized quite so as
part of this this philosophy you know the teachings of Dhamma one of the things
he talks about is that there are three types of the main teacher his name is
Goenka who has passed on now but there are recordings of him where he he he just
gives the lesson and one of the things he talks about is that there are three
different types of wisdom one is you hear someone else give you a piece of
wisdom another is that you yourself understand it where you can intellectually
and completely understand it and relate it to other people but then there's a
third piece of wisdom where you feel it and he gave the example of of medicine
that if a doctor tells you oh you're sick you need to take this medicine and you
say oh that's great doctor thank you for this medicine that's you
recognizing this other person giving you this piece of wisdom you can go and
possess the medicine that's you understanding it you go went to the
pharmacy and filled up your prescription but until you take it it's not going to
help you and that was the piece that I felt was missing where I you know one
of the things that's due to the difficulties of the last couple of
years my it's it's really taken a toll on my body so for what you know for about
a year ago I just came out of this period where I had a lot had like massive
hair fall like massive hair fall and I also developed a chronic health issue in
that in that period so it was like I understood the ideas that people were
telling me intellectually but I hadn't quite internalized it where it wasn't
being all these issues and miseries of my life were still being stored in my
body and we're still taking a toll on me mentally and physically and
spiritually and this this going to this helped take me to that finish line
where I'm not saying I'm fixed or anything like that but at least
understanding the principle of how to help myself and how to engage with
with with with my issues that was that was extremely extremely necessary that's
incredible it sounds like an experience I could benefit greatly from I'm you're
not gonna change too much though right I might become too zen and just float
out of here do you think this is gonna inform your future content are you
gonna take it in a different direction yes I think so I think you know one of
the conversations you and I had had last time like I was telling you the you know
you've inspired me to be less sort of a tacky about things and more more sort of
create positive visions for things so I you know you had you had sort of told
me about how you think about those things and that was something I was kind
of mulling over in my mind and now I understood why that's so important for
me to do that so I don't want to be sitting in just bashing things and it's
okay I think to criticize stuff I don't I don't think there's anything wrong with
that I think that's a necessary part of any dialogue but to be constantly
dunking on something is not something that I want to engage with I think that
that instead trying to spread as much positivity and love as possible is is
really what what I kind of gleaned from from this experience that's amazing I
think for the last couple years the level of cynicism has been increasing but I
feel like it it might get to a breaking point where people are gonna get keen to
it and say I'm done with this cynicism because even even in our area we're like
critical drinker he'll make a video about how horrible a movie is and that will
get three million views and then he'll say hey this movie is pretty good and
that'll get like a couple hundred thousand views yeah and even myself like
when I see he's like he says this movie really sucks I'm like oh this is gonna
be a great review yeah let's hear a critical drinker just dunk on this movie
yeah but same same that's fine I hope he keeps doing that yeah but because the
movies do suck they need to get dunked on but yeah someone has to dunk on them
and he does it so well yeah we need a positive image of the future we need a
vision that we can that gets us out of bed in the morning and I was I just did a
podcast about the pyramids in Egypt and one thing that's so special about them
is they're so mysterious but when you see them you realize that possibilities
are endless and you're looking at something that is impenetrable to time
and for one moment you get a glimpse into this thing that is like eternal and
it makes you feel like you're part of this thing that's eternal and that even
though your physical body was gonna go away part of your essence can just like
ripple on forever and when you it's easy when you're in this matrix world where
everything's so temporary and the buildings are all concrete and glass and
everything's put together so fast and carelessly you kind of feel like you're
just a cognitive machine you're just disposable and yeah I feel like the
importance of getting outside of the matrix into these situations like what
you just did or seeing the pyramids or just anything that takes you out of
your normal state of consciousness yeah maybe it's psychedelics who knows can
show you can can let you touch a different state and see time in a
different way see yourself in a different way and step outside yourself so yeah
it's very important to to mix things up otherwise it's like roundhog day same
thing every day yeah yeah and look you know especially true for SF is that
it's very easy to distort your own reality and think that this is life this
is everything that's happening the chaos that's happening on these city streets
is life and suddenly I found myself in these beautiful woods and it's snowing
and they're deer about and woodpeckers in the trees and they're you know ducks in
the pond and I thought wow what you know I'm I'm so wrapped up in a one type of
existence that I can't I can't even perceive anything else sometimes so it's
good to just like you said just good to break out of it yeah well I don't think
your phone addiction is that bad actually because when you were saying
that I was like oh boy that's I do the same thing sometimes when somebody's
talking to me while I've got my phone out I'm like alright just want to see
this one more meme hold on yeah it can get bad yeah I mean it's you know it's
it's it's designed to keep you hooked you know it's designed to keep you
swiping forever yeah I mean I just got back from a trip and I had my my phone
on airplane mode I didn't want to do the roaming and so I my mind was like okay
you're gonna be back in Wi-Fi pretty soon you're getting closer to Wi-Fi and I
felt like my mind I'm like can you just enjoy what you're doing now instead of
worrying about when you're gonna get to that like I felt like a guy that was
swimming through the ocean trying to get to an island there's Wi-Fi it was
okay I that so okay so as part of the question I they have you you know hand in
your phone you can either leave it in your car you leave it in a locker and I
found myself not missing the phone at all because I'm on the phone even when
I'm brushing my teeth I mean it's like I said it's bad nothing you're saying is
that bad I'm glad you're validating that other people are also there doing
doing this along with me so I'm not enabling you though no I have changed
I'm now reformed hopefully it sticks is the question because you know it's like
two weeks we're two weeks out of this so but I did not miss the phone but when
it was time to get it again I reached for it in this dark locker it's just a
single phone and it honestly felt like I was reaching for the ring from Lord the
Rings you know in Gandalf we just down for it and I and it felt like hot in my
hand and I went to sit down because I was eating breakfast with my friend she
would she's the one who had convinced me so she was there finally we could talk
and it was like I was talking to her but like my attention mentally was on that
phone and and I thought wow it's so strange because then she got up she left
and I turned it on and I saw like my usual you know notifications okay text from
mom and dad like okay check my you know Instagram real quick check YouTube real
quick cat check Twitter real quick and then I thought really like this is this
is the thing yeah but like this is what all the consternation is about just for
those like four or five in things of engagement that then you just cycle
between all day for what you know and what satisfaction did that give you and
that moment you got nothing out of that you got not a damn thing not as much as
satisfaction as you had talking to your best friend over you know over breakfast
a minute ago and so the whole ride home we had a long ride so I had a long time
to think about it and I said okay it has to change like the relationship has to
change like it has utility it is the must in modern life but you have to change
that it should not be moving on your person at all times like again it's
it's like the ring it's like the ring where when I'm walking around and I have
my hand in my coat because it's SF so it's cold all the time my hand is around
the phone you know like that like that level of engagement with it or what if
I'm around the house it's in my back pocket if I'm at my desk it's sitting
right here on the desk if I'm standing in the kitchen it's it's on the on the
counter next to me if I'm in the bathroom it's in the bathroom with me if I'm in my
bedroom it's on my side table why such an intense like it is it's like I'm
attached to it and and so I said okay no it's gonna live in the kitchen 24 7 it's
not gonna be here next to you if you need it you can get up use it in the
kitchen then you can leave it there and come back and that has been the new
system so it's not allowed in the bathroom it's not allowed in the bedroom
nowhere it just lives in the kitchen and that has been really really good I
keep trying to break it but I'm like nope don't forget you know I need to do it
for 30 days and then it'll hopefully stick from there and I don't have to
force it as much well that's yeah that's a great insight that you tapped into and
you're inspiring me I should probably do the same thing I might need the 10-day
retreat yeah like jolt me into it yeah it's ironic because we're both content
creators or influencers or however you want to put it but it's like we make our
career online mm-hmm and a lot of the things that we're spreading our awareness
about your behavior which if you listen to us you might get offline so we're
like wait don't don't don't listen to us too much yeah yeah I but I also think
that you know when I was on the retreat a lot of the time I actually was thinking
about when you know when you have breaks and stuff and you're not you're not
like meditating I was thinking about a lot of movie scenes I was thinking about
TV shows certain quotes that were sticking out to me and like even books
certain books and I thought that's one thing I realized is that because of my
phone addiction I actually deprioritize all the things that I genuinely love and
I mentioned family and friends and my husband but I actually even even art like
sitting and watching Lord of the Rings felt feels like oh it takes too much
time out of the day but me being on the phone for four hours you know not
cumulate are not all at once but cumulatively throughout the day yeah
I'm probably on the phone for four four hours so that's okay doing something
that brings you no joy but watching something really nice or even a you
know a YouTube video that you like that you find informative interesting
whatever versus just mindlessly scrolling and I think that was actually the
big thing is that I'm still you know I'm still consuming things but it's stuff
it's just being about more mindful and what impact it has on me I think that
that was the shift is that engaging actually engaging with art on a day-to-day
basis versus scrolling Twitter where I had I go through you know 15 different
types of emotion in rapid succession in under a minute you know what does that
really do for me I'm outraged at this and excited by that and I'm building to
this and what does that do for me versus sitting and watching something that I
actually really like or find find interesting one of my favorite quotes
is from Terrence McKenna he says if you don't have a plan you become a part of
somebody else's plan and I think about that quote all the time it's like nobody
wakes up in the morning and says today I'm going to spend eight hours on my
phone nobody does that right but once you slip into a subconscious state which
we operate on 95% of the time your mind just reaches for those programs that are
like deep grooves in your your mind yeah and like the more you do in action the
deeper the groove is going to be in your mind it's like skiing down a mountain
yeah and so you know it's it's like such a deep program like there's certain
apps on my phone that I go to all the time and my my finger will automatically
scroll and search for that if I move that yeah my thumb like wait where'd that
go hmm do it subconsciously and then wait you know I'll do it without thinking
yes like I used to go to Facebook so much that I would go on the computer and
then my fingers would just type in FAC and I'm like I don't even want to go to
Facebook right now why am I doing this or even that moment where I'll like close
the app only to reopen it and not even realize like I just closed it and I
reopened it and even the instinct that if if my phone is on my desk I will just
instinctively instinctively reach for it and it is that that yeah like you're
saying it has those groove marks right it's built in after years and years and
that's why that what what you learn at the Bush now is that craving it's a
craving and you have to meet it immediately and so you just leap to meet
it immediately so having that creating that disconnection and recognizing it's
that it's just it's that slight form of distance space between the craving craving
coming up and you resolving it instead going oh look at that craving I have a
craving to be on my phone right now why okay because I just reached something
hard in in the script in the in my next video script that I don't know how to
resolve and I feel inadequate I feel like maybe I'm not good enough for this
maybe I'm not good enough for for what I'm trying to be maybe I'll never be
good enough maybe I'll fail at this okay so you're afraid like you know so just
taking it that's the weird thing about being a human being is that we're so
fear-based we're so anxiety-based and we make these crazy leaps you know we
make these crazy leaps of the small thing happens and it'll be like well
maybe I'll die because of this you know what I mean it's like maybe
psychologically I'm completely completely you know at risk because of
this so it's very interesting then then we have these tools to then distract us
in the moment and keep us away from that that but it exists somewhere it's
always there so it's better to address it rather than let it just just let it
hide from you oh yeah that's very inspiring you're I'm definitely gonna
make some changes after this conversation thank you thank you for
saying that and yes I think you'll find I think you'll find the ten day retreat
really helpful in doing it if you know if yeah I'll send you I'll send you some
stuff about it after yeah I'd love to check it out clearly becoming a bit
pushy well I like it that it's not it's not led by a guru or something right
it's kind of just your own experience yeah and they're very anti-ego it's a
very anti-ego like anytime there's a group that's led by one individual who's
got like all the answers I'm always like I'm not really into cults you know like
that's not my thing yeah but this sounds like a very personal journey which
I've always been drawn towards those experiences like sensory deprivation
tank or psychedelic journey or something like that yeah those have kind of sparked
my interest more because it's like I don't know you're just grappling with
your own inner journey hmm exactly I think this you know micro dosing around
psychedelics is is fascinating it's really really interesting yeah it's
something I've covered a lot of my channel yeah but it's definitely not the
all-end-all cure like people are going crazy with it now yeah it's that I like
by the way I like how you think in quotes because I feel like I think in
scenes and like movie scenes I think you think in quotes and you come up with the
best ones they like the exact right quotes but there's that that that one I
think it's a Carl Jung quote that don't be careful of unearned wisdom am I am I
right about that I'll have to look into that one that's a good one be careful of
unearned wisdom yeah and I think it relates to this is that you know
psychedelics is if people think that it's an easy route to wisdom but it's
really it's really not it's yeah it's it's more about building on what you're
already doing like aiding that rather than suddenly catapulting you into
massive realizations 100% well this has been an amazing conversation thank you
and I'm so excited for our collaboration to come out me too when this
podcast is out it'll be out so hopefully people love it and if you want to
check out baggage claim it's one of the greatest channels on YouTube I watch
every video thank you thank you so much thank you for having me and this was a
great conversation I really appreciate I love talking to you this was great it
was awesome okay I'm gonna end this transmission
