People who haven't spent a lot of time in deep wilderness
mostly don't know how much happier they would be if they were.
Mostly don't know how many of their pains and illnesses and psychological disorders would go away,
how much of the striving is actually a result of emptiness from living in an environment
in which we don't have intimate relationships with other people in nature.
If you spend time with an indigenous culture and see how much more they understand the language of all the animals,
most people aren't aware of how impoverished their life is that they don't know how to communicate to the animals,
that they don't know what the whole world around them is saying all the time,
and that their mind is never still and quiet.
So it's hard to feel bad about missing something you've never experienced and you don't know exists.
Also, when the addict is coming down, they don't want happiness.
They want a hit of the supply, right?
If somebody's coming down on heroin, they don't want to see a beautiful sunset.
They don't want a deep conversation with a friend.
Everything else is meaningless because they have created a hypernormal stimuli
that allows them to only get happiness from a very narrow thing.
It's actually dead in their ability to get happiness from lots of things.
So there are reward circuits in us that are more addictive.
There are other reward circuits that are not addictive that are more actually...
So the addictive reward circuit will give you a very quick spike and then it will drop you,
and then that makes a craving for another spike.
And obviously sugar does this and likes on social media do this
and using filters to look more beautiful than you are does this and etc.
Most of the things in our world do some version of this
and then in the low, then you crave more of that thing.
And so you get, of course, more bipolar type experience,
but you also get an erosion of your baseline over time.
There's less and less things that make you happy.
You more and more need those stimulus and you need larger amounts of them.
The types of reward circuits that lead to psychologically, physiologically, healthy people
are ones that don't give you as much spike as quickly, but raise your baseline over time.
And so the type of reward you get from exercising,
the type of reward you get from meaningful conversation with friends,
from helping somebody, from time in nature, you get reward circuits from those things,
but they're different in kind than the reward circuits you get from fast food
or from porn or from social media or those other things.
But it's very hard to monetize those things on the supply side.
It's very hard to sell you any of the things that on your deathbed
you will say are what you wish you had spent all of your time with.
Every person on their deathbed says,
I wish I had spent more time with my family and with my kids
and with the people that I loved and telling them that I loved them
and working less and pursuing things less.
And none of the hits that they were spending their life pursuing
are at all meaningful in those reflections.
But because the supply side can basically market to the addictive impulse better
and it's important to understand that like from a business perspective,
especially once you have a fiduciary responsibility to maximize shareholder profit,
you're like legally bound to that as a director of public corporation.
One of the core goals is maximize the lifetime revenue of a customer.
And addiction is awesome for a lifetime revenue of a customer.
So when you look at the emergence of fast food and processed foods,
whether we're talking about hostesses and Twinkies or Candies or Coke or McDonald's,
they're basically combinations of salt, fat and sugar,
different combinations of that with different texture profiles
that were actually scientifically optimized to maximize addiction.
There were lots of split tests done to see which ones had the people crave them the most again.
Yet the reason that people, in an evolutionary environment,
the reason that things that had salt and fat and sugar
gave people more of a kind of dopamine hit was because in an evolutionary environment,
pre-agriculture, those things were very rare.
It was hard to get much of them.
And so if you got them, there was an incentive to go find the things
that were evolutionarily rare and that were useful.
As soon as we make them hyperabundance, then people are dying of the excess of them,
we've built a world we're not actually genetically fit to,
and then exploit the weakness of that rather than try to support people to navigate it well.
But it's also that those nutrients were bound with vitamins and minerals
and a lot of other nutrients simultaneously.
So the fast food removes all the micronutrients,
optimizes those things, optimizes addiction,
and so you can have people who are actually dying of malnutrition while they're obese
because they're so deficient in micronutrients.
And so what fast food is to food where you just take the maximally addictive part
and strip out why we're even attracted to it in an evolutionary environment,
strip out all of what's good in it,
is also what social media relationships are to human relationships,
is also what porn is to human intimacy,
is also what the news is to the desire to understand the world you live in,
is what productivity is relative to meaning.
Stripping out a very narrow, aligned with the interest of the market hit
that still has that same thing,
then you will feel a need for greater and greater productivity
and of course that is great from a GDP maximizing perspective
and not great from a deathbed reflections
or the quality of how children are raised
or the quality of the environment perspective.
