Hello, we're here today to have a conversation about evolution and major transitions in evolution.
And it's time, I think, for us to be together and talk about this.
Oh, absolutely.
I'm really excited about this.
And one of the things I wanted to do, and I think you agree with me on this, is thinking
about the course of major transitions in evolution of how this is informing us about the past
and especially what we did not cover in the course, also the present and maybe even the
future of evolution.
Sure, yeah.
And what the past can inform us about what might happen in the future?
Because we're coming from two very different perspectives.
I'm more of a geologist, paleontologist, who I look at organisms going back way into
deep time.
And you're looking at what I would consider a thinner slice of time, but a very important
slice of time.
Sure.
I really start at the present.
And with genetics and knowledge about human cultures, work my way back into the past and
try to make those links to other kinds of animals.
And this is something where I'm a little deficient.
So maybe you could help me out with how genetics can maybe inform us about what's going on
in deep time.
Let's say we go back into the geologic past.
And some of these major transitions, especially that we did not cover in the course, what
would be one that would interest you the most and how we might be able to tie genetics
into that?
Well, what's I think interesting when you think about what we're learning about genetics
today is, you know, obviously when we look within species of living animals and plants,
we trace their genealogies back and try to connect them with a molecular clock to figure
out when they diverged.
But when you go back to that very deep time interval, then you have, you know, as far
out as the earliest eukaryotes and going back to prokaryotes, there's a tremendous amount
of genetic exchanges that happen between those early prokaryotes.
So much so that it makes it difficult to try to trace what the tree of relationships is.
I mean, they're really trading genes with each other.
And you've got these sort of mutualisms that arise, you know, in terms of when your karyotes
arise and they're capturing mitochondria.
And you know, that's a big shift.
But also, you know, almost the development of genetic defenses, because eukaryotes with
their nucleated cells and chromosomes that are binding the DNA together, those are ways
of resisting having other organisms tinkering with your DNA.
So it's cool to add the genetic element to that and investigate things where the fossil
record, you know, isn't telling us about the dynamics of those interactions.
That's very interesting.
And it's something I don't know very much because when I took genetics, it was way back
in college and it's changed so much as a field since then that now I would have to relearn
it completely.
And you've reminded me of how there was an evolutionary transition we did not cover the
course that's actually relatively recent by my perspective, maybe not so recent from
yours.
And that was the evolution of grasses and grasslands and how that affected the evolution
of not just primates, but a lot of animals.
So I'll ask you to start with because you're the dinosaur guy and I know this involves
dinosaurs, right?
So when did grasslands start?
It now seems like it happened at least in the Cretaceous period.
And this was a huge surprise, not just to botanists who look at, say, genetics or the
divergence of certain plant species and especially grasses, which are very interesting plants.
But the Cretaceous period more than 65 million years ago, we paleontologists were amazed
to find this out.
They were preserved as what are called phytoliths.
Now these are biomaterialized tissues that grasses secrete.
And as you were mentioning, protections.
We think this was a kind of protection that plants had on early on in their evolution.
These are silica, bits of pieces of silica in the grasses and they actually showed up
in a coprolite.
Now these coprolites are fossil feces.
And these fossil feces were big enough that they only could have come from sauropod dinosaurs.
So what was cool about this is it told us that not only there were grasses back at the
end of the Cretaceous, but there were actually dinosaurs eating those grasses at the end
of the Cretaceous.
This is totally counter to what we thought about grasses before in terms of their evolution.
Oh sure, when I learned about this, and I was really interested in grass because I came
from Kansas and we had an experiment station which was natural prairie.
And so I really got to know a little about that grassland ecology.
And everybody was saying that grasses originated in the Eocene and that this was a very recent
sort of evolutionary event.
And in terms of primate evolution, it's been very important because you think of primates
as being arboreal animals and they are, but the increases of grasslands over the course
of the Myocene and then into the Pleiopolisocene, that's really created new habitats for terrestrial
primates.
It's created new kinds of restrictions on the apes and more arboreal primates because
now habitats become a little more fragmented in the forest whereas grasslands are spreading.
And the other thing is that this is the niche that ultimately hominids invade.
And so this spread of grasslands is so important to our understanding of human evolution and
bipedality and our use of resources.
It's neat to see that field come together.
Well and then me with a deeper time perspective, I think about grasses evolving, say sometime
maybe in the Cretaceous, it was after the first flowering plants had evolved.
And then you might have had insects helping that as a form of co-evolution, how that led
to grasses that somehow survived the Cretaceous extinction.
So then we're looking at even mass extinctions and how those some grasses were lucky enough
to make it past that boundary.
We wouldn't be here talking about this if that hadn't happened maybe.
Oh yeah.
And in terms of understanding the way that these ancient animals lived, I mean it reminds
me of the Fayum in Egypt where originally that site had been interpreted as being sort
of a Sahel-like grassland.
And what they showed by looking in detail at the paleosols and inside of the paleosols
the insect and animal burrows that are in there, they showed that this can't be a grassland
ecology.
It's got to be much moisture than that.
And that was a real demonstration of the environment in which these early primates were evolving.
That's a great example and I can go back to the Cretaceous again where I've been studying
insect trace fossils from the Cretaceous recently.
They're associated with dinosaur nesting horizons and you can tell from these insect
trace fossils because insects are still so conservative in their behavior that they only
live in terrestrial environments, they never invaded marine environments and some of them
are very specific to dry areas or to more moist areas and you can say exactly what that
climate was like based on those trace fossils.
Yeah, that's been key to understanding Arte's environment where you've got these different
little environmental niches in the same radiometric horizon but in some places you see the dung
beetles and you have different vertebrate fossils and it just shows you what that landscape
was like in the past.
Yeah, dung beetles are one of my favorite insects for that reason because they're such great
not only environmental indicators but their fossil record goes back into the Cretaceous
and again we have dinosaur coprolites that have dung beetle burrows that go into them
and it shows us something about what was happening with nutrient recycling during the Cretaceous
and I guess this relates then to the importance of ecology for understanding more of a deep
time perspective but also what's presently going on with evolution.
Oh sure, you know when I think about some of your lectures and the big changes in the
early part of life's history, their ecological importance has been massive, I mean if you
think about the earth without an oxygenated atmosphere, I mean that's such a big shift
and then something like the origin of grasses where today we take it for granted as a biome
but there was a time when it didn't exist, these ecologies are being made by organisms
and so when we think of applying what we understand about that to the present, it just makes me
think wow, you know the amount of changes that we're able to cause to these ecologies
must have you know a lot of implications.
Yeah, and that's a good point I think because when you go back to say even the protozoic
or the Archean, you have stromatolites, stromatolites first started forming reefs, I mean those
were the first reefs, normally we say coral reefs and it's interesting because it ties
into what you're saying about how organisms create their own ecologies sometime and with
stromatolites they had reefs, then you had corals that evolved to form reefs in marine
environments and then you have sponge reefs and all these various reefs that were different
types of ecosystems that were built up by different organisms as they evolved or when
extinct.
Yeah, on the subject of you know altering ecologies and grasslands, you know humans have been
burning systematically for maybe up to 100,000 years and what happens is that humans arrive
on the scene and they will light wildfires and that will burn off the grass, it clears
out brush you know so that this is a more open area and then new growth comes up and
that attracts the herbivores and that kind of alteration which is technologically really
simple you know you just have to have control of fire to manage it but it's had enormous
effects on the landscape.
And that reminds me of how in Australia I'm very interested in what happened with the
evolution of various animal groups in Australia because it's a continent that's been off
on its own for about almost 100 million years, somewhat isolated so it's a great experiment,
a grand experiment in evolution there and how marsupials were kind of selected instead
of placental mammals there because it's more desert environment.
People show up about 50,000 years ago in Australia, they're carrying fire and they start burning
the grasses because to help them with big game hunting basically but also just to clear
the land and how that then caused extinctions we think through habitat alterations as well
as hunting and how humans just with this very simple tool completely change a landscape.
Oh yeah, you fly over the world today in an airplane and you can see the alterations
that we've made to some parts of the world but you know just with very simple technology
it was possible to do a lot.
And then how that affected the evolution of plants and animals in various ways too.
Which I think brings us to the present, we're thinking about what's happening with evolution
in the present and we could look at it from a human perspective which is your field but
I'm also thinking about what's happening with organisms today that humans had some part
in changing evolution.
Oh yeah, domestication, obviously the big example, you know we think about what kinds
of plants and animals are numerically dominant in the world today, you know domesticated
plants they've exploded from what were originally very small niches in many cases.
I mean Teo Sinte lived in a very small part of Mexico originally and now it's descendants
maize are spread worldwide whereas we also see those evolutionary changes in domesticated
animals.
I mean probably no example is better than dogs because you've got the tremendous diversification
of different sizes and colors and shapes and temperaments and skills.
A lot of that's been selected really recently, you know the last several hundred years but
the changes that come on with domestication are notable in the very earliest skeletal
evidence of dogs which now looks sort of surprisingly old.
How old is that?
There are a couple of dog crania that look like they're upper paleolithic in age so you
know as old as twenty, twenty five thousand years, one of them might be over thirty.
Yeah, doesn't surprise me at all actually because I just think about that natural connection
between humans as being visual trackers for instance and then you have dogs that are olfactory
trackers that that's how their natural selection has worked really well for that primate lineage,
that canid lineage and it makes sense that they would work together and that would make
hunting better for both of them.
There's a cave in France that has some cave art on the walls and there are footprints
that go in and out of this cave from the people that apparently were living there at the time
and there's a set of a child's footprints and it looks like there's several sets of dog
or wolf footprints in this cave but there's one set that seems to be going along with
this child and the footprints have a short toe in the middle which is characteristic
of dogs as opposed to wolves so it's you know maybe really the first case where you can
show that there's an association if it's real you know and in the archaeological record
we always have to try to replicate you know find these things again and again and try
to make sure that they're really associated.
That's very and I didn't know that so that's very interesting to me because I always figured
that it was a deeper connection in just thinking from an evolutionary standpoint and I think
that's where you and I definitely mesh with our perspective is that we always ask ourselves
how did evolution result in what we're seeing today and domesticated animals, domesticated
plants are great examples of how we've selected for certain traits and just made that so much
quicker than it normally would happen and it reminds me of invasive species for example
because domesticated animals sometimes go bad and they get wild in certain environments
and completely change or wreak havoc on ecosystems.
Yeah the way that humans in particular can move plants and animals around you know puts
them into ecologies that they didn't evolve in sometimes they happen to be really well
suited to that and they spread and they can spread faster than people I mean you think
of people reach the Americas and they brought many old world plants and animals with them
sometimes those animals spread tremendously fast compared to the people so that you know
in South America the first cattle that came over some of them went feral and there were
we think hundreds of thousands of cattle in South America living wild before colonists
from Europe you know spread across and ultimately took over them all.
Well I even know of ecologists who are interested in looking at how some of these invasive species
like you just mentioned that I didn't know that about cattle in South America going feral
so fast and so far but I'm thinking about other places in North America where these
species these feral species they're going back to basically their Pleistocene program
for some of these species that come from Europe so I always think about with feral
cattle say on the Georgia coast I think of them as being Pleistocene.
Yeah I don't think of them as cows gone bad or anything like that that they really have
reverted to their Pleistocene hardwired behavior and it's totally different from old bossy
in the field. Oh yeah I mean in some parts of the world they're trying to back breed
those Pleistocene traits you know to try to bring them back so you could imagine that you know
that would be a very different kind of animal I mean we've selected strongly for
tameness in these animals and and other characteristics that we like it's you know
it's really fast evolution. That's interesting because it's a type of co-evolution because
one of the themes we've had in the course well one of them I can think of that we've both
used quite a bit is convergent evolution that we've had many instances of organisms from different
evolutionary lineages that evolved very similar traits but another really important concept I'm
glad you brought that up is co-evolution how organisms sometimes have a mutualism and you
pointed out even prokaryotes. Yeah the one that comes to mind right now though for me is ants
because when you think of all the things that humans do technologically you know we're farmers
well ants are farmers you know they have domesticated fungus that they raise and and take care of in
these specialized chambers and you think of humans using tools well ants can use objects you know
to in in ways that are very specialized so that there's a you know it's it's a convergence that's
you know very different in type but in some sense in both cases seems to involve our social
natures. Very good point because the evolution of you social insects insects that have this
differentiation or caste system now that's that to me is mind-blowing as a form of a major transition
evolution that I wish we could have covered in the course and it's a complicated one because how
did you get selection for different castes within a species with very different morphologically
distinctive individuals within that system that then like you said duplicates this architecture
to termite nests and ant nests so they're just incredible in terms of their complexity. They are
and they're highly diagnostic in terms of species I mean when you look at paper wasps and the different
kinds of things they make you can tell the species from the nest and the ant nests if you fill them
with casting powder and see what they look like underground they're highly distinctive. It's it's
so interesting to think about the ways that this one genome that all of those individuals in a colony
have to share that is coded differently in these different casts that have morphological differences
from each other it's you know it's controlled differently by hormonal influence from the queen
and other individuals so that some will develop into queens and other developers and workers
it's tremendously genetically complicated but in some sense it's a community version of the same
kind of genetic complicated mechanisms that lead our cells to differentiate so that we have different
cell types with the same genome in them it's all the same control mechanisms that get switched on
and off by natural selection in different ways. Yeah and that's a great way to put it I think is that
we have this kind of a parallel evolution we've seen in these behaviors of very complex social
organisms and I know with primates that social organization is extremely important in terms of
what happened in primate evolution and it makes me wonder what's going to happen with the future of
not just humans as primates but primate evolution with what we know from the past
and what we're observing today and if you have any takes on that. Well we know a little bit about it
I mentioned that over the past 10,000 years our brains have been reducing in size and everywhere
that we have good skeletal record we see that there is this change and so the question is why
and will it continue you know is this a trend where we're going to end up being you know all tiny
brain. I don't think we can extrapolate but you know to answer what's going on think of the kinds
of changes that we've undergone in society and in diet since the agricultural revolution
we live in these big groups but we're very sedentary live in one place
so you don't have to keep track of resources in many different you know geographical areas
quite as much you do have to keep track of social relationships so on balance you know it's not
obvious whether this is harder or not as hard it's different but in dietary terms you're eating a
diet that has much less protein and that has you know periodic famines because it's not quite
reliable and so there's this energetic selection and smaller brains are always bigger are always
better you know you always want to be smaller if you can you'll use less energy so the advantage
there seems to be fairly clear the question is where does it go in the future we have a couple
of hints and they're not really hints about the future they're hints about you know the recent
past there's a study in New England called the Framingham Heart Study where they followed a
bunch of people who live in Framingham Massachusetts and they followed the children of those people
and then the grandchildren so this has gone on for two generations now and it turns out that
there are traits that are different among people who tend to have more kids and that's natural
selection if you like in ongoing populations of you know industrialized countries well most
fundamentally that gets back to our definition of evolution is being changed over time that's right
and then we as scientists we always want to say what can we observe and what are these observable
changes over time and it could be something as simple as you're having selection for more children
within a particular species heart species or it could be just a selection for a certain color of
insect or a certain type of plant that's a pollinator or in deep marine environments organisms that
could were selected for pressure but that change happened over time and in the study you just cited
that's very interesting for me for a perspective because I say but that's just so recent that's
only been in how many generations it's two generations yeah and to me that's not very much
it absolutely isn't it could turn around tomorrow you know that's that's one aspect is it doesn't
have to turn into a continuous change in any direction it could fluctuate right but the other
thing is that of course Darwin recognized that a very small change in one generation if you happen
to add it up if it goes in the same direction then it adds up to a big change so it's that issue of
uniformitarianism right and uniformitarianism is one of my favorite tools that constantly
whenever I go out in the field I'm looking at what are the modern processes that I see today
and then in my mind I kind of have to use my imagination how would that fossilize how would
that get preserved and I think that speaks a little bit then to the future of the study of
evolution is how are we going to study evolution I'm kind of very much of a traditionalist in
that I like uniformitarianism it works really well in my better understanding evolution I was
kind of curious about you with regard to teaching about evolution learning about evolution what we
might need to do you know I deal with these time periods when what we're really interested in is
you know in in some sense why things today are different than they were in the past and I'm so
you know focused on our species and its immediate surroundings and then you know primates our ancestors
that it's easy to sort of look at that and say well you know what's important is the stages that we
went through and this has been real pervasive in human evolution to think about these stages
but in fact it's not a series of stages it's a series of of branches of different kinds of
related organisms that each underwent their own history and you sort of have to try to
reconstruct those histories I find it so interesting to to hear about your work because of its
interdisciplinary nature you know you're thinking about you know work with everybody who could
possibly tell you about the organisms where you're looking at the trace fossils and that's
got to be key to understanding the whole history of these organisms it's it's extremely key you're
right and I'm also impressed with how interdisciplinary your work is because here you are taking in
all of this genetic information that we see in modern humans and then how do we extrapolate that
past to to the past of looking at these genetic changes and that's what they were genetic changes
that happen with natural selection over time and primates, anthropoids and and just the lineage
that led to us today talking about this yeah it's sort of a genetic paleontology in that sense
because I can say well it looks like this changed but we don't always know why or when or you know
or how and so it becomes you know pulling from those different disciplines to understand you
know why these genes would have been changing at that time yeah and that makes me think about
then with our teaching of evolution and the future because there's not just of course a future to
evolution but our teaching of it how do we bring those together in a way that I think anyone we
want to teach about evolution that they can better understand the importance of bringing together
those disciplines how they really do have to work together oh yeah I mean when you look at
the way that you and I constructed the course in terms of you know looking at transitions
that's clearly one way to do it because each of those transitions had so many consequences
and required so much information from different fields another way to look at it is understanding
the way that things sort of work you know this genetic stuff about how to build bodies is something
that we're really just coming to understand but it makes clear predictions about what kinds of
organisms you ought to see so that with the origin of bilaterians you know you've got a clear prediction
about what kind of body segments might have been there and how that might have been arranged and
then you go to the fossil record and and try to confirm that that's a very good point because when
we do get the fossil evidence for what looks like the first bilaterians it entered the realm of
predictability that we could actually predict what some of those fossils were going to be like
say in between those first metazoan fossils that we get abundantly preserved from about 550 to 580
million years ago and then say 600 million years ago and then once we got say into after that in
the Cambrian again this predictability that we know that there's certain types of forms
that organisms should take on but occasionally we're really surprised by what we find in the
fossil record oh sure i'm so impressed at you know thinking about the future and what we might
discover in the future that's right that you think about horizons on earth that you can still
explore that we don't know that much about and the deep sea arises as one of them where you know
there's been a tremendous diversity of animals that we've discovered down there by exploring and no
doubt there'll be more but you were telling me that there are trace fossils on land that actually
gave some hints about that that's right we actually have it i call it reverse uniformitarianism in
that we actually looked at the rocks first and that told us about what happened on the deep sea in
terms of life going into the deep sea and colonizing those deep sea environments of hundreds of millions
of years ago and this to me i think is pointing out how in the future we're gonna find i'm very
confident of this more fossils and i like to say the fossil record gets better every day
and what keeps me going and i know it does for you is that these new fossils provide us with new
insights on evolution and how evolution is also through our better understanding of it and these
major transitions our thoughts going to evolve too yeah when i look back at my field and think
you know when i started as a graduate student which is you know not all that long ago in the
history of the field what we knew then and what has changed since then just in terms of new fossils
and new methods of analysis i mean things like we can study the the fat residues on burned stone
tools so that we can get some estimate of what kinds of plants and animals were being eaten you
you add those pieces of information and the pace of change of our knowledge has been so fast
and if i go back maybe 40 years ago and think what was the fossil record like then you know i know
what all those fossils are for hominids you know i could probably you know we could fit them on a
table that was the size of this you know rug that we're on and but not now but not now i mean
there have been sites that have hundreds and hundreds of specimens it's just amazing well and
through this perspective of deep time it's unfortunate that now we're out of time being able
to talk about it but john it's been a real pleasure doing this course with you for me too yeah and
we learned a lot from one another thank you
