Hello, and welcome back.
In the last lecture, we spanned a good amount of time, going from about 400 to 300 million
years ago in the Devonian Carboniferous Periods, and that was through looking at the evolution
of plants that made up the first true forest.
These forests were extremely important in many ways, including their effects on soil,
controlling erosion, providing food and habitats for insects and other animals, and even changing
global climate.
Well, key to the later spread of forests was the evolution of seed plants, and that allowed
vascular plants to spread into drier, upland environments that previously excluded them.
Now these plants didn't have to stay wetted to water bodies, but could be in many places
across the Paleozoic landscapes.
In this lecture, we'll return to the first half of that 100 million year period we covered
last time for plants, and we're going to follow a transition for animals.
Specifically, the transition from bony fish with lobes-like fins to four-legged vertebrates
otherwise known as tetrapods.
Tetrapods simply means four legs, which then became the group under which all four-legged
vertebrates are classified.
These early types of tetrapods are extinct, but they were the progenitors of all tetrapod
vertebrates today, whether these are amphibians, reptiles, birds or mammals.
As mentioned last time, forests helped the tetrapods.
The forests composed of tall, massive, densely populated trees and other plants formed the
first canopies.
A canopy is the upper story of a forest in which the overlapping leaves and branches of
nearby plants make for a separate sort of ecosystem, well above the forest floor.
For the ground, though, the canopy blocks out a lot of direct sunlight, and thus it
provides shade.
So if you're a moist skinned amphibian and you're crawling out of your watery habitat,
you're very grateful indeed for this shade for several reasons.
For one, you're not as likely to have your skin dry out, which could have some sort of
immediate ill effects on your health.
Secondly, the ponds, lakes and streams you call home are going to have reduced rates
of evaporation, and that's good for both staying moist and finding food, such as fish that
live in those same water bodies.
Third, debris from the forest is going to be falling into the nearby water and creating
boggier swampy terrain that rewards more movement in and out of the water.
And fourth, as an amphibian, you're still dependent on water for your reproduction.
Depending on your gender, that's where you deposit your eggs or your sperm.
No more water bodies, no more reproduction, and that means you soon wave goodbye to your
species.
All of what I just said would have been equally valid for many other animals adapting to land.
So forests, in a sense, made tetrapods possible.
And speaking as a tetrapod right now, I'm very appreciative of these Devonian forests
for their role in bringing us together to discuss this today.
So what kind of fish made the move to land?
Most of the bony fish in the world today have ray fins with thin bones radiating out from
their bodies, but there's a second, much smaller group that have their fleshy lobes for fins.
These lobe fin fish, sometimes also known as sarcopterigian fish, they're only a small
minority of fish today, but there's a lot of evidence pointing to them as the ancestors
to all the tetrapods.
We'll come back to these concepts soon, but I first want to talk about how some of my
fellow tetrapod paleontologists recently made some significant fossil discoveries that better
illuminate these tetrapod origins, which happened during the Devonian period about 400 million
years ago.
The fossil they found named tiktalic is one of the most important fossil finds of the
past few decades.
This fossil provides a beautiful example of what's popularly known as a transitional fossil.
That is, it has traits that connect ancestors with descendants quite neatly.
It's part of a group that marks such a clear transition between fish and tetrapods that
sometimes we call them fishapods.
How was that fossil for the fishapod tiktalic discovered?
It's a somewhat long story, starting about 375 million years ago, but we'll skip that
part for now and we're just going to focus on the recent past.
Up until about the year 2000, paleontologists had found a fair variety of lobe fin fish
from the Devonian period that had these anatomical similarities very close to those of tetrapods.
Likewise, primitive tetrapods have been recovered from younger Devonian rocks that clearly showed
their fishy heritage.
So paleontologists were able to connect the dots, so to speak, by stating that the first
tetrapods, which were amphibian-like, were descended from lobe fin fish, and that the
transition happened during the Devonian period.
Moreover, they could look at the exact ages of these fossils and they could narrow down
which interval of geologic time should have witnessed the transition between fish and
tetrapods.
And that interval was about 380 to 365 million years ago, or during the late Devonian.
Given this as a predictor, paleontologists could restrict their search for transitional
fossils from rocks representing that time span.
And they could restrict them even more by looking at rocks that were formed in freshwater
environments like rivers and lakes.
These were presumed to have been the right environments for the initial evolution of
tetrapods to be able to go up on land.
After all, nearly every modern amphibian is directly associated with freshwater.
And many of these primitive Devonian amphibians likewise have been found in freshwater deposits.
So this team of paleontologists, which included Neil Shubin from the Field Museum in Chicago,
followed this line of logic in their search for the oldest tetrapods.
They looked at geologic maps for rocks of the right age, 380 to 365 million years ago,
and the right ancient environments, rivers and lakes.
After doing this, they focused their search to a place far north in the Canadian Arctic
on Ellesmere Island.
And they arranged for a series of expeditions there starting in 1999.
Now this is a remote place with no convenience stores, no coffee shops anywhere in sight.
So this was a major endeavor for the researchers without a lot of payback at first.
Fortunately, they were typical stubborn scientists who wouldn't accept failure and after five
years of going back to the same field site, their foresight and persistence finally paid
off.
In 2004, they found the remains of Tectolic, which is probably the best example of a transitional
fossil between lobe finfish and tetrapods.
We're going to talk more about this fossil later, but its discovery and subsequent description
of the scientific literature was greeted with such a claim and fanfare that you would have
thought it was a new species of dinosaur.
And that's with no offense meant at all that any species of dinosaur, this fossil, was
much, much more important though in its evolutionary significance because it showed this deeper
link in the history of all tetrapods.
In fact, within the next few years, more than 10 specimens had already been found shedding
even more light on how lobe finfish evolved into tetrapods.
Additionally, the preceding detective story serves as a wonderful example of how paleontology
and geology can be used quite effectively to predict these major transitions in evolution
from the fossil record.
So let's get down to some basics.
I've been throwing around the word tetrapod as nonchalantly as if it were rutabaga, and
it deserves a bit more explanation.
Well, tetrapod refers not only to vertebrates that evolved to have forelimbs, but also all
descendants of the first forelimb vertebrates.
So snakes cannot claim they're not tetrapods because they lost their legs during their
descent from four-legged lizards.
Not that I've heard snakes claim much anyway, but implied in this definition is that these
limbs were used for walking on land, and they also could have aided in swimming or walking
along the bottom of water bodies.
But what sometimes makes the term tetrapod even more difficult to apply is how evolutionary
scientists might exclude transitional animals from the category of true tetrapods, reserving
the term tetrapod only for those fully capable of walking on land.
For example, is tiktolica tetrapod or a lobefin fish?
To answer that question, we need to back up a little bit and look at the differences between
the two groups of vertebrates.
So how does a typical early tetrapod compare to, say, a lobefin fish, anatomically speaking?
Well, the anatomy is actually much closer than one might think.
Lobefin fish, so-called because they have these four thick stubby fins, are either termed
as cross-opteridgens or sarcopteridgens.
Now when I originally learned that classification of fish way back in the dark ages of my undergraduate
years, I remember getting those two terms confused with one another.
Now I understand why.
These were originally thought of as separate categories for closely related fish.
Nowadays though, they're simply lumped together into one category, the sarcopteridging fish.
Sarcopteridgens are under a larger category of fish called osteicthes, more colloquially
known as bony fish.
Bony fish also include the so-called rayfin fish or actinopteridgens.
The rayfin fish are most of the fish you might see on a dinner plate or swimming in
an aquarium, with the exception of the cartilaginous fish or chondriacthes, which include sharks,
rays, and skates.
Anyway, the tetrapod seemed to start with the sarcopteridgens, a group whose survivors
today include lungfish and celicans.
Lungfish were already quite common and diverse during the Devonian, and they have a good
fossil record, and they're still alive today in Africa, South America, and Australia.
On the other hand, celicans, which may be a little less closely related to most tetrapods,
were thought to have gone extinct during the Cretaceous period, more than 65 million years
ago.
Amazingly, a live specimen was caught off the coast of southern Africa in 1938, though,
and more specimens have been caught since then.
As a result, the lineage of this group of loaffin fishes was extended an extra 65 million
years.
So, as one can easily surmise though from the name lungfish, lungs had developed in
loaffin fish.
This allowed them to stay out of the water for extended amounts of time.
This is an excellent adaptation for surviving droughts, because lungfish undergoing such
an environmental stress can then just more easily move overland from a shrinking water
body to another with a greater amount of water.
Lungfish had further adaptations for making it through dry time, such as burrowing and
hibernation.
Some lungfish can live for more than six months in their burrows, which they line with this
mucous cocoon, and that keeps them moist while conditions outside might be too dehydrating.
This is evidently a long held behavior in lungfish, because paleontologists have interpreted
burrows from the Devonian period on, and occasionally they find a fossil lungfish in
these burrows.
Now the four lobe fins of a sarcopterigine fish are its paired pelvic fins and pectoral
fins.
These fins thus are homologs for pelvic and pectoral fins on tetrapods, and many of the
same bones are present too.
In fact, when you put them side by side, you can easily see how these bones correspond
to one another.
For example, in the four limbs, the radius, the ulna, and the humerus can be identified
in either animal, likewise for the hind limbs, with the femur, the tibia, and fibula apparent
in each.
The differences you do see between the bones though are in the number and arrangement of
bones further down the limb and tetrapods.
For example, the so-called wrist bones, or carpals and tarsals, those became more numerous
in tetrapods, and these attached to phalanges, otherwise known as fingers and toes.
Well, teeth were similarly complex in the sarcopterigines, and that lent to the taxonomic
term labyrinthodon, which literally means maize teeth for many of these early tetrapods.
This in fact establishes an important anatomical link between these fish and the first tetrapods,
because these teeth are often rather specialized structures in vertebrates.
Remember when we discussed the earliest vertebrates and conodonts as tooth-like structures in
jawless fish?
These were very distinctive features of conodont-bearing animals, and subsequent vertebrates that
evolved to have teeth can also be identified on the basis of a tooth or two.
Although paleontologists are often the butt of jokes about how we can reconstruct an entire
animal from a single tooth, it's true that many species of vertebrates can be classified
on the basis of their teeth.
Furthermore, teeth tell us much about the preferred food of a given vertebrate, which
we'll learn more about in future lectures, especially when we talk about the evolution
of primates and humans.
So what were some of these evolutionary challenges faced by vertebrates leaving the water?
Adapting to land was not so much about breathing air.
One fish had already evolved that in the Devonium, and they were fine with extended times out
of the water.
Instead, locomotion was the main problem, related to supporting a greater weight when
moving out of the water.
As you remember, this was a problem invertebrates had when they first went on to land.
They saw this by having tough exoskeletons on the right musculature for moving around
out of land.
For vertebrates, though, this meant they needed to evolve some sort of added structural support
in their skeletons, especially the limbs and the vertebrae.
For the limbs, it's rather obvious that those had become lengthened in places, with stronger
joints between bones, and stronger muscles that were capable of lifting these early
tetrapods off the ground.
The lower most bones had to flatten somehow, so that these became more weight bearing.
But what about their vertebrae?
Well, they previously encountered stresses from lateral swimming, from a back and forth
movement of the tail.
These bones then had to be reinforced by stronger connections of musculature that kept the body
from bowing down in the middle.
An additional consideration is that the head had to be able to move more freely, and for
two reasons.
One is that locomotion would have generated its own stresses, as walking on four limbs
requires more of a jerking, alternating right-left movement, rather than a smooth lateral movement
provided by swimming.
Think about how jolting this movement might be without the buoyancy provided by water.
Considering that fish have their pectoral bones connected directly to their skulls,
that means walking would be transmitting the impact of every step straight to the skull.
And considering that aspirin was not available, then you might agree that this would have
been a very bad thing indeed.
Another reason for movement of the head?
That was also so that the tetrapods could easily lift it up and down to grab prey.
Thus these tetrapods had to develop a neck, which is lacking in fish.
So what sort of fossil evidence supports the transition between these loaf and fish and
tetrapods?
Well, a lot, much of which comes from body fossils, but some important clues also come
from trace fossils.
Body fossils include loaf and fish, such as Eusthenopteran and Pandaricthes, which had
many transitional traits showing how some loaf and fish were well on their way to evolving
into tetrapods.
Eusthenopteran was a wonderful example of a pre-tetrapod coming from rocks about 385
million years ago in Quebec, Canada.
Now its pectoral fin has most of the homologous bones we might expect to find in a tetrapod,
such as a humerus, a radius, an ulna, carpals, metacarpals, and phalanges.
Similarly, its pelvic fins have a femur, fibula, and tibia, but their lower bones are
not so easily linked to tetrapods.
For this and several other reasons, paleontologists don't think that Eusthenopteran was capable
of walking on land and that it still lived in the water.
Now, Pandaricthes is another great example of a pre-tetrapod and is even closer to the
ideal of one than Eusthenopteran.
This fish, which comes from 380 million year old rocks of Latvia, has pelvic and pectoral
fins that show exactly the sort of transition between forms that can be used for either
swimming or weight-bearing, for example, crawling across very shallow water.
Now, what is very interesting about this fossil is how its pectoral fin is closer to that
of a typical tetrapod, whereas its pelvic fin is more like that of a fish.
Well, Tectolic, mentioned earlier, comes from Lake Devonian Rocks in Canada, and now I really
hyped this fossil beforehand so you might be thinking, this had better be good.
Not to worry, it is.
What were some of its traits?
Well, it had a flat head and a body with eyes on the top of the skull.
It has ear notches on the skull, and these were also an early tetrapods which probably
was related to ears being used for hearing out of the water.
The shoulders of Tectolic were disconnected from the skull.
This means it could move its head up and down.
In other words, it had a neck, which fish lacked, and for the first time, a vertebrate
could shake its head no if asked a question.
It probably had both lungs and gills.
Some of the bones show support for gills, whereas its ribs were developed enough to
also hold lungs.
Its fin bones show all of the homologous bones shared by tetrapods, and indicate these fins
could support it out of the water, yet it also could be used for swimming.
As its discoverers pointed out, this fish could do push-ups.
An important tetrapod fossil, first found also in the 1930s, is ichthyostegum.
This comes from late Devonian rocks of Greenland.
It's about 370 to 360 million years old, which puts it about 5 to 10 million years after
Tectolic.
The largest adults of this tetrapod were about 1.5 meters or 5 feet long.
These were sizable animals.
Some important traits they possessed are seven digits on the hind limbs, scald very similar
to that of Sarkopt origin fish, pectoral and pelvic girdles that were adapted for walking
a land, but these were probably more common in juveniles.
Because of their large size, the adults may not have been as mobile as the youngsters.
Well, anatomically similar to ichthyostegum is a canthostegum.
This tetrapod also hails from the late Devonian rocks of Greenland, and it's from rocks that
were about 365 million years ago.
This animal, though, was noticeably smaller than ichthyostegum, with a length that was
just a little more than a half meter or around two feet.
It had the following traits.
It had eight digits on the front limbs, and then at least eight on the rear.
A skull that was less fishy when you compared to ichthyostegum, and closer to that of a
typical tetrapod.
The front limbs seemed really poorly adapted for walking, but the rear limbs were better
suited for support than in cross-op dirigions.
It's been suggested that the many digits on the hind limbs then may have been useful for
clamoring through plant debris that was falling into the water from these Devonian forests.
And this is a great example of a tetrapod that's showing a shift, though, from pectoral
movement to pelvic movement.
Well, what are some of the trace fossils left by early tetrapods?
Because tetrapods would have been the first vertebrates to leave actual tracks, and because
they were forelimbed vertebrates, they accordingly should have left trackways with four-fold
patterns.
Moreover, we expect that tetrapod trackways would define as wide diagonal pattern with
support coming from alternating front and rear limbs, but with a sprawling gait.
An ideal trackway made by an early tetrapod then might have had a forelimbed hand impression
immediately in front of a hind limb foot impression on either side, but as they alternating
side pairs.
The tracks would also show the unique early tetrapod traits of more than five fingers
in the feet.
So expect to see six, seven, or eight toe impressions instead, a relic of their low-fin fish ancestry.
So along these lines, probably the most spectacular find of probable tetrapod tracks was reported
in 2010 from early Devonian rocks of Poland.
Not only are these trackways, probably those of tetrapods, they're in rocks that are about
10 million years older than tiktolic, dating closer to 395 million years ago.
These trace fossils include many trackways from multiple animals, and measurements of
one trackway indicate an animal that was quite large, more than two meters long, was 6.5 feet.
Some tracks also have digit impressions showing six to seven digits in the feet, just as would
be expected for early tetrapods.
Now interestingly, these tracks are also preserved in rocks formed in coastal marine environments.
That's interesting because it's contrary to the expectation that the evolutionary transition
between sarcopteridgens and tetrapods must have only happened in freshwater environments.
As a result, paleontologists are now reconsidering whether the freshwater assumption was necessarily
valid or if the evolution of tetrapods happened along seacoast as well.
Well, obviously more such trackways from either freshwater or marine rocks will be very helpful
with resolving the scientific problem.
And a few other trace fossil finds are some undoubted tetrapod tracks that come from Devonian
rocks in Victoria, Australia, and these rocks were formed in freshwater environments, but
there were some more problematic tracks found in late Celerian, early Devonian rocks in another
part of Victoria, Australia, but not everybody accepts these as tetrapod tracks and their
age is part of the reason for such caution.
Now were there late Celerian or early Devonian tetrapods?
Most people currently think no, but the fossil tracks from Poland have pushed back the possible
timing of this transition.
So now we have to rethink such negative assumptions and imagine how tetrapods might have originated
perhaps earlier than 385 million years ago, perhaps closer to 400 million years ago.
That would take us back to the time of the earliest known fossil insect.
Now how do these results tie in with say developmental biology and genetics compared
to what we see in the fossil record?
Well, in developmental biology we have long known that the embryological development
of tetrapods reflects this fishy legacy.
Pharyngeal gill slits, also known as gill pouches, show up in all vertebrates in their
embryological development and are even present in human embryos in the first trimester.
And remember hox genes and that they code for proteins along the axis of an insect and
they're often associated with specific segments?
Well, it turns out hox genes are also in vertebrates and recent studies of them have
started to provide insights on how certain traits in vertebrates linked to these regulatory
genes can be switched on or off.
These experiments are better explaining how what were originally fish fins could later
become tetrapod limbs in an evolutionary lineage and how such a genetic change could occur
relatively quickly.
After that natural selection then took its course and tetrapod limbs would have been
selected favorably under the right circumstances.
Well yet another piece of evidence supporting the timing of the sarcopteridgian tetrapod
transition comes from molecular clocks.
Now you've heard me make a few critical comments about molecular clocks in previous lectures,
a sum of which may or may not be justified.
But molecular clocks do agree much better with the fossil record as their calculated
dates of divergence get closer to the present.
These clocks showed dates close to 360 to 370 million years ago.
That's actually a little earlier than what the fossil record indicates.
Now molecular clocks normally suggest divergences much farther back in the geologic past, making
paleontologists either upset or depressed, so it's nice to have dates that are closer
to what we've found so far.
All in all the timing indicated by the fossil record is about right for the transition from
loaf and fish to tetrapods.
Now I know what you're probably thinking, did changes in Devonian environments have anything
to do with this major transition?
In a word, probably.
As mentioned before, the growth and spread of forest and terrestrial ecosystems would
have provided new habitats and many more food resources for the expansion of tetrapods.
Oxygen content in the atmosphere had been undergoing some fluctuations, but by the later
part of the Devonian had increased closer to the 21% levels we see today.
At times in the Carboniferous, as we mentioned in the previous lecture, we think oxygen levels
may have even become even higher than today, such as 30%.
These higher amounts of oxygen were needed for not so good tetrapod lungs to work properly.
So as soon as oxygen was produced in greater amounts by terrestrial forests and carbon
dioxide correspondingly decreased, tetrapod evolution was made easier.
Forests also provided shade.
That kept the amphibians moist or otherwise protected them from the ill effects of prolonged
direct sunlight while also preventing evaporation of their habitats.
And as hinted earlier, the evolution of forests in the Devonian provided more food for aspiring
tetrapods, whether as predators or herbivores.
Now insects and other terrestrial arthropods also diversified considerably during the Devonian.
Again, this diversification would have provided more food for tetrapods, especially if some
of these insects had aquatic stages of growth, which sure enough they did.
Ephemeropterans, mayflies, as well as odonates, dragonflies and damselflies all developed
first in aquatic environments.
Even on land, the first cockroach-like insects had shown up by the Carboniferous Period around
310-320 million years ago.
Some of these insects were much larger than modern-day roaches, so they would have provided
some pretty tasty snacks or meals for hungry tetrapods that could actually move their heads
up and down, unlike their lobe fin ancestors.
So what was next for tetrapod adaptations in terrestrial environments?
Well, water was still needed for reproduction.
So as these tetrapods began to expand into a wide variety of environments, some faced
some new challenges in places where water sources dried up completely.
How do you adapt to such conditions?
Well, for reproduction, the answer was surprisingly similar in timing and structure to what plants
did.
When they made the transition to seeds, land animals would begin to enclose an egg with
its own internal water pool and food supply, which came in handy during times of drought
or the expansion of arid environments.
Remember the two ice ages and mass extinctions of 370 to 360 million years ago and 320 million
years ago?
And with enclosed eggs came other adaptations that caused certain lineages of these tetrapods
to become the first reptiles during the carboniferous period, about 320 million years ago.
So this transition for animals will be the subject of our next lecture, the evolution
of the enclosed egg and the resulting evolution of the first reptiles.
