Hello, and welcome back to the course.
I hope everybody's ready for another trip back into deep time.
In the previous lecture, we looked at the first major transition evolution.
That was the shift from prokaryotic to eukaryotic cells.
The more complex cells of eukaryotes, given their wider variety of functions and adaptations,
that pretty much set the stage then for the evolution of multicellular eukaryotes.
In this lecture, we're going to look specifically at the early evolution of multicellular eukaryotes
known to scientists as metazoans.
Otherwise, you and me, we might just call them animals.
Although other multicellular eukaryotes may have evolved, such as types of algae and plants,
the evolution of animals is a particularly pertinent transition.
We're going to discuss that in this course, going from invertebrate animals to humans.
But for today, we're going to be looking at these early metazoans.
While the fossil evidence of this earliest animal life, as well as the questions this
evidence provoked, this has intrigued an inspired paleontologist for quite a while.
This evolutionary transition, though, between these single celled eukaryotes, also known
as protozoans, had to have happened during the latter part of the protozoan.
That was between 1 billion and about 600 million years ago.
We're also going to consider a few questions about metazoans.
For instance, how long ago did metazoans should have shown up in the protozoic?
How old are these various types of fossil evidence for these early metazoans?
What are some of the places where these fossils have been found?
What types of fossil evidence do we have for metazoans?
And what are some interpretations we might have for how did these animals live and how
did they evolve?
We'll also compare these early animals to animals that we have around today and how
these differences may reflect some sort of evolutionary responses to unique environmental
conditions from about 550 to 600 million years ago.
So let's go back to that term metazoan.
As I mentioned earlier, metazoan is a synonym for animal, but this term refers to a very
important distinguishing aspect of animals compared to, say, other types of life.
As you probably all know, animals are multicellular organisms composed of eukaryotic cells.
There goes some eukaryotic cells right now.
All of you are composed of them.
But the metaprethix refers to change, and the zoan is animal, and that hints at how
the ability to change somehow sets us apart from other multicellular eukaryotes.
I mentioned earlier that plants are multicellular organisms.
They're also composed of eukaryotic cells.
But those cells in animals are going to be very different from those of plants, and animals
differ considerably in their development and physiology.
Well, for one example, animal cells lack chloroplasts.
Last time I checked, nope, no chloroplasts.
Plants instead use those for photosynthesis in their cells.
This means that animals cannot manufacture their own food using sunlight, but instead
they have to depend on eating plants, other animals, or otherwise ingest organic material
for their nutritional needs.
Hence we call animals heterotrophs, whereas plants are autotrophs.
Well, just a minute you say.
Fungi are also multicellular eukaryotes and heterotrophs.
Are you saying I'm like a fungus?
Well, no offense to either animals or fungi, but yes, animals actually are very distantly
related to fungi.
It turns out in their evolutionary histories, fungi and animals shared a common ancestor
more recently than with plants.
Now this is an insight that was completely unexpected at one time, but we've confirmed
it repeatedly through these molecular phylogenies, which we're going to discuss in just a bit.
So nonetheless, these eukaryotic cells of animal cells, they're going to be different
from other eukaryotes by having these cell membranes.
In contrast, plants and fungi have stiff cell walls.
Eukaryotic cells with cell membranes enable animals to change into many different shapes
during a single lifetime.
This means they have more plasticity in their growth history or ontogeny.
Think about the huge differences in the body of a human or any other animal as it goes
from an embryo to, well, say a professor lecturing in a classroom.
This is going to give you an idea of how animals have an amazing ability to change and rearrange
their cells throughout their growth.
Well, when did these first metazoans evolve?
Well, to answer that question, paleontologists often work together with biologists who study
the evolution of organisms through their calculation of molecular phylogenies.
I mentioned molecular phylogenies and molecular clocks several times already, and these are
indeed related to one another.
Molecular phylogenies are evolutionary lineages based on genetic differences in molecules
of modern organisms.
Think about DNA and RNA, for example.
Those contain genes that are inferred to have changed through regularly occurring mutations
over the course of time.
Now, some of these changes were so regular, in fact, that molecular biologists refer to
them as molecular clocks.
The overarching principle of a molecular clock is that the amount of genetic change, or you
might say genetic distance, between two organisms corresponds to that amount of time elapsed
since they diverged from one another.
A rate, by definition, is change over time.
So once these molecular biologists have calculated a rate and the differences of one organism's
DNA or RNA from another, they can then solve for time.
Ideally, these times are also bracketed by using known appearances of fossils of that
lineage.
But, if the fossils haven't been discovered yet, which is common in paleontology, then
scientists use the molecular clocks to predict when those fossils should occur.
For example, molecular clocks apply to humans and chimpanzees show a genetic distance of
about five to seven million years.
That means they split from a common ancestor around six million years ago.
Well, so far, we don't have any fossils from rocks that directly represent that split,
but there are fossils on either side of it that help the paleoanthropologists attest these
molecular clocks.
Dr. John Hawks will talk more about this topic in one of his upcoming lectures.
When applied to the origin of animals, though, the first attempts at these molecular clocks
let's just say they had a few problems, because they suggested an evolutionary development
that happened much, much further back in time than we expected.
The initial calculations yielded dates about 1.2 billion years ago for the divergence of
animals from single cell eukaryotes.
That's way older than any metazon fossils found thus far.
As of now, the oldest undoubted and abundant metazon body fossils are in rocks from about
550 to 600 million years ago.
That's the case when the first molecular clock dates were figured out.
So this 1.2 billion year age for the divergence, that was briefly supported by discoveries
of some supposed metazon trace fossils, which were these so-called trails, but it turned
out they weren't right.
These were rejected by most of the paleontological community.
These were interpreted originally as a billion years old, turned out, nope, they weren't.
So it was back to the drawing board for the molecular biologists.
Such a disparity between these calculated dates and the fossil record really annoyed
molecular paleontologists, who then from their labs told us paleontologists go out there
and find some fossils, prove us right.
But to paleontologists, this absence of life from 1.2 billion years ago through fossils
that was completely expected.
For one thing, older fossils had more time to be destroyed by Earth processes.
Think about weathering, erosion, and plate tectonics, just to name a few.
So fossils from so long ago, those are going to be more rare compared to younger fossils.
So the earliest animals may have been soft bodied and very small, meaning they may not
have been preserved in the first place, or even in a way we could recognize them.
So who was right, the molecular biologists or the paleontologists?
Well, it turned out the molecular biologists were wrong, but it took other molecular biologists
to figure that out.
Remember when I said the dates are calibrated by using known times for the first appearances,
some fossils?
Well the researchers extrapolated the results partially on the basis of genetic distance
in vertebrate animals.
Vertebrate animals, it turned out, have slower rates of genetic change compared to invertebrates.
As a result, the molecular biologists very likely overestimated divergence time for the
first animals.
Well after correcting for this factor, the dates came down a little bit, they're now
closer to a billion years ago.
And that's a bit more reasonable compared to 1.2 billion years or older.
So what else do we use to estimate the initial evolution of metazones and test these molecular
phylogenies?
Well one very exciting recent development comes from chemical fossils, namely biomarkers.
Just to review, organisms sometimes leave behind diagnostic biochemical compounds that
stay preserved in the rocks.
This is even if you can't see any other evidence of, say, a body fossil or trace fossil.
For example, these compounds called starines, these were found in a sedimentary deposit
in Canada, dated from about 635 million years ago, and these document that certain types
of sponges lived at that time.
Sponges are the simplest known metazoans, so this chemical evidence fits very well with
expectations based on modern biology.
Even better we find the same distinctive compounds in modern sponges, and it gets even better.
These same compounds are in rocks from the same area over 100 million years, from 635
to 535 million years ago.
That places sponges from the later part of the protozoa chion into the early part of
the Phanerozoa chion.
So as of now, this is the oldest evidence for animals in the geologic record.
Although molecular phylogenies predict we should, someday, find evidence that's even
older, and say closer to 1 billion years ago.
As of now, biomarkers from the 635 million years sedimentary deposits, those give us
a minimum time for the metazoans in the fossil record.
The currently raining hypothesis for the origin of animals is that the first one is descended
from colonial eukaryotes that had flagella, these little whip-like appendages that you
see in single cells.
This hypothesis fits well with our view of sponges as the most primitive animals we have
around today.
Sponges are these loosely organized collections of cells and, here's what's cool, they include
these flagellated cells called choanocytes.
These closely resemble single celled, flagellated eukaryotes called choanoflagellates.
So based on these modern analogs, as well as the previously mentioned biomarker evidence,
we still accept the hypothesis that sponges, or animals, very much like sponges were the
first metazoans.
And before we move on to discuss the actual body fossils of metazoans, though, we need
to know what we're looking for.
And to do this, an evolutionary distinction between two major groups of animals should
be made.
Metazoans are divided into two main groups based on their cellular organization and their
symmetry.
The first group, radiata, is represented by radially symmetrical animals, as you might
imagine from its name.
This group is composed of sponges, otherwise known as peripherals, true jellyfish, also
known as skyphozoans, primitive animals that look like jellyfish but aren't called comb
jellies or tinophores, hydrazoans such as Portuguese man of war, and anthozoans, which
includes medaria, a group that has sea anemones and corals.
Now the second group of metazoans is the bilateria, that includes all other animals.
As you can tell from that name, these have some sort of bilateral symmetry in their body
plans.
Take a look at yourself sometime and you'll see that you are a bilaterian.
Evolutionary scientists consider bilaterians to have evolved from ancestors resembling
these jellyfish or comb jellies we mentioned earlier, and that's based on their more complex
arrangement of cells into tissues that allow for digestive tracts, nervous systems, and
circulatory systems.
Think of a typical earthworm as one example, and it has all of those systems, whereas a
sponge, jellyfish, or coral doesn't have any of those.
So when we look at what we think are metazoan fossils from the Precambrian, we often ask
ourselves if they fit into either one of these groups, radiata, or bilateria.
Where do we find the earliest metazoan fossils?
Well metazoan body and or trace fossils are in rocks from about 600 million years ago,
but they're most common in Precambrian deposits from about 580 to 550 million years ago.
These fossils come from South Australia, they come from Siberia and Russia, Namibia and
Africa, South China, England, and right here in the United States we have some, coming
from California and North Carolina.
Well the fossils from the Ediacara Hills of South Australia, those are probably the
most important.
Discovered by geologist Reg Spriggs in 1946, Spriggs was very surprised to find these fossils
because the conventional wisdom at the time was that Precambrian rocks contain no fossils
of animal life.
In fact, it wasn't until the discovery in 1957 of very similar fossils in England that
paleontologists started making connections between these Precambrian fossils from different
parts of the world.
This was followed by a lot of research that confirmed the Precambrian ages of the rocks
as well as the similarities between the fossils and where we're off to the races so to speak.
Paleontologists' eyes were seemingly opened up and they started finding many more such
fossils in Precambrian rocks.
Now because of the original discovery of these fossils in the Ediacara Hills as well as their
abundance and variety, these fossils became great examples for other such fossils and
they are collectively called the Ediacarum biota.
That time span they represent, that's also been dubbed the Ediacarum period.
Well, what do these earliest metazones look like?
Most are preserved as impressions or filled with sand as internal molds.
Most of these fossils must have had relatively stiff, tough exteriors, although almost all
of them were soft bodied.
They lacked shells, they didn't have bones, or any other sorts of mineralized tissues.
Probably the most spectacular body fossils found in recent years, however, are also the
smallest.
These are interpreted as fossil embryos and they come from rocks in South China, dated
as about 580 million years old.
Although these fossils have been disputed, they so closely resemble the stages of cell
division seen in modern animals that they are probably just that, fossil embryos.
Now body fossils superficially resembling both radiata and bilateria that we see today, those
come out of the Ediacarum period, but there's a few important exceptions there and that's
indicated by their lack of definite organs or other anatomical traits we normally associate
with modern animals.
So it lends to a little bit of doubt about their exact identities.
Nonetheless, let's look at some of these.
Spriginia, for instance, this little fossil was named in honor of Reg Spriggs, the geologist
who discovered these fossils, looks like a segmented worm or an odd arthropod, but the
problem is it doesn't have any sense organs like eyes, it doesn't have any antenna, and
it doesn't otherwise seem to have any means of detecting the outside world and what we
would ordinarily call ahead.
It also doesn't have any legs.
What it does have, though, is a definite bilateral symmetry.
So it makes sense to classify it as a bilaterium.
Although we think this animal moved about on the seafloor, we don't have any direct
evidence of that life habit either.
Dickinsonia, that's an interesting one.
This is a giant fossil about the size of a large dinner plate, but flatter than a pancake.
It also has a bilateral symmetry to it, but with ridges radiating from a central dividing
line.
But like Spriginia, it does not have any obvious eyes, mouth, or other organs.
Most paleontologists think it's like a giant flat worm of some sort, and an interesting
aspect of it, though, is the seems that it was able to move along the sea bottom because
we sometimes find trace fossils directly associated with the bodies.
Now, pterodidium, this fossil has generated a lot of attention because of its superficial
of resemblance to a so-called soft coral or a sea pin.
It's bilaterally symmetrical, and a detailed look at its body parts, though, when we compare
it to, say, these sea pins or sea fans, that kind of breaks down.
This and these similar fossils, they have a basal disc that was used to attach it to
the sea bottom, a stalk, and a main body, and a pointed top.
But because we're very sure they stayed in one place, they were passively gathering nutrition
from water currents, we're not so sure that they necessarily are like corals, that they
use some sort of predation, like stinging cells to kill their food.
Now, tribrachydium is a very interesting fossil because it has this radial symmetry,
it has this three-arm structure, as you can see, in the middle of this disc-like body.
So it's really tempting to say it belongs to radiata, or you could say it's an echinoderma
of some sort, but echinoderms, as you recall, maybe have a five-fold symmetry, not three-fold.
So what is it?
We don't know for sure.
But otherwise, it's a great example of one that's difficult to classify.
Now, Kimberella, this fossil is one of the more interesting ones because the earliest
metazoans, this one, resembles a miluskin.
At first, paleontologists assumed it was more closely related to jellyfish, they classified
it as radiata, but then a closer examination of several specimens showed that it had a
bilateral symmetry and maybe more of a stiff body.
Even more exciting is its association with trace fossils that have scratch marks.
These indicate this animal is scraping and presumably eating algal mats at the time.
This behavior was extremely significant in the evolution of early animals in that it
showed how they were starting to exploit these new food sources and alter their surrounding
environments.
These bigger and easily seen body fossils, like the ones Spriggs originally found in
Australia, are weird and wonderful in their forms, with more than 100 species identified
thus far.
Sure, some of these fossils do look a little weird, and some of them, alternatively, look
like modern sea pence, sea corals, and they have enlarged disks from like projections.
They superficially resemble jellyfish, segmented worms, arthropods, miluskins, or even echinoderms
like sea stars and sand dollars.
But a closer look at their anatomies reveals just how wrong these identifications can be.
Now, when we look at some of these organisms that are certainly bilateral symmetrical, we
should be able to classify them as bilaterians, but these bilaterians lack obvious sensory
organs or even alimentary canals.
No eyes, no guts, or anatomical accoutrements we take for granted in most modern bilaterians.
So these oddities have led a few paleontologists to propose some of these animals weren't animals.
They were instead one-celled organisms, really big ones.
Fungi, or some symbiotic eukaryotes, they used chloroplasts, and thus they were more
like lichens than animals.
So this is why you'll sometimes hear a few properly cautious paleontologists call these
fossils the Ediacaran biota rather than the Ediacaran fauna.
Nevertheless, despite their strangeness, most paleontologists accept that the vast majority
of these fossils do indeed represent abundant evidence for metazoan life.
Furthermore, they hypothesize they represent evolutionary experiments during the latter
part of the Precambrian, as explained later.
Now these metazoan trace fossils are also very important for looking at too, not just
the body fossils, because these are direct indicators of metazoan behavior.
Metazoan trace fossils from the Ediacaran include these shallow horizontal burrows, surface
trails, or scrape marks.
These trace fossils were made by metazoans exactly where we find them, and this gives
us some insights on metazoan interactions with their original environments.
Only a few types of metazoan trace fossils have been found, and they typically consist,
like I said earlier, of these simple trails, horizontally oriented burrows, a few scrape
marks.
But these trace fossils are very important for helping us to understand the evolution
of these early animals, because we can look at these and interpret behavior, and very often
they're made in the environment where the animal was living.
On the other hand, body fossils could have been transported by currents and buried far
away from where they lived.
In many instances, we can only speculate how they behaved.
Probably the best example of a Precambrian metazoan trace fossil linked to a body fossil
that we showed earlier is that of the previously mentioned scrape marks, which match the size
in the form of the body fossil Kimbrella, and in some cases Kimbrella is at the end
of that trail.
But there are a few other examples of Ediacaran fossils that are connected to trace fossils
such as Dickinsonia.
This means that some of the earliest animals were capable of movement.
This implies they had evolved internal musculature and other means of getting about.
But probably the most evolution or remarkable trait of Precambrian metazoans showed by trace
fossils is how shallowly animals burrowed.
These burrows, trails, scrapings, they're all on very simple horizontal planes.
There's very few to no indications of any sort of deep burrowing that we see in modern
animals today.
The evolutionary reasons for why this change in a big way during the Cambrian period will
be discussed further in the next lecture.
But suffice it to say that for this sort of evolution of marine communities, this was
a big shift and not just in the lineage of organisms.
What do these body and trace fossils tell us about Precambrian metazoan lifestyles and
evolution?
All Ediacaran metazoans were living in shallow marine environments.
Their forms were also closely associated with the sediment bottom.
Most of these were sedentary and they were attached to the bottom.
A few mobile forms were around in which they were moving about, crawling or just below
the sediment surface with burrowing.
And there's some evidence of animals that might have floated, but there's no evidence
of them swimming.
And we can look at some of these trace fossils and know that they were also moving by grazing
on algal mats or they were feeding on organic material while burrowing horizontally underneath
the surface.
So what caused this seemingly sudden appearance of abundant metazoans in the fossil record
from about 600 to 550 million years ago?
The simplest explanation thus far offered is that these represent a relatively rapid
evolution of animals following a long time of global cooling.
This has, no pun intended, a cool name, Snowball Earth.
This cooling was probably caused by photosynthesis because if you think about it, cyanobacteria
and algae, they proliferated on the protozoan.
Increased photosynthesis decreased carbon dioxide and methane.
Both of those are greenhouse gases.
So their declines would have corresponded to lower temperatures.
At the same time it would have increased oxygen and oxygen is good for metazoans, hence it
would have helped the evolution of metazoans.
This long period of glaciation which lasted nearly 100 million years ended just before
abundant metazoans become more common in the geologic record.
The onset of widespread warm shallow seas as well as a break up of a supercondent called
Rodinia after about 650 million years ago, that allowed life to thrive and then diversify
under new selection pressures.
Climate productivity also would have increased with these increasing temperatures as algae
would have grown and reproduced more readily in the world's oceans.
This gives really good evolutionary reasons for new species of animals to occupy new ecological
niches.
And speaking of selection pressures, what is unique about metazoan evolution during
the protozoic young is this apparent rarity of predators.
Hence it's led to this tongue-in-cheek nickname of this time as the Garden of Idiacra.
Well things soon changed though.
Starting in the Cambrian period at about 540 million years ago, predators became more
common and the so-called arms race between predators and prey began with the co-evolution
of many animal lineages affected ever since.
Now while other feeding behaviors remained at some lineages of animals, predation evolved
as a strategy for readily acquiring more available animal protein.
This development resulted in selection for various modes of protection against predation
such as the development of skeletons.
In turn, predators would have had to evolve ways to get past these skeletons if they were
going to get a meal.
So how could changing environments and evolution cause such a rapid increase in proliferation
of skeletons and predation?
That is the subject of the next lecture.
See you in the Cambrian and with it its evolution.
