Hello, and welcome to the next major transition in evolution, where we're going to look at
the beginnings of the basic body plan that much leader was utilized by humans and so
many of our other favorite animals.
The last transition we covered was about the development of bio mineralization in animals,
and that seemed to have happened in a very short period of time within the Cambrian
period, but actually took place over tens of millions of years, starting in the E.D.
Akron period, and then it accelerated during the Cambrian period.
We also explored how this innovation might have been an evolutionary consequence of animals
adapting to both the changing chemistry of the world's oceans, acceptations being involved
in that, and there was some sort of co-evolution driven by the interactions of predators and
prey.
Among the examples of bio mineralization we discussed was the formation of appetite.
Now that's the calcium phosphate that composes the teeth and bones and vertebrates, and that
brings us to our next major evolutionary transition, which is going to be the shift of invertebrates
to vertebrates.
So I'll start this lecture out by talking about a long-standing paleontological mystery
that was related to the early evolution of vertebrates, and this mystery was just solved
in the past few decades.
It was presented by these enigmatic fossils called conodons.
Conodons are small, phosphatic, tooth-like structures found in rocks such as limestone
formed in marine environments.
Now these conodons ranged in geologic age from the middle of the Cambrian period starting
about 0550 million years ago until the end of the Triassic period, or around 200 million
years ago.
So, in total, they were around for more than 300 million years.
Now paleontologists first recognized these fossils in the mid-19th century, but their
exact identities were unknown until well into the second half of the 20th century, hence
the mystery.
Conodons were abundant, they were easily identifiable, and they are geographically widespread.
They also evidently underwent their own evolution, based on how they showed changes in their
forms through time.
But because conodons were always found as these disaggregated and isolated elements, paleontologists
disagreed on just what animals they belonged to.
Were they the remains of some sort of soft-body marine invertebrates, or were they from soft
body marine vertebrates?
The phosphatic composition of conodons, composed of calcium phosphate, the mineral appetite,
suggested they were linked to vertebrates.
After all, this is the same material found in vertebrate teeth and bones.
No other evidence supported this affiliation, however, so this interpretation remained unconfirmed.
Everybody presumed that most of the conodon-bearing animals were probably soft-body, so only
their mineralized parts were making it into the fossil record, the conodons.
Lacking any more evidence from actual bodies, some paleontologists continued to hold out
for the possibility that conodons may have come from some sort of odd, extinct group
of invertebrates.
All in all, though, conodons were like pieces of a puzzle, but one for which there was no
picture on the box to guide anyone putting it back together.
And to make matters even worse, about 95% of the other pieces were missing from the
box.
As a result, the box labelling for the conodons should have said, will require more than 100
years to warn paleontologists just how long it would take to solve this puzzle.
Well, then, in 1983, this fossil was found in Scotland from the early Carboniferous
period, which was about 360 to 320 million years ago.
This fossil helped to shed some light on this problem.
The fossil, Clytonathus, not only had an assemblage of conodons altogether in one place, but these
were directly associated with the impression of a long, thin, eel-like animal.
The conodon animal was finally revealed.
The conodons were indeed these tooth-like elements, and they were arranged around one
end of the animal, so these were interpreted as structures associated with a mouth.
The fossil also seemed to have this cord-like structure running down its length, called
a notochord, these V-shaped musculature along its sides called myomeres, and it had these
tail fins.
Any organism with these traits, we call a chordate.
That's a huge category that covers all vertebrates as well as certain invertebrates, such as
the conodon animals.
We'll come back to the differences between chordates and vertebrates later, but for now,
suffice it to say that it was a huge breakthrough to know that conodons belong to an extinct
group of chordates.
One of the hallmarks of science is that experiments should be repeatable, and, fortunately, sometimes
the fossil record helps us out by providing more than one specimen of a rare fossil.
This happy circumstance becomes even more likely once paleontologists know what fossils
to look for, and then they can recognize these in rocks.
Well, sure enough, since 1983, at least 10 more specimens of these conodon-bearing animals
have been reported, and all of these are eel-like animals with the previously listed traits of
chordates.
In fact, paleontologists have even gone one step further and lied these fossils with vertebrates.
Citing their similarity to modern lampraise and hagfish, otherwise known as slime eels,
which are these primitive, jawless fishes that live in today's oceans.
So we now know that conodons were tooth-like elements in chordates similar to what we have
in modern jawless fishes.
We also know this group of animals was very successful in its evolution, starting in the
Cambrian period and for more than 300 million years afterwards.
What is somewhat humbling about this fossil evidence for primitive chordates was how it
had been under the noses of paleontologists for more than a century, yet only recently
have they been able to relate conodons to the early evolution of chordates and vertebrates.
So, one of the central questions we have to ask about this evolutionary transition is,
how did the evolution of invertebrates lead to the evolution of vertebrates?
For a reason, we'll be sure about the when part of this transition.
Now no definite fossils resembling chordates are in the Ediacaran period, and the oldest
known fossil chordate is from the earliest part of the Cambrian period.
So this evolutionary transition must have taken place between about 545 and 530 million
years ago, but conodons show up in fossil record about 515 million years ago.
Well, this means chordates and vertebrates had already been evolving and diversifying
minimally for over 15 million years.
Well, what are chordates and what invertebrates are most closely related to vertebrates?
Let's define chordates first, and what we'll do is distinguish chordates then from vertebrates.
Chordates have the following important traits.
They have openings or slits in the region of the pharynx, often called pharyngeal gill
slits.
They have a notochord.
That's a structure that runs along the length of the animal to support its nerve cord.
They also have a dorsally located nerve cord that goes along with the notochord.
Now what might be a little confusing is that some chordates are also invertebrates, which
is to say they're not vertebrates, but vertebrates are chordates.
It's just that vertebrates have definite back bones, or some other means of stiff support
for their spines, such as bones around their cords.
So in other words, there are invertebrate chordates and vertebrate chordates.
This makes it easier to figure out how invertebrates evolved into vertebrates.
We just look at modern and fossil non-vertebrate chordates for some clues.
In fact, the how for the transition between invertebrates and vertebrates is perhaps easiest
to answer by just examining modern animals that have the same characteristics we'd expect
to find in fossils representing those transitions.
Ideally, an animal that's in between invertebrates and vertebrates is going to have some sort
of blend of anatomical traits shared between invertebrate chordates and primitive vertebrates.
But we also might want to make sure we have the right invertebrate precursors, too.
So let's examine some invertebrates that are not chordates, but also share some traits
with chordates, too.
So we do have some non-chordated invertebrates that just happen to share a few anatomical
traits with chordates.
These animals belong to a group that's appropriately named hemichordata, and its members are called
hemichordates.
Now, hemichordates share a common characteristic with echino-derms.
In turn, both of these non-chordates share a common ancestor with chordates.
So when we look at an evolutionary chart of those, you can see the relatedness of where
hemichordates are going to be more closely associated with echino-derms, but that group
had a common ancestor then with chordates.
Now, hemichordates are best represented today by acorn worms.
These are burrowing, worm-like animals that live in shallow marine environments.
I personally have seen many of their burrows on Georgia beaches, although I rarely see
the animals themselves.
But there's a large number of species of these acorn worms that are distributed in the oceans
worldwide.
Another group of hemichordates that lives in relatively deeper parts of the ocean, especially
in the southern hemisphere, are taro-branks.
I will not say much about these relatively rare animals other than to point out how they're
very likely living relatives of the most common hemichordates preserved in the fossil record.
These are called graptolates.
This extinct group of colonial animals floated in the Paleozoic oceans, and it was represented
by a good number of species, and it had a worldwide distribution.
They show up in rocks from the latest part of the Cambrian period, or a little less
than 500 million years ago, and then they disappear from the fossil record by about 320 million
years ago in the Carboniference period.
In short, hemichordates have been around as long as chordates and have undergone their
own evolutionary history that's separate from the chordates.
Now, hemichordates share a few traits with chordates, such as possessing this dorsal
nerve cord, openings that resemble gill slits, and they have a stoma cord.
A stoma cord is a tube-like structure that runs along the length of the animal that very
much resembles a noda cord.
But hemichordates are also related to echinoderms based on similarities of their larvae and
their DNA, which is why evolutionary biologists have concluded these two groups shared a common
ancestor.
So however difficult it might be to imagine a sea cucumber or sand dollar as a distant
relative to chordates, they are.
Remember this when you look into echinoderm and think about how it is your evolutionary
cousin, although their calcareous skeletons tell you just how far removed they are from
your family tree, which may be as a relief.
A chordates, as mentioned earlier, though, those include vertebrates, and these are placed
under a group called craniata.
Closely related invertebrate animals consist of two groups, urocordata and cephalochordata.
So you can see how all three of those groups are comprising the chordates and how vertebrates
are then a separate branch from a common ancestor within chordata.
You can probably name lots of examples of modern vertebrates, sharks, bony fish, amphibians,
reptiles, birds, mammals.
But in my experience, most people have a really tough time coming up with even a few examples
of urocordates and cephalochordates.
So we're going to look at those animals more closely before we get back to vertebrates.
Living examples of urocordates include sea squirts.
Because of their unfortunate tendency to squirt sea water into people's eyes, as soon
as you take them out of the water and peer at them more closely, I've had this happen
before too, so I can attest to their names.
These sea squirts are also classified, though, as tunicates.
And their chordates, because their larval forms have notochordates, their adult forms
have pharyngeal gill slits.
Most people, including myself, find this amazing, because the adults look just like some sort
of sea anemone or sponge or bryozoan or some other simpler invertebrate.
In fact, tunicates are also related to plants.
Their name comes from the tunic they build around their soft bodies using cellulose,
a compound produced by many plants but very rare in animals.
So there's a bit of a convergence there in that evolution.
Now cephalochordates, on the other hand, include modern animals that are very much pertinent
to our discussion of early vertebrate evolution.
Tunicordates living today are known as lancelits or amphioxis, and these are regarded as modern
examples of immediate ancestors to the most primitive vertebrates.
These little animals, much of which are not much longer than a Swiss army knife, have
very straightforward body plans.
They have a streamlined blade-like body, pharyngeal gill slits again, a dorsal notochord, muscles
arranged in myomeres, and a tail that extends past its anus.
This is sometimes called a post-anal tail.
Now I know, that sounds like some horrible medical condition, but it's perfectly normal
even in vertebrates, simply meaning there's a tail that extends past the anus.
Lancelits, however, have no mineralized tissues whatsoever if they're completely soft body.
So true vertebrates, on the other hand, they're much more likely to have all of the traits
of a chordate, pharyngeal gill slits, dorsal notochord, myomeres, post-anal tail, but also
some hardening of body parts.
So that could be as cartilage, that could be as teeth, or that could be as bones.
Now later in their evolution, vertebrates replace cartilaginous notochords, in some
craniates, to form the first true backbones.
Clearly, though, sharks, which don't have backbones, as well as other cartilaginous
fish, like rays and skates, have shown that backbones were not really needed in some lineages
of vertebrates.
But with this quick little zoological tour of chordates, you might be now more aware
of the incredible diversity of their forms, ranging from tunicates to humans.
True vertebrates, though, are more narrowly defined as belonging to craniota.
Craniota includes hagfish, lamprace, and jawed fish, otherwise known as nathostomes.
Craniota include vertebrates, and most modern vertebrates are descended from jawed fish.
As the name implies, craniots have heads supported by skulls, but these can be composed of either
cartilage or bone.
So when we look at an evolutionary chart of those, you can see how, again, the craniots
and the preceding groups of echinoderms, hemichordates, and chordates are all related
to one another, with this craniota as being one of the outgroups.
Now other than the anatomical similarities of modern echinoderms, hemichordates, and
chordates, what types of evidence back the evolutionary transition of, say, hemichordates
to chordates?
Well, why not look first at their fossil record?
The following fossils serve as some excellent examples of early chordate invertebrate evolution.
They also look similar enough to one another that their chordate traits, such as gill slits,
myomeres, and post anal tails, can be sorted out without much difficulty at all.
Now the oldest known chordate is uninozoan.
This is from the early Cambrian of China in rocks that are about 530 million years old.
This beautiful little fossil looks very similar to a modern cephalochordate, and in fact is
regarded as one bipalientologist.
Another early chordate, looking very similar to it, the previous one is picaea.
This is from the Middle Cambrian of British Columbia in Canada.
You remember the British Shale fauna, which we discussed in the previous lecture, while
picaea came out of that same fossil assemblage.
And for quite a while it was regarded as the oldest known chordate until, of course, uninozoan
and some other fossils from China displaced it.
These two fossils are similar enough to one another that they probably were closely related.
Well, there are several other early chordates from China, and we'll go through some of these
here.
Haikuela, for instance, that's an anatomically closer fit to a vertebrate when you compare
to say picaea or uninozoan.
So more than 300 specimens of this fossil have been found, consequently it's really
well studied, it's very well described.
Amazingly, these specimens are only a little more than an inch long, but they show impressions
of the brain, heart, notochord, aorta, and other detailed anatomical attributes.
So if I had to name a transitional fossil between non-vertebrate chordates and the true
vertebrates, this would be it, because a lot of paleontologists would have a tough time
deciding whether it's one or the other.
So what's the oldest known vertebrate from the fossil record?
Well, there's two possible candidates for that from the early Cambrian, again coming
from China, a mylocung mingia and haikuic theis.
Now unlike the previously mentioned fossils, these both seem to have primitive skulls.
Now they're not mineralized ones like I'm wearing right now, these are likely made of
cartilage.
Now mineralized skulls would have made them more akin to craniots or true vertebrates,
although not everyone accepts this classification.
Nonetheless, even if these were not vertebrates, they're very, very close.
So with all of these fossils in mind, as well as knowledge of conodons as the parts of primitive
vertebrates that were very similar to modern lamprey and hagfish, we have a really good
assessment of the fossil record for chordate evolution during the Cambrian period.
But was this Cambrian period actually the time when chordates evolved from non-chordates
and then vertebrates evolved from non-vertebrates?
No, probably not.
Some evolutionary biologists have proposed an even earlier evolution.
Now such assumptions, of course, are based on molecular clock data, and this molecular
clock data shows that divergences happen in the protozoa chion between 750 and 800 million
years ago.
Now this is 200 or 300 million years before the fossil record shows these animals in,
say, China or Canada or other places in the world.
So this makes paleontologists just a little suspicious of such dates.
As we learned before, molecular clocks tend to overestimate divergent times in evolution,
thus they're less accurate as we go further back in geologic time, too.
Nonetheless, this evidence suggests that kinoderms, hemichordates, urocordates, cephalochordates,
and vertebrates all likely originated during the pre-Cambrian.
Now, unfortunately, fossils of their descended lineages were not preserved, or we haven't
found them yet.
Moreover, this early evolution, this was also probably tied into snowball earth, which
you recall previous lecture when we talked about the evolution of the early metazoans.
This was a time of extended glaciations mentioned when we discussed it before, and in this hypothesis
life in general would have experienced these really long periods of stasis during cooler
times, whereas warmer times would have triggered some sort of greater diversification.
Now once the earth warmed up for an extended time during the deacron period after 650 million
years ago, core date evolution may also have heated up with it.
In short though, paleontologists would not be surprised at all if someone, someday, discovered
a pre-Cambrian vertebrate fossil.
Sadly, these fossils are probably very rare.
As we discussed in the previous lecture, the fossil record received this really big boost
starting with the Cambrian period, and that happened as the world's oceans became more
saturated with calcium, which helped with bio mineralization and bicarbonate, and these
other elements that then aided in animals donating their bodies to science.
Nonetheless, I would love to be proved wrong on this, and for some paleontologists, somewhere
to find these pre-Cambrian core dates.
Now whether those would be invertebrate or vertebrate core dates, I don't care.
It'd be a great find.
So along those lines, some excitement was generated in 2006 when there was a fossil identified
as a chordate, similar to a cephalochordate, and it was discovered in the Ediacaran of
Australia.
Well, later analyses though are leaning more toward this fossil as an oddly preserved specimen
of Kimberella.
You remember Kimberella from several lectures back, it was more of a Moluscan type of animal.
Well, it only superficially then looks like a chordate if preserved in certain ways.
Oh well, better luck next time.
Okay, so that was the fossil evidence.
What else do we have showing evolutionary linkages between invertebrates and vertebrates?
Well, lots.
For example, we could look at embryology, or as it's known today, developmental biology.
This provides some insights on how echinoderms, hemichordates, and chordates are actually
closely related.
The swimming larvae of echinoderms and hemichordates are another example.
Both of those live in marine environments, and they're strikingly similar to one another
in their overall anatomy and their forms.
So this also links them to chordates.
Molecular clocks are also interesting to look at because, as we just mentioned, genetic
similarities between echinoderms, hemichordates, and chordates can be discerned from these.
These analyses support interpretations of their relatedness, and they've helped to pinpoint
common ancestries among those groups.
So based on a combination of what we know from fossils and modern biology, we now have
a much better handle on how echinoderms, hemichordates, urocordates, cephalochordates, and craniates,
like me, all share a fascinating story of evolution since the Precambrian that certainly
became a lot more detailed in the Cambrian.
So why is this evolutionary transition important?
Other than, of course, our obvious bias that we vertebrates have become interested in our
own origins.
Well, one independent way to judge this importance is to do a what-if scenario.
That is, what if vertebrates had never evolved from invertebrates?
So now I want you to just erase vertebrates from the world and think about what would
be left and how different life would be.
Well, insects would still rule the land and skies, regardless of whether vertebrates
were around or not.
But vertebrates change the world in many ways, occupying every environment on Earth, from
the deep oceans to the high mountains.
So other than humans, of course, modern vertebrates play major roles in all ecosystems.
Some even act as keystone species, and a keystone species is a species that, if you took it
out of that ecosystem, it would completely change that ecosystem into an environment
very different from what you see today.
So just for a short list of vertebrates, think about what would be missing from life if the
following vanished tomorrow.
All fish, sharks, rays, bluegill, bass, catfish, tuna, salmon, flounder, or any fish you might
ordinarily like to catch while fishing, eat for dinner, watch swimming in an aquarium,
or view in their natural habitats in freshwater marine environments.
All amphibians, such as frogs, toads, noose, salamanders, they would all be gone.
All reptiles, that would include alligators, crocodiles, lizards, and snakes.
All birds, which today are represented by about 10,000 species.
All mammals, which is about 5,500 species, from eggling platypuses to pouchberry marsupials
to live birth placentals, such as whales and ourselves.
So with the absence of birds and frogs in particular, I want you to think about how much quieter
the world would be in terrestrial environments.
In marine environments, also think along those same lines, whales, they provide an ongoing
soundtrack throughout the world's oceans that's probably been around for the past 50
million years or so.
Now of course, all of these modern animals had their own evolutionary heritages too,
which we're going to learn about that in upcoming lectures, so just wait for those.
Nonetheless, they all can be traced to the evolutionary transition of non-core dates
to core dates, and from non-vertebrate core dates to vertebrate core dates.
Core dates really took off in their evolution after the Cambrian too.
This is especially evident in the fossil record of fishes during the rest of the Paleozoic
era.
Thus, it's going to be good for us to keep in mind how all of these animals connect back
to that lineage that is more or less hemichordate, cordate to vertebrate.
So with the evolution of the vertebrates well on its way in the Cambrian oceans, after the
Cambrian explosion, the major transitions come in much quicker.
In fact, each of the next four lectures are going to address these distinct transitions
that built directly on what happened in the Cambrian.
Next time, for instance, we're going to jump forward a mere 50 to 100 million years where
we'll find life already getting out of the water.
Tires were included in this ecological and evolutionary transition of life, but they
were preceded by the first components of terrestrial ecosystems.
So this would include land plants and arthropods.
With this next major transition in evolution, we're going to leave the Cambrian period and
we're going to travel forward in time to the Ordovician and Celerian periods, about 450
to 400 million years ago.
Once there, we're going to learn about how life overcame the challenges presented by
getting out of the water.
See you there and then.
