Greetings. I'm glad to be back for today's lecture, which is about the major transition
from monkey to ape. This was once thought to be a really key stage in human origins
because the anatomical and behavioral characteristics that we share with apes are really a fundamental
aspect of what it means to be human. But now it's clear that many of the features of living
apes are examples of parallel evolution or evolutionary convergence in primates. Phylogenetically,
we descend from apes, but those apes that are our ancestors are in many ways different
from the apes that survived today. This lecture will review early Miocene origin of apes within
Africa and the way that from that African origin apes dispersed through the Old World into
Europe and Asia. I'll also explore the reasons why ape diversity increased and then declined
over time as apes were ultimately replaced in many of their ecological niches by the
ancestors of today's Old World monkeys. And finally, I'll describe the exceptional fossil
remains of Ardipithecus, a late Miocene ape which is especially close to hominins and that really
has helped us revise some of our understanding of ape evolution. What is an ape? Well, when
you think about what apes are, you think about primates and the way that they live in the
trees and so on, but we have to consider what apes are in comparison to other living groups
of primates, in particular compared to Old World monkeys who are the closest relatives of the
apes. Living apes share a number of features that Old World monkeys don't have. Many of these
features are related to their locomotion, the way that they get around. For example, living apes
have shoulder joints that are very mobile. They're able to move their arms around in a full circle.
Other kinds of primates, in particular Old World monkeys, tend to be optimized for this sort of
motion. There are dental characteristics that apes share also. Today's Old World monkeys tend to
have molar teeth and premolar teeth that form distinct crests from side to side across them.
Apes, in contrast, don't have these high-crested teeth that make a scissor action. Apes have low
cusp teeth that grind against each other. And there are also life history characteristics
that today's apes share. Those life history characteristics include a relatively long
lifespan. They live a long time, but in particular, a long rate of maturation. They take a long
time to grow up. And a long birth interval. The spacing between successive births that a
female will have. Those life history characteristics are so unique that orangutans give birth on
average every eight years. A tremendous spacing between births. For humans, this is actually
quite short. We have spacing about three to four years in hunter-gatherer societies. But that spacing
is nothing like what we see in Old World monkeys, who give birth sometimes every year or every two
years. One thing to point out as I get into the fossil record of the apes is that a lot of them
have very similar sounding names. Their names all end in Pythicus. And what makes things more
confusing is that there are a lot of monkeys that also have names that end in Pythicus. It's a Greek
word, means ape or monkey. And primatologists have applied this all over different kinds of
primates. So I'll try to point out that the first part of the word is really what sets these monkeys
and apes apart. A good question to start off with is, are we apes? We're related to apes, and apes
are our closest relatives. So it's very common to hear people say, well, humans are just another
kind of ape. And in an evolutionary sense, it's very true. We don't form a separate group from
the apes. We descend from an ancestral ape. And yet, ape isn't a taxonomic word. It's not a formal
scientific concept. The apes we understand to be those animals that are most closely related to us
that share certain kinds of characteristics. In taxonomic terms, we call this group the
hominoids. Hominoids include all of the living apes, their fossil relatives, and also living humans.
Hominoid evolution is a process that's unfolded essentially over the last 25 million years.
But evolutionary biologists didn't always know that it was this short time period. In the early
days of evolutionary biology, people thought that humans and apes might have very, very distant
ancestry. This was recognized by pre-evolutionary biologists like Cuvier, who placed humans and
other kinds of primates into two very different families. Humans, he called the bimana, which
meant two hands, apes, monkeys, and other primates he called the quadrumana, which means four hands,
recognizing that their feet were grasping just like our hands are. In the early part of evolutionary
biology, the co-discoverer of natural selection, Alfred Russell Wallace, who worked really as a
contemporary of Darwin, thought that human evolution was so distinct that our ancestry might go back
even into the Eocene. Today, we recognize that that's 50 million years into the past. That's an
awful long time for a distinct line of humans to be separated from other primates. And Darwin, in
fact, disagreed with him about this very long supposed time of human ancestry. Darwin placed
humans alongside the African apes. He thought that we were closest to chimpanzees and gorillas. In
this respect, he was exactly right. These are our closest relatives among the living primates.
Darwin thought this was a relatively close relationship that might have taken not so long to
come to. Well, this debate over whether the human ancestry was very long or very short continued
right up into the 20th century. A very prominent early paleontologist named Henry Fairfield Osborn,
he was the director of the American Museum of Natural History and very famous for a number of
dinosaur discoveries, he also took a great interest in human evolution. And he thought that humans
should have a very long ancestry, which he placed at that time in Central Asia. Mid-century
anthropologists came to recognize that we were relatively very similar to other kinds of primates.
And one figure that stands out is Sherwood Washburn, an anthropologist who was the first really to
defend Darwin's original principle that we were close to chimpanzees and gorillas. And Washburn
in particular thought that we were closest to the chimps and that gorillas are an out group to us.
That had a number of consequences for predicting what human ancestors should look like and the
contours of what ape evolution should have been that we still are working through today.
I want to show you a cladogram that shows the general relationships of the apes
and the monkeys and humans places in this. So in this cladogram you can see that the great apes
and humans I've placed together as a group that originated something like 10 to 13 million years
ago for the ancestor of all living great apes and humans. Gibbons, who today we call the lesser
apes, diverged substantially before the great apes began to diversify, something like 16 to
20 million years ago. And that would represent the common ancestor of all the living hominoids.
Circupithicoids are the old world monkeys. They diverged from our lineage something like
22 to 26 million years ago. If we look closer into this cladogram, I've separated out the
orangutans, gorillas, bonobos, chimps and humans, the living great apes and humans. The human branch
of this is called the hominins and we'll be talking about those in the next several lectures.
Bonobos and chimps are close relatives of each other. They diverged only about a million years
ago. But humans and chimps shared an ancestor something like 4 to 7 million years ago, gorillas
a little bit further back, around 6 to 9 million years ago, and orangutans something like 10 to
13 million years ago. Now all these dates are based on molecular clock estimates, genetic comparisons
of these living primates and humans. But as you'll see in some instances they really help us to
interpret the fossil record and in others they resoundingly reinforce the evidence that we're
getting from the fossil record about the ancestry of these apes. Apes were diversifying after 20
million years ago and this in geological terms is the myosin period. Now the myosin was a different
world than today in a lot of ways. For one thing it was substantially warmer. They didn't have glacial
cycles going to temperature extremes as we have had in the last 5 million years, intensifying.
The myosin was warmer and milder. Forest covered most of the tropical and temperate world including
most of Africa, especially Central Africa, Southeast and South Asia, and the southern part at least
of Europe. One of the big differences between the myosin and now in these places is that there was
less of a rain shadow from the mountains of East Africa. There hadn't been rifting yet to the extent
that it is today separating biomes in East and Central Africa. There wasn't quite as much of a
monsoon in East Africa or Southeast Asia so that ape habitat was dispersed across most of the old
world. In addition to that there were seas that were evolving, getting smaller in fact across Asia
that once separated Asia and Africa and Europe and Asia. Those seas remained barriers but they
were shrinking during the course of the myosin leading to greater connectivity between different
parts of the old world. That gave a very important way for primates to begin to disperse into other
parts of the world and to diversify. Now the first apes that we know of lived in Africa.
The earliest of which we have good fossil evidence is called Proconcil. Proconcil lived between about
22 and 16 million years ago and it consisted of several different species. The major differences
among these species relating to body size. Some of these were relatively smaller and some of them
were a lot bigger. Proconcil in every variety that we know of was a quadruped and by quadruped I mean
that it went on all fours and had basically a pronograde posture. Its back was essentially
horizontal when it was walking. That's pretty different from any of today's great apes. Even
chimpanzees and gorillas who are quite terrestrial in their habits and are quadrupedal, they walk on
all fours, they don't have their backs horizontal when they're doing it, they have their backs
sloping because their arms are longer than their legs. But if we look at the skeleton of Proconcil
what you can see is that the arms and legs are just about the same length. That's a very important
cue as to its locomotor strategy. This is the locomotor anatomy that we see in today's monkeys
and it's confirmed by those other parts of the Proconcil anatomy where we can look at muscle
attachments. For example, its humerus, the bone of its upper arm, is configured for this powerful
back and forth motion and not the around and around motion that most of today's apes are able to do.
So Proconcil was a quadruped, very monkey-like in its locomotion.
Its range of body sizes from small to large, the smallest versions were sort of the size of maybe a
big cat. The bigger versions were like a large dog and so this is a real range of body sizes that
impacts the extent to which these different kinds of Proconcil may have been terrestrial or arboreal.
It's easier for a smaller primate to get into the trees. Conversely, it's quite a bit harder for a
small primate to survive predators if it goes far from the trees. So predation, terrestriality,
and body size are already varied in this earliest group of primates.
If they walked like monkeys, how do we know that they were apes? I mean after all, if they look like
monkeys, why wouldn't we just say they're monkeys? The answer to this question has to do with their
teeth. When we look at the teeth of Proconcil, we see ape teeth. We don't see the specialized teeth
that old world monkeys have with these crests that go from side to side and chew against each other
What we see is low thick enameled teeth that are made for grinding against each other.
This dietary adaptation gave Proconcil the ability to eat lots of different kinds of food
where they moved through leafy foods relatively quickly trying to smash the pulp out of them
instead of chopping up the leaves finally. By 19 million years ago, we have true old world monkeys
so we know that that adaptation, which dentally is very distinctive, had arisen at that point.
The other kinds of species that have more ape-like teeth we know have to be apes.
Also in this earliest period of ape evolution, we see some locomotor diversity and this is going
to be a theme that we see across most of the myosin. I want to point out in this earliest time period,
one primate in particular named Marodopithecus. Marodopithecus, like Proconcil, lived in East
Africa. Marodo is a site in Uganda, but Marodopithecus in combination with quite a large body size,
almost gorilla-like, also had a lumbar spine that was stiff and vertical.
That lumbar spine shows that it was more of a vertical climber and not so much of a horizontal runner.
That difference in locomotor anatomy is something that we will see in other contexts later in
ape evolution and it gives us a real signal that in locomotor terms the apes are able to adapt
rapidly in different contexts, but in dental terms they retain this ability to eat a broad
range of foods and not specialize on any particular thing. By 15 million years ago,
the apes are beginning to spread out of Africa and into other parts of the old world and certainly
after 13 million years ago, with the first apes it's not quite so clear, but by 13 million years
ago we have apes in South Asia that are almost certainly close relatives of orangutans. We have
other apes in Europe that seem more similar to the African apes today and this East versus West
split seems to be a main feature of the evolution of middle myosin hominoids. Nevertheless,
hominoids remain in Africa and continue to diversify there and I want to point out
Kenyapithecus which is as you might guess from the name from Kenya of about 14 million years ago
as one of the first apes that has a dental pattern that is very much like living apes.
When we look at this maxilla you can see that the teeth are numbered very much the same as ours
and this dental formula as you'll remember is also the same dental formula as in old world monkeys,
but when we compare the teeth in detail you can see that the cusps are relatively low,
that they're square teeth and they don't have any ridges around the outside of the tooth.
Those features are shared by all the living apes and so this is a good candidate for that first
ape to disperse out of Africa. Sheevapithecus lived in Pakistan, India and possibly China
between 12 million and 7 million years ago. Sheevapithecus is important because when we look
at its skull you can see that it's very similar to an orangutan. Sheevapithecus in the center
an orang on the left and a chimpanzee on the right. I mean this is a real clear case of phylogenetic
resemblance and it's good evidence that Sheevapithecus living in South Asia was
a relative or ancestor of today's orangutans, but Sheevapithecus unlike orangutans today
was a quadruped. We know from its humorous that it had this adaptation of being terrestrial
and having this powerful back and forth motion as a quadrupedal terrestrial primate does.
In dental development it's similar to today's apes like chimpanzees and orangutans in terms
of how long it took to develop its teeth and in terms of how many fossils we find in the
Sheevalic hills of Pakistan and India over 60,000 paleontological vertebrate specimens
have been catalogued. Only a handful of those are Sheevapithecus. So in terms of its abundance
in the environment, it looks to be a lot like living apes. It looks like it's rare that it lived
at low densities and that it had a long period of development much like living apes do. But what it
wasn't was like orangutans in being highly arboreal and suspensory beneath branches. That's a real
point in favor of the hypothesis that orangutans developed their locomotor anacondasis.
Locomotor anatomy in parallel with other living apes including chimps and gorillas and presumably
this is a second case in ape evolution of this parallelism.
I can't leave the Asian apes without talking about my personal favorite Gigantopithecus.
Gigantopithecus as its name implies was gigantic. We estimate from its mandibles and teeth
that it would have weighed up to 800 pounds in life making it the biggest primate ever to have lived.
It started around 7 million years ago but Gigantopithecus unlike most of these myocene
kinds of apes survived right up until 300,000 years ago a time during which humans were present
in its range in China. So it's very possible that humans maybe our ancestors encountered
Gigantopithecus as they moved into China. I wonder what they would have thought when they saw one of
these giant apes. Maybe they thought it was delicious.
Dryopithecus lived on the other side of Eurasia in Europe and it's important because of its early
time. It gets there by 13 million years ago but it's also important as a representative of diversity.
There are different kinds of apes living in Asia. As we saw with Sheevapithecus and Gigantopithecus
there are also different kinds of apes living in Europe from 13 million up until about 7 million
years ago. But after 10 million years those apes begin to decline slowly in diversity.
European apes were eating maybe as many kinds of foods as today's apes do
on average a little bit harder of a diet because their teeth have a little bit thicker enamel and
seem to have been adapted to grinding a little more than cutting but certainly as diverse as today's
apes. That diversity also made them a bit of a target in ecological terms. The old world monkeys
during the middle to late Miocene had evolved two distinct branches. The colobines specialized on
eating leaves and they developed a complex stomach to enable them to become really efficient leaf
digesters in coordination with microbes. They have a stomach that is convergent in some respects
with living bovids like cattle. Circopithecines specialized for terrestrial and arboreal life
eating fruits and hard seeds. The big advantage that these monkeys had over the apes was their
short birth intervals. Monkeys reproduce faster than apes do and so over the course of the late
Miocene the smaller apes begin to decline. The bigger apes specialize on having even longer
birth intervals and more complex maybe learning but the monkeys are colonizing these new areas
and they take advantage of their short birth intervals and also the increasing pace of
climate change to colonize areas that the apes have to abandon. So by the end of the Miocene
apes are left only in a few habitats across the tropical world.
Now there are some outstanding problems that remain in ape evolution. One of those problems is
where do the gibbons come from? Gibbons today are a major branch of the apes but we don't have much
of a fossil record of them before the Pliocene. It's unclear where and when the gibbons diversified
from the great apes except for our molecular estimates which tell us that it happened
before around 16 million years ago. Another factor that's a bit of a problem is this issue
of locomotor diversity. How is it that these different kinds of apes are adapting to what
seem to be quite distinctive locomotor biologies? Some of them highly quadrupedal and specialized
toward a quadrupedal movement. Others of them seem to be specialized for climbing and hanging
under branches to the extent that they've compromised their ability to terrestrially move
by adopting a new kind of motion called knuckle walking. Well one fossil that has really given
us a lot of information about this since 2009 is Artypithecus. Artypithecus was found in the
middle Awash region of Ethiopia. It lived between 5.5 and 4.3 million years ago. Artypithecus has
an almost complete skeleton especially its limbs are nearly complete and that gives us a lot of
evidence about its locomotion. Artypithecus unlike humans but like other apes had a grasping foot.
It had a foot that had its big toe coming off and able to grasp things and that made it really
good at getting around in the trees despite a relatively large body size. At about 50 to 55
kilograms this ape was something like 110 to 120 pounds. That's a real big ape. It also had hands
that were a lot like living chimpanzees and gorillas hands and by that I mean that Artypithecus
had much longer fingers and a relatively short thumb. These are hands that are made for gripping
branches from below and hanging from them so that the tendons that hang are quite strong
whereas the gripping of small objects is very difficult. From its hands we know that Artypithecus
was not a knuckle walker. The bones of the hands show us that it wasn't able to block its fingers
in that knuckle walking sort of gait and that means that Artypithecus which shares many features
with living chimpanzees gorillas and hominins. Artypithecus was not a knuckle walker like chimps
and gorillas. It may indicate that chimpanzees and gorillas evolved this style of motion in
parallel with each other. So another case of locomotor convergence among the great apes.
It also has some features that indicate its convergent width or possibly related to the
hominins. One of those features is the position of the hole on the base of its skull. That hole
called the foramen magnum is relatively forward in Artypithecus. That forward position means that
it carried its spine a little more vertically habitually than most of the great apes do today.
That's a human-like characteristic. It may indicate that it was climbing vertically more often or it
may indicate that it habitually was squatting or doing other kinds of sitting motions.
In the pelvis it also has some features that are very similar to hominins. It has a short
pelvis that's more mobile than the pelvis of other kinds of apes. One of the big differences
between humans and apes is in the spine. Our spine has five vertebrae in the lumbar column.
On average, chimpanzees and gorillas have between three and four and their spines are stiffened
by a very tall pelvis. Artypithecus wasn't like that and again may indicate that these
locomotor adaptations occurred in parallel and we know from orangutans that they also occurred
in parallel in orangutans. So ape evolution has been a tremendous story of convergence.
One of the things that is maybe most interesting about Artypithecus is that we know quite a bit
about its paleoenvironment and in terms of primate and human evolution nothing could be
more essential to understanding the adaptive characteristics of organisms as to understanding
the entire environment in which they lived. The part of the middle awash region, a site called
Aramis where Artypithecus was discovered, is really unique because the geological layer that
includes the Artypithecus remains occurs between two volcanic layers called tufts and each of those
layers which represents a fall of ash from ancient volcanoes, each of those layers can be dated with
radiometric techniques. We know that the date of those layers, both of them about 4.3 million to
4.4 million years old, is very similar from top to bottom so that the entire span in which Artypithecus
is found represents only a few thousand years. That gives us a geological portrait of a moment in
time and because this site extends over a substantial distance the excavators were able to trace
different paleoenvironments across this one time interval. They were able to show that some of
the paleoenvironments were relatively wooded, some were a little swampy with some water, some of them
were drier and more grassland like and they were able to catalog the kinds of vertebrates that are
found in those different environments. The insects in some cases including dung beetles that were in
those environments and of course the apes and monkeys that were in those environments. What they showed
was that Artypithecus was found only in the very wooded environments. Now that may not be much of a
surprise to find that an ape lived in the woods but it is highly important that they were able to
sample all these places and for an ape like Artypithecus which in locomotor terms seems to have some
characteristics which are very much like humans and that might represent a close relative of
the ancestor of hominins and later humans. That demonstration that there's a clear paleoacology
in which this species lived is really important to our understanding of ape and human evolution.
So to sum up, ape locomotor anatomy was diverse with a lot of convergence in the surviving
great apes. The kinds of characteristics that we used to think were really distinctive similarities
of humans and apes may have in many cases evolved in parallel but there are other characteristics
of the apes including their long life history, their behavioral complexity and their dental
adaptations that are true links to humans and to more ancient apes. We're survivors along with
the living great apes of a much more diverse adaptive radiation in the past and as we look
forward into evolution from this point we'll be describing the evolution of our own branch,
the hominins.
