Hello, and welcome to the lecture where we're going to take a look at the evolution of the
marine and flying reptiles, those wonders of the Mesozoic world often neglected in favor
of their land-dwelling contemporaries, dinosaurs.
In the previous lecture, we learned about the evolution of dinosaurs, those most famous
of diapsids, and the early evolution of the dinosaurs was not only related to significant
changes in locomotion, such as upright posture and bipedal movement, but likely was also
connected to a mass extinction at the end of the Triassic period.
This allowed them to occupy newly opened ecological niches.
In other words, their evolutionary success might have been a matter of being in the right
place at the right time, though more efficient respiration may have also helped.
In that lecture, we also mentioned briefly the evolutionary cousins and contemporaries
of the dinosaurs, the pterosaurs, who also lived at the same time as the dinosaurs throughout
much of the Mesozoic era.
Now, what were these swimming and flying reptiles and how did their evolution represent significant
milestones in the history of life?
Well, variations of these same questions were actually being asked in the early part
of the 19th century in Great Britain.
And one of the reasons why is because of extraordinary fossils of marine and flying reptiles discovered
by one of the most important figures in Mesozoic paleontology, Mary Anning.
Although she was previously famous for inspiring the tongue twister, she sells seashells by
the seashore.
In recent years, she's been getting her due for considerable contributions to understanding
the evolution of Mesozoic reptiles of the sea and the air.
Now, Anning was born in 1799 in Lyme Regis in southern England.
She began collecting fossils in that area as a child under the tutelage of her father.
He sold these fossils then to augment their family income.
Lyme Regis has these extensive cliffs of Jurassic rocks and they're composed of sediments that
originally formed in marine environments.
These rocks bear many, many excellently preserved vertebrate and invertebrate fossils from the
Jurassic period.
They span a time from about 200 to 145 million years ago.
Now, after gaining some experience in finding fossils, Anning, who was from a lower class
background and she had received no formal training in paleontology, she continued to
collect fossils and sold them to tourists and scientists in order to make a living.
Now, her finds, though, they were nothing short of astonishing, even by modern standards.
For example, she helped discover the first known specimen of the marine reptile, ichthyosaurus,
when she was only 11 years old.
She later discovered the first known plesiosaur.
This was a large marine reptile with paddle-like fins and a long neck.
This and similar reptiles later inspired sightings of the Loch Ness Monster, which, of course,
we're not going to discuss in this course, nor any other, for that matter.
Well, she also found a pterosaur that never had been before seen in the United Kingdom.
The only previous ones had come from Germany.
Now, among the many invertebrate fossils she collected were blemnites.
These were squid-like animals and ammonites, which are distantly related to nautiloids,
but with much, much more complicated suture lines, which makes them beautiful fossils.
All in all, Anning's hard work provided some of the most important Mesozoic vertebrate
fossil finds of the 19th century.
And this was at a time when women were strongly discouraged from participating in science.
Well, sadly, she died at an early age at only 47 years old, and she wasn't really credited
by her scientific peers for most of her fossil finds.
Fortunately, although long past due, we're now recognizing just how much her discoveries
changed our perspectives, and how marine vertebrate animals now we know so much more
about how they evolved during the Jurassic period.
Well, how different were these marine vertebrate animals from, say, dinosaurs?
Well, dinosaurs we defined in the previous lecture by their archisaurian heritage that
they came out of diapsid reptiles.
Now, if you recall, the major skull ties for amniotes that we discussed in previous lectures
are synapsid, diapsid, and anapsid.
A fourth skull type that developed in some marine reptiles, but not mentioned previously,
is a uriapsid skull.
Although at first glance, the skull looks like it belongs to a synapsid because of its
single temporal fenestra, it's actually a variation on a diapsid skull.
This change could have happened by closing of skull bones in the lower of the two temporal
fenestra in a diapsid skull, which then would have left the upper hole.
Then you would have a skull looking exactly like what we see in uriapsid skulls.
Many marine reptiles, such as ichthyosaurs and plesiosaurus, had uriapsid skulls, although
a few also had more overtly diapsid skulls, such as a group of reptiles called mosasaurs.
Sea snakes also evolved during the Cretaceous period, and these are diapsids too.
So the early evolution of sea turtles, that also happened during the Mesozoic, and these
are anapsids.
Of course, because pterosaurs share a more common, recent common ancestor with dinosaurs
than any other reptiles, they're diapsids too.
In short, most of the marine and flying reptiles were diapsids, evolutionarily speaking, except
for turtles, which were anapsids.
Also despite dinosaurs living at the same time as these animals, they were largely separated
from marine and flying reptiles by both habitats and behaviors.
For example, during the Mesozoic era, the world's coastlines and oceans were where many different
marine reptiles evolved, some of which are still familiar to us today, such as what the
previously mentioned sea turtles and sea snakes.
Now, as far as we know, dinosaurs never purposefully went into the ocean, so although we do have
plenty of examples of their tracks preserved in rocks that were originally ancient seashores.
Now this meant that dinosaurs also occasionally liked long walks along the beach, probably
a sunset, and perhaps accompanied by a loved one.
Less romantically though, dinosaurs also sometimes died near shorelines and their bodies washed
out to sea.
Paleontologists once in a while find dinosaur bones then mixed in with those of marine animals.
Now, otherwise, the only overlap between dinosaurs and marine and flying reptiles happened
toward the end of the Mesozoic era, when birds started evolving into new ecological niches,
including those in the sea and the air.
But the transition to birds, that's going to be the subject of our next lecture.
So some of the marine reptiles that lived during the Mesozoic era, such as mosasaurus,
plesiosaurus, and ichthyosaurs, these have been extinct since the end of the Cretaceous
period.
That was about 65 million years ago, which makes me very glad I never snorkeled or scuba
dived during the Mesozoic.
And what were some of the most important marine reptiles, how did they evolve?
Probably the most intriguing from an evolutionary standpoint were the ichthyosaurs.
Now, ichthyosaurs' ancestors probably belonged to a clade called ichthyoteregia.
This was a group of ichthyosaur-like reptiles from the early to middle Triassic.
Their evolution may have been driven by increased changes of formerly terrestrial environments
to more shallow marine environments.
But paleontologists have a tough time figuring out exactly when this transition happened.
But regardless, ichthyosaurs were very successful and diverse by the late Triassic and through
the early Jurassic.
They declined though during the rest of the Mesozoic, and they eventually went extinct
before the end of the Cretaceous.
ichthyosaurs were active eaters of seafood based on their stomach contents and they had
limbs that were modified into flippers and they streamlined bodies.
They were superbly adapted for swimming and otherwise spending their entire lives in the
water.
One species of ichthyosaur actually developed the largest known eyes of any vertebrate,
about 30 centimeters or a foot in diameter.
Now these huge eyes were presumably an adaptation foreseen under reduced light conditions at
great depths.
And that would have really helped them with finding prey as deep as 500 meters or 1600
feet.
They had a wide range of sizes too, about with some as small as 2 meters, which 6 to 7 feet
long, and some late Triassic giants reached about 20 meters or 65 feet.
For some reason though, ichthyosaurs never got that big again after the Triassic extinction
event, and that was probably a function of competition from other marine predators.
But probably the most fascinating evolutionary insight that comes from ichthyosaurs is the
fossil evidence of their giving life birth.
As far as we know, this was the first time this behavior had evolved in amniotes.
In these extraordinary fossils from the early Jurassic of Germany, from about 190 million
years ago, we see baby ichthyosaurs exiting the birth canal of the mother ichthyosaur and
with their tails coming out first.
This behavior is a clear adaptation for living and reproducing in the water.
As modern whales and dolphins show exactly the same sort of position of their young
drained life birth, the selective advantage for this behavior is that the head remains
in the mother throughout much of the birthing.
This allowed the baby to breathe until it's completely out of the mother, thus preventing
drowning.
Well, the opposite trait, the young coming out of the birth canal had first, would be
a great example of a maladaptive one in such a water-dwelling amnia.
And it would very quickly be weeded out by natural selection, no passing on genes for
you.
Nonetheless, giving life birth with head first young is perfectly fine for a land-dwelling
animal.
And we're going to come back to that topic in a future lecture when we discuss the evolution
of whales and how we can better tell the shift from land-dwelling to sea-dwelling through
their reproduction.
Well before these fossils were discovered, ichthyosaurs were assumed to have come up
on shore to dig nests, unsandy beaches, lay eggs in those nests, and then waddle back
out to sea, just like sea turtles have done since the Mesozoic.
So this fossil evidence from the early Jurassic, along with hundreds of specimens with embryos
inside their body cavities, points toward a significant adaptation in ichthyosaurs.
This was such a successful adaptation that this behavior apparently continued throughout
the remaining evolutionary history.
For example, a Cretaceous Age ichthyosaur coming from 110 million-year-old rocks in
Canada was recently found with embryos inside its abdominal cavity, 80 million years after
the early Jurassic ones.
Now I also draw a behavioral comparison between ichthyosaurs and dolphins.
I did that earlier and I just want to make one more point related to a general principle
in evolution.
And that's that ichthyosaurs and dolphins, they're often held up as examples of convergent
evolution in which unrelated animals converged in their forms as a result of adaptations
to similar environments in selection.
But here's an important point.
Their similarities in anatomy are analogous, they're not homologous.
Although we see they both have streamlined torpedo-like bodies, fins, and all of these
other fantastic adaptations for swimming swiftly, when you look at their bodies in
more detail, their apparent relatedness breaks down pretty quickly.
With a closer examination, you can plainly see that one is descended from diapsid reptiles
whereas the dolphin required two transitions, first from synapsid reptiles to synapsid mammals
and second from land mammals back into water.
The two transitions leading to dolphins also took a much longer stretch of geological
time.
We'll explore those transitions in the two upcoming lectures.
Now let's take a look at another famous group of marine reptiles from the Mesozoic, Plesiosaurus.
Plesiosaurus and ichthyosaurs probably shared a terrestrial ancestor called Nothosaurus from
in the middle of the Triassic period.
Plesiosaurus were a large and very group of ureopsids and they include a subgroup called
Pliosaurus.
The fins of Plesiosaurus show their relationship to land-dwelling ancestors as five digits
are all together in each fin, looking very much like modified hands and feet.
The first undoubted Plesiosaurus, those are in late Triassic deposits from about 200 million
years ago, so these originated soon after ichthyosaurs and co-evolved with them.
Plesiosaurus however outlasted ichthyosaurs well into the Cretaceous, almost making it
to the end of that period close to 65 million years ago.
Now most of these animals likely ate fish and mollusks and their well-developed fins
meant they were active swimmers.
Among the mollusks they probably ate were squids and similar animals called aminoids,
the Mesozoic equivalent of the calamari.
Now artistic depictions of these animals though normally show them chasing large schools of
presumably delicious fish.
Plesiosaurus were probably not fast swimmers but they were maneuverable and based on their
body shapes a few clues about their life habits can be gleaned from their skeletons.
Plesiosaurus are sometimes divided informally into short-necked and long-necked forms and
although the long-necked ones are probably the better known ones in the public realm,
the short-necked ones included some of the largest and most important predators of the
Mesozoic seas.
Oh one of these was the late Jurassic Liopluridon which reached lengths of about 12 meters or
30 feet.
That's big enough that it might have eaten some Icthiosaurus or even smaller Plesiosaurus.
Now this supposition is backed up by tooth marks that are in the bones of other Plesiosaurus
and they match these of large Plesiosaurus.
But you also have to think about marine crocodiles.
When marine crocodiles were living at the same time they also could have made these
tooth marks.
Yes, there were marine crocodiles in the Mesozoic seas too.
Some of them, much larger than any living today, giving dinosaurs yet another reason
to stay put on land.
Anyway, the long-necked Plesiosaurus certainly would have had an advantage in nabbing fish
by having small head with sharp teeth projecting well ahead of their much larger bodies.
With regard to reproduction, we don't know for sure if Plesiosaurus gave live birth or
not.
So far, their fossils lack the extensive evidence for this behavior that we found for Icthiosaurus.
Nonetheless, when you consider how large some of these animals became and how well adapted
they were for an ocean-going lifestyle, paleontologists have predicted that the evidence for their
giving live birth is going to emerge someday.
Well, we'll see.
Competing for those bigger catches of seafood in the Cretaceous Oceans were the Mososaurus,
which I can only describe very unscientifically as totally awesome marine predators.
Just take a look at their jaws and teeth and you'll see what I mean.
Some of these marine reptiles were more than 17 meters or 55 feet long, almost three times
longer than a great white shark.
Compared to Icthiosaurus and Plesiosaurus though, Mososaurus were relatively late in making the
transition to oceanic environments.
They show up early in the Cretaceous period from about 110 to 95 million years ago.
Now the evolution of land-dwelling Mososaur ancestors into aquatic environments probably
took place during the early Cretaceous.
This is when sea level had risen and subsequently expanded shallow marine habitats worldwide.
The most immediate ancestors of Mososaurus were likely semi-aquatic reptiles related
to monitor lizards, known today as Varanids, and most famously represented by Komodo dragons.
So imagine it greatly scaled up Komodo dragon swimming in the oceans.
So after Icthiosaurus went extinct in the Cretaceous period around 90 million years ago, Mososaurus
and Plesiosaurus probably took over their ecological niches and diversified considerably
in the world's oceans.
But Mososaurus were clearly the kings and queens of the late Cretaceous marine reptiles.
So like Icthiosaurus, Mososaurus had life birth too.
At least one fossil specimen has the remains of young inside its abdominal region.
Now this shows a convergence in this behavior for two very different groups of marine adapted
reptiles and at different points in geologic time during the Mesozoic era.
However improbable that might seem, another group of reptiles dissently related to Mososaurus
yet also adapted to marine environments during the Cretaceous period includes snakes.
In terms of their evolutionary history, snakes descended from legged ancestors, lizards.
Even modern snakes have vestigial hips and these link those with lizard ancestors.
At least three species of lake Cretaceous snakes are preserved in marine sediments deposited
about 95 to 100 million years ago.
All three of these snakes still have tiny rear legs.
Now because snakes were originally hypothesized as probable descendants of lizards, these
snake fossils are excellent examples of transitional fossils.
Their tiny rear limbs are very well defined with each of them having a femur, tibia and
fibula indicating how these snakes still had legs connected to their hips although their
front limbs had already been lost.
The interesting circumstance of these snake fossils preserved in marine rocks led to a
provocative hypothesis.
Did snakes first evolve in marine environments?
A recent fossil find of another Cretaceous snake in 2006 in Argentina though put some
doubt on this hypothesis.
This specimen seems even more primitive compared to the ones from Lebanon and Israel and it's
preserved in terrestrial deposits.
Nonetheless, other snakes after the Cretaceous period also evolved to live in marine environments
including those that are around today.
So the last marine reptiles I'll mention are ones that, like sea snakes, we still see in
the world's oceans today and those are sea turtles.
Although many researchers think that sea turtles evolved from freshwater turtles, the oldest
known fossil turtle, a Doncha-Chelly's Semitastacea, that comes from marine rocks as old as the
late Triassic dating at about 220 million years ago.
Now this specimen found in China was very interesting in that it still had teeth which
modern turtles lack and had only developed a shell on its lower surface and not the
upper.
Modern leatherback sea turtles have a similar sort of arrangement.
They don't have a bony shell or carapace on their back but they do have bone underneath
and covering their bellies called a plastron.
Other turtles that evolved full shells were probably selected because of predation pressures
from aquatic predators from above.
So turtles must have diversified from coastal environments, evolving into new marine niches
provided by the heightened sea level of the Cretaceous.
Of these was the largest sea turtle that ever lived, Arculon isochronous.
And this is from the late Cretaceous from about 70 million years ago.
This turtle was more than four meters or 15 feet long, bigger than an average sized car.
And just to give a sense of scale on that, its nearest living relative, the leatherback
sea turtle, would have looked embarrassingly inadequate when put next to Arculon.
But the largest of these measuring only about two meters or six and a half feet long.
So what was flying above these marine reptiles as well as the dinosaurs that were on land?
Well before birds, the world skies were filled with a wide variety of pterosaurs, more than
a hundred fossil species at last count.
Pterosaurs were apparently the first vertebrates with powered flight.
As mentioned in the previous lecture, dinosaurs and pterosaurs shared a common ancestor under
the clade, Ornithodira.
They were distantly related to crocodiles.
These flying reptiles probably originated during the late Triassic.
The oldest pterosaur, Unimorphodon, comes from rocks in Italy that date to about 210
to 220 million years ago.
Now this gold sized pterosaur, like all pterosaurs, had remarkable adaptations in its hand, where
the fourth digit became enormously elongated, along with a novel bonus risk called a pteroid.
This helped to support wingman membranes for flight.
The membrane connected to the fourth digit, that was the largest part of their wings,
stretching all the way down their bodies to the rear legs.
Pterosaur bodies were also adapted well for staying aloft.
They had hollow, lightweight bones, short torsos, long necks and tails, and a long skull.
Now interestingly, paleontologists have speculated that these reptiles probably didn't develop
flight from, say, tree dwelling archosaurs, because pterosaurs lack any sort of obvious
adaptations for climbing or even perching in trees.
So their selection for flight may have been from the ground up, or in places with extensive
sea cliffs, although this is a bit speculative.
A great example of convergent evolution in pterosaurs is also provided by hair-like projections
on their skin, and these show up in some fossils as impressions on the wing membranes.
Now although it's not hair in the sense of the same structure in mammals, these hair-like
fibers probably serve the same function, which was insulation.
Thus this hair, along with metabolic needs for sustained flight, those suggest that pterosaurs
may have evolved warm-bloodedness or endothermia independently of mammals.
This would have made them very different from most other reptiles, and much more similar
to birds and bats in their physiology.
Flying insects also may have made up the diet for some pterosaurs, although their skulls
represent a really wide range of feeding adaptations, and this indicated that they also ate fish
or even plankton.
The evolutionary history of pterosaurs probably represents diversification related to the
filling of ecological niches.
Nonetheless, the amazing variety of crests in many of their skulls, along with some evidence
of sexual dimorphism in some pterosaurs like Pteranodon, indicate that sexual selection
may have been part of their evolution.
Sizes of pterosaurs range from the tiny nemocoloterus crypticus with about a 10 inch or 25 centimeter
wingspan, or about the size of a robin, to the giant quexal codilus.
Quexal codilus was the largest known animal to have flown, with a wingspan of about 11
meters, or 36 feet, pretty close to the width of a fighter jet.
So naturally, this pterosaur comes from Texas, where even their fossils are big, and it lived
during the Lake Cretaceous about 70 million years ago, when pterosaurs in general became
rather large.
From trace fossils, we know that although pterosaurs were very common near marine environments,
especially those that ate fish, they did walk on land.
A good number of pterosaur trackways are now known, and these show that pterosaurs walked
on all fours, using their hands and their feet to move on the ground.
In fact, one extraordinary Cretaceous fossil trackway from France showed evidence of a
pterosaur landing and then walking after flight.
We're also fairly sure that pterosaurs nested on land in laid eggs, rather than giving life
birth.
Four eggs with fossilized pterosaur embryos inside have been reported from the fossil
record.
So some paleontologists have proposed that pterosaurs partially bury their eggs in ground
nests, similar to how some modern reptiles of birds do.
Pterosaurs therefore may have shared a lot of behaviors with birds through undergoing
similar paths of natural selection.
Well, what happened to all these magnificent swimming and flying animals by the end of
the Cretaceous period?
A mass extinction wiped out nearly anything big, dinosaurs, mosasaurus, pterosaurs, and
many other animals.
The most likely cause of the extinction was an event for which evolution had few responses,
a meteorite impact.
A large amount of evidence supports this hypothesis, including the actual meteor crater, which is
in the Yucatan Peninsula of Mexico, and a deposit of a rare element, iridium, which
is found in meteorites that marks the end of the Cretaceous.
Of course, a direct hit by a large meteorite, that would be pretty bad for any life at the
impact site.
But we think we also think about what happened after the impact that made the biggest difference
to life.
Dust kicked up by the impact and smoke from forest fires would have shut down photosynthesis
for several years.
Global temperatures also would have plummeted.
This scenario is similar to that of a nuclear winter, which was envisaged during the 1980s
by Carl Sagan and other scientists with reference to an imagined nuclear conflict.
The only organisms that would have survived such a shock to the Earth's ecosystems were
those with the right acceptations, such as a small size and burrowing abilities.
Such traits may have evolved for other reasons, but they came in really handy when a big rock
fell from the sky.
In a word, their surviving organisms were lucky.
With this in mind, we'll now think about other verbiage, birds.
These were evolving alongside these marine and aerial reptiles throughout the Cretaceous
period, yet they survived the end Cretaceous extinction.
In just 75 million years, from about 145 to 70 million years ago, birds had taken to
the same skies as pterosaurs, and they occupied the same seas as mosasaurs and other marine
reptiles.
How did these birds evolve from the first ones known from the latest part of the Jurassic
perhaps more than 150 million years ago?
Well, that's a topic we're going to explore more in the next lecture.
See you then and there.
