Lecture 15 British Functionalism
I think it's fair to say that when most people think about anthropologists at work today,
they have the vision of the field worker, boots on, jodhpurs on, pith helmet on the
head, clipboard in hand, going out into the world, learning a local language, and living
among a people for a long period of time, making detailed observations. It wasn't always like that,
though. James George Frazier never left his study. He left the task of gathering data to others,
and considered anthropology to be mostly a theoretical task of bringing together
data from around the world, and theorizing on that basis. It was in the 1920s, with the rise of
functional anthropology under the aegis of Bronislav Malinowski and A.R. Radcliffe Brown,
that this new style of individual fieldwork-based anthropology first came into being.
This was based on a whole series of grave dissatisfactions with what came to be disparagingly
known as the Victorian style of armchair anthropology. The new generation of anthropologists
were very suspicious of the efforts of Tyler Frazier and their colleagues to construct some
grand theory of human nature based on the data they were giving. They thought this was premature.
Some day, perhaps, we might have enough reliable data from enough local societies that we can begin
this kind of theoretical construction. But they felt that Tyler and Frazier had simply jumped the
gun, were premature in trying to put together these theories. Their methods were questioned.
Frazier would take a mid-winter fire festival from Scandinavia and hold it up for comparison with a
spring equinox fire festival from Ireland and try to derive some conclusions about the function of
fire festivals. The new anthropologists felt this was illegitimate. You were taking rituals
and myths and social practices and ripping them out of their contexts in order to hold them up
and compare them with other similarly decontextualized phenomena. Malinowski himself put it this way,
cultures are not collections of isolated facts but are interconnected holes. And so they felt it
was better to go into a particular local society and get to know it instead of doing the grand
comparative task. They also questioned the competence of the ethnography that was being
gathered. As I said, Tyler and Frazier and their generation simply took information wherever they
could find it. This meant that they were interviewing tourists who had just been vacationing around
the world. They were reading traveler's tales, missionary journals, they were talking to every
mercenary and sailor and adventurer and freebooter who ever set foot in another country.
Most of the time these people did not even speak local languages and as they stood to one side
and observed local customs had no idea what was going on. And so the quality of the data upon
which these Victorian anthropologists built their theories was seen as very, very suspect.
The whole idea that religion was a kind of bad science seemed to the new functional anthropologists
to be a theoretical dead end. A.R. Radcliffe Brown wrote the following. The usual way of looking
at religion is to regard all of them, or all except one, as bodies of erroneous beliefs and
practices. When we regard the religions of other peoples as, or at least those of what are called
primitive peoples, as systems of erroneous and illusory beliefs, we're confronted with the problem
of how these beliefs came to be formulated and accepted. This method of approach, even though
it may seem the most direct, is not the one most likely to lead to a real understanding of the nature
of religions. When you begin with the assumption that something is essentially irrational or just
dumb, you don't get very far in your theorizing about it. They also disagreed with a concern that
most of the thinkers we've considered to date have had, and that is the question of the origin
of religions. The new functionalists were not at all concerned to try to determine where religion
came from. That could only be done in the most speculative manner, since we didn't have access
to any real data from the very earliest manifestations of religion. This means that the question was
simply unimportant. What was more important was to look at religion as it is practiced in actual
living societies, and to see what role it plays in the life of those societies.
Their final source of dissatisfaction was they could not share any other theorists' concern
with the truth or the falsity of any particular religious belief.
Tyler and Frazier, in distinguishing religion and magic on the one hand from science on the other,
were focused squarely on the question of are religious beliefs true or false, and having
determined that they were false, they said well then they simply have to disappear eventually
if humanity is to continue its progress forward. Like the phenomenologists, these functional
anthropologists thought that was simply not an interesting research question to pursue.
Regardless of whether a belief is true or false, it still remains the case that the belief and
its associated practices are actually doing something in the life of a particular society.
The key then was to discover what religion did, not whether it reflected right or wrong views
about the world. With all these dissatisfactions then, what did the functionalists actually do?
The first thing they determined to do was that they were going to gather their own data, rather
than sitting back in their studies and interviewing returning sailors. They would go to particular
field sites, they would learn the local language, they would formulate their own questions and get
the information about those questions directly from native informants. They came to understand
that cultures, as Malinovsky had said, were interconnected holes. They used the model of
a living organism as a way of understanding individual local cultures. Just as a living body
has different organs within it and different components that each does its own thing in
helping the organism as a whole to survive, local cultures are made of an interlocking
interconnected series of structures, each having its own function in keeping the organism,
that is to say the society, alive and to make sure that it thrives. Functional anthropology
is generally held to have been founded by the Polish-born British educated Bronoslaw Malinovsky.
In the late 1910s and early 1920s he did field work in the Trobriand Islands in Papua New Guinea,
staying with a particular tribe for a long time, learning their language and taking detailed
notes on every aspect of their common life. When Malinovsky analyzed the structure and function
of different components of the society, he conceived that the function of any individual
piece of this structure was to keep the individual alive. And in analyzing what kinds of functions
needed to be pursued in order to help the individual survive and thrive, he identified
seven separate functions. These were nutrition, reproduction, bodily comfort, safety,
maintenance of relationships, movement being able to get about, and then finally a sort of catch-all
category that was growth so that they could move beyond simple survival functions into other
secondary things such as art and culture, dance, song, all these other things that make life good
for people. Now what this might mean in actual application, if we can just take a simple example,
you might find in some literature the accounts of a ritual among Native American peoples who grew
corn that when they planted their corn in the spring they would put the seed in the ground and
then next to it they might insert a minnow. Now if you asked the native what they were doing,
they might say that the minnow represented an offering to the god of the corn so that he would
be propitiated and the corn would then grow and prosper because the god would be caring for it.
But the functional anthropologist might know better. In observing this kind of ritual they might say
that the fish as it rotted in the ground next to the seed of corn was actually providing fertilizer
for the corn and so this ritual whatever meaning the native might have ascribed to it was actually
performing that function of providing better nutrition by helping the crops to grow better.
And so that was then how it functioned. And so as Bronislav Malinowski described the religious
aspects or the religious functions of life among the Trobriand Islanders, he placed it squarely
within their system of economic exchange. Rather than simply describing myths and practices and
rituals that the Trobriand Islanders told, he accompanied them on trading expeditions as they
sailed across the channels among the islands of Papua New Guinea to go and trade with other tribes.
He noticed that it was in this context that certain myths and practices were enacted and he
identified ways in which the religious practices actually connected with the economics of the
exchanges. They provided precedence. They described structured relationships that helped you to
identify what it was legitimate to exchange, who constituted a legitimate exchange partner,
mythical models of God's engaging in exchange that gave you a clue as to how the transaction was
to be managed and ways of resolving conflicts and disputes. And so rather than simply reading
an isolated story as narrated in a collection of world mythology such as Jung or Tyler and
Frasier would have been interested in, Malinowski said once you see these things in their context,
you can actually see how they function to help the society do the things it needs to do in order
to survive and thrive. This becomes very clear when you read his own presentation and analysis of
certain myths that the Trobriand Islanders told. He tells a myth of how the first human beings
came out from the realms of the underworld through holes in the ground and first saw the
light of day and began to establish human societies. In one particular village,
Malinowski says the story is that four different clans all came from these primordial ancestors
who emerged all from the same hole. Now among these four clans two were the precursors of the dog
clan and the pig clan who actually had the shape of a dog and a pig. As they came out,
they had a seemingly nonsensical conversation. The dog observing how the pig roots around
in the dirt to find his food declares that the pig is a lowly animal because it finds its food
this way while the dog engages in the more noble activity of hunting. The dog then goes on to assert
that based on this he will have superiority over the pig. Now Malinowski asks how have we handled
myths like this in previous scholarship? Pointing to a very popular book of world mythology that
he had at hand, he said in this kind of book you would have simply had the text of the myth taken
down, ripped out of its context absolutely away from its living setting and you would have had
simply a disembodied story. A scholar then studying the myth in his armchair in his own studio would
then read it and maybe find symbols in it and relate them to symbols in other myths but he says
what happens when the field worker actually goes to the local site learns the language and observes
the myth in action begins to say in what settings is the myth told who gets to tell this story
on what occasions with what effect then a whole new kind of interpretation begins to emerge.
He says the functional cultural and pragmatic aspect of any native tale is manifested as much
in its enactment, embodiment, contextual relations as it is in the text. It is easier to write down
the story than to observe the diffuse complex ways in which it enters into life or to study its
function by the observation of the vast social and cultural realities into which it enters.
So let's enter into that cultural reality and what do we find?
We find, for example, that in this particular village there is active ongoing competition for
status among the four major clans. The dog clan seems to be pretty consistently on top. Now if
you're simply reading the myth out of this context you might assume that it is simply a sort of
reflection of a pre-established and stable social order in which the dog clan has the ascendancy,
but once you get on the scene you see a very different picture. You see that status is always
being contested and within this competition for high status the myth is a weapon. It is not just
a static tale reflecting a stable reality, it is in itself a force that helps to shape that reality.
Members of the dog clan tell this tale every chance they get in order to continue asserting
their own superiority. Not only that but Malinowski also noted that tales such as this are frequently
told immediately whenever any newcomer arrives in a village. Trading partners come from over the
ocean or people come to visit. They will immediately be taken to the village headman's hut, sat down,
and they will hear the tales recited. Is this simply because everybody loves a good story and you
want to entertain your guests? Malinowski says no. Again the myth is performing a function.
By sitting and listening to the myths of how the village was founded, where the clan came from,
and how it relates to other clans, the newcomer is learning valuable information. The newcomer is
getting a crash course in the social lay of the land. Who is related to whom? In what ways do
they relate? Who has status and who doesn't? What are the rules of conduct in this society?
And so in this way the newcomer can be immediately oriented and will avoid making any serious gaffes
or faux pas or talking to the wrong person or doing something in the wrong way. They will be
immediately educated in the right way to act and relate to the people. And so in this way the myth
once again functions in a very concrete way. This is of course very very different from what
the Victorian anthropologists were doing. But this is precisely where Malinowski says
the new technique of individual ethnographic field work, learning the languages and placing
the religions into their living contexts gives us a much better understanding of what they're
actually doing than a simple literary analysis of a disembodied story. The other figure who helped
initiate the new movement in functional anthropology was Alfred Reginald Radcliffe Brown,
another Londoner who did much work in Africa. He shared a good many of Malinowski's assumptions
about the way that you study religion. He wanted to go do field work, learn local languages and
find how elements of religion along with all of the other structural elements of culture
actually served within society. He did however have a somewhat different take on
the level at which religious phenomena functioned. As I stated earlier from Malinowski, the primary
level of function was that of the individual. Economic structures, religious structures,
all of these things really had to help keep the individual alive and then the individual would
be there to help the society to function. For Radcliffe Brown, society itself was the primary
unit. The individual's needs and comforts weren't all that important and so the function of religion
was actually to preserve the structures of society and to help individuals to integrate
themselves into it and to motivate them to contribute to its ongoing life. This helped
to explain things like war where individuals may actually have to give up their own lives,
something that definitely does not help anybody to survive and thrive but which will help the
society itself to get along. This led Radcliffe Brown to attend in a way much more to ritual
than to myth because ritual was the place where people came together and where social bonds were
formed and structures defined and maintained and as he himself admitted in one of his writings,
this put his position very, very close to that of Emil Durkheim who we looked at a while ago.
In a way that presages the thought of Clifford Geertz, Radcliffe Brown identified the primary
function of religious ritual as the regulation of human sentiment and by sentiment he might have
also meant not just emotion and feeling but also what Geertz would later call moods and motivations,
propensities to feel certain things that would lead people to act in certain ways.
In particular, the sentiment that he thought ritual was designed to inculcate and reinforce
was a feeling of dependence on power. He put it this way.
I venture to suggest as a general formula that religion is everywhere an expression in one form
or another of a sense of dependence on a power outside ourselves, a power which we may speak of
as a spiritual or a moral power. He agreed with Durkheim that the religious objects of rituals
were probably simply society's way of representing itself to itself and this helped him to understand
how ritual did that function of regulating people's moods and motivations and binding them
into a viable social unit that could then move forward into the future.
Now we have an understanding of functional anthropology. It will in turn be superseded,
though not entirely, by what we will call symbolic anthropology. What were some of the problems that
cropped up within functional anthropology that took away from some of its explanatory power.
In the first place, functional anthropology did not seem to leave any room for the native voice.
If you go back to the ritual of planting a small fish with the seed corn, the one thing that you
might notice is that you don't even need to talk to the native who is performing this ritual. You
can observe what he or she is doing and then you can surmise that the minnow is providing fertilizer
for the corn and from that you can derive a function for this ritual. What the native him
or herself actually has to say about the meaning of what they're doing really doesn't need to enter
into it at all. Now as we saw when Malinowski was explaining the myths that he considered,
he avoided this mistake but future generations of functionalists made this mistake rather easily.
Another problem with functional anthropology was that it tended to overly reify
local societies as things that were stable and endured over time. As James Boone explains in
his book Other Tribes, Other Scribes, the functional anthropology practice gave rise to a particular
genre of literature, the ethnographic monograph, which very quickly became ossified and presented
only certain kinds of contents. What it left out was any sense that a local society was actually
a dynamic changing entity. Once you had the functions in place then you assumed they had
always been there and they would always be there and nothing would ever change.
There was no place in functional anthropology for a consideration even of how a local society
might interact and be influenced or mutually transformed by a neighboring society and something
that you certainly never did see in any sense was the presence of colonial powers which made it
possible frequently for the anthropologists to be there in the first place and the anthropologist
always studiously left him or herself out of the account as if they were a mere fly on the wall
whose presence made absolutely no difference in how people went about their business.
Much of this was shaken when after his death Malinowski's field diaries were printed in which
it was discovered that he wasn't just out in the wilderness of Papua New Guinea, he was within easy
walking distance of a colonial garrison of soldiers and the natives were very well aware
that cooperation with this anthropologist might be a very good idea at the very least there was
a fortress full of soldiers who had guns over the horizon but in a more positive vein cultivating
the acquaintance of this fellow who spoke your language might actually be very useful as it
provided a liaison who could represent your interest to that colonial garrison but this never
shows up in the anthropology and you would have no clue that the presence of the colonial soldiers
or of the anthropologist walking about the village clipboard in hand had any kind of noticeable
effect on how people went about their business. Finally functional anthropology at its worst
could be prone to a particular kind of Darwinian mythology of its own when you saw any kind of
myth being told in any particular setting or any exchange taking place or any ritual being enacted
if you were already disposed to believe that the primary purpose of these things was to function
in a way that enabled individuals or societies to thrive then it was easy to insert your own
reading into how it functioned this led to what Stephen Jay Gould has called a series of just
so stories where people simply dreamed up well what could this be doing to help people survive
as an example of this one could look at a book by the anthropologist Marvin Harris who is a
functionalist of the extreme materialist sort in which he explains all kinds of puzzling phenomena
from around the world for example he takes on the Aztec cult of human sacrifice of parading
victims up the temple of the sun and ripping out their still beating heart and holding it up and
holding it up and then eating the body of the victim in a cannibal feast for Harris the reason
people did this was because there was a protein deficiency in the local diet and this cannibalistic
practice actually helped people to supplement their diet it pays absolutely no attention to the
myths that accompanied this by which the Aztecs themselves understood what they were doing
and it completely ignores the fact that it was only the local aristocrats who even participated
in the cannibalistic feast if there was an endemic protein shortage then the commoners who didn't get
to eat the sacrificial victim should have been dying of starvation all around similarly Harris
looks at the prohibition on eating pork in the Levitical Code of the Hebrew Bible and wonders
well why would anybody not want to eat pork he decides that there is a stark difference between
pigs and all other domestic animals cows and sheep and goats will provide you other products while
they're still alive you can get wool from your sheep you can get milk from all three of those
animals and at the same time they do not compete with human beings for the local food source they
eat completely different things that people can't even touch pigs on the other hand only yield
nutritive value when they're slaughtered you don't get milk from them you don't get wool from them
their only value comes when you actually kill them so while they're alive they give you nothing
and at the same time their diet is closest to that of humans and so in a sparse arid environment
like ancient Palestine to raise pigs is a very wasteful activity you're feeding them things that
you could be eating and you only get a benefit from them when you slaughter them but pigs taste
pretty good pork and bacon and ham are wonderful and people will want them and so it takes something
of the force of a religious proscription to convince people not to go eating the pigs
these kind of explanations pay no attention to native understandings and as with the Aztec example
can even be demonstrated to be false a later anthropologist E. E. Evans Pritchard severely
criticized this mode of functional explanation by caricaturing it as the if I were a horse style
of explanation where you look at the horse's behavior and then think to yourself now if I were a horse
that's why I would be doing those things so as we'll see next time symbolic anthropology arose
as a way of helping the native voice come back into the picture so that local meanings could once
again be inserted into the account in order to check the runaway imagination of functionalists
who might think that they know exactly what every element of a culture is doing to help that culture
to survive
