Lecture 20, Mircee Eliati
We'll finish up our look at the phenomenological study of religion by considering the work
of the Romanian-born scholar Mircee Eliati, who really brought it to its finest and most
complete articulation.
Eliati built on the thought of both Emil Durkheim and Rudolf Otto, bringing the two together.
Durkheim had described the experience of religious people in terms of their division
of the world into two distinct realms, that of the sacred and that of the profane.
But Durkheim didn't believe there was really anything behind those categories, they were
simply social frames of thought by which people organized their life within their own societies.
Rudolf Otto, in his book The Idea of the Holy, had described the real encounter of
the person with a sacred reality and tried to define phenomenologically how people responded
to that encounter.
But he never took it beyond the level of the personal and in fact thought that this was
an experience that only a very few people had.
Mircee Eliati brought both of these things together.
He said not only do people actually encounter a sacred reality, but that the effects of
this encounter can spread into society so that beyond the level of the purely personal,
people do all kinds of things to organize space and time, their societies, their cities,
the way they build houses, all flow out of the experience of the sacred.
In fact he thought that before modern times this was normative, that religious experiences
of a sacred reality were the fundamental basis upon which people organized their lives.
So he had constantly referred to the lives of archaic peoples, as he liked to call them.
And the person that he was trying to describe, the ideal person who lived in this sacred
reality, he described as homo religiosus, the religious person.
And his job as a scholar was then to reconstruct the history of this response to the sacred
by looking at empirical evidence that showed how people responded once the sacred had broken
in from its realm into the profane world.
He described this under several headings.
The most salient that we'll look at today are sacred space, sacred time, symbol, and
the interplay of myth and ritual.
So to begin with sacred space, one of the things that Eliade took over from the thought
of Immanuel Kant was the idea that reality is not simply uniform.
Existence is not something that is just the same no matter where you find it.
Reality can have different levels of density, it can have different intensities.
And like Kant, who thought that God was simply the most real thing in the universe out of
which other things were created, Eliade thought the sacred was the realisimum, as he liked
to say, that which had the greatest density of being, and so broke into the profane world
in a creative way to bring other things into being.
Sacred space arose in those places where the sacred did this, it places where it broke
in to create, to found, to establish anything that humans needed to relate to.
In those places then where the sacred had come in, people experienced space very differently.
Now it's not that Eliade thought people directly perceived the greater density of reality.
As a scholar he didn't think he could actually get into people's minds, but he did think
that we could get a clue as to where these breaks in space occurred by looking at the
way people behave.
For example, if they walk over the threshold of a church building, some kind of sacred
space, you can actually see that they behave differently.
They might speak in hushed tones, they might change the level of language that they use,
not using slang, but using somewhat more elevated language.
They might dress better, or at least feel bad if they think that they're underdressed.
And so by all of these signs that people exhibit, you can see that they are experiencing the
space very differently.
The place where the sacred broke in to found or established things was taken mythologically
to be the center of the world.
And in describing this center, Eliade used the Latin term oxus mundi, an axle of the
world, the point around which things revolved.
Now this could be established by people's direct experience.
For example, when you look at the story of the founding of Mexico City, you find people
wandering, looking for a place to live, and then in the middle of a lake on a rock they
see an eagle grappling with a snake, and take that as a divine sign that this is the place
where things are to be established.
Now that's an instance of a spontaneous appearance of the sacred that might correspond more to
Otto's description of the encounter with the sacred.
But again, breaking somewhat with Otto, Eliade asserted that it doesn't have to happen spontaneously.
People can actually do things to bring the sacred in, to evoke it.
They can do rituals of divination, they can do something as simple as roll a pair of dice
and look at the result and make decisions on that.
They can bring the sacred in without having to have a spontaneous mystical experience.
When they do this, they then have a way of organizing space.
The place where the sacred breaks in will be the center of their habitations.
You think of the great cathedrals in the middle of medieval cities.
You can also see how they organize the space around it.
Streets emanate from it in all directions.
People's habitations will be closest to it.
As you get farther from the center, space becomes progressively less organized and therefore
in a way less habitable.
So outside of the village, which is the most highly organized space, you'll have the farmlands,
the lands that people have plowed but they don't actually live in, and then beyond that,
the wilderness, the place where space remains unorganized and chaotic.
So the inbreaking of the sacred in this way by organizing space literally creates a cosmos
where there once was only chaos.
It creates the habitable, organized world in which people can live and carry out their
lives, whereas outside of that is simply chaos, the wilderness, the trackless land where one
gets lost.
In the British Library, there is a 13th century salter that has a miniature illumination,
a map of the world.
It's only about four by six inches but it's highly detailed and illustrates very nicely
what Eliotti was talking about.
The map is completely inaccurate.
It's nothing any cartographer would recognize as representing the earth.
You certainly couldn't plan any trips by referring to it.
It does show, however, a sacred reality.
In the middle of the circle of the world is Jerusalem, absolutely dead center, the place
where God manifested by incarnating in Jesus Christ.
The reality spreads out from that and becomes progressively less organized.
When you get out to the periphery, the edge of the known world, you have these interesting
illustrations of tribes of deformed men.
You have men with only one leg, men with no heads whose faces are represented on the center
of their chest.
In other words, you see the organization of reality breaking down and things becoming
a little more chaotic.
Outside of the circle are a pair of dragons, which in European mythology are always creatures
of chaos, creatures who are working against the organization of the world, trying to bring
it back to its pre-creation state of disorganized chaos.
Now, does this mean that the wilderness is a bad place?
Is it the opposite of the sacred?
Not really.
The wilderness by being a place of chaos actually is a place of both danger and power.
Because it is unorganized, it is a place where unmaking can take place.
So when religious rituals need to take place that involve taking something apart before
reconstituting it, the wilderness is the place to go.
For example, before Jesus begins his preaching ministry, he goes and spends 40 days out in
the desert, out away from human habitation, out in the realm of chaos.
Among African tribes, the initiation of young boys that takes them from their previous status
as dependent minors to responsible adults involves exposing them to chaos so that in
a sense their previous status can be unmade before they can be remade as adults.
They are taken out to the wilderness, and there they are shown visions of monsters, which
are again creatures of chaos.
So the wilderness is not profane.
It is simply outside of the realm of secret and profane, simple disorganization, and by
that very token, a dangerous and powerful place where transformation can happen.
Now getting into the realm of sacred time, again, Eliade believed that time was not uniform.
This is something he thinks modern human beings have lost with our watches and our clocks
that measure off seconds ticking by in a completely uniform manner.
We tend to see time as simply this continuum that itself never really alters in any way.
But just as space has a greater density to it, and a different feel and tone when you
enter into the realm of the sacred, time does as well.
Now sacred time manifests in Eliade's thought in two different ways.
One kind of sacred time is the time of creation.
This is what Eliade refers to with the Latin phrase elude tempus, that time.
That time is not historical time.
That time cannot be localized on a timeline.
That time is the once upon a time of fairy stories.
It's the distant time of Alaskan, Athabaskan natives.
It's the dream time of the Australian Aborigines.
That kind of sacred time is the place where the acts of creation and world establishment
first happened.
It's where the creative power of the sacred actually came into the world and organized
space around the point of its in breaking and established the order of things.
It's where the shapeless clay is taken and formed into the human being.
It's the time when the eagle and the snake appeared on the rocks so that Mexico City
could be established.
So that sacred time is the time when things are new.
Things are at their most perfect.
As Eliade says, they are fresh from the Creator's hand and they have the greatest amount of reality.
This is usually followed by a sense of degeneration, that things go through cycles of creation
and disillusion.
This is very well illustrated in the Hindu myths that Eliade studied very intensively,
where the world comes fresh from the hands of Brahma, the Creator God, but then goes
through a progressive series of four ages in which things get more and more run down,
like a clock winding down, or like something that simply decays through time.
It eventually reaches a point where it's unsalvageable, the gods have to put it back
into its state of chaos in order to create it anew and get another world cycle going.
Now, this sense of degeneration of things, of disillusion, means that every once in a
while, creation has to be renewed.
It's like the circus act of the man who spins plates on the end of a stick.
And every once in a while, as the plate starts to get wobbly, the man can go back and start
it spinning again, give it a fresh shot of energy so that it will get back on balance.
This leads us to the other manifestation of sacred time that Eliade refers to.
This sacred time is the time of rituals, and it is in rituals that this fresh jolt of creative
energy is infused into the world to combat its degradation and degeneration and to get
things back on track and going once again.
So this kind of sacred time is experienced by people, again, as the crossing of a threshold,
just as going through the door of a church takes you from profane space into sacred space.
So the moment when a ritual begins, whether it's by ringing a bell, lighting a candle,
once that starts, people know that they are no longer in ordinary time, they are in sacred time.
Now what makes that time sacred is that the ritual involves the retelling of the myths of creation.
Every ritual will tell the story once again of how God created the world, or in the case of the Christian
Eucharist, how the ritual itself was instituted at the Last Supper, or in the Easter Vigil
service, the story of how God created the world, a story told just at the point where spring
is starting to bring the vegetation back and bring the world back from the brink of death
in winter to the life it will experience in summer.
So the rituals of sacred time make the time sacred by taking that first kind of sacred time,
that illude tempest, that once upon a time, and bringing it out of its distant, unlocalizable past,
and placing it right in the present so that people can re-experience it, and so that the creative energy
that manifested in that time can then be recalled and infused into creation once again.
The third topic that Eliade refers to is symbol.
For Eliade, the sacred itself was never really accessible to the human mind.
Again, this flows right out of the Kantian tradition of phenomenology as a philosophical stance.
Recall that Kant said, as people experience the world, all that they ever really have access to
is the way that their minds put the world together.
This is the experience or the phenomenon that occurs in the mind alone.
What is the world in and of itself?
We will never know. Kant referred to it as the Ding An Sich, the thing that is just out there,
that we can never have any kind of direct contact with, and so cannot know what it would be
apart from the way our minds put it all together.
Playing off this, Eliade said that the sacred is a Kantian Ding An Sich.
We never have a direct experience of it, but like Otto, Eliade believed that it made more sense
of our experience if we at least thought that they referred to something in the external world.
Otherwise, it was hard to explain why the expressions of human religious experience were so uniform.
If it was simply, as Durkheim said, something that we're all making up,
then it would be hard to understand the universality of these experiences of sacred space,
sacred time, and the deployment of symbols.
So symbols for Eliade are the ways in which the mind apprehends and constructs its experience of the sacred.
Anything in the world can become a symbol, a rock, a tree, a mountain, a lightning bolt,
a species of animal, a human artifact like a cross or a star of David.
There is nothing inherently sacred in the object, but as people experience the sacred
and need some way to put this experience together and to bring it to expression within their own minds,
they pull these things out of their profane experience of the world and they attach it to the experience of the sacred
so that it brings to mind and helps them to grapple with and to organize their own experience in certain structured ways.
Now, Eliade spent a lot of time looking for these symbols.
He looked all across the world to find how they manifested in different cultures and to find patterns in their deployment.
And very much in the way that Carl Gustav Jung had done, he found that there were repeating symbols.
There were symbols that appeared in place after place and time after time in culture after culture in roughly the same way.
To give just a few examples out of the catalog of symbols that Eliade put together,
he found, for example, that the sun was usually a symbol of universality.
For example, when the first emperor of Japan was trying to consolidate his rule in the 6th century AD
and trying to find a way to convince other clans that they should accept him as their sovereign,
one of the things he hit on was to claim descent from the goddess of the sun, Amaterasu.
So he used this symbol of universality of this sun that hangs in the sky and gives its light to everybody
as a way to allow other clans to think about his role in their lives.
Another common symbol is the moon.
The salient feature of the moon is its waxing and waning.
The fact that it seems to diminish for a while and to disappear and then to start growing again.
The moon therefore becomes a very natural symbol for growth and transformation that one finds in many, many cultures.
Another almost universal symbol is water.
Water is formless, it is shapeless, it has no identity of its own.
It takes on the shape of whatever vessel that it's put in.
And so across many, many cultures, water is a symbol of chaos.
You might recall that the very opening of the book of Genesis shows the spirit of God brooding over the waters.
There is not nothing in the cosmos, there is water, the universal symbol of chaos.
In the Babylonian creation epic, the Enuma Elish,
creation takes place when the hero god Marduk defeats the monster Tiamat,
who is a water creature, a water dragon, and thus also represents chaos.
And in ritual, water is frequently used as a symbol of chaos in the sense that it un-makes things in order that they may be made new once again.
In the Christian Rite of Baptism, for example, people are immersed in water.
And this demonstrates the un-making of their previous selves, their reversion to the un-manifest state of chaos,
so that when they rise from the water, they can be reconstituted as new creatures.
One final set of symbols is that of the sky father and the earth mother.
This is explicitly sexual imagery.
The rain that falls from the sky is very frequently interpreted literally as the semen of the god that falls into the earth.
And the furrow that is plowed into the earth is very much like the vagina,
into which the seed is planted and then watered and out of which new life springs.
And so in many places across the world, we find monotheism as such doesn't really take hold.
It is hard for agricultural peoples to hold strictly to the image of a sky father without an accompanying earth mother.
When we look at the archaeological record of ancient Israel,
we find that frequently out in the countryside, away from the cities, away from Jerusalem,
where farmers had to plant their vineyards and grow their crops,
there are temples and shrines up on the hillsides,
upon which you might see a plaque that says to the god Yahweh and his Asherah.
The Israelite god Yahweh was being paired with a fertility goddess associated with the earth,
and so they were playing the role of sky father and earth mother in order that people might have a way to think about the growing of the crops.
And then finally we must consider the relationship between ritual and myth.
We've already alluded to this when talking about sacred time.
There are certain kinds of rituals in which the sacred time is established by bringing out of the distant past the ilu tempus,
the once upon a time in order to make it present once again.
But there are certainly other kinds of rituals that do not involve making the past present once again.
There are for instance rituals which simply serve to bind the community together.
These rituals will make use of mythic imagery by gathering the people together in that very place that serves as the oxus moondi,
the temple at Jerusalem, the arbor where the great tree grows, and in gathering around it the people will experience once again
the sacrality of the space by seeing the way that the sacred breaks into it.
In other such rituals, even if they are located not at the sacred center but in the periphery,
for example in a parish church away from the cathedral that sits in the very center,
the ritual will evoke the sacred and bring it in.
For example, the Christian Eucharist calls down God to inhabit the bread and wine,
and so the space around the altar which may be fenced off from the people by an altar rail
becomes the site where God enters into the space and creates a center for the duration of the ritual.
This requires the retelling of the myth of the institution of the ritual itself.
In the initiation of young boys in India, people will retell myths of how the gods brought forth the first human beings
and instituted them as fully adult humans.
Symbols will be deployed such as the sacred thread that hangs over the initiates shoulder
that shows they have crossed the boundary from childhood into adulthood
and they have become responsible members of society.
Rituals make almost no sense without an associated myth because every ritual ever done
re-establishes once again the relationship between the sacred reality which exists in its own realm
and the profane reality that it comes in to organize.
And this is what enables societies to constitute themselves,
to explain to themselves their own structures, to understand the roles that people must play
by reference to sacred prototypes, and in a whole host of ways, it makes people's lives make sense.
Now as we come to the end of this lecture on phenomenology,
we really come to the end of our survey of theorists of religion.
One of the issues that we have been pursuing throughout this whole series of lectures is the issue of reductionism.
As I said when introducing phenomenology, one of the motive forces that got scholars thinking along these lines
was the tendency of sociological, anthropological, and psychological theories to reduce religion to something else.
By asserting, say, that religion is nothing but a psychological process that takes place within people's minds,
one asserts then that religious language is not really appropriate for understanding religion.
One must describe it in the language of psychology.
Or when Marx says religion is part of the superstructure of the economic life of a community,
he is saying that the theological language with which religion talks about itself is not appropriate for understanding religion,
one can only really understand it and explain it by putting it into economic vocabulary.
Eliade was trying very hard to make religious studies a branch of academic study in its own right with its own justified language.
By saying that the sacred really exists, even if in a separate realm that only breaks into the profane realm,
Eliade was in part asserting that religious studies cannot be reduced to anything else,
that because it is a discrete kind of phenomenon, it has to be understood, described, interpreted, and explained in its own terms.
Religion becomes a sweet, generous phenomenon.
Looking at the whole sweep of where we've been, it seems like a return to a kind of theology.
Religious studies had broken away from theology by the time of David Hume and had become something that described religion in non-religious terms.
The phenomenologists tried to steer a middle path between a return to theology,
that is a description of religion that used the language and vocabulary of a specific religious tradition,
and to describe religion in completely non-religious terms.
So in a way, what the phenomenologists were doing in fighting reductionism was to come up with a kind of theology of religion itself,
a kind of way of discussing religion that wasn't bound to the categories or frameworks or the communities of any particular religious tradition,
but simply a way of talking about religion as such, as something real that had a real referent in the sacred.
Where do we go from here?
For the next several lectures, we will look first at a critique of all of these academic traditions from the feminist angle,
and then we will look at some case studies to see how well or how poorly these theories help us to understand the religious lives of real people.
