Lecture 23 – Theory in Action – Case Studies
In the last lecture, we examined two case studies that allowed us to shed some light
on how these theories help in the collection of data for analysis in religious studies.
In this lecture, we'll look at two other case studies, but in this instance, our emphasis
will be on how theories help us to come and interpret the data.
First we will look at some material regarding the religion of slaves in the American South
prior to the Civil War, and then we'll look at the rise of Christianity in late antiquity.
In 1978, Albert Rabatot published his landmark book, Slave Religion, about the religion of
slaves in the antebellum South in America.
Now the theory that I want to bring to this data is Marxism.
These slaves represent a classic case of the theft of labor in Marxist terms, and the religious
interplay between the slaves and their masters should be amenable to Marxist analysis.
We'll look at this interplay in two different perspectives, one from the point of view of
the masters themselves, and then the slaves in narratives that were collected later.
The masters, as it turns out, acted very much in a way that Karl Marx would have predicted.
They were very concerned that their slaves' religious life enabled the slaves to accept
that they were and ought to be slaves.
The masters wanted very much for whatever kind of religions the slaves were practicing
to keep them docile, to keep them in their place.
But interestingly, the actual practice of the masters evolved over time.
At first the masters resisted any efforts to convert the slaves to Christianity at all.
As the later Marxist thinker Antonio Gramski had seen, religion, especially the prophetic
strain of Christianity could be the amphetamine of the masses just as much as it might be
the opiate of the masses.
The masters saw, correctly, that the adoption of Christianity on the part of the slaves
would be dangerous.
It would give the slaves a reason to give their allegiance to a moral power higher than
the masters.
They also were unwilling to admit, in many cases, that the slaves even had souls, and
they were afraid of the consequence of the slaves coming to think of themselves in a
religious framework that might make them equal to the masters even in the limited context
of ultimate concerns.
So when the masters had control over the slaves' access to religion, they at first put forth
efforts to try to prevent the slaves from becoming religious at all.
When missionary societies came to the plantations asking for access to the slaves in order to
preach to them, many of the masters denied this access.
But many slaves adopted religion anyway, and in those instances the masters tried very
hard to literally beat it out of them.
There were instances like the story of praying Jacob, a slave in the South, who adopted religion
and decided that he was going to pray at certain times during the day even if he was supposed
to be working.
He would put his tools down in open defiance of the overseers and get down on his knees
and pray.
In his case, the story goes that the overseer was unable to stop him, was unable to even
approach him, but there were certainly other instances in which the masters and overseers
could and did approach the slaves.
They would imprison them, chain them up, and flog them in an effort to get them to stop
praying or to stop preaching or to stop going to religious meetings, and in these instances
the slaves stood up to their masters, strengthened by their religious convictions.
In other instances, the plantation owners did allow missionaries to come onto their plantations
in an effort to convert the slaves, but when meetings were held and sermons preached,
the masters wanted to control very tightly the content of these sermons.
They wanted the message to consistently reinforce the idea that slavery was okay in God's eyes
and that the slaves should simply accept their lot.
Later slave narratives recount how slaves got very tired of hearing sermons based on
Ephesians 6-5, which goes, slaves obey your earthly masters with fear and trembling in
singleness of heart as you obey Christ.
And they heard enough sermons on the letter to Philemon, a very short text in the New Testament,
in which the apostle Paul writes to a slave owner that a runaway slave has come to Paul
and Paul is sending him back with the message that the slave should obey his master.
The slaves heard more sermons on those two texts than on just about any other text of
the Bible.
So in this case, Marx's theory seems to be pretty well on target.
The masters are acting about like Marx would have expected.
They're trying to use religion as a part of a superstructure and ideology that they hope
will help maintain an economic status quo that works very much to their advantage.
But Marx's analysis also extended to the oppressed people themselves and their religious behavior
and his expectation was that religion would actually keep people docile and would keep
them from trying to do anything to correct their abuses by focusing their attention,
misplacing it, Marx would say, on an otherworldly, heavenly compensation when the main task was
to work to change the present economic arrangements.
Does Marx's theory hold up in this case?
When you read the slave narratives that were collected after the war and published in many
sources, one finds that the religious attitudes of slaves are in fact far, far more complex
and nuanced than Marxist theory could anticipate.
There are indeed some slaves for whom religion was a kind of compensator, a comfort under
the very difficult circumstances of their lives.
An anonymous slave from South Carolina, interviewed later by WPA workers, had this to say,
children sold, old man gone, all visitors and company and big house, all cooking and
washing, all on me and never done enough, Mrs. never satisfied, no hope, nothing, nothing
but Jesus.
I look up, oh Lord, how long, give me patience.
She says that when nothing else would comfort her, she could look to Jesus and pray and
Jesus would understand her situation.
This sounds very much like Marx's analysis, but there is a difference.
In Marxist analysis, this would have indicated a genuine acceptance of her lot, but in fact
she is expressing nothing of the sort.
We find further confirmation of this when we find slave narratives from slaves who escaped.
They tell us that religion acted as an otherworldly compensator at those times when they didn't
see any prospect for escape.
This did not make them docile though, if a chance to escape came along, they certainly
took it.
And in those instances, religion was part of the ideology that led them to escape.
Slaves looked very much to the Exodus narrative, the story of how the children of Israel were
freed from their bondage in Egypt.
And they drew a great deal of strength and inspiration and hope from this.
And when an opportunity for escape arose, that was the religious narrative that gave
them the impetus to take what for many was a momentous step.
Many slave narratives actually present the decision to attempt an escape as if it were
a religious conversion.
People stay up all night, wrestling within themselves, looking for the conviction that
this is the right thing to do, to leave the familiar grounds of the plantation, to go
into the unfamiliar woods, and to take the chance that they might be caught and severely
punished in order to grasp at freedom.
In this case, we see that religion is actually the inspiration that leads the slaves to try
to do something about their situation.
Another factor that is not really anticipated within a Marxist analysis is that even while
on the plantation, with no hope of escape, slaves could use religion as a means of maintaining
some level of human dignity under their unbearable enslavement.
There are many instances where slaves stand up to their masters, where drawing on the
superior moral authority of their religious convictions appealing to God, they will look
the master right in the eye and speak truth to power.
Even when these kinds of things aren't happening, the slaves drew upon their religious convictions
to stand tall, to continually reaffirm their own humanity as children of God, even under
the dehumanizing situation of slavery.
But there were other slaves that had other attitudes.
Many slaves were not particularly religious at all.
Many of them simply found the whole prospect of Christianity ridiculous.
They couldn't fathom how a genuinely good and all-powerful God would have ever allowed
them to be enslaved in the first place.
They also tended to see Christianity in particular as the religion of their masters and something
that had nothing at all to do with them and their lives.
Rabatot has this to say about them.
There is no way of knowing how many slaves were doubters, agnostics, or atheists, but
it is clear that some saw Christianity as meaningless, a sham, and a white man's religion,
a fact which should temper generalizations about the piety of all slaves.
There were evidently atheists on the plantations.
Finally, religion on the plantation gave rise to a situation that I don't believe Marxist
theory has any way of analyzing.
That was that the shared Christianity of slaves and masters sometimes gave rise to a genuine
mutual recognition of each other's humanity and the formation of a genuine community between
masters and slaves.
Rabatot observes that this was more observable when the religion was the evangelical, emotional,
experiential, revivalistic kind than in more liturgical traditions like Episcopalianism.
But there are many narratives that are left to us of pious slaves converting their masters.
Of masters taking an interest in the doubts and troubles of slaves and presenting the
gospel to them and converting them.
There are instances of slaves having visions in which they are told by God that it is their
lot and their duty to be preachers and the masters recognizing this call and allowing
the slaves to set up a meeting right on the front lawn of the plantation house and to
preach to both the slave and the white communities together, leading to a great revival and a
great outpouring of emotion.
It may be that this mutuality was only temporary, lasting only for the duration of the religious
service, but it is nevertheless genuine and it did have effects on people's lives.
The upshot of all of this is that Marx's theory about religion's place as an ideology that
undergirds an oppressive system of economic deprivation doesn't quite capture all of the
nuances of religion when we examine the data from a classic case of oppression and theft
of the value of labor.
Is there a better theory that might explain or help us to understand this data in a more
nuanced way?
We might at this point turn to Rodney Stark and William Simms' Bainbridge's rational
choice theory.
Remember that in their theory, religion was a general compensator that stood in when people
could not get the thing that they actually wanted.
But Stark and Bainbridge specify that people will accept compensators only when the actual
item desired is unavailable.
A person would not rationally take an IOU if they had the option of getting cash right
on the spot.
These slaves themselves, in their later narratives after the war, expressed a good deal of impatience
with people who accused them of acting like Marxists predicted, of an oppressed people
who had been bamboozled by the religion of the oppressors into being docile and in not
working toward some kind of revolution.
These slaves say, if you had been in our position, you would have taken it too.
Seeing no chance for the actual item they desired, that was freedom, they accepted the
compensator of a postmortem reward in heaven and access to the streets of gold.
But as Stark and Bainbridge would predict, but Marx wouldn't, when the opportunity to
escape did arise, they did indeed take it.
There was no reason to continue accepting the compensator when the real thing was there
and available.
There are only a handful, very few narratives of slaves who became so committed to the Christian
vision of their masters that they actually forsook an opportunity to escape and remain
in slavery out of a sense of duty.
And in one of those cases, the slave even later repented of what he saw as a moral lapse
and escaped later.
He felt very bad that his previous opportunity had gone by and he had not capitalized on
it.
Let's move now to our second case study, the rise of Christianity in late Roman antiquity.
One of the great historical puzzles is how Christianity came to be the official religion
of the Roman Empire by the year 380 AD.
It had started out as a very minor messianic Jewish sect located on the eastern end of
the Mediterranean, on the far end of the empire, and yet within a mere three centuries, it
became the official religion of the Roman Empire.
Now there are, there is no shortage of books outlining the history of early Christianity.
During my days in seminary, when I took the required church history courses, we read some
of these books.
These books presented a fairly standardized picture of the history and spread of early
Christianity.
They focused on the activities of apostles and evangelists who traveled up and down
the Mediterranean, showing up in city after city, preaching on street corners, gaining
converts, manifesting miracles, establishing churches.
We also see the life of these churches as they struggle to maintain themselves, as they
experience schisms, as people present competing interpretations of the gospel, and as they
produce miracles of their own.
All of these histories, however, fail to contextualize these activities in such a way that would
answer the question, why did this religion grow so fast and eventually become adopted
by the government as the official religion after a period of persecution?
Rodney Stark, in his book The Rise of Christianity, decides to take on this question from a sociological
perspective, to try to answer the question, how did this happen?
How did a marginal messianic Jewish sect become the official religion of the Roman Empire
in such a short period of time?
He begins to look at the data and apply sociological analysis.
Now in all the sociological theories, we looked at one of the things that sociologists normally
do that did not really appear is quantitative analysis, simply crunching the numbers.
So the first task for Stark is to run the numbers to simply examine the question, was
the rate of the growth of Christianity really miraculous?
And although he found actual numbers hard to come by, there was enough data out there
to get a kind of starting figure of about 3,000 believers in the year 34, up to about
25 million believers by the time of the emperor Constantine.
That does appear to be a miraculous growth curve from 3,000 to 25 million.
But Stark plots this rate of growth using a formula that charts it by percentage per
decade and finds that the rate of growth is 40% per decade.
Now that may sound like a lot, but it is in fact not miraculous.
It works out to about 2% to 3% per year.
The reason that the growth rate becomes seemingly miraculous is that when things grow by percentages,
then the numbers behave very much like compound interest.
If you chart it on a graph, you start with a very slow rate of growth that rises steadily
but very modestly until suddenly it spikes upward.
And as Stark charts the data, that sudden upward spike in fact happens in the generation
right before the emperor Constantine legalized Christianity.
It seems that the emperor could read the writing on the wall and could see that despite the
persecutions, this marginal sect was in fact now growing very rapidly and encompassing
a larger and larger proportion of the population and could probably not be persecuted out of
existence anymore and it might be a good idea to legalize it.
By way of comparison, 40% per decade is the current rate of growth of the Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints, the Mormons.
Well, the question still remains, why did it grow at all, even if the rate of growth
is not actually miraculous, why did it grow?
What investment would Roman citizens have in a Jewish sect?
Here, Stark turns to his rational choice theory.
Putting aside standard sociological and anthropological theories which said that religion is essentially
an irrational enterprise, Stark believes that people are essentially rational.
Remember, in his theory, rational choice is based on exchange theory.
People will exchange something for something else that they feel is of greater value.
So the key to analyzing the rapid growth of Christianity is to see where it was able to
present value to the Roman Empire.
The first thing Stark notices is that traditional Roman paganism provided almost no ideological
support for a society that was growing more and more multicultural all the time, especially
in the urban areas.
The Roman gods were not creators, they were not the father of all mankind, they were in
many cases purely local deities.
In the mythology of these gods, they did not love anybody, and they certainly didn't command
people to love one another.
You could pray to them, but they needed to have sacrifices offered to them, apparently
they wouldn't actually do anything for anybody unless they were bribed, and even when the
bribe was given, they had no guarantee that the gods would actually follow through.
There were many instances where the gods simply took the offering and obsconded.
So there was no ideological resource within traditional paganism for binding together
an increasingly fragmented society, or for providing wide-scale social service networks.
Roman paganism gave no one any reason to care about anyone who was not blood kin.
When a great plague swept through the Roman Empire, for example, the great physician Galen
left the city and went to his country estate and left behind a letter that is still extant
today stating he had no responsibility to risk his own life to take care of strangers.
Now the Roman emperors themselves realized that part of the problem with the empire was
a religious problem.
They looked at the fragmentation of society.
They could see the declining population, and they begged people to set up social welfare
networks and to have more children, but people didn't respond because their religion gave
them absolutely no reason to.
This led to a period of searching.
The Roman population at that time were just as aware as the emperor that things were not
well with their society, and they were actively looking for a religious alternative.
There was a tremendous marketplace of religions at that time, and in the urban centers many
religions were trying to get in and spread their message in hopes of being adopted in
a widespread basis as the religion that was going to save the day.
So Manichaeism, Mithraism, the mystery religions, and even diaspora Judaism were all out there
presenting their messages.
None of them were quite succeeding, but Judaism actually was coming fairly close.
Many Romans were very fascinated with Judaism, the teaching that there is only one God who
takes care of everybody, that this God loves the people that he created, and that he commands
them to set up social networks to take care of each other.
All of these things seemed very promising to the Roman population, but there was one
little problem, and that was that Judaism was not really a religion in the sense that
we understand that term today.
It was an ethnicity, and it is very difficult, not impossible, but difficult, to convert
from one ethnic group to another.
It's far less easy than converting from one religion to another.
Christianity, according to Stark, was able to overcome this barrier.
Part of the reason that Christianity was so successful was that by repositioning itself
as a religion open to Gentiles, so that, for example, one could be a Parthian Christian,
a Roman Christian, a Greek Christian, an Israelite Christian, one could adopt the religion without
giving up one's ethnicity, made a Jewish social ethic more highly available for adoption
by the wider Roman population.
Now there are many specific ways in which this new social ethic was clearly beneficial.
As I mentioned a moment ago, one of the manifest problems in the Roman Empire was the declining
population.
Now something that is not generally known about late Roman antiquity was that it was
very degrading to women.
Two of the most widespread practices were female infanticide and abortion, and there
are letters extant in which prospective fathers are telling their wives, in a very cold blooded
way, if the child born is a girl, discarded.
And the sewers of Rome have been found to be clogged with the bones of babies.
Abortion was widely practiced, and in these pre-medical days the outcome of abortion could
just as easily be the death of a woman, or the permanent infertility of a woman as the
ending of an abortion.
The Romans, therefore, were in a systematic way depleting their own population of women
of childbearing age.
And as anyone familiar with Darwinian theory knows, the ability of a population to reproduce
itself is going to depend on the availability of women.
Christian social ethics elevated the place of women.
They did not practice abortion, they did not practice female infanticide, and therefore
they were more fertile than the rest of the population, whereas there is no record at
all of any Roman pagan family having more than two children, the Christian families
were typically having quite a few.
So they were spreading through the population simply by reproduction.
Now Roman women could see that this was a very good deal for them.
And so Roman women converted to Christianity in very large numbers.
They could see that they would not have to discard their baby daughters, they would
not be subjected to dangerous abortions, it was much better.
So as rational actors, they chose it.
And because Christians were reproducing more, they actually had more women available for
marriage.
And so Christian women were marrying out of the Christian community into the wider Roman
community.
And as sociologists have long noted, in any case of a mixed religious marriage, the religion
of the children will generally be that of the spouse who cares more.
In most instances, this was the Christian wife.
And so through that mechanism, the population of Christians spread.
Another specific benefit manifested itself in two instances where great plagues swept
through and depopulated large parts of the Roman Empire.
As the instance of the physician Galen shows, Romans, based on the ideology of their religion,
saw no reason to risk their own lives to take care of people who were not blood kin.
The Christians, however, had an ethic of taking care of each other.
If you were a member of a church and you got sick, somebody would come to your house and
they would bring you clean water to drink and food to eat.
They were risking their own life, but their religion told them they needed to do that.
And many who were then exposed to these plagues developed an immunity and were thus able to
go into the houses of the sick with seeming impunity.
The wider population noticed a couple of things.
One is that the Christian survival rates were greater.
When a whole family is down sick, survival rates go up by 30 percent with the availability
of basic nursing.
Just to have somebody bring you water and food will increase your survival rates tremendously.
So the pagans could see that the Christians were surviving in greater numbers.
They could also see that these people who were doing the nursing and developed this
immunity were able to go into these houses with impunity.
This made it look like their God was very effective.
Well we could go on with example after example, but this is enough to show that in Roman eyes,
Christianity was a rational choice of a religion.
To avoid reductionism, Stark points out that you can't simply position this within an overarching
theory of religion as such because then you would not be able to understand why Christianity
succeeded where the other religions on the scene did not.
But you have to take into account the actual doctrines, teachings and the beliefs of Christianity
because without that you will not understand what it was that made Christianity the rational
choice for an empire in decline.
