Lecture 21 The Women's Studies Perspective
In her book The Mismeasure of Woman, Carol Tavris examined a series of self-help books
aimed at women, and noticed that all of them tended to say that the problem with women
is that they don't live up to male virtues, and when they try, they do so poorly.
In an exercise in Turning the Tables, Tavris asks, what would it be like if self-help books
were written for men that helped them to emulate women's virtues a little better?
What kinds of advice might men get?
What kinds of diagnoses of their problems would be offered?
Just to give a short sample of the kinds of things she said we might see, rather than
women have lower self-esteem than men, we might have men are more conceited than women.
Again, rather than women do not value their efforts as much as men do, even when they
are doing the same work, we might have men overvalue the work that they do.
The problem, according to Tavris, is that women are being measured by an inappropriate
male-based norm, and in fact if women were to judge themselves in norms more appropriate,
they might find that in fact they have no problems at all.
This is the fundamental problem that the feminist critique of religious studies points to.
It will no doubt have been noticed by many of the listeners to this series that all of
the scholars that we have examined up to this point have been European and American men,
and that the point of view that they have been representing has been primarily a male
one.
This was true from the inception of the discipline of religious studies up until the 1970s, but
during the 1970s a group of feminist scholars began re-examining some of the most fundamental
assumptions that underlay both the collection of data in religious studies and the analysis
of that data in subsequent publications.
Now I want to make one distinction before we proceed, it's one that was put forward
by the scholar Rita Gross that will guide our thinking.
Rita Gross actually identifies two modes of women's critiques of religious studies.
One she calls the women's studies perspective, the other she calls the feminist perspective.
The women's studies perspective is really a critique of the way in which scholarship
has been pursued.
It has a lot to do with the task that scholars in the field of religious studies say that
they're trying to pursue, that is the accurate description of the religious lives of living
communities and a useful analysis of the data so that we can understand them as they are.
The androcentric perspective, that is to say the male centered perspective impedes our
ability to do that and so simply produces bad scholarship.
Most critiques on the other hand have a more active political or social agenda.
The feminist perspective is one that advocates social and political change in the roles of
women.
So just to be clear of what we'll be doing in this lecture, we will be confining ourselves
to the first of these two perspectives, what Rita Gross calls the women's studies perspective.
In the 1970s, Valerie Saving published a now classic article that for the first time really
brought forward the androcentric perspective that appeared to be inherent in the study
of religion and a trenchant critique of the problems that it caused for the description
and analysis of people's religious lives.
Some of her findings had to do with the simple nuts and bolts of data collection.
It should come as no surprise that many traditional societies and even many modern industrial
societies have norms in place for the ways in which men and women relate to each other.
A male field worker going out into the field to study a religious community will probably
find that while he has open access to the male members of the community, he has no access
at all to the female members.
I experienced this myself.
My early research was on Buddhism in Taiwan and even though in the Taiwanese scene there
are five times more nuns than there are monks, I simply had no access to the nuns whatsoever.
I could talk to the monks all I wanted.
Now this problem can be resolved simply by getting more female field workers out on the
scene and this helps us to understand for example why the field of anthropology was
the earliest of the academic disciplines to really welcome women into its ranks.
From the time Margaret Mead went out into the field in Samoa, it became very clear that
women scholars simply had access to data that the men just could not get their hands on.
But if that were the extent of the problem, then simply bringing more women into the academic
field would solve it, but in fact the problem goes far, far deeper than that.
Even when female scholars go out into the field and begin reading texts or interviewing
local informants, they bring to their study the whole academic discipline in which they've
been trained and so find that the questions that they formulate are not always the right
questions.
Rita Gross herself recounts the story in many of her publications of how her teacher, Mirce
Eliade himself, encouraged her to pursue women's perspectives in religious studies and her
immediate response was, no I don't want to do that, I want to do something important.
She was already accepting the proposition that the male perspective on male religious phenomena
was important and female perspectives simply weren't important.
As a result of their training then, when female scholars do go into the field and begin either
reading text or talking to local people, the questions that they're bringing are questions
that are more appropriate to men and therefore they find they cannot talk to the women because
they're not asking questions that the women have ever really thought about and so paradoxically
even when their questions are about the women they tend to ask them of the male members
of the local society and so in reporting on women's religious lives they are reporting
what the local men have had to say about it.
But perhaps the greatest problem is found in a very deeply rooted assumption that the
male norm, male modes of being in the world are in some sense one and the same with the
human and that to describe the male mode of being is somehow to describe the human and
this leads to the result that whenever women's modes of being are found to differ from the
men's they are then taken to be in some way deviant.
While out in the field therefore, the scholars whether male or female tend to disvalue the
reports of women.
Aside from not even being able to ask the right questions when the data does somehow
come in when they do find a woman who has something to say to them that comes out of
her own life experience, what she says tends to appear in a footnote or to be simply discounted
as non-data.
Rita Gross's description of the three step process by which androcentrism works can really
help us to understand exactly what androcentrism entails and why it is so detrimental to good
religious studies.
The first step as I've said is the collapsing of the male norm with the human in general.
That is to say if one sees a male initiation ritual one can assume then that you're simply
looking at initiation rituals as such and then to simply read this as an accurate and
complete report of how initiation rituals are done.
The second step is to then ignore or discount any kind of data that might come from a specific
women's perspective in this belief that in describing the male one has the human.
And then the third step is that when the female is actually detected and found to be in some
way different from the male it is then seen as deviant or somehow subhuman.
It is seen as extrinsic to the human experience.
So the male norm and the human norm become the same thing.
To describe the male norm is taken as an accurate and adequate description of the human norm
and the female norms are therefore taken as somehow outside the human and deviant.
These assumptions are so deeply ingrained in the way that we think that for most people
they are very very difficult to spot.
Dr. Gross has an interesting thought experiment that can show us just how deeply rooted these
assumptions of androcentrism are.
There's a sentence that she will say that sounds like a perfectly ordinary English sentence
that even women have trouble finding the difficulty with.
Imagine any sentence that begins, Egyptians did not allow women to and then you can fill
in the blank with whatever the activity is that women are forbidden.
If one says that then there is an implicit assumption underlying that very sentence that
Egyptians are men.
Who is it that is not allowing women to engage in whatever activity or is allowing them to
engage in any activity?
And men then come to stand for Egyptians as such and women become something that the
Egyptians are acting on by allowing or not allowing them to do something.
Now this is not to say the sentence is false.
There probably were in ancient Egyptian society activities that women were simply not allowed
by social norms to engage in but a more accurate description of the situation might be to say
the male in Egyptian society who had the reins of power did not allow Egyptian women
to engage in such and such an activity.
By phrasing it that way one is at least acknowledging that the category Egyptians includes both
men and women and that there is a power differential among them in which women are dictated to
and are told what they can and can't do.
But simply to say Egyptians did not allow women to whatever makes male Egyptians into
Egyptians as such and precludes us from even seeing the women as being full members of
Egyptian society and part of the social scene.
Now what makes this all bad scholarship is that it obviously excludes women from the
very community that people are trying to study but aside from that the feminist scholars
will contend that it distorts the male religious life as well.
To give an example of this there are African male initiation rites where the young boys
who are to be initiated into their lives as responsible adults are taken out of the village.
They are in a ritual manner torn from their mothers arms.
The mothers then run after them weeping and crying while the boys go off into the wilderness
to spend some time in a hut undergoing ordeals and religious rituals.
Now this is a simple footnote what is left out of the final account of these initiation
rituals is the viewpoint of the mothers.
Their behavior is simply noted as part of the ritual procedure they are supposed to
play this role but the real focus of attention is on the young boys and the male preceptors
who are initiating them and it goes through their experience and completely omits any
idea of what the women whose sons are being torn from their arms think about it, how they
perceive the situation and it is not even thought proper to ask the young boys themselves
how they perceived this act of being torn from their mothers arms.
So even though the topic of discussion is a male initiation rite rather than a female
initiation rite the fact is that we do not have complete data.
We do not have what Clifford Geertz would describe as a thick description.
We have only part of the story and to represent this as a complete understanding even of this
very male religious experience is therefore inadequate.
It cannot be good scholarship.
Now how does this play out when the topic of discussion actually is an aspect of women's
religious lives?
In some of these same African tribes there are initiation rites that are for the purpose
of introducing young girls into the life of the adult female community that exist alongside
of those male initiation rites.
Once one begins to study these rituals one finds that they proceed in a manner very different.
So at least at the surface level it is inadequate to take the male initiation and to let it
stand for initiation rites as such and then to put forward a description of initiations
as a category that include things like being torn from the mother ordeals and trials and
incorporation back into male society.
Now once we're over that hurdle and we come to see that there is a form of initiation ritual
that is very specific to women then the next step is to see how it differs and to try to
avoid the trap of seeing it as somehow a deviant form of initiation but rather something that
is an initiation rite appropriate to women that must be understood and described in its
own terms.
There is some ethnographic data on an African tribe called the Bakwari and the women who
are initiated into adult female society among the Bakwari are also taken from the village
and like the men they go out into the wilderness that place which Eliade described as the place
of chaos and transformation and they are like the men shown images of the spirits of the
wilderness but then an interesting twist takes place.
The men having undergone this wilderness experience are then brought back into the village reincorporated
into the order of society and the structure of the male initiation is such that it reinforces
the boundary between the habitable space the sacred space in Eliade's term and the wilderness
the space of chaos where spirits which the ethnographers describe as mermaid spirits
live and are seen to be very dangerous.
But when you observe the Bakwari female initiation you find that rather than being shown these
mermaid spirits as a warning as a sign of chaos that must be kept out of the boundaries
of the village.
The female initiation actually involves taking these mermaid spirits and incorporating them
into the being of the young female initiates.
So when they are brought back into the village and reincorporated into village life their
own understanding of the process that they've just undergone is that they have been out
to the wilderness and they have taken some of that wilderness and brought it right into
the boundaries of the village.
The conclusion of the ethnographer Edwin Ardener is that Bakwari women do not bound
themselves off from nature in the way that Bakwari men do.
This is a very different model of initiation and it must be studied and understood in its
own right by people who can do the participant observation to see the details of the ritual
and who can understand that this is not simply a variation of or a deviation from a male
norm and that both the male initiation and the female initiation equally represent two
modes of human religious life.
Now while Valerie Saving criticized the way that ethnography was done, how the data were
gathered and interpreted out in the field, Rita Gross goes a little farther and turns
her attention back to the scholarly community which takes in this data and analyzes it.
It's not hard to imagine that when these points were first being made within religious studies
departments there were protests by people who found the old ways of doing things quite
satisfactory and didn't really want to have their methods of research critiqued.
One of the primary defenses of the old androcentric model was to say well with all the good intentions
that we might take into our field research the fact of the matter is that most archaic
societies, most of the pre-modern religious societies that we study are androcentric in
the way that they're set up and the way power is distributed.
We cannot alter the data simply to make it more politically correct or more politically palatable.
To this Rita Gross offers two responses.
In the first place, as Valerie Saving had pointed out, we actually don't know that this
is the case.
The field research that has been done to date has been done largely by men or by female
scholars who take male androcentric assumptions into the field with them.
We have not got the data from the women's perspective in the field so it's simply too
soon to say that the material itself is inherently androcentric and has to be therefore described
in that way.
In the second place, even if that proved to be the case, scholars can exhibit more critical
awareness of that fact.
They can at least point out that the data that they're bringing back is from a male
perspective simply because that is what the local culture was able to offer them.
Another problem that has surfaced is that even when these issues are taken seriously,
the way that they're managed within publications and within religious studies departments has
not been an adequate response.
Frequently when you see a book that describes the religious life of a community, the androcentric
male norm is still sustained throughout most of the book and a chapter might be appended
to the end that shows the women's perspective.
Within departments of religion, a similar move is made.
A single scholar will be hired by the department, generally a woman, who will be charged with
the task of women's studies so that all of the other members of the department can then
be absolved of the task of critiquing their own method of scholarship.
Both the chapter on women at the end of the book and the single scholar who does women's
perspectives within a religious studies department are inadequate responses.
They are in fact a way of sequestering or quarantining the problem rather than dealing
with it in a systematic way.
The critique of religious studies from the women's studies perspective is a critique
of how every scholar goes about the study of religion.
It claims that the androcentric perspective by its very assumptions and ways of proceeding
distort the material.
Women working in a religious studies department and teaching religion should at least want
to be describing and analyzing living religious communities accurately.
And so how could you say that we'll do this in the last chapter of the book or we'll have
one faculty member take care of this and the rest of us can go on distorting the material
just as we always have.
If we're serious about what we say it is we want to do then everybody needs to take
on board this self-critical examination of our own assumptions and modes of procedure
which has in fact been one of the strengths of religious studies scholarship since the
mid-1970s when we have come to realize that we do not stand on a platform above the human
condition from which we can look down on the mass of humanity and say we know what's
really going on in a way others don't but that we are part of the human enterprise ourselves
and we need to be self-critical and allow the very material that we're studying to interrogate
us so that we become much more aware of the very assumptions that we had taken for granted
and we can then make some positive changes in forwarding the project of human understanding.
Now to make this more clear let me critique a specific example of a presentation in religious
studies and show how this would actually work with a concrete case study.
In the area in which I work which is East Asian Buddhism I do a lot of teaching of courses
on Chinese and Japanese Buddhism and other East Asian religions.
One of the most popular topics for study is Zen Buddhism and there is a film that I frequently
show to my classes called The Principles and Practice of Zen.
This film follows the life of a young Zen novice throughout the course of a year from
the time in late spring when he first presents himself to the temple asking for admission
into the Zen training program through the winter and then finally to the end of his
first year when he's making a decision as to whether or not he wants to remain in the
temple for another year.
When the young man first shows up he prostrates himself on the threshold of the temple and
asks for admission.
The abbot of the temple then makes him undergo an ordeal.
He stays out in the cold and the rain being brusquely refused and told to go away until
finally about two days later after being starved and cold and very sore from the constant prostration
he is admitted into the temple.
At that point then the film fast forwards from April into the middle of winter and it
spends most of its time dwelling on a seven-day intensive Zen retreat called Rohatsu Ozeshin
in which all of the monks within the monastery undergo an extremely rigorous week of training.
It's like boot camp for Zen monks.
They are deprived of normal sleep, they're given very little to eat, they are constantly
in seated meditation, they have to control themselves very tightly, they present themselves
to the abbot again and again to have their own understanding and level of enlightenment
tested, they're constantly being thrown out of the abbot's office and told you haven't
got it, try again until by the end they are almost ready to break down.
Aside from that there is not very much said about what these monks do during the remainder
of the year.
There are some brief indications that they help to clean the monastery, that they cook
in the kitchen, that they go off to the mountainside to gather firewood and that they work in the
fields planting rice.
But the bulk of the film dwells on the severe ordeal that the monk has to go through simply
to be admitted into the monastery and this winter retreat with all its hardship and deprivation.
Now, the title of the film once again is the Principles and Practice of Zen.
The promise of this title is that we are learning about Zen Buddhism.
There is not a woman in sight anywhere in that portion of the film.
Are there women's Zen monasteries to be found anywhere?
Do women even practice Zen?
We don't know.
What we do know is that a male model of initiation by ordeal and a striving against oneself in
order to achieve a goal are being presented as if this were simply Zen as such.
Now what if we were to find that there are female Zen practitioners and that they do
things a little bit differently from the males?
Would we think that this was Zen, another facet of Zen?
Or would we simply think that this is a deviant form of Zen?
For example, during this intensive winter retreat, we are shown that when monks get
drowsy and begin to fall over in their meditation, a senior monk comes wielding a large stick
and hits them very hard on the shoulders in order to wake them up.
I know of a case of a woman's Zen master in America who, when her students begin to
get drowsy in meditation, comes up to them and massages their shoulders.
What are we to make of this?
Are we to think that this is a deviant form of Zen because it doesn't conform to Zen
as such as we've seen it presented in the film?
Diagros' recommendation is that we simply learn to accept the fact that in most societies
of the world, there is sex role differentiation.
This means that we will always have to study the human in its male and female modes.
We cannot collapse the human with the male and simply regard the female as deviant.
We also cannot try to impose a kind of artificial equality on male and female roles with any
the religious life of a community because that simply is not how it works and that would
be just as inaccurate as the substitution of the male for the human as such.
In the case of these Zen communities, what Diagros would recommend is that we simply
acknowledge the fact that humanity comes into genders and that these two genders tend to
have their own norms that are appropriate to them and that they are not the same, they
are different, and that if we are going to study the religious life of human beings,
we are always going to have to take the male norm as the male norm, the female norm as
the female norm, and then perhaps engage in some reflection as to how the two relate to
each other when they form a single, seamless, coherent society.
If we want to understand Zen, then we do have to look at the life of this all-male Zen monastery
and the kind of boot camp style of Zen that they practice there.
But we will also have to look at the female Zen monasteries and look at the way that they
do things differently that answers to their own very appropriate female norms and we will
simply have to understand that Zen comes in these two varieties, both of which are equally
human.
