We're going to finish our unit on sociological theories of religion with a school of thought
that is called Rational Choice Theory.
We'll be talking mostly about one of its major exponents, Rodney Stark, who's been extremely
prolific in his writings, but we should understand that this is a whole school of thought on religion.
Rational Choice Thinking arose in the early 1970s out of a group of sociology students who were
working at the University of California. They were dissatisfied with all previous theories
of religion, not only within sociology, but within other disciplines as well, for a whole
variety of reasons. One reason was they thought these previous theories weren't really theories
at all, but mere metaphors. Freud's theory of religion, which we'll see in two lectures,
of religion as neurosis was simply a metaphor mistaken for a theory. Marx's view that religion
is simply an opium used to justify a particular economic system didn't really explain very much
at all. They were also dissatisfied with the monocausal tendencies of these previous religions,
the tendency to ascribe a single cause to all religious phenomena whatsoever.
For Durkheim, as we've said, all religion arose out of the reification of society as it created
an image of itself in order to focus its attention on itself, and everything, according to Durkheim,
flowed out of that. First and foremost, though, they were dissatisfied with the starting assumption
that most social science theorists brought to the study of religion. This was the assumption that
religion is fundamentally irrational. There's a whole tradition of English anthropological
thought that we've already seen, to some extent, where religion is nothing but bad science. For
many of the thinkers of the Enlightenment, religion was simply superstition. For Freud,
it was delusion. It was neurosis. And so, according to Rodney Stark, the primary research question
that most social scientists brought to religion was, what makes them do it? Why do people engage in
irrational activity? This school pointed out that there was not any other branch of social science
that began with this assumption. Imagine an economist who began with the assumption that
using money is essentially an irrational activity, and so the primary task of economics is simply to
figure out why people engage in this irrational activity. An economic theory based on that premise
would not go very far in promoting any kind of real understanding. They thought any sociological
theory of religion had to begin by jettisoning that as a beginning assumption. It would be far
more fruitful, they said, to assume that people are essentially rational, provided you are clear
about what it means to be rational. And from that starting point, one can then generate a robust
theory which, unlike the predecessors, might actually give you a chance of providing plausible
explanations for concrete religious phenomena. If you assume religion is irrational, and if you
assume that religions are superstitious, and if you do not differentiate among religions, then what
can you really do? To simply say religion provides a gnomos, or a sacred canopy as Berger had done,
will give you no way of attacking a concrete problem such as, why is the Latter-day Saints
Church growing in America right now? Why are conservative churches growing? Why did Christianity
and not Manichaeism or Mithraism become the official religion of the late Roman Empire?
You need a theory that will enable you to handle concrete questions and come up with answers.
In order to do this, in the late 1980s Rodney Stark and William Sims Bainbridge published
A Theory of Religion. This theory of religion was going to differ from all its predecessors
in some very important respects. It would, first of all, start out with the assumption
that religion is a rational activity that human beings undertake, just like any other social
activity that they engage in. The second major difference was it was going to be a deductive
theory. Most preceding theories had been inductive, that is to say they started with
observable realities and then tried to generalize principles from them. A deductive theory works
the other way around. It begins with a set of principles and then applies it to the particulars
of reality. So as Stark and Bainbridge worked out their theory, they took as their model
Euclidean geometry. Euclidean geometry begins with a small set of axioms, axioms being statements
that are simply assumed to be true. They don't have to be proved, they are the beginning assumptions.
It tries to start with the smallest number of these axioms that is possible in order to
generate a complete system. In Euclidean geometry, for example, one starting assumption is that
parallel lines never meet. Nobody has to prove that, it is simply taken for granted as the
foundation block of the whole system. So Stark and Bainbridge came up with a set of seven axioms.
They added to it a list of 104 definitions that were all functional in nature as you recall from
the first lecture. A functional definition is simply one where the author tells you what he
or she is going to mean when a term is used. So they deploy these definitions to add clarity to
the structure of their argument. And from these axioms and these definitions, Stark and Bainbridge
generate a series of 344 propositions. These are all logically derived from the axioms and the
definitions. They are not derived from observing people's actual religious behavior.
Now, obviously, a theory that consists in 344 propositions cannot be reported in a single
half hour lecture. I could spend more than a half hour simply reading the propositions to you one by
one. But to see the starting point, it is useful to see the set of seven axioms that form the basis
for everything that will happen. Because Stark and Bainbridge claim that they are complete.
What will interest you about these axioms is that there is nothing overtly religious
going on in them. They simply lay out the logical basis in human behavior from which
a system of religion can be derived. So what are these axioms? Number one is that human perception
and action takes place through time from past to the future. Number two, humans seek what they
perceive to be rewards and avoid what they perceive to be costs. Number three, rewards very in kind,
value and generality. Number four, human action is directed by complex but finite information
processing systems that function to identify problems and attempt solutions to them. Number
five, some desired rewards are limited in supply, including some that simply do not exist. Number
six, most rewards sought by humans are destroyed when they are used. And last, individual and social
attributes which determine power are unequally distributed among persons and groups in any society.
This sounds very much like economics and there's a very good reason for that. It is based on
economics and very specifically with exchange theory. The axioms postulate that people working
in time seek rewards and try to avoid costs. That is to say they try to get the things that
they want and they try not to lose anymore than they have to in the exchange. Now beginning from
that point in exchange theory, Stark and Bainbridge then begin to build their theory of religion.
Their theory of religion is called rational choice theory because it understands rationality
specifically within this framework of exchange theory. Exchange theory states that people will
enter into relationships of exchange with each other. The fundamental human activity is trading
what you have for what somebody else has. To do this rationally, one tries to control the exchange
ratio, that is to get the maximum reward for the minimum cost. In most instances in economics,
this works well for both sides because they value things differently and so each side can come out
of an exchange feeling that they have benefited from it and have minimized their costs.
People seek rewards but rewards are often scarce. Some rewards are so scarce, one may think of
mansions and porches, that only individuals who have power have access to them. This was the seventh
axiom. Power is unequally distributed and so some people will have more of it than others and they
will be able to get the rewards that are the most scarce. When does this start to become religion?
Remember that one of the axioms stated that not only are some rewards scarce but there are rewards
that actually don't exist at all in any empirically available sense. Something that everyone would
like to be able to do according to Stark and Bainbridge is to avoid death and live forever,
to have eternal life. There's a whole segment of Chinese Taoism that was busy for a thousand years
trying to invent an elixir of immortality so that people would not have to die.
It never worked. It never seems to. Nobody seems to be able to come up with a way to
attain the reward of living forever. So what happens when a reward is so utterly unattainable?
There are two possibilities. The first does not lead anybody into religion. It is simply to just
accept the fact that the reward can't be had and to give up any hope of trying it. So in the case of
eternal life, many people simply opt to give up hope of it and just shrug their shoulders and say,
well, everybody dies and that's pretty much the end of it. But the second possibility is the one
that leads us into a theory of religion. The second possibility is that when a reward is
unattainable, a person will accept a compensator instead. What is a compensator? A compensator is
a kind of IOU. For example, in a simple economic exchange, if you do some work for me and I don't
have cash to give you as an immediate reward, I could write you a check. A check is not money.
A check is a contract that entitles you to go to my bank and draw some money out of my account.
It's a kind of an IOU that guarantees that the person will get the reward at some future time.
The person having confidence in this compensator will accept it unless you have burned them in
the past with a bad check and then they will see that the compensator is invalid and they might not
accept it. But assuming your credit is good, the person will take your check on the expectation
that they will be able to exchange it later for the reward that they wanted in the first place
when they entered into the exchange relationship with you. When eternal life is the issue,
a compensator would be a kind of promise that you can in fact have eternal life just not now.
Just as I can't hand you cash and so I write a check instead and you assume you will get the
cash later. You might go to somebody who says well I know that you want eternal life but you
can't have it in this present world but there is a way that you can get it in a future world.
That becomes a compensator. This leads to the crucial definition of religion
that Stark and Bainbridge use consistently through their text. It reads as follows.
Religion is a system of general compensators based on supernatural assumptions. Again religion is a
system of compensators based on supernatural assumptions. For the rewards that aren't available
to anyone, religion will give you an IOU that you can then cash in somewhere in a supernatural
reality through supernatural means and this is the essence of religion. So when people enter
into religion they are entering into an exchange relationship in which they are willing to incur
certain costs say to curb their desires, to act morally, to be good to other people,
to participate in rituals on the assumption that the religion is giving them a compensator that
they can cash in in a future state in a kind of life after death. Now this becomes a sociological
theory of religion when you begin to see how this actually works in variously structured
social groups. Stark and Bainbridge point out that somebody has to be mediating these compensators.
Somebody has to actually hand you the IOU. This could be a priest, it could be a shaman,
it could be a mystic who has ascended to the transcendent realm and has come back to tell
you that indeed the reward is possible to attain if you simply accept the compensator.
But whatever the case in a simple society this mediation will be done simply by ordinary people.
A small-scale society does not allow for much division of labor and so the rituals may be run
by people who in other parts of their life do other things. The head of the family may take
some time out to perform religious rituals for ancestors. But throughout history societies grow
more complex and as they grow more complex a division of labor appears and you begin to see
for the first time religious specialists. People who do nothing all day but mediate these religious
compensators to people by running the rituals, by teaching, by providing the means to induce
people to believe that the compensators are valid IOUs that can be cashed in for the rewards people
actually want. As societies grow even more complex still the religious specialist becomes
a religious organization and then religions become subgroups within society in their own right
whose task is the mediation of these general compensators to give people what they want.
In a final move towards societal complexification very often societies become so complex that they
become pluralistic and you might actually have more than one organization mediating these general
compensators to people. The only way to avoid that is to try to establish a monopoly and religions like
any business like monopolies it means they don't have to work for their clientele they can become
lazy. This sometimes happens when state power and its ability to coerce people is brought in on
the side of religion so that any competition is simply outlawed. But this doesn't always work
it's not always tenable as state power is withdrawn from religion then a situation of pluralism can
develop. Now when we handle the pluralistic question we can see a crucial difference between the
stark bainbridge theory and peter berger's theory. As you recall from the last lecture peter berger
thought that pluralism was a bad thing for religion. To have a gnomos in place required that its
plausibility be sustained and one of the things that impacted on the plausibility of a particular
gnomos was the presence of competing gnomoi alternative visions of reality that cast some
doubt on the solidity of one's own and made it seem more relative.
This was bad for religion but now berger and bainbridge are saying that just like in the world
of business pluralism is a good thing it means that there are more firms offering the religious
goods and services on the marketplace they have to stay sharp they have to remain responsive to
the needs of actual people they cannot adopt the lazy posture of the monopolist whose clientele
will simply be there whether they do their job or not and so they have to work to get people in.
Berger had also noted that religious pluralism led to a market situation in which religions were
competing with each other and absent state coercive power this means that religions literally
have to market themselves to get an uncoerced clientele to select their product.
We can see this theory at work in its refutation of secularization theory.
As you recall from the last lecture secularization theory was the assumption that the plausibility
of religion as a body of knowledge was under threat not only from advances in science and
technology but also from the pluralistic situation that cast the tenability of any one set of
propositions about the world into some doubt. But if you follow stark and bainbridge in seeing
religion as an essentially rational activity expressed through rational choices in exchange
relationships you can begin to understand why some religious groups are actually thriving
even in the face of the advances of science. Let's say for example that you are wanting to
join the church of the Latter-day Saints the Mormons. Now an older style of theory in which
religion is just bad science would look at the founding story of LDS the reception by Joseph
Smith of the Golden Tablets from the Angel Moroni and would say what a bunch of hogwash
how could anybody believe that this stupid belief is probably doomed to die as people become more
rational. But now let's apply rational choice theory to the same situation. It has been observed
for quite some time that in the insurance industry the actuaries that is the people who set the tables
of risk have frequently used Mormon populations to set the norms for human life expectancy
and levels of health. Whatever one might think about Mormon beliefs rational or irrational
it is an undeniable empirical fact that the Mormon lifestyle and the level of community
support that one gets leads to a very tangible set of rewards good health long life a generally
elevated level of happiness. Now somebody might be willing to exchange even a fairly high level
of cost in order to get those rewards. On the one hand the cost may be material Mormons do ask
that their members tithe that is give 10% of their income to the church they also demand a fairly
large commitment of one's time. So the cost in tangible terms is quite high but the cost can also
be cognitive. One may be asked to accept and to publicly espouse the story of Joseph Smith
gaining the golden tablets and may be exposing oneself to a level of public ridicule for that.
It is still entirely rational however according to Stark and Bainbridge to make that choice both
cognitively and materially in order to get those goods. Rational choice theory also helps us understand
why strict religions thrive. Many social scientists tend to be libertarian liberal wanting human freedom
we already saw that Max Weber for example could not understand the acceptance that people gave to
the level of control in Calvinism in Renaissance Europe but rational choice theory provides a
plausible explanation why people join very strict high-cost churches. One has to understand that
such churches are like any religious organization putting a set of goods and services out on a
religious marketplace but what's crucial to understand is that these goods and services are
collectively produced. By that they mean that it is not a church hierarchy that produces the goods
it is the people themselves who join. As in the Mormon case if part of the good that you're getting
the value that you're deriving from the organization is a social service network people who will
take care of your family in the case of some disaster access to an educational system and other
things that require the cooperation of all the people to produce then this becomes a collectively
produced good. The church hierarchy perhaps manages and orchestrates the production of these goods
but it is the people themselves by their contributions of time and money and talent
who actually make it happen. In this kind of situation then the high cost that a person pays
in order to belong to one of these organizations takes care of a couple of problems. First of all
it takes care of what's dark in Bainbridge called the free rider problem that is people who simply
walk into a church participate in these services on Sunday morning use up the electricity that's
running the lights and all of the other costs that are incurred by having the service but
perhaps don't put anything into the plate when the plate comes by. Such people are free riders
they're deriving benefit from the organization but they're contributing nothing back. If an
organization says to you that you have to pay a high cost just to walk in the door then by that
mere fact it's going to weed out people who are not willing to contribute to the production
of these collectively produced goods. Having eliminated the free riders then the value
of the goods becomes greater. Remember that even though this theory begins with the assumption
that people want to maximize rewards and minimize costs it's really not about the simple cost of
things it's about the exchange ratio it's about the overall value that one gets. Look at a simple
economic decision I might pay two dollars for a little pen knife that just has one blade but I
might be offered the chance to pay ten dollars and get a fully functional swiss army knife.
Now ten dollars is a greater cost than two dollars in anybody's book but we could all agree that the
swiss army knife represents the better value and it would actually be irrational of me to not pay
the higher cost to get the better value. And so in terms of strict religions with the elimination
of the free riders and the gathering of a group of people who are willing to work hard and contribute
a lot of resources into the creation of a full slate of spiritual economic social service and
support services a person would be foolish not to take advantage of that opportunity and this
helps to understand why on the american scene fundamentalist and evangelical churches are
thriving while on the other hand more liberal mainline Protestant churches are in somewhat of
a decline because they're not as demanding of their membership being willing to take anybody in
they end up with a lot of free riders and are therefore not able to compel the whole of the
congregation to contribute to the creation of the goods that will actually make their offerings
more valuable on the marketplace. This theory based as it is on axioms played out logically
and deductively by the building up of definitions and propositions may seem a little bit too
formalistic and pat for some people and stark and his colleagues have certainly made their
contributions in less formalistic ways to tackle problems of religion but it is a robust powerful
theory that unlike a lot of the other theories that we've already seen and that we'll be seeing in
future lectures it does provide ways of arriving at plausible explanations for a wide variety of
religious questions not only that but it gives some purchase on some very concrete religious
problems just for the comparison a theory such as comps which simply says in a very general way
religion serves to bind society together one does not have to differentiate one religion from another
religion is simply taken as a generic phenomenon and it does not matter which religion you're talking
about whether buddhism or christianity or the Mormons under such a theory one cannot handle
a question such as why does one religion thrive while another one doesn't in a certain social
setting using comps assumptions one would not be able to answer the question why did christianity
become the official religion of the roman empire but using start's example as he does in his book
the rise of christianity one can address that question there were a whole wide spectrum of
religions available in late roman antiquity why did christianity become the winner in the whole
field stark in bainbridge's theory is able to handle that question by pointing out first
that because christianity like the Mormons today made their goods through collective production
they were able to draw people in through a series of social service and support work
ancient roman paganism by contrast was not collectively produced the life of a typical
pagan temple simply consisted of the priest and a couple of helpers who acted more like
broadway entrepreneurs than like religious functionaries they put on shows they mounted
rituals and simply hoped that people would come and enjoy them and feel compelled to contribute
toward their support but because that's all that was happening there was no social support
nobody was going to come visit you when you were sick nobody was going to come support you
when you were in prison or in trouble nobody would come to do anything for you under any
circumstances stark in bainbridge's theory also differentiates among religions by
actually paying attention to their specific teachings many other theories pay no attention
whatsoever to the actual doctrines teachings and practices of religion but again using christianity
and late roman antiquity as the example stark points out that you can understand the failure of
paganism in part by looking at what they believed about their gods roman gods did not govern the
whole universe they governed simply a portion of it roman gods did not love anybody roman gods had
to be given sacrifices and offerings to bribe them into doing anything at all and there was
absolutely no reason to think that they wouldn't just abscond with the bribe and take off failing
to grant you your wish christianity on the other hand taught that there was one god who was the
father of all people and who commanded people to love one another this had a very concrete result
when plagues swept through the roman empire the pagans having no ideological reason to care about
anybody outside of their own family did not go and help anybody in trouble the christians on the
other hand precisely because they believed that god was the father of everyone and commanded us to
take care of each other actually went into the houses of sick people risking their own lives
to bring them clean water and food to eat and to nurse them back to health basic nursing
on this level even without any medical practice will increase survival rates by 30 percent anybody
observing the religious scene in late roman antiquity could see that the christians were
surviving at much higher rates than the pagans and seeing that should we wonder then that they made
the perfectly rational choice that there might be something to christianity that they wanted
and were willing to pay the price for that paganism could no longer give them
