We'll finish up our look at psychological theories of religion by examining the life
and work of Carl Gustav Jung, one of Sigmund Freud's most famous followers, who later set
off on his own and found at his own school of thought. Carl Gustav Jung was born in Kesswell,
Switzerland in 1875. He was quite an intelligent child, but very introverted, withdrawn, and he
even claimed in his later autobiographical notes that he detected in himself two distinct
personalities called Person 1 and Person 2. He had a great interest in building things with blocks
and with the study of philosophy, and he especially liked the philosopher Immanuel Kant,
who we'll be looking at shortly. But he didn't follow this interest in his professional training.
Instead, taking a cue from an imminent grandfather, he went to medical school in
Basel in 1894 and graduated in 1900 with a specialty in psychiatry, going to work after that
in a psychiatric clinic in Zurich. In 1903, he met and married Emma Rauschenbach,
who came from a very wealthy family, which meant that his future was assured of nothing else.
They had five children together, and they had a very close and happy marriage. In fact, Emma
was his confidant and his collaborator on many of his works until her death in 1955.
The real turning point in Carl Gustav Jung's fortunes came when he encountered Sigmund Freud.
Having read Freud's book on the interpretation of dreams, he felt that he had found a kindred
spirit, somebody that would understand the kind of explorations that he was mounting in his work
on the unconscious. So he sent Freud a set of his own writings, and Freud responded very graciously
and invited him to come for a visit in Vienna. And when Jung showed up, the men got along so well
that it said they stayed up for 13 straight hours talking non-stop.
Freud found Jung very handy to have in his budding psychiatric association. For one thing,
in the anti-Semitic atmosphere of the Germanic-speaking nations of Europe at that time,
it was very handy for Freud to have at least one disciple who wasn't Jewish, a comment on the times.
But he also found in Jung what he thought was going to be his true protege,
and he treated Jung as a son and expected from him total loyalty.
Well, as so often happens in these mentor-mentee relationships, Jung eventually broke with Freud,
wanting to go his own way. Their differences were both personal and professional. On the personal
level, Jung became disturbed quite early on at the unorthodox nature of some of Freud's domestic
relationships. And he began to chafe under Freud's demands for total loyalty, especially when Freud
called on him to maintain his teachings as dogmas. That was the word Freud used.
They eventually broke in 1913, and the split was quite bitter. The personal issues aside,
the reasons for the breakup included at least these four elements in professional disagreements.
One was they had very different views of the unconscious. We'll look into that in more detail
in just a moment. The second thing was Freud insisted dogmatically that sexual repression was
the sole cause of all psychiatric problems and neuroses. Jung noticed that in his own clinical
practice he had seen any number of patients whose problems could be traced to something other than
sexual repression, and so he broke with Freud over that. Interestingly, he also disagreed with
Freud's negative assessment of paranormal psychology and research in extrasensory perception.
Jung had attended seances and taken copious notes, and in an amazing episode, when Freud
dismissed categorically any belief in paranormal events, Jung gave him a demonstration, which shocked
Freud quite a bit. And then finally, they disagreed on the value and role of religion. As we recall
from the last lecture, Freud's opinion of religion was that it was nothing but a negative influence
in people's lives that were just best outgrown. Jung had a more nuanced view of religion and saw
it as potentially having a positive role in giving people resources for coping.
After the break, Jung went through his own crisis in looking for a new direction. He also
underwent severe psychic traumas. He said he had appalling visions he could see Europe dripping
with blood. Not long thereafter, World War I broke out. He quit his medical practice altogether.
It was taking up too much of his time, he said, and he needed to his time and energy
for the research and writing projects that he was undertaking.
He began to travel extensively. He went all over the world, and he talked to everyone from
Indian pundits to Native American shamans, collecting world mythology, reading relentlessly,
getting information from any source that he could on dream images, mythologies, themes,
anything he could find. He also spent the time delving into his own psyche, trying to find the
roots of the unconscious within himself. The results of all this were a massive study in world mythology
and an interest that he pursued right up till the last year of his life,
research into alchemy and the symbolism and practice in that.
Yong died in 1961, leaving behind an estate and a foundation and a group of devoted followers
who carried on his message to the world. Looking now at Yong's life and thought,
the first thing we want to look at, one of the most direct contributions to his
break with Freud, was his view of the unconscious. Now to review for a minute,
Freud, who discovered the unconscious and put the word into our vocabulary,
saw the unconscious as a very dark, dank, bad place. It was a basement or a sewer into which
people repressed all of the things in their life that were too threatening or too dirty,
just that they could not deal with without feeling gravely threatened by them.
He also said this was the source of neurosis, because as more and more things got repressed
into this unconscious, pressure built up and the neuroses that people displayed were just
the leakages of all of these bad things that were stuffed into this place.
Yong, on the other hand, saw the unconscious in a much more neutral sense. His definition
of the unconscious was, it's whatever mental contents we have of which we're not conscious.
They don't have to be bad. All that's required is that we not be aware of them
in our conscious state. Pure and simple. But also, breaking with Freud,
Yong analyzed the unconscious into two different levels. On the one hand, there was the personal
unconscious. And this consisted simply of things that came out of somebody's own personal experience.
They were things that were not shared with other people. They were built of our memories,
our past experiences, our own habits and inclinations, our ways of relating to other people.
Things that are specific to us. The contents of the personal unconscious tended to coalesce
into a series of complexes. Now we can leave those aside, because they don't play directly into
Yong's view of religion. What's far more important for understanding the way Yong analyzed religion
is the other part of the unconscious, the collective unconscious.
The idea of the collective unconscious has frequently been misunderstood by many of
Yong's own followers. Many people have thought that when Yong talked about the collective unconscious,
he was talking about some kind of mystical connection that people share with each other,
some kind of mind-to-mind connection that puts us all in touch with each other.
Now, given his implicit belief in paranormal phenomena, it would be plausible to think that
he did believe this to be the case. But in his own writings, he denied that. He said the collective
unconscious is not some kind of hive mind that we all partake of. The collective unconscious
can be seen as simply contained within each individual's psyche. But what makes it collective
is the fact that it's human. Since we are all human beings, Yong assumed that we all have within us
the very same basic psychic structures. And so even without having a direct connection
from one mind to the other, it is still possible to think that there are many things in our unconscious
that are structurally the same from one person to another. Whereas the personal unconscious
contained complexes, when Yong spoke about the contents of the collective unconscious,
he spoke in terms of another concept that's very important for his evaluation of religion,
the collective unconscious contains archetypes.
Archetypes are images that the mind uses in order to represent its own structures
and its own instinctive contents to itself. And this was the key for understanding why
Yong did not think this was some kind of mystical connection. Here's what Yong himself had to say
about the archetypes. There is good reason to suppose that the archetypes are the unconscious
images of the instincts themselves. In other words, that they are patterns of instinctual
behavior. The hypothesis of the collective unconscious is therefore no more daring than
to assume that there are instincts. So Yong believed that in formulating images,
the unconscious was simply structuring its own contents in certain ways in order to manipulate
them and to move them around and relate them to each other and to bring them into our daily behaviors.
Now, the archetypes being in the unconscious are generally, by definition,
below the level of consciousness, and we're not aware of them. But we can have access to them by
certain means. For example, dreams are a place where the images of the unconscious come out.
Mythologies and the recurring themes that one finds from culture to culture all around the world
also contain images that by their very recurrence and seeming universality appear to indicate that
there are things in our minds that we share in common with people all over the world simply by
virtue of being human. You also see it in art. You see it in any kind of dramatic performance
in poetry, in ballads, in songs, in music, in any place where the imagination is allowed to rise
and to express itself and bring things out in order to communicate at a deep level with other people.
Now, when examining the contents of people's dreams or world mythologies, Yong thought that he
could actually identify and catalog all of these archetypes and to see how they relate to each
other in order to get clues as to how this collective unconscious works as a way of studying what it
means to be human and to relate to our own selves and to others. To give one example,
Yong wrote about a painting by Leonardo da Vinci which depicts the baby Jesus sitting
on the lap of his mother, the Virgin Mary, while Saint Anne, Mary's mother, is visiting with them.
Now, Freud would have looked at this as a manifestation of religion and he would have
dismissed it. But Yong looked at it as an image and he correlated it with images that he found
in other mythologies to derive the archetypal motif of the dual mother. He related this to a very
basic fundamental self-conception that human beings have, that they have a dual nature,
each part of which has its own birth. There's a lower animal nature that is governed by our
instincts and our needs. There's a higher spiritual nature that allows us to act in a
virtuous or moral way and to create societies and get along with each other. These don't seem
always to be correlated or integrated very well with each other and so they're frequently conceived
as being two separate things. Closely correlated with this theme of the dual mother,
Yong said, was the recurrent theme of the new birth. Now, those of us in the West who are used to
Christian belief in practice are very familiar with the idea of being born again, but for
Yong, this is only one instance of that motif. You could find it also in ancient Egypt where in
the investiture of a new pharaoh, he was said to be born again and assume his divine status before
ascending the throne. We also have in ritual, as Yong would have observed in India, the initiation
of a young boy into the study of the Vedic literature which is said to be his new birth and his gaining
of a new sacrificial body marked by the ritual piercing of the ear and the conferring of a sacred
string that he will always wear over his shoulder. Once he has gone through that ceremony, he is said
to be one of the Dvija, the twice born. So the archetypal image of the dual mother and the two
births that people go through were for Yong universal images that actually had effects in people's
lives in determining how they assume their place in society, how they conceive their place in the
universe, what they thought they were in and of their own nature. Whether this is by mystical
connection or simply by virtue of the fact that our brains are built to think that way, it doesn't
matter. What is important is that these contents, these archetypes of the collective unconscious
transcend the individual. They don't belong to the individual alone, but they put the person
firmly into the human race. The second theme that I want to explore that tells us about Yong's view
of religion is his stance, which was at the same time phenomenological and pragmatic.
Now we'll be examining the nature of phenomenology in great detail in subsequent lectures. Let me
give you a very brief indication of what the term means right here. Phenomenology is the philosophical
view that we do not really have any contact with the world as such. This lectern that is right
here before me is simply out there in the world, but all I know of it is what I see, what I feel,
perhaps even what I hear. But those things are all mediated by my senses to my mind, which then
constructs them into an image and it's only that image that I can ever know. I can't ever know the
thing in itself. I can only know the image. This was Yong's basic stance and this differentiated
his approach tremendously from Sigmund Freud's. It meant that Yong bracketed out the metaphysical
question and turned his attention strictly to the experiences of the mind and the effects that they
had in people's lives. As you recall when discussing Sigmund Freud in the last lecture, Freud regarded
religion as an illusion. Illusions, he said, were things that we believe not because they're
necessarily true, although they might be, but we believe them because we want them to be true.
They are wish fulfillments. He denigrated religious belief simply because he thought they did not
reflect reality. A confirmed atheist, Freud, said, there is no God out there, so to believe in a God
is simply a very unskillful frame of mind that is not going to help you in life because you will
be relating to the world in a way that's not real. That's where Yong parts company from Freud.
Yong really does not care if anything that we believe in our religions is really out there or
not. For him, that is an unimportant question. What is important is that we do believe them,
that we do have these images and contents in our mind, and that by virtue of having these images
and contents in our minds, they affect us and make us behave in certain ways. To give an example of
this, let's take the belief in the devil. Many religions, Christianity, Judaism, Islam, and many
of the Asian religions have devil figures. They're tempters, they are figures who wish us ill,
they want to do evil, they're selfish, they look out only for themselves and don't care about other
people. Now, for Yong, the devil was simply an archetype of the collective unconscious.
Freud would have said, there is no devil out there, and so to believe that there is one is
simply a false belief and must be discouraged. But Yong said, well, what happens when we take
part of our own psychic contents and reify them into this image of the devil?
This Yong said might actually be a healthy thing to do because all of us have within ourselves
a shadow, a dark side of our personalities, a place that we do find threatening, that we don't
really want to face, but is nevertheless very real and a part of us. You don't want to simply take
that devil figure and make it into an image that you then separate from yourself because to do that
would not be healthy. To actually see a devil in the external world that you'd identify as not me
is to divorce yourself from a part of yourself and to fence it off and put it in a separate
place where you don't have to face it and try to integrate it into your own personality. It
stymies the process of individuation and integration. Rather than try to take the Freudian
approach of convincing people that there is no devil and they should simply stop believing in
it, Yong's approach would be to guide them into appropriating that satanic imagery, bringing it
back into themselves, realizing that when they put this image forward, bring it into conscious
awareness, they are bringing up a part of themselves and this presents a tremendous opportunity
for the integration and incorporation of this image as a part of our overall personality.
So you don't want to just erase it, you don't want to extinguish it or make it go away,
you want to bring it in, coordinate it with everything else that is an integral part of you
so that you can be an integrated person with a sense of balance.
The third aspect of Yong's thought that I want to highlight here doesn't have much to do with his
break with Freud, although it does impact it somewhat and this is Yong's view of the predicament
of modernity as he saw it unfolding in the 20th century and especially after the traumas of World
War I. Part of the problem with modernity as Yong saw it was that it had an overemphasis
on rationality and logical consistency. Now one might wonder what's the problem with that?
As we've already seen, there are several thinkers in the history of the theories of religion
who identified irrationality as one of the fundamental things that's wrong with religion.
Religious beliefs bring us into believing things that are mutually contradictory,
that can't exist together. They make us act in ways that are just following instincts,
to do things that we haven't really thought through, to believe things that just don't hang
together. As you recall, Freud thought that rationality was the answer, rationality was
how you produced mental health. By bringing things out of the basement of the unconscious,
by bringing them into conscious awareness, one could then critique them, one could see how they
were nonsense, one could use the adult rational mind to think the issue through and find a better
way of coping with the stresses and the problems of one's life. And the final result for Freud would
be a mature adult individual who could approach the world rationally. Yong fundamentally disagreed
with that. Yong's belief was that the collective unconscious with all its archetypes representing
instincts represented every piece of ourselves. And if this produced irrationalities, that's because
we are fundamentally made of mental components that cannot ever be brought together into a
rational structure. The archetypes of the unconscious simply represent every kind of
instinctual need, every inclination, habit, proclivity that we have. They all are equally
part of us. And if when brought to the surface and considered by the rational mind, they cannot
be put together into a logically consistent picture, then so be it, that is what we are.
And to demand pure rationality was simply unhealthy. It meant that we took elements of
ourselves and pushed them out, fenced them off, denied that they were part of us, and it impeded
our ultimate individuation and integration. Yong actually believed that pre-modern people
were superior to the moderns in that way. Pre-modern people believed in the value of
attending to dreams. They put on dramas in which they could enact their most fundamental
natures. They created works of art. They told mythologies that were deeply satisfying precisely
because they took all of these images out of the unconscious and put them together and showed them
back to ourselves as integrated holes. Modern people had lost that by this overbearing emphasis
on rationality. To give a concrete example of how Yong thought that this had actually gone wrong
in modern religion, he pointed to the Christian belief in the trinity in a series of lectures
he gave that were later published as the book Psychology and Religion. Yong looked at the
Christian trinity as a tripartite picture of ultimate reality, and he said there's something
missing in that. As he looked over the mythologies and the mandalas and the images of art the world
over, he saw fairly consistently that the image of the divine or of the superior part of the human
being was generally represented as a circle divided into four quadrants. The trinity then
was missing something. One of the quadrants wasn't there. What was it? Now here's where it gets
interesting because at this point Yong makes two suggestions as to what might be missing from this
picture, not one but two. On the one hand he says the feminine is not there. All three persons of
the trinity are represented as male in traditional Christianity. Catholicism and other branches of
Christianity have somewhat dealt with this by bringing in the Virgin Mary as someone to whom
one can pray and maybe some female saints as well, but the godhead always remained exclusively male.
The other suggestion was to put Satan. The missing piece of this quaternity that he wanted to create
might also be darkness or it might be our lower natures, our instincts, the evil within us.
Now the reason why rationality creates this problem is because to see either the feminine
or the shadow inserted into the very godhead is to put something into god that is contradictory to
the belief that god's fundamental nature is good and the rational mind can see nothing in this juxtaposition
of male and female or of light and darkness but a logical contradiction which must be resolved by
simply eliminating one or the other of the contradicting elements. But Yong said most of the
traditional religions of the world have realized that every picture of the absolute must include
opposing elements. Consider the yin yang symbol of Taoism where the light and the dark swirl
around each other in equal measure or the ancient Zoroastrian religion where light and dark are
balanced forces that are continually in tension with each other. Most of the traditional religions
of the world in other words were able to accommodate the coincidentia oppositorum,
the coincidence of opposites and actually saw that drawing opposites together was not a logical
contradiction but a profound act of integration that created health. Now Yong was not so naive as to
say that all forms of religion are good. In this he followed the pragmatic stance of William James
who also was able to distinguish healthy religion from unhealthy religion. There were tendencies
that Yong could see that were clearly unhealthy and there were times when the images such as the
Trinity itself became obsolete because they were no longer able to serve the purpose of
individuation and integration. For example he saw in some of his patients an identification of the
patient as individual with an archetype. Imagine someone who says I am God. This does one of two
undesirable things. On the one hand investing oneself in the archetype might lead to the
dissolution of the individual. The individual simply gets lost in the Godhead and disappears from view.
But the other possibility is that the individual may keep their own sense of ego intact but inflate
that ego to fill out the archetype and when that happens then I become God and you'd better listen
to what I say. You inflate your own ego. So there were ways in which archetypes could be unskillfully
integrated into an unhealthy whole but the important difference with Freud was that Freud saw all
religion as always bad because it didn't mirror reality and led people to act in unskillful ways
whereas Jung was willing like William James to admit that while some religion may not be the best
religion as a whole was in general a good thing that gave people stability resources for coping
with the problems of life and potentially integration individuation and mental health.
Now by the way this does make Jung much more friendly to religion but I should point out that
because Jung was not interested in the metaphysical question whether the things we believe in are
actually out there or not many people today who consider themselves religious would not consider
Jung to be their friend but Jung did have a profound impact founding a whole school of thought a way
of approaching religion that started with the assumption of a universal human nature a universal
set of stories of images of symbols of rituals of dramas that all of humanity could draw upon to
attain health and integration both individually and within society later on in this course we'll
see Mirja Eliade who pursued much of the same research agenda as Jung did and in fact the two
were very good friends but in our own culture a more immediate follower would be Joseph Campbell
the author of The Hero with a Thousand Faces who was a great influence on George Lucas and who's
writing on universal myths and universal symbols provided much of the basis for the Star Wars
movies and may help to account for its success by providing a basis for universal appeal something
to think about.
