Lecture 14 The Victorians and the Golden Bough
We'll begin the next few lectures on anthropology just by a brief consideration of how the discipline
of anthropology came into being.
In the late 19th century, most people in the West believed that the world was only
about 6,000 years old, that humanity was basically put on the earth ready made by God somewhere
around 4,000 BC, that they were born in an original state of grace.
They were already perfect at the highest point of their development.
But then, as the Garden of Eden story showed, they had fallen.
And so, as travelers who explored the world began coming back to Europe and America, bringing
with them stories of Stone Age tribes, primitive peoples living in forests or dwelling in tents.
The natural assumption was that this was simply part of the fall, that this was a degeneration
from perfection down to this state of savagery.
However, at the same time, new sciences were beginning to reveal new truths about the world
we live in and the people who inhabit it.
Geology was showing that the world was far, far older than 6,000 years.
Archaeologists and paleontologists were discovering the bones of ancient human beings that went
back thousands and thousands of years with no sign at all of any kind of original perfection.
In fact, when they looked at the material remains of these bones and sites that they
were excavating, they could really discover no discernible difference between these ancient
savages and the modern savage tribes.
This led to the development of new ways of thinking about the history of humanity, about
the progress of human development through history, and about human nature as such.
Were these primitive humans like us in the modern industrial age?
Or were they somehow different if they were the same?
How did you account for the differences?
And how did you account for the fact that they could be the same as contemporary primitive
tribes and yet be so different from modern industrial humans?
Out of all this, the science of anthropology was born, so named, because it was literally
the study of man, anthropology, and the goal was to discover the basis of human nature,
to discover what human beings were.
The founder of this discipline, in the sense of being the first person who actually held
a university chair with the title Professor of Anthropology, was Edward Burnett Tyler.
Tyler taught at Oxford and in 1871 published a two-volume landmark work called Primitive
Culture, most of which was taken up with a theory of religion based on the evidence
that was coming in from all over the world from missionaries, traders, mercenaries, and
soldiers.
Tyler believed that the fundamental task of the human mind was a cognitive one.
Humans have to engage the world.
If they're going to get along in the world, they have to get to know the world.
And so from his perspective, the historical development of the human race from the earliest
primitive peoples right up to modern industrial man was based in the growth of knowledge.
Because of that, he posited that most of the advances in thought that took place among
primitives were the result of the thoughts of single individuals, these kind of primitive
geniuses that Tyler dubbed with one of his more memorable phrases, the savage philosopher.
The savage philosopher was a heroic lone figure, an older man, naturally, sitting on
a stone, considering the stars in heaven, watching the flashes of lightning, looking
at how the rain sometimes falls and sometimes doesn't, looking at how sometimes there's
luck in the hunt and sometimes people go hungry, and wondering about it all.
How do we come to grips with this world?
How do we get to know what's going on out there?
These lone geniuses sat on their rocks, stroking their beards, and came up with new insights
about how the world worked.
Many of their insights were religious in nature.
The basis and foundation of Tyler's theory of religion lay in what he called animism.
Animism was a view of living beings and nature that posited spirits that dwelt within them.
Now true to his feeling that the primary task of human development is to gain knowledge,
he tried to reconstruct the steps in the empirical development of this idea of spirits.
In his reconstruction it went like this.
One of the problems with which the savage philosopher dealt was the problem of death.
What happened when somebody died?
What was the difference between a living human body standing up, walking around, talking,
breathing, and a dead human body lying on the ground, cold, stiff, and inert?
One of the clues was to notice that even after somebody died, people in the tribal band might
still have dreams of that person.
Now not knowing the nature of the mind or the nature of dreams, it was then reasonable
for these savage philosophers to deduce that the image of the deceased that they saw in
their mind was in some sense the person.
And so they assumed then that what happened when a person died was that something that
had been in them and had made this body alive had now left that body and was in some way
appearing to them in their dreams.
The next step in Tyler's reasoning was you could also observe that people can dream about
living people.
You dream about living friends and relatives as well as dead ones.
What the savage philosophers deduced from this observation was that whatever this spirit
is that appears in dreams is somehow detachable from living beings even before their death.
This means that these spirits that are seen in dreams are somehow self-sufficient.
They can exist on their own.
That leads to the third step in the chain.
Seeing that spirits can exist outside of physical bodies, they then begin to wonder could there
be spirits that never inhabit bodies, spirits that are always in some way free-floating.
Deciding that this is in fact a possibility, they then begin to see spirits almost everywhere
they look.
They begin to see spirits in the animals and plants upon which they depend for their
sustenance.
They begin to generalize these spirits into a kind of category so that rather than the
spirit of individual bears, for instance, there might be a spirit of the bear and that
they can perhaps communicate with this spirit in order to have good luck while out hunting
bears.
They also begin to think that it's also quite possible that careless talk or actions might
offend these spirits and cause bad luck in the hunt, giving rise to taboos.
This theory of animism leads Tyler to his fundamental definition of religion.
He says religion is belief in spiritual beings, pure and simple.
That's all there is to it.
Once you've made that leap to believing that there are spirits both in living beings and
also detachable in free-floating, then you have religion in human development.
Animism for Tyler becomes the basis of every other aspect of his theory of religion.
For example, he says animism undergirds all mythology.
That once people decide there are these living spirits that are moving about in the world,
then the tendency is to name them, to assume that they have life stories the same as any
other being.
And so you can look at the bolts of lightning that flash in the thunderstorm, and you can
say that's Zeus throwing his darts.
And then you can make up stories about Zeus and his life and loves.
Or you can look at the sun going across the sky and say, well, there must be a spirit
in that.
It's Apollo, the spirit of the sun driving his chariot across the vault of the heavens.
And you can proceed from there to imagine a whole life story for Apollo.
It all is rooted in animism.
Religion also gives rise to magical practices.
If you think that there are spirits that are operating in things within nature, then you
might also come to think that you can talk to them and try to propitiate them just the
same way that you might talk to somebody that you want to get a favor out of.
So prayers, magical techniques, attempts to manipulate nature come into being based on
this.
The next major component in Tyler's theory of religion is his idea of survivals.
Survivals are basically throwbacks.
They are things that might have been useful or might have made sense at some point in
history or at some stage of human development, but have outlived their usefulness, are no
longer good for much of anything, and yet people continue to do them or think them or
believe them simply out of force of habit.
You might think, for example, of Christmas trees that are put up in homes in the modern
West.
They were originally rooted in fertility rituals that were based in the Winter Solstice Festival,
but we aren't celebrating Winter Solstice Festivals much anymore, but we still put up
an evergreen tree and decorate it because, well, we've just always done that.
The practice of the sport of archery might be another survival.
It was once a necessary skill without which it would be impossible to feed your tribe.
Today it's a sport.
We go to the supermarket for our food.
We just like to shoot bows and arrows, even though there's no real use in doing so anymore.
The crucial move that Tyler makes is to extend this notion of survivals to religion as a
whole.
In Tyler's view, in the modern age, religion itself is a kind of survival.
These people didn't really have any better way of getting to know how the world worked
or of trying to cope with it and to coerce it into providing them things, and so it was
actually meaningful for them to tell myths, to conduct rituals, to perform acts of magic,
and to worship.
It was vital.
Today, though, we don't need that anymore.
We have science.
Science is giving us technology, and so we have more reliable information about the world,
which is giving us more effective and consistent techniques for producing the kind of results
that we want in the world.
That we still continue to go to church, that we still pray about things we want for Tyler.
These things were all survivals, and so in his usage, survivals becomes basically a
synonym for superstition.
Something that we would actually be better off if we just went ahead and left it behind
and focused our attention on things that really do make sense and really do matter.
The last aspect of Tyler's work that I want to call attention to is the way that he turned
the traditional view of human development completely on its head in order to yield the comparative
method for the pursuit of anthropological studies.
As I mentioned at the outset, the traditional view was that humanity had undergone a kind
of degeneration.
God had placed Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden.
They were already in a perfect state, but through their sin they had fallen.
Mankind had fallen into a state of savagery after that.
Some of us were lucky enough and persistent enough to have climbed out of that, and were
now modern industrial people who had good science, but as travelers were reporting, a
lot of people around the world had not made that climb out of savagery, and so they were
still stuck basically in the state of the fall.
Tyler turned that completely upside down.
He pointed to the evidence that was coming in from archaeology, and he said, we are not
finding the Garden of Eden anywhere.
We are not finding any evidence of an original state of perfection.
We have to assume, then, that humanity simply starts from some very low, savage, primitive
level, out of which some of us have been able to climb by intelligence, persistence and
experimentation while many others haven't.
He likened this to the growth and development of a human individual, starting from childhood.
Children are fundamentally ignorant.
They make up stories in order to explain things.
They anthropomorphize everything around them, attributing to it some kind of intelligence,
talking to their dolls, talking to their toast for crying out loud.
But as they mature, they learn in a more realistic way how things work, and because of that are
able to act much more effectively in the world.
Burnett said that is how the human race as a whole has developed.
But they haven't all done it at a constant speed, and that is how we come to see that
there are some modern industrial societies, while there are still persistent pockets of
savagery to be found here and there.
It is not that the modern savages are different from modern civilized people.
They are to be understood as simply being at different stages of this growth and development,
and we hope, then, that the modern primitives will sometime catch up to the place where
civilized people are.
Because of this, Tyler was able to posit that human nature is, in fact, everywhere the same.
Not only could he think that civilized people have exactly the same human nature as tribes
living in the Amazon in the 19th century, but he also was able to say that we have exactly
the same nature as those primitives whose bones paleontologists are digging up.
And this is crucial because, based on this observation, he is able, then, to deploy the
comparative method.
Only if you assume a basic sameness of human nature does it make sense to say that we can
learn lessons from primitives that might actually shed light on where modern civilization has
come from.
If the ancient primitive is a radically different kind of being, or if the tribes living in
the rainforest are radically different from us, then there is essentially nothing we can
learn about ourselves by studying them.
But if, in fact, we are related to them in the same way that we, as adults, are related
to the person we were as children, then we can use our observations of these primitives
to help experimentally define the process of our growth as a species from the most primitive
state of savagery right up to modern civilization.
With that, I want to turn now to Tyler's successor, the Scottish anthropologist James
George Frazier, whose masterwork, the Golden Bau, grew over the years to where it encompassed
twelve volumes in its final edition, and who expanded and refined Tyler's basic theories.
Frazier was much more literary than was Tyler.
And Frazier's device for getting into the study of ancient cultures is to take a theme,
a single story, from an ancient Greek writer named Pausanias.
Frazier was trained as a classicist, and he knew his Greek and Latin literature very well.
Pausanias tells a story about a peculiar priestly institution that was in evidence in the woods
outside of Nemi in the early period of Roman antiquity.
In this institution, there was a priest.
He was called the king of the wood.
He had attained his title by entering the forest sword in hand, by seeking out the tree
upon which grew the Golden Bau, from which the book gets its title, plucking that branch,
and with the branch in one hand and the sword in the other, finding the king of the wood,
engaging him in single combat, and killing him.
Having killed him, then he became the male consort, the husband of the goddess Diana,
the queen of the woods.
And through their union, the continued fertility of nature was assured.
Frazier found this a very striking ritual.
It seemed out of place in its own period of time, where Roman civilization was already
well on its way beyond such barbaric institutions and practices.
And so he thought that perhaps what Pausanias had recorded was an actual ritual that continued
to hold some Tylaurian survivals within it, and so by looking through that story, one
could then see what was in back of it, things that came from a much deeper past, a pre-literate
period of time, a more barbaric culture.
And in the ensuing 13 volumes, Frazier proceeds to bring together evidence from everywhere
he can find it, from the traveler's tales of people going in the South Pacific up the
Amazon and into the jungles of Africa, stories from other Greek writers, legends, mythologies
from the Norse.
He brings all these together looking for parallels to each and every element of this story of
the king of the wood in order to try to find where the universal symbols are that might
give us a clue as to the universal nature of humankind.
And so, for example, he finds myths from the northern reaches of Europe in which trees
do indeed have a golden bow.
It is, in fact, mistletoe, which turns a golden color in the deep of winter.
He finds stories of people who believe that that mistletoe which grows on oak trees remains
alive even as the oak tree loses its leaves and goes dormant in the winter, which leads
them to think that there is a principle of life and fertility in that mistletoe.
That sometimes a detachable soul from another being is put into that mistletoe, so he finds
the legend of the Norse god who puts his soul into the mistletoe and therefore cannot be
killed because his soul is kept safe except that somebody plucks the mistletoe and makes
an arrow of it and shoots him.
Perhaps that's why the golden bow must be plucked first.
He finds fire rituals.
He finds parallels to each and every element of the story of the king of the wood in Nemi.
One assumption that Frazier shares with Tyler in all this is his belief that the primary
purpose of all of the mythologies and the rituals and the magical practices that he
describes have a fundamentally cognitive and technological application.
For example, when he looks at rituals of fire that take place during the winter solstice,
he finds in these a form of magic whose purpose it is to keep the days from continuing to
get shorter and shorter until, if you extrapolate far enough, the sun finally vanishes altogether
by producing fire to stimulate the sun to begin its growth again after the winter solstice.
He divides magic into two basic varieties, contagious magic and sympathetic magic.
Contagious magic is so-called because it works by contact.
For example, if you take the sweat off a sick person and do rituals with it by the contact
with that sweat, you might be able to effect a cure.
Psychic magic, on the other hand, works at a distance by resonating with things.
So he points out that there are rituals for making rain in which people take a large sieve
and they pour water through it and shake it to reproduce a kind of simulation of rain
coming out from underneath.
And in this way, they try to stimulate the arrival of the rains by simulating rain in
their ritual.
What is ignored in all this is any kind of attention to the social dimension of religion.
This is exactly where, as you recall, Emil Durkheim found the very essence of religion.
Ritual was a way of binding society together.
Auguste Comte thought that the disappearance of religion was actually a danger to society
because it portended social chaos with the disappearance of religious rituals and services.
Religion society would lose one of its major avenues for keeping societies together.
Tyler and Frazier pay no attention whatsoever to the social dimension of religion.
Religion and magic for them are the analogues of science and technology.
They are the ways you get to know how the world is and techniques for manipulating the
world.
They are arrived at by individuals for Tyler the savage philosopher.
And when they are enacted in a ritual setting, the purpose is essentially magical.
When a community gets together to do a midwinter bonfire festival, they are simply gathered
to technically bring the sun back.
There is no sense that their gathering together does anything to reinforce their bonds with
each other.
Frazier also shared with Tyler this sense that there was a progression to human development.
Like Tyler, he believed that humanity from its most primitive state to its modern civilized
state had gone through a series of stages of growth that could be identified and described.
His primary difference with Tyler in this respect was that whereas Tyler made no real
distinction between magic and religion, magic was based in religious beliefs, based ultimately
in animism, Frazier did draw a distinction between magic and religion and as he laid
out his scheme for human development, he said we have come through three primary stages,
a stage of magic, a stage of religion, and then finally a stage of science.
The stage of magic was based solely in the effort to control and manipulate nature in
order to make things happen, to keep the volcano from erupting, to make the rains fall in time
for the crops, to keep the sun from disappearing after the winter solstice, etc.
Now people being good empirical observers will note that these things don't always work.
Sometimes you do your rain ritual and the rain doesn't fall.
Sometimes you do a healing ceremony and the patient dies.
That's when humanity then moves into the stage of religion.
Whereas magic thinks that there are pure impersonal techniques that one can deploy to make things
happen, religion sees deities or spirits animating things out in the world and these things
are intelligent.
You can talk to them, you can pray to them.
So in the stage of religion trying to get something to happen in the world is much more
akin to trying to get somebody to do something for you than it is to simply doing some technological
thing to make something happen.
This helped them to understand why these things didn't always work.
Just because you approach somebody for a favor even if you bring them some kind of offering
doesn't mean that they're necessarily going to do it.
By positing that the fundamental forces of the world were free agents, religion was then
able to better account for the basic unreliability in the spotty results that were attained by
the use of religious rituals to make things happen.
The third stage of science in a way is a return to magic.
It takes the personality and the intelligence and the willfulness of deities out of the picture
and once again goes back to simply trying to find techniques that when you use them are
bound to work to get things done that you want to do.
But the big difference of course between science and magic is that magic is based in ignorance.
Magic is simply done by people who don't know what else to do whereas science is based in
empirical evidence, experimentation, rigorous observation and so it produces much more
reliable results.
Now although Frazier has sometimes been accused of breaking human history a little too cleanly
into a tripartite scheme, in fact this is not the way he conceived it.
At the end of his book he asks us to imagine this kind of fabric with three colored threads
as you move across the fabric.
The threads at one end are dominated by a single color but other colors begin to make
their appearance.
In the middle the second color begins to predominate but the other doesn't disappear and then
finally in the end where the third color makes its appearance the other two are still there
with it.
So he saw magic, religion and science not as hard and fast ways of schematizing human
history but as a fabric of interweaving themes that helped him to understand why it is that
you can still see palm readers putting their signs out even in today's modern technological
society.
I want to leave you with an image.
Frazier's Golden Bough as I said was based on this fantastic story of the king of the
wood who had to dwell in the forest, defend himself against newcomers at all time and
live in constant fear that the day would come when a younger and stronger rival would kill
him and take his place.
If you've ever seen the movie Apocalypse Now, when the Martin Sheen character enters Kurtz's
compound and is ready to kill him, he first goes into Kurtz's tent, he goes over to a
nightstand and finds a pile of books there, he picks one up, looks at it and puts it back
down and you see clearly on the screen that it's the Golden Bough.
