Lecture 19 From Freeze to Auto
Now in many of the lectures that we've had up to this point, where the subject has been
religion as seen through the disciplines of psychology, sociology, or anthropology, it
may have occurred to you to wonder what happened to the religion. Very often it may have sounded
like we were simply talking about psychological theories about the mind, sociological theories
about social structures, or anthropological theories about culture. You would be right
to ask that question, and this brings us to a topic that needs to be cleared up before
we move on to the phenomenology of religion, because phenomenology is itself a response
to this notion. What all three of these disciplines that we've looked at so far share in common
is a tendency to take a reductionist view of religion. Reductionism is the move of saying
that phenomenon X is really nothing but an example of phenomenon Y, and therefore to talk
about it in terms of X is not really useful. You have to describe it in terms of Y in order
to understand it. As a vivid example of this, think about Marx's theory of religion. He
did not think there was anything to religion. God did not exist. The social structures,
the churches, and the ashrams that religion puts out there are really examples of economic
structures. This means that religion reduces to economics. You cannot talk about religion
in religious terms. You have to talk about it in economic terms in order to make sense
of it. Most of the authors we've looked at so far, even if they don't reject religion
outright as Freud and Marx did, still tend to bracket the religious question. This is
a move that is sometimes referred to as methodological atheism. Methodological atheism would be,
for example, a sociologist saying, well, the tools of sociological research are really
not the right tools for discovering if God really exists. It will only reveal sociological
truth. To use the research methods of sociology to study religion as such and to determine
religious questions would be like using a telescope to study an elephant. It's simply
the wrong instrument. It won't give you any useful answers. So they will say, we will
look only at the sociological or the cultural side of religion and leave the religious questions
out. But frequently, even having made that disclaimer, they then proceed to provide such
a complete explanation of religion that you wonder where the research tools appropriate
to religion could possibly add anything. Having read Peter Berger's Sociological Theory
of Religion, one wonders why even bother wondering whether God exists or not. This is where the
phenomenology of religion makes its entrance. Those who follow this mode of research reject
the idea of methodological atheism and are looking for a way to overcome reductionism.
They are trying to say that religion is a sweet, generous phenomenon in its own right.
It does not reduce to something else. And as a consequence, one must formulate religious
ways of researching it in order to bring the divine, the sacred back into the picture as
an intimate part of the object you're trying to understand. This is called the phenomenology
of religion because it takes its cue from the phenomenological philosophy that goes all
the way back to Immanuel Kant. Now this is going to be a bit of a stretch because as
you recall, Kant was not that fond of religion himself. But within Kantian philosophy, 20th
century phenomenologists of religion found just the conceptual tools that they needed
to study religion in its own right, as it is in itself, without looking at it as merely
an aspect of society, the mind or culture. This requires that we review some of the concepts
that we looked at when we looked specifically at Immanuel Kant.
When Immanuel Kant was talking explicitly about religion, as you recall, his two modes
of reasoning about religion were limited to rationality and morality. What could be theoretically
demonstrated on a logical basis or what was simply an advisable belief to adopt because
it had good moral outcomes. When he stuck to the purely theoretical, all that he could
say about God was that God was the densest phenomenon of being. He had more existence
than anything else and therefore could serve as the ground and the origin of all other
things that exist. That's hardly the God that any kind of religion actually puts out
there.
Using morality or what he called practical reason, one could maybe not prove something
logically but one could justify a belief. In particular, he said we could justify a belief
in the immortality of the soul and in the grace and providence of God because logically
none of these things could be either proven or disproven and so there was no compelling
reason not to believe them and one could justify belief by looking at the fact that people
who believe in God's grace and providence and believe in the immortality of their soul
seem to live better moral lives than those who don't.
Now this leaves something out. An aspect of religion that for many people is a crucial
ingredient and that is the aspect of feeling. Even in Kant's own day, European culture was
just entering into the period that we call the romantic era, an era in which art and
literature and music and even national life was seen very much in terms of its affective
content, the way it made people feel, inspiration. And within the realm of religion itself,
the romantic tendency manifested in the movement that we call pietism. Kant himself was the
son of a pietist family. Pietism firmly believed that the essence of religion actually was
feeling, emotion, the very thing that Kant had left out. A book that was published in
1802 toward the very end of Kant's life by Friedrich Schleiermacher had an enormous impact
on European society and has never been out of print. This book is called On Religion,
Speeches to its Cultured Dispisers. And in it, Schleiermacher radically redefined the
essence of religion as a feeling. He said religion is a feeling of ultimate dependence.
Now this being the case, it might be hard to imagine just how Kantian philosophy could
contribute to a mode of researching religion that depends on the kind of feelings that
religion evokes. To understand how this came about, we have to go back to Kant's theory
of aesthetics, the one place in his philosophy where he actually allowed a positive role
for feeling. When confronted with both beauty and the sublime, Kant said the essence of
these experiences was a feeling of disinterested pleasure that was brought about by the harmonization
of the mental faculties. Now, the feeling was not evoked by anything that was actually
out in the world, at least not according to Kant. If you see a tree, at least that's
an act of cognition. There is a tree out there, we presume, that is determining how the mind
forms an image of that tree. But when you say that is a beautiful tree and the looking
at the tree provides you with that sense of disinterested pleasure, it's not because
there is such a thing in the world called beauty. The experience of beauty is simply
a way of describing how the perception of the tree affects your mind. The only thing
that saved this idea of beauty from a completely privatistic subjectivism to where we just
like what we like and we can't share that feeling of beauty with other people was Kant's
idea of the basic sameness of the structure of all human minds. That made it reasonable
to suppose that if I find something beautiful, then you probably will too, because our minds
are structured the same way. But here's the important thing. There is no external referent
for that feeling. The feeling of beauty is not an act of perception, because there's
nothing outside in the world that it grasps. It is simply an emotional side effect of a
perception. Later Kantians were not happy with this explanation. They did not feel that
it adequately accounted for the way that we can share experiences of beauty. And so we
turn now to a second generation Kantian philosopher, Jacob Friedrich Fries, who retooled Kant's
aesthetic in order to make room for the idea that there is a kind of beauty out in the
world that we are perceiving.
Fries was struck by the intersubjectivity, the communicability, the shareability of
the experience of beauty. He found it striking that two different people could both watch
the same sunset and each have identical pleasure from that experience. He thought that Kant's
assertion that this is simply because their minds are structured the same didn't quite
do it. So he wanted to add to Kant's framework the idea that beauty actually is something
in the world. And that the reason two people can share an experience of beauty is because
they are both actually perceiving it. And so in the same way that they can both agree
that's a tree, they can both agree that's a beautiful tree or a beautiful sunset.
The problem is when you try to identify just where that beauty is. Is it an aspect of the
tree itself? Well, Fries thought no, that's probably not right. So what he did was to
say that beauty exists at a different level than solid objects in the world like chairs
and rocks and that it actually takes a different faculty of perception to get in touch with
it. Beauty, therefore, was a kind of transcendent quality that couldn't be strictly identified
with any physical object and perceived directly by the senses. Rather, beauty was a kind of
transcendent reality that was apprehended by feeling itself.
So aside from perception, Fries put out the term Andung in German, which means intuition
or intimation. Beauty as a transcendent reality was obscure. We couldn't see it directly.
We could only know it was out there by this kind of intuition of it. But that was enough
for Fries to make it a communicable, shareable experience. The two people watching the sunset
could both be intuiting intimations of this actually existent beauty that lay behind the
sunset. Now this is not really a theory about religion. And Fries, while bringing in Kant's
idea about the sublime, is in any case simply trying to solve a problem in how we experience
beauty. Like Kant himself, Fries was not a particularly religious man. But the Friesian
retooling of the Kantian framework provided the key for Rudolf Otto to start to fashion
a fully phenomenological theory of religion that came to see the object of religion, God
or the sacred, as something that actually was out there.
He did this by combining Fries's idea of the intimation of an obscure reality called beauty
with Kant's own description of how we come into contact with the sublime. As you recall,
when Kant talked about the sublime, he said this was not quite the same as an experience
of beauty. Beautiful things please us by their form. They agree with our minds, and so they
produce this feeling of pleasure. The sublime, on the other hand, was a sterner experience
of beauty. It was not necessarily conformable to the structures of our mind, and so struck
us as somewhat alien. The sublime could also be overpowering and frightening, even as it
held us in its thrall. You can't take your eyes off an erupting volcano, even as you're
quaking with fear as you observe it. Otto therefore took this idea of the sublime and
applied Fries's apprehension of beauty to it, to come up with the idea of the human
encounter with the holy. The holy was his version of Kant's the sublime. Kant didn't
care if there was any kind of deity behind the volcano or the hurricane, he just was
interested in the feeling that it evoked. By the holy, Otto meant to indicate an actual
divine reality that we really did encounter in deep religious experiences. He used another
word interchangeably with the holy to talk about this. He would sometimes call it the
numinous. This comes from the Latin word numen, which meant the majesty or might of a god.
As a brief aside, this is not to be confused with Kant's term numinon, which was the world
in and of itself, the reality that we can never quite come into direct contact with
as opposed to the phenomenon. Otto took his inspiration from a story in the life of Martin
Luther, a story that as a Lutheran theologian, Rudolf Otto would have been intimately familiar
with. It is well known that early in his life, Martin Luther was in his room one day when
a violent thunderstorm erupted in the town. The storm frightened him tremendously and
he really felt like it was more than just a natural storm that he had really encountered
some kind of power that enthralled him and frightened him. And it was a life changing
experience. Luther declared to God, if you let me survive this, I will serve you. Otto
interpreted this episode from Luther's life through the lens of Kant and Fries. It had
been an experience that Kant would have said was an encounter with the sublime, a frightening,
overpowering, overwhelming phenomenon of nature. But Otto observed that Luther had taken a
religious lesson from it and had thought he had come face to face with God. And using
Fries's way of talking about feelings as a valid way of cognizing the world, getting
intimations of this hidden reality, he said Luther's experience should be understood at
face value. He really did encounter God and the structure of that encounter and the way
that Luther experienced it cannot be reduced to simple sociology or psychology or anthropology.
It really was an encounter with the divine that has its own characteristics and must
be studied as something in its own right. So what are the characteristics of the encounter
of the human being with the holy or the numinous? Otto pointed to three aspects of this encounter
that he encapsulated in a Latin phrase. He said it is the mysterium tremendum et fascinans.
And the three terms in that phrase, mysterium, tremendum, and fascinans, each has its own
content which must be understood separately. We begin with the mysterium. In the encounter
with the holy, human beings come to feel that they are in the presence of something that
is utterly alien, something that their minds have never had to cope with before, something
that is outside of their entire framework of experience, their world view, as Clifford
Geertz might put it. For example, in the Old Testament of the Christian Bible, God says
my ways are not your ways, and there is a pervasive sense in every encounter that anybody
in the Bible has with God that they are confronted with a mystery, something that they cannot
readily wrap their minds around, something that is alien to them. The tremendum indicates
the frightening, the appalling aspect of this encounter. And according to Otto, this fright
or this dread had three separate aspects to it. On the one hand, it was overpowering.
God does not confront the individual as a mouse. God confronts the individual as the
heavenly host, the entire army of heaven, showing up on your doorstep like the first
mounted battalion, completely surrounding you and overwhelming you. The second feature
of the tremendum is that it is awesome. It inspires a feeling in you not of pure dread,
but of awe, of being just thunderstruck, struck dumb, speechless by this encounter.
And the third aspect of the tremendum is that the experience is infused with a kind of energy
and urgency. It's not that you can have this experience and then, once it's over, just
shrug your shoulders and say, well, that sure was interesting. Like Luther's encounter
with the thunderstorm, it made a claim on you. It gave you a message and a mission that
changed your life and infused that mission with a sense of urgency. The fascinants, the
fascination of the Holy, pointed to the beauty of the experience, as the Psalmist says, love
God in the beauty of holiness. So even as you were overpowered and struck dumb and overwhelmed
by the energy with which the Holy encountered you, you also could not tear your eyes away
from it. You could not walk away. You had to see where it was going. You had to have
the experience and drink it into the full. As Kant had said about the experience of beauty,
one of the aspects of that experience is that it has a kind of finality to it. When we experience
beauty or the sublime, we don't have the feeling that this is going anywhere else beyond and
outside of itself. Otto took that idea and said, the fascination that is exerted upon
us by this confrontation with the Holy is because it is ultimate. It is final. It is
not a window through which you look in order to see something else. It simply is what it
is and you have to deal with it in its own terms. There is nothing beyond it for you.
On the human side, the result of this encounter with the Holy on the human being was to produce
what Otto called creature feeling. This harks back to Schleiermacher's definition of religion
as a feeling of ultimate dependence, that in one's encounter with the ultimate, one came
to know that one was not self-sufficient. One could get through life under your own steam,
under your own power, that you had to rest in this ultimate reality and somehow trust it.
For Otto, this creature feeling was a feeling of transience, of contingency in the face of
this ultimate self-sufficient reality. One came to know the smallness of one's own place in the
universe and one's marginality in the grand scheme of things. Now one issue that Otto had
to deal with once he had defined religion as this encounter with the Mysterium Tremendum
at Fassinans was that it appeared to leave out another aspect of religion which Kant had
certainly felt was absolutely crucial and not easily omitted. And so Otto had defined a place
for it. This is morality. It's not always clear that the encounter with the Holy while changing
somebody's life actually does it in a direction that we might find morally good. It might lead
some people to do things that we might consider evil or it might have no effect on their morality
at all. Otto certainly did not want to say as a good Lutheran theologian that morality had no
place as part of the essential nature of religion. He did simply note that as we look at the history
of religion we do find that there are religious figures who founded their morality on this encounter
with the numinous. Jesus certainly had. Moses when he encountered God on the peak of Mount Sinai
came down the mountain bearing the Ten Commandments. So there certainly was a morality built into
or at least founded on this encounter with the Holy other God. But it didn't always happen so it
didn't seem there was a necessary connection. Looking at the experiences of various figures in
the Japanese religion Shinto for example they certainly do define the essence of their religion
as a feeling that one is in the presence of some kind of power. As the 18th century Japanese Shinto
scholar Motohori Norinaga had put it the essence of the spiritual reality of Shinto is simply the
feeling of awe and presence that you may come to experience when looking at an overhanging rock
or a mighty waterfall. But he certainly didn't say that that necessarily leads one into any kind
of moral amendment of one's life. So some people have seen this as a weakness in Otto's definition
of religion as this almost mystical encounter with the Holy and Otto himself never seems to have
been able to make that connection really stick. There have been other dissatisfactions with Otto's
approach to religion. One is its utterly private nature. Lutheranism was about the priesthood
of all believers. The Reformation itself had been a rejection of the claims that the Roman Catholic
Church had as a community upon the individual and the necessity of the individual to belong to the
church and to go through priests in order to have access to God's grace. Lutheranism was one of the
sources of Western individualism. It said every individual stands alone before God and mediates
their own salvation directly with God. No social structures are necessary. This put all the emphasis
on the encounter of the individual with God. This, of course, leaves no room whatsoever
to study a social dimension for religion. One doesn't even have to have a church available
if all that needs to happen is one experiences a thunderstorm or walks through the woods and
encounters a large impressive rock. Another problem was that even when you look at the lives of
religious people you might wonder how many have actually had this experience. Otto seems to be
saying that one is not even strictly speaking religious unless you have had this life-changing
confrontation with the holy or the numinous. But if you ask yourself on any given day in your
average mosque, church, synagogue, gurudwar, or ashram and poll the people who are assembled there,
how many of them would say, yes, I've had that experience? And yet there they are attending a
religious service. It would be hard to make the case that they are not being religious in some way.
So one could criticize Otto for putting forward a definition of religion that actually excludes
obviously religious people from the whole experience of religion. And then finally,
within the religious studies community, Otto has been criticized for making the study of religion
itself a kind of hermetic or esoteric enterprise that requires initiation. One is very struck in
reading his major book, The Idea of the Holy, at a sentence that occurs very early in chapter one,
where Otto addresses the reader directly and says, if you have not had this experience,
you might as well stop reading now because you're not going to get everything that I have to say.
In other words, Otto seems to think that for somebody who has not had this experience to even
engage in the study of religion is tantamount to somebody who's tone deaf going to study music.
How could they do an adequate job? Many scholars of religion who really don't believe that religion
has a real referent in the divine have objected to this, saying Otto is putting forward a kind of
initiatory model of religious scholarship. In other words, he's turning the study of religion
itself into a kind of religion that requires you to be baptized into it through this tremendous
initiatory experience. Granted, all of these weaknesses, Otto's idea still proved very powerful.
By turning to the experience of the Holy in a phenomenological manner, he does appear to have
rescued religion from the methodological atheism of the psychologists and the sociologists and the
anthropologists. He does seem to have made a case that religion is a particular kind of human
experience that does relate to an actual divine reality and that if you want to understand that
experience, then you have to know something about that reality and you have to believe
that religion is the human encounter with it. Once you've made that move, then you have in
his account overcome the danger of reductionism. It is no longer possible to say with Marx,
religion is nothing but a form of economic activity and therefore you can only study it with
economic categories or with Freud. Religion is a kind of neurosis and therefore you cannot study
it as religion. You have to study it as a psychiatric phenomenon. Now we can say religion
is something in its own right that must be studied in its own terms. That is the fundamental insight
that gave impetus to the greatest founder of the phenomenological study of religion in the 20th
century, the Romanian-born scholar Mirce Eliade, who took Otto's fundamental experience of the Holy
and showed that in fact it can provide an explanatory framework that reaches out in many
directions to explain a wide variety of topics such as why do we build houses and found cities in
the way that we do, why do we structure our societies in the way that we do, by referring
all of these to the inbreaking of the sacred into ordinary human reality as a point of orientation.
And that's where we'll take up the story in the next lecture.
