Lecture 16 Symbolic Anthropology, Ferdinand de Sassure
As I indicated at the end of the last lecture, not everybody was happy with the results of
the functional anthropology. It seemed to mute the native voice. It seemed that as long
as the anthropologist in the field could think up some function that a particular cultural
practice or a myth or a ritual might serve, they didn't really need to hear what the
native said about what it meant. And so out of that dissatisfaction, a new style of anthropology
was born beginning in the 1930s but gathering steam mostly in the 1960s called symbolic
anthropology that sought to give native accounts of what their own practices meant to them a
little more weight in cultural analysis. The two major figures that we will look at in symbolic
anthropology are the French anthropologist Claude Levy-Strauss and the American Clifford
Geertz. But first, we're going to take another digression into the thought system of another
thinker from another field who wasn't really talking about religion but whose mode of analysis
provided the basic framework within which symbolic anthropology could work. The person
we'll be looking at is the French linguist Ferdinand de Saussure whose analysis of language
drew very much on Kantian philosophy. Ferdinand de Saussure wanted linguistics to be part
of a larger science that would study signs of any kind. So this would include not only
words and language but also street signs, gestures, symbols, things like corporate logos,
just anything that signified something else. He wanted to call this science semiology.
Now as it turns out, such a science has emerged in Western academia, it's now called semiotics.
But Saussure looked at the linguistic applications of a science of signs.
Now you start with the basic question, how do words signify the things to which they
point? Let's imagine that I'm standing before a tree and I point to it and I say there is
a tree. Now this pointing finger seems to provide a link between the word I'm using,
tree, and the thing out there in the external world. And so our common sense assumption
is that the word tree simply refers to that thing in the world that we're calling a tree.
So it has an external referent. But Saussure was not so sure that that is what was happening.
Drawing on Kantian thought, he said to assume that words just point to things, is to assume
that the world in some sense gives itself to us, predigested, that there's nothing
that the mind really has to do to take the image of the thing in front of us and make
it into a tree. But Kant had already determined that this is not what happens. Remember, when
we look at anything in the world, all we really see is just shape and color. So all we see
when we're looking at a tree is really a mottled field of green with a kind of brown
thing hanging from the bottom. We have to take that shape and color and we have to form
it into an image and determine that it is an object that is separate from all of the
other shapes and colors around it. So the structures of the mind have to build an image, and in
the phenomenological approach of Kant, that image is really all that we have to deal with.
Now this is where Saussure's analysis of language comes in. Saussure adds the linguistic
component to Kant's phenomenology. Starting with the assumption that the mind has already
taken this field of green and this stick of brown and has turned it into a solid image,
Saussure then said, the mind then associates a word with that image. So what is really
going on in our minds when we use a word like tree is that we are relating to set the
separate mental things to one another. We're not pointing to an object in the external
world. We are taking a concept that we have made, an image of the tree, and we are associating
it with a word, tree. Now the word for Saussure was a simple sound image. He liked to use
that phrase because it doesn't actually become sound until we open our mouth and speak it.
But the very fact that we can say the word tree is determined by the fact that there
is an image of the sound tree already in our mind. So the relationship in our mind is therefore
between a sound image and a concept or an object of thought. Put those two together and you
have a word. A word therefore as a sign has two parts that Saussure called the signifier
and the signified. So this sound image tree becomes the signifier and the image tree becomes
the signified. And when I point to the tree and I say to you that is a tree, what I am
at least hoping will happen is that the signifier that you hear will correlate with the sound
image that you already have in your mind and that you will already have this conceptual
image of the tree to lock it onto. Now there is another aspect to this assumption that
the world does not just give itself to us. It is one thing to create the image of the
tree in our minds, but an essential part of creating that image is differentiating it
from other images that we have in the world. For example, we might call something over
here a tree, we might call something over there a bush. Now in the real external world
there is nothing at all that cares about distinctions between trees and bushes. The things are just
out there being whatever they are. In our own mind though, we take one perception,
form it into a concept and apply a sound image to it to form a word. We then take this other
thing and decide that it is not the same as the first thing, that bushes are to be distinguished
from trees and we then choose a different sound image to designate it. This means that
one of the vital functions of any given word is not just to signify something, but to differentiate
it from other things. Now since all of these things are within our minds, what is really
going on when we distinguish trees from bushes is we are taking two very similar images but
we are putting a conceptual fence between them and we are putting bushes into this corral
and we are putting trees into this other corral and we are using the sound image or the signifier
bush tree to separate them and keep them apart in our minds. But at the very same time that
we are keeping them apart in this way, we are also creating a relationship between them.
We might put both of these fenced in corrals within a larger corral that we call plants
and so by doing that we are then relating bushes to trees in a very significant way.
Now these are all interpretive acts to decide that something is an object in its own right
to be separated from other things in the world, to create fences that distinguish it from
things that might be very similar to it, to put these into larger frames of reference.
These are all acts of interpretation and relation. And what Saussure noted was that when you
study different languages of the world, you find that the fencing can actually take place
in different ways. Now his example to demonstrate this was to look at the way that English and
French dealt with sheep. He pointed out that the English language has a pair of words that
both refer to sheep, that we have sheep and we have mutton. The French on the other hand
have only one word, mutton. And what that meant for Saussure is that the French and the English
were literally organizing the world in two different ways. The English were taking sheep
on the table and sheep on the hoof and putting them into two separate corrals with a fence
between them. The French on the other hand by having only one word that referred to both
sheep on the table and sheep on the hoof were not making that distinction. What this indicated
was that the French and the English were interpreting the world in a very fundamentally
different way because the French use of only one word meant that there was only one concept
that indicated a kind of sameness and identification between sheep on the table and sheep on the
hoof that the English mind did not perceive. This indicated to Saussure that the French
were literally seeing the world, constructing its relationships in a very different way.
Now, this example of sheep on the table and sheep on the hoof seems a little trivial. Let
me give you something that's a little more different from my own experience in studying
Chinese culture. Chinese is a language utterly unrelated to English. French and English are
related as European languages. And the Chinese will construct a very different world than
the English do. To give an example, I was very puzzled in my study of Chinese language
by the word gua. This word appeared in compounds that meant watermelons, papayas, sweet potatoes,
and catalogues. This leads you to wonder what does this word gua mean after all? The English
world certainly does not put all of those foods in a single category. We would at least
take the sweet potatoes out and put them over with the vegetables. It turns out the Chinese
language tends to organize the world by the shape of things. And so the word gua seems
to indicate any kind of edible plant whose fruit is sort of long and round in shape.
This means that the world is being organized differently. A whole different set of relationships
is being established when the Chinese approach to the world. Now, in the Kantian turn, neither
the French nor the Chinese nor the English are correct. Not one is more accurate than
the other. As I said before, the world is just out there being what it is and it doesn't
really care what we make of it. What we are really doing according to Sausure is forming
images, associating signifiers with them to create words, and then relating those words
together in such a way that it actually helps to determine how we organize things in the
world and how we approach them. Another significant facet of Sausure's thought that I want to
call to your attention was his idea of the arbitrariness of the sign. What he meant by
this is that nothing is necessarily connected to anything else as signifier to signified.
Sticking strictly with words, there is no reason why a tree should be called a tree.
Any other sound image can be equally well applied to this image of the tree that we
have in our minds. This can readily be demonstrated just by learning another language. The Spanish
call it an arbol, the Chinese call it a mul. Who's right? Nobody. It really doesn't matter.
As long as something is signifying the concept, it doesn't really matter what that something
is. Now this has implications for the way Sausure conceives of the life of the word.
It turns out that because the sign is completely arbitrary, this gives us the paradoxical statement
that it is both mutable and immutable. Now how can it be both at the same time? By mutable,
Sausure points out that because there is no necessary connection between the signifier
and the signified, between the word tree and the concept of tree, this means that it can
change. And so as time goes on, words can actually shift their meaning. They can come
to signify a different concept. It's been pointed out, for example, that if you read
the Psalter in the King James Bible, you come across a very odd statement where the Psalmist
says, I will prevent the dawn. Well, what does that mean? Is he going to keep the sun
from coming up? No, it turns out that back in 1611, the word prevent actually meant
to precede. So the Psalmist is simply saying he's going to get up before sunrise to go
make his prayers. Now the word means to impede or to obstruct. Neither of these is correct.
It's not that one usage of the word prevent is right and the other is wrong because the
relationship between signifier and signified is completely arbitrary. Therefore, the word
prevent can mean to precede or to obstruct. It doesn't matter. And so this shows us how
the sign is mutable. It can change. When Sousour talks about the immutability of the sign,
what he's pointing to there is that language subsists at the level of the community. That
is to say, none of us can arbitrarily, by ourselves, unilaterally change the meaning
of a word. Words are conventional since they are tools that allow us to communicate one
with another. There has to be some agreement between the members of a language community
as to what the words are going to mean. Those of you who have raised children might have
noticed that when children are learning a language, when they're somewhere three, four,
five years old, they like to experiment with words. They might come to you one day, point
to the TV set and say, I'm going to call that a Weebelfetzer. And you might say, you
can't really do that, dear. And the child will say, why? Well, what can you say? There
really is no reason to call it a television instead of a Weebelfetzer because the sign
is arbitrary. But what you can say is, well, you can do that if you want, but nobody will
know what you're talking about. And you're always going to have to tell people, well,
I mean the TV. And then they'll say to you, well, why didn't you just say the TV? And
eventually you will give up the fight and you will go along with the program and call
it a TV or a television, the same as everybody else.
This is an odd thought for Westerners. Western frames of reference tend to be very individualistic.
And it's hard sometimes for us to think of something that dwells simply at the level
of the community and cannot really be understood as happening at the level of the individual.
But this is the case with language. When we are growing up, we learn a language that
we did not invent. It is passed on to us, and it is a useful tool to communicate with
other people in our language community. But as time goes on, it can change, but it only
changes as the convention changes. Individuals may help get the ball rolling, but it's the
community that has to accept the change.
So to go back to our earlier example, when the word prevent ceases to mean precede and
begins to mean obstruct, this is not because some individual decreed that that would happen.
It happened because the community shifted in its conventional usage of the sign.
So by pointing to both the mutability and immutability of signs, what Sausour was doing
was giving us a way of understanding that language is a living organism that has a life
of its own. It can change because of the arbitrariness of the sign, but it does not change simply
because of any rational effort to control the direction of its change. It moves organically
at the level of the community, and it evolves over time.
Another aspect of Sausour's thought that I want to point to is his analysis of language
as having two different aspects to it. We can think of this as the language as such
on the one hand, and the actual deployment of language on the other. To designate these,
we'll use the French terms that Sausour himself used. On the one hand, there is long, the
language. On the other hand, there is parole speaking. Now what is the relationship between
these two aspects of language, and how do they exist? Long is language as such. It's
what we mean when we use the phrase the English language. Now where does the English language
exist? Is it in dictionaries? Is it in books of grammar? Is it in people's minds? Look
as you may. You will never actually find the English language as such anywhere in the world.
It is not contained in its totality in any one person's mind. Even the Oxford English
dictionary does not contain every word that people in the English-speaking community use.
There is no grammar book that can say for all times and all places all of the rules by
which we put words together to express ourselves, not only in standard English but also in poetry.
So the English language, the long, is a pure abstraction that doesn't really exist anywhere
in the world. There is nowhere that we can point and say, there it is. Parole, on the
other hand, speaking, is concrete acts that instantiate the English language. The words
that I am speaking right now are the parole, the speaking. I am putting sentences together.
I am using words. I am using grammar, syntax, and semantics in order to form these sentences
so that I can express my meaning to you. And what this does then is to take this grand
abstraction called the English language and put it into concrete expression. Now that
you can easily point to. In fact, parole is the only kind of concrete existence that any
language actually has in the world. The English language as such exists nowhere. It exists
in fragmentary form in various places, but nowhere does it exist in its totality. All
that there really is is parole, speaking. And yet, you can't simply dismiss the idea
of the English language as a vague abstraction not good for much of anything because without
it, there would be no parole. There would be nothing to guide the way that I form words
and send them through the air into your ear or write them down or act them out. Without
the long aspect, there would be no structure, no vocabulary, no grammar, no way for us to
engage in any concrete acts of speaking. And so, we have to think about both of these aspects
and hold them in tension. The great abstraction called long and the concrete instantiations
in parole, language and speaking. Now, it's at this point that we can begin to see how
Sausure's thought was so provocative for people who were looking for an alternative to functional
anthropological analysis. The ideas of long and parole are especially provocative. Since
Sausure himself had indicated that what he was doing was not restricted simply to linguistics,
but could be applied to any situation in which a symbol or a sign or a signal carried some
meaning into somebody else's mind, anthropologists could quickly see that this method of analysis
could be applied very much to culture. Think of the relationship between long and parole,
language and speaking, as applying to culture and cultural performances, religion and religious
acts. Let's say you could apply it to Christianity and the actual performance of a mass or somebody
kneeling and praying the rosary, or Chinese culture and people getting together to drink
tea. This is a very fruitful way of looking at the way that cultures and religions subsist
in the world. All of the aspects of Sausure's analysis can be brought right over into the
analysis of both culture and religion. If you are an anthropologist looking at culture,
you can begin with the idea that the world is not a predigested set of meanings that
is just waiting for us to appropriate them, but that meanings are assigned to things.
The world has to be organized in such a way that we can know where we are and know what
to do. So culture, like language, may be one of the mechanisms by which the mind takes
the totality of raw sensory data that is coming into the mind and organizes it in such a
way that we can form societies and know how to deal with each other. Not only do we form
the image of a tree and associate it with the word tree, but we can also form the image
of fathers and fatherhood, mothers and motherhood, or even maternal uncles and their relationship.
And we can make a whole web of signification out of it. And by doing so, we then know how
to get along in the world and to deal with one another and how things relate to each
other. The idea of the arbitrariness of the sign can also be used in cultural analysis.
It has been observed that the insistence on actual biological connection in determining
whether somebody is your mother or your father is a peculiar western concept. There are other
ways of construing relationships. There are cultures where there is no marriage and where
the basic unit that raises children is the mother and her brothers, while the father
may be off taking care of his sister and his nephews and nieces. There are also places
where fatherhood has been defined functionally, that you don't call somebody a father unless
they are in some way acting the role of your father and the question of whether they are
actually your biological father or not simply doesn't enter into it. So the idea of fatherhood
can be applied in different ways to different kinds of relationships, roughly analogous
with us. And just as calling a table a table in English or a mesa in Spanish really doesn't
matter, it's completely arbitrary. So the designation of father to somebody whose DNA
can prove that he is biologically your father or simply some man who came into your life
and was a father to you and therefore gets treated as a father, both can happen, neither
is right, neither is wrong, it's completely arbitrary. And then finally, the idea of the
mutability and immutability of language gives us a way to talk about cultural or religious
dynamics. As language is not a static unmoving stable set of signs that are related in grammars
in certain ways, so culture is also not a completely stable thing. Precisely because
cultural or religious significations are as arbitrary as the assignment of the word tree
to the concept of tree. As the community moves and develops, they can also move and develop.
And so as we saw with functional anthropology, one of its shortcomings was that it tended
to assume that societies were completely stable units and wasn't really prepared to deal
with the dynamics of cultural change or cultural interactions. The linguistic model of Saussure
did provide a way of talking about how communities and the cultures and languages they bear and
the religious practices that they enact can actually change as time goes on. Again, not
because a single individual wills it so, but because the community as a whole experiences
an evolution in the way that it construes the world, creates relationships between things,
decides how people should act within certain relationships, and it all moves on. And just
as language can be changed by contact with other languages, as English was changed forever
after the invasion of the Norman French in 1066, this mode of analysis gives us a way
of talking about how cultures can change through their contact with other cultures. And therefore
as Malinovsky could not really incorporate the fact that his mere presence on the Trobrian
Islands, along with the entire colonial garrison of soldiers that backed him up, might have
had some kind of effect on the local native culture that he was studying. An analysis
modeled on Saussure's linguistics would be very well equipped to bring that aspect in
and to realize that the mere presence of the anthropological field worker is a factor
that actually can affect and change the very culture that one is studying.
These days when anthropologists themselves tend to come out of the native cultures that
used to be the objects of study, and they know the stories of how their own parents and grandparents
used to play the anthropologists, this idea is now very well accepted. Now when we come
back for the next lectures, we're going to look at Claude Lovestros and Clifford Geertz,
two anthropologists who began the field that we now call symbolic anthropology. What we
will notice is that they each took a different piece of Saussure's theory and applied it
as the basis of their own study, using Saussure's distinction between long and parole, between
culture as a system of symbols that generates cultural acts and those cultural acts themselves
that instantiate the culture. We will see that Lovestros tended to focus on the long
aspect of things. He wanted to find that deep structure of culture out of which cultural
action arose. While Clifford Geertz on the other hand tended more to emphasize the parole
aspect of Saussure's theory and focused much more on how culture was actually instantiated
and how it motivated people to do certain things. We'll begin next time with Claude Lovestros.
