Lecture 10 William James, The Description of Religion
And now with this lecture we begin a new unit on psychological theories of religion and
we begin with the figure William James.
William James was one of the founders of psychology, who was born into a prominent New England family
in 1842.
In fact, his brother was the novelist Henry James.
He was one of the founders of the Department of Psychology at Harvard University, but he
had also gone on some adventures in his youth, doing explorations up the Amazon with the
anthropologist Louis Agassi.
James not only taught medicine and psychology at Harvard, but he's also a noted philosopher,
and his philosophical stance played a prominent role in the development of his psychological
theories of religion.
James, along with C.S.
Purse, is one of the founders of a philosophical school called pragmatism, and so let's take
a moment just to understand what pragmatism was and how it approached philosophical questions.
Pragmatism arose out of a growing dissatisfaction that took hold in philosophical circles in
the late 19th century with purely abstract metaphysical theories of truth and reality.
One of the reasons for the dissatisfaction was that pure strings of abstract logic seemed
oftentimes to lead nowhere.
Immanuel Kant, a couple of centuries before, had pointed out that there were philosophical
problems that he called antinomies.
These were problems that were important, but which could not be solved by the pure application
of logic.
Such questions might be, is there an immortal soul, or is there not?
Are there rewards and punishments in life after death, or are there not?
Purely abstract scholastic reasoning could lead you to both affirmative and negative
answers to those questions, and both the affirmation and the negation could be equally
well defended with equally good logical arguments.
Another development that cast doubt on the value of purely abstract truths was the development
of the 19th century of non-Euclidean geometry.
You might remember that in the lecture on Rodney Stark's rational choice theory, we
talked a bit about Euclidean axioms.
These are the postulates from which one begins to construct the whole truth of geometry.
One of those axioms was parallel lines never meet.
People began experimenting in the 19th century with a geometry that was not based on that
axiom, which postulated parallel lines can meet.
And what came out of that was a very useful set of geometrical assumptions and propositions
that led people to be able to theorize about such things as curved space.
So something that turned out not to be useful in an abstract theoretical sense in saying
that this is true, but that's false, turned out to be quite useful in its practical effects.
It enabled people to do things, and this appeared to give these non-Euclidean geometrical
systems a lot of significance.
People could see that there was a similarity between the Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometries
and with Kant's antinomies.
In other words, a Euclidean geometry that began with a certain set of axioms was also
true.
The non-Euclidean geometries based on a whole different set of assumptions were equally
true.
What do you do if the philosophical task is to pursue truth, but you find that logic alone
won't show you the way?
Getting back to Kant, we begin to see proposals for a way of approaching these kind of questions.
Kant had said that when you have this kind of problem, whether the soul is immortal or
not, whether there are rewards or punishments in the afterlife or not, and you can't decide
them on purely logical grounds, it's legitimate then to judge them by their effects and then
to adopt one and reject the other based on the kind of benefit or harm that comes from
actually living them.
In this case, if you do believe that the soul is immortal and if you do believe that there
are rewards and punishments in an afterlife, then you find that in people's real lives,
they begin to behave better, they watch their behavior, they treat each other better.
Whereas if you deny the immortality of the soul and if you deny the proposition that
there are rewards and punishments after death, people's behavior begins to slip.
So regardless of the logical status of the question, one can see that there are practical
effects that follow from adopting one or adopting the other, and if the logic won't
do it, then it is legitimate to go with the answer that produces the better effects.
This was the beginning point of pragmatism.
Pragmatism took this process a step further and flatly denied that purely abstract logical
speculative truths had any value at all.
It was the effect that an idea produced in the world that gave it significance.
A dry abstract proposition that didn't actually do anything in the world, didn't change
somebody's mood, didn't make them behave differently, didn't lead to some palpable
effect might be an interesting idea, but it was not a significant idea.
To have significance, an idea had to do something in the world.
It is from this pragmatic starting point that William James begins his analysis of religion.
As a pragmatist, his assumption is going to be that the truth or falsehood of religious
propositions is simply not an interesting question.
The effects of religious truths and propositions are what bear investigation.
So does God exist?
Whether that proposition is true or false is of no consequence.
As a pragmatist, William James wants to see what happens when people come to believe that
God exists and what happens when they deny that God exists.
One last general point before we get into William James' writings.
William James invented a term that has become very common in English language.
He invented the term stream of consciousness.
It later became used to designate a style of literature practiced by James Joyce.
As a psychologist, what James meant by this term stream of consciousness was that within
every person's head, there was a constant stream of thoughts and experiences.
Similar to James, people thought that individuals simply had discrete, separate thoughts occurring
one after the other.
And if they weren't overtly thinking something at any given moment, then their brains were
essentially empty for the time being.
James said, no, it's a stream of constant experience that is never interrupted.
Even when you're not thinking something, you are still experiencing.
And that experience of a continuous stream of reality is where we actually live.
That stream of consciousness is where things really happen.
And as we'll see at the end of this lecture, it is that idea of the reality of people's
experiences that is the key to understanding James' ideas about religion.
Turning now to James' works, he produced two significant treatises on religion.
The first was a very short piece originally delivered as a lecture in 1896 called The
Will to Believe.
In The Will to Believe, James talked about religious belief, not as the intellectual
acceptance of a logical proposition.
In other words, he was not so interested in religion as a belief, say in the existence
of God or the devil, but as a decision.
The title tells it all.
Believing is an act of volition.
One comes to believe something because one wills to believe it.
Now James is aware that from the very outset this idea may present some difficulties for
the average person.
He says, if I'm sick in bed, I cannot, by a simple act of will, convince myself that
I'm really well.
If I try to will to believe that I'm actually well when I'm sick, as soon as I get out of
bed and try to leave the room, reality is going to set me straight.
So how can you simply will to believe something?
James answers this question by pointing out that not every belief we have is about a simple
matter of fact, whether I am sick or I am well, whether the earth revolves around the
sun or the sun revolves around the earth.
Many of the things that we believe have more to do with the adoption of an ultimate worldview,
the adoption of a system of values or of an ethic, and by our adoption of a worldview
and a set of ethics, we arrange our lives, we predispose ourselves to exist in the world
in a certain way and to behave in certain ways.
If one is going to adopt an ultimate worldview or a set of ethical standards, then one cannot
simply wait until all the facts are in.
We might ideally wish to raise our children free of any religion so that they can enter
the religious marketplace that we spoke of earlier as intelligent consumers investigate
all the products and then make the right choice for themselves.
But nobody ever does this, even in some very prosaic situations.
When you're at the grocery store and you're confronted with a wall of toothpaste, the
rational thing to do might well be to go and research every single brand of toothpaste
and try to decide which one is best for you.
But none of us are really willing to go to that much trouble just to choose toothpaste.
And so we simply look at what's available to us and we make a decision to choose this
one and leave the others aside.
So rationality only plays a limited role in our decisions because even in the most
fundamental consumer decisions, we never wait until all the facts are in.
But what if what we're trying to decide is an ultimate worldview, our view of the way
things are, and a set of ethical standards by which we are going to behave?
Even the proposition that we're going to wait until all the facts are in simply doesn't
apply.
We could be doing that until the day we die and the price that we would pay for behaving
in that way is that our life would go by without anything to give it sense, without
anything to guide us.
We simply can't afford to do that.
So James says this is where the psychology comes in to the study of religion.
Because people cannot in the present world use rationality and logic to make all the
decisions about what they will believe and how they will act, then other factors come
into play.
And one of the most important of these is the emotions, what he calls our passion nature.
Now interestingly, this has been borne out by some modern psychological experiments.
In patients who have suffered brain damage that takes away their ability to feel emotions,
one does find in experimentation that they are unable to make even the most basic and
apparently logical decisions.
Emotions do play a critical role in helping us to make vital decisions about things we'll
buy, things we'll wear, things we'll eat, who we will marry, and what religion we will
adopt.
So now James begins to introduce the process by which people come to this decision point
to adhere to a certain set of religious beliefs.
He says that to have any impact, such a decision must meet three criteria.
The first of these criteria is that they must be choosing between live options.
The term live options means that the choices with which one is presented are in fact things
that you are likely to want.
For example, right now, somebody might offer me the opportunity to buy a motorboat.
Well, I have no interest in water sports, I don't live on an island, I don't need it
for transportation, and so the choice to buy a boat while it is a real choice is simply
for me not a live option.
A live choice involves at least two live options, either one of which could attract you and
which you have to make a decision to adopt one or the other.
To be truly religious, the choice also has to be momentous.
James's example to illustrate this is to say, imagine that somebody comes to you and
offers you an opportunity to participate in an expedition to the South Pole.
That's a momentous choice, it may never come to you again, and what it offers you is the
chance of immortality as a great explorer, and to choose against it entails losing that
opportunity perhaps for the rest of your life.
This has much more significance than say deciding between black and blue socks.
The third is that it has to be a forced choice.
Very often we are presented with choices and we are free to opt out of them.
So if I'm deciding what to eat for lunch today and on the one hand I could have a turkey
sandwich, on the other hand I could have a pastrami sandwich, those are both live options
for me, certainly I like both of them, but it's not a forced choice.
If somebody says choose between these I could easily say no thanks, I think I'd like bologna
or peanut butter or jelly instead.
If there are other options out there, or even if the course of action of not choosing
it all, of simply backing away and saying I'm not hungry, I don't want any sandwich,
if any of those conditions apply then the option is not forced.
So a real religious choice would look like this.
It would have to be a choice between two live options.
I would have to for instance be equally attracted to the option of adopting a certain religious
viewpoint or not adopting it.
It would have to be momentous.
The choice would have to demand of me that I either commit myself fully to a certain
set of religious beliefs and behaviors or to let them go and adopt another one instead.
This will affect the entire course of my subsequent life and it becomes then momentous.
And finally to be forced there have to be no other options.
I can be presented with the choice of adopting this religion or that religion and even if
I choose not to choose, that still becomes part of the choice.
To adopt the attitude of permanent skepticism is a religious choice.
So one might think one can opt out of the choice but in fact one cannot because even
to be an agnostic is to make a decision that will affect your subsequent life in a very
momentous way.
So William James says that when presented with this kind of choice that is live, momentous
and forced then one has no other option but to make a decision to believe.
The logical option is not there, one acts.
To illustrate the importance of this William James asks us to consider an analogous situation.
Let's say there's a certain young woman that you would like to marry.
Now if one decides to be rigorously logical and rational about the choice then one might
want to put off actually proposing to the young lady until all the facts are in and
you know her so well that you are absolutely certain that she is going to be the perfect
spouse for you.
How are you going to decide that?
You might wait the rest of your life and take the risk of missing out on several years
of a happy marriage while you're off trying to research and do background checks.
Just as the decision to love somebody and to marry somebody is a momentous decision
that is an act of will so also is the religious option.
James sums it up by saying the whole defense of religious faith hinges upon action.
If the action required or inspired by the religious hypothesis is in no way different
from that dictated by the naturalistic hypothesis then religious faith is a pure superfluity
better pruned away and controversy about its legitimacy is a piece of idle trifling unworthy
of serious minds.
In other words if it isn't the momentous live and forced option that James says it is then
away with it.
It's not worthy of the name religion.
It does not evoke the kind of serious act of will which for James is the essence of
religious belief.
So you see his pragmatist and psychological stance at work here.
As a pragmatist he's interested in belief not as intellectual ascent to a logical proposition
but as an active choice that forces one to move in a certain direction.
As a psychologist he says the rational mind is only one of a number of factors the emotional
life and cast of mind that a person displays are also in play and this can only be studied
legitimately by psychology.
In 1902 William James' magnum opus on religion appeared.
The varieties of religious experience was a transcript of the Gifford lectures that
he delivered in Scotland a year or two previously.
In this book William James lays out a complete psychological study of religious experience
hence the title the varieties of religious experience.
James positions his study in this book as a phenomenological study.
Now since the term phenomenology is going to assume great importance in subsequent lectures
let's think about this for a moment right now.
The word phenomenology is derived from the Greek word phenomenon which means image.
It means the construction of things that one has in one's mind as opposed to objective
external reality as it is in itself.
So when William James is talking about a phenomenology of religion when he says he's going to focus
on religious experience he means precisely that he is not going to tackle questions
about the validity of religious truths.
He's not going to try to decide whether God exists or not.
He is not going to pay attention to the institutions of religion.
He's happy to leave that to the sociologists.
He is instead going to pay attention strictly to what happens within the mind literally
within the stream of consciousness of an individual in their religious life.
In his first chapter James takes on various other theories about the origin of religion.
One in particular that irritated him evidently was what he called medical materialism which
tried to say that religion came about as a byproduct of some mental or physical state.
Indigestion for example might lead somebody into mystical transports.
James said even if we grant that that's true it is useless.
The origin of a religion explains nothing and so he parts ways with previous theories
that we've already looked at in prior lectures that tried to account for the origin of religion.
The real question was about religion's enduring value.
He points out for instance that George Fox the founder of the Society of Friends or Quakers
was actually quite delusional in many aspects of his life.
He recounts an episode where Fox felt the urge to take off his shoes in the middle of winter
and walk several miles across the countryside and go into the town of Litchfield crying
as he walked up and down the streets, woe to the bloody city of Litchfield and then he
left, got his shoes and went home.
Fox himself had no idea why he had done that and perhaps a modern psychiatrist could point
to some sort of organic brain disorder that led to that.
But then the question is so what?
The Society of Friends is still here.
The set of religious ideas that George Fox put out there was in fact adopted.
It had effects within a sizable community of people who to this day are still living
it out.
So to simply point to the origin of religion within mental or physical states is to say
nothing about the enduring value of religion.
It is to contribute nothing to the understanding of people's actual religious experience.
So he leaves that aside and focuses strictly on how religion is lived in the lives of individual
people.
Now the rest of the book can seem at first glance to be a rather dry compendium of different
categories of religious experience.
For example the very first chapter after the introduction is called The Religion of the
Healthy Minded and in this chapter he talks about a kind of religious experience culled
from diaries, from autobiographies, from biographies of significant religious people
and he says in some cases we see that the person just seems to be congenitally happy.
They are averse to any kind of dour pessimism.
They don't generally indulge in ascetic practices.
They see the world as wonderful, as directed by a provident God.
They feel safe and comfortable in it and nothing seems to deter them from their elevated mood.
And Francis would be an example of this.
The French philosopher Rousseau would be another example.
In the next chapter he talks about the sick soul and here we have the Soren Kierkegaard's
and Friedrich Nietzsche's of the world.
Those whose characteristic mood is rather pessimistic who are more apt to talk in religious
terms about being stuck in an endless round of meaningless rebirths or about the doctrine
of original sin.
They see that something is drastically wrong with the human condition and that they need
a religious solution to it so they seek conversion, they seek salvation.
The chapter following that talks about the divided self and maps out a series of experiences
of people who see themselves as somehow split in two, as divided against themselves, as
somehow not really working together, all of their gears aren't clicking for some reason.
For these people the thrust of their religious lives will be a search for integration.
So perhaps their preferred mode of practice will be meditation.
They might attempt to engage in mystical practices that will put them in touch with
a larger reality that will show them how it all fits together.
We could go on and on.
He talks about the phenomenon of conversion.
He puts forward a theory of mysticism, but in the end what does it all get us beyond
simply a dry cataloging of different kinds of religious experience?
If that's all it is, why bother?
There are two things that we can observe here.
First, is that in constructing these categories William James has deliberately used some very
extreme forms of religious life and practice in order to make his point.
He says this might seem a little morbid, it might seem a little pathological, but there
is some cunning behind this.
He says if you look at the lives of ordinary people, the average churchgoer, the person
who sits in the pew in the church or the synagogue or goes to the mosque on Fridays, you might
not be able to really discern what's most essential about religion because these people
will hold their religion lightly and they will not be too deeply into it and there won't
be much to report.
The religious extremists, the fanatics, the people who are delusional, who march up and
down the streets of cities yelling woe to the bloody city of Lichfield.
These people can actually show us the stark contours of religious experience because it
is so prominent in their life and their behavior, it so dominates every aspect of their lives
that there is much to see and much to learn from.
But beyond that, he calls these people the experts.
These are the people who can really show us because they have specialized in religion
and they bring back to us reports.
They can actually tell us what the stream of consciousness looks like in the religious
life.
And so one of the values of this apparently dry cataloging of religious experiences is
we get a sense of the full range of what happens in real people's lives.
But second and of crucial importance is something that James points out in his concluding chapter.
Just prior to his own lifetime there had been calls for the creation of a science of religion.
James's psychological approach was meant to counter that.
As we've already seen so many times, the primary research question for so many people
was to look at the irrationality of religion and then try to decide why do people do it.
Religion had so often been portrayed as bad science that many had come to believe that
was fundamentally the essence of religion.
It is bad science, pure and simple, that's all end of story.
Now James is perfectly willing to admit that there is an awful lot of bad science in religion
and in the concluding chapter he actually gives copious examples of really egregious
scientific claims that come out of religious texts and religious assumptions.
So he grants the point.
There is in fact a lot of very bad science in religious texts.
But he's not going to take the next step that all of his predecessors had taken which was
to say therefore it is in its fundamental essence pure superstition doomed as science
and technology progress and as humanity matures.
Instead he goes a different way and says that may all be true but it's a distraction from
the real issue.
Quoting the Muslim mystic Al-Ghazali who once said to understand drunkenness as a physician
understands it is not the same as actually being drunk.
William James says a science of religion might describe to us some of the after effects of
religion but it will not give us religion its own self.
In other words to claim that religion is doomed because it is nothing but bad science is to
look illegitimately at an after effect, a side effect of religion, the production of
faulty systems of science.
The stream of consciousness is where people actually live.
The stream of consciousness is therefore where religion actually resides.
And so a proper investigation of religion can do nothing else but to look squarely at
the religious experience of living people.
Anything else is just the sideshow.
What's happening inside your mind is the main event.
