Lecture 22 – Theory vs. Reality – Case Studies
Up to this point, these lectures have all been about theories of religious study.
At some point, however, theory has to meet reality, and it has to interact with reality
in a way that gives us some understanding.
Some people tend to distrust theory as an artificial grid imposed upon reality.
But in fact, as Auguste Comte had pointed out centuries ago, without theory there is
no knowledge.
Without theory, all we have is disconnected facts floating around.
Theory is what allows us to relate facts to each other, and in so doing, generates knowledge.
Theory is the pegboard upon which we hang the facts, and from which we can make sense
of them.
Other scholars of religion, such as Donald Wieb and Rodney Stark, have also defended
theory by saying, science is generalization.
We cannot stay at the level of specifics, or else we get nowhere.
Without being able to generalize, we don't really have any knowledge of anything.
So theory is absolutely essential.
Love it or hate it, we can't get along without it.
But those who are distrustful of theory are correct in alerting us to the dangers of theory.
Theory can shift very subtly, from a tool for interpreting reality to a hard and fast
grid that we then bend reality to fit.
Theory can become something that we plant our flag, take our stand on, that we defend
against all counter-evidence.
When that happens, when one takes a certain mode of theory and declares, I am a theory
name here, ist, I am a structuralist, I am a Marxist, then what happens is the theory
then drives every aspect of data collection and interpretation and might well cause us
to miss some very important things.
This danger, I think, is very well summed up in a saying that we used to have on construction
crews that I worked on when I was younger.
We used to say that when all you have is a hammer, everything starts to look like a
nail.
The pages of religious studies literature are littered with examples of people who let
their theory run away with them and were led by that to distort the realities that they
were looking at.
To give a couple of examples, first, Mirce Eliotti himself, whose theories on sacred
space and sacred time we looked at in a previous lecture, had the idea that the sacred breaks
into our profane world and gives us a point of reference around which we can orient our
reality.
He called this point of reference the Axis Mundi, the axis of the world, the still point
around which everything else revolves.
Now, while this was used to establish towns and cities, Eliotti was also very aware that
there were nomadic people whose wandering lives prevented them from having any kind
of fixed center.
But he noted in the ethnography of various nomadic tribes that they frequently took something
like a sacred pole with them, and wherever they set up their camp, they set up this pole
and they then organized the camp around it.
And so he interpreted this as another instance of the Axis Mundi, only this time a portable
one, that helped the people to orient themselves in any new location into which they came.
He saw something in the evidence from some Australian tribes that he found very exciting.
It seemed to be a great confirmation of the essential nature of this world-orienting capacity
that these sacred poles had.
He said there was this Australian tribe that one day when they were out wandering, something
happened and their sacred pole got broken.
He said not knowing where they were in the world, not being able to orient themselves,
they lay down and died.
What a dramatic example of the importance of this religious symbol.
Later, one of his students, Jonathan Z. Smith, wondered if that story were true, and he went
back and rechecked the ethnographic data, and he found that in fact no such thing had
ever happened.
Eliotti had over read an account of a certain instance.
He said the people were a bit distressed by the rupture of their sacred pole, but they
certainly did not lay down and die, and they weren't even depressed for any great length
of time.
In the face of the publication of these findings, Eliotti was forced to recant this particular
story, although it remains in the re-editions of some of his earlier books.
If we look for another example at Emil Durkheim and his sociological theory of religion, we
find that he looked to the very same ethnography of Australian Aboriginal tribes to illustrate
his idea that the sacred and the symbols of the sacred are nothing more than society's
way of representing itself to itself in order to be able to think about itself as a collective
entity.
In his book, the elementary forms of religious life came out.
It was immediately criticized by a large number of anthropologists.
For example, the Dutch anthropologist Arnold van Genep went back and looked at the very
same ethnographic reports of these Australian tribes that Durkheim had been looking at,
and pointed out that the evidence was far more ambiguous than Durkheim had been willing
to say, and in fact there were places where the evidence could be read to show just the
opposite of Durkheim's theory.
It was also pointed out that most of his evidence came from one particular tribe in the north
of Australia whose patterns of life did not represent those of all the other tribes.
In fact, this was a rather exceptional tribe on the Australian scene.
And still other sociologists and anthropologists who had been reading Durkheim's previous
publications and had met him at conferences and had a chance to speak to him, pointed
out that the main outlines of his theory were in place long before he ever wrote his book.
So the theory was already there and in fact formed the framework, the grid through which
he looked at the data, and he used the theory therefore to shape the data, using the data
then to prove the theory rather than using the theory to interpret the data.
These are the dangers that we run into when we get overly invested in a particular kind
of theory.
Now for the remainder of this lecture and for the next lecture, what I want to do is
use four specific case studies to look at different aspects of religious studies theory
in order to test them and see their utility in helping us to come to terms with the religious
life of other people, to see how useful they actually are.
In the two case studies that we'll examine today, we will look at one aspect of religious
studies theory and that is theories of how one goes about collecting data.
In the two case studies that we'll examine in the subsequent lecture, we will then look
at how theory helps to interpret the data once it has been collected and compiled.
We have looked at several theories, particularly from sociology and anthropology, that have
to do with methods of observation and data collection.
A major component of the evolution of anthropology has been the changes in the way people went
about collecting the data and the way that they justified these methods of collection.
Frazier and Tyler, the Victorians, simply read stories and tales and reports from missionaries,
travelers, mercenaries, soldiers of fortune, colonial administrators, tourists and anybody
else who had been to an exotic locale and could bring back an account of how a ritual
had been conducted or how a myth was told.
The functionalists, starting with Bronislaw Malinowski, had insisted that the proper method
of data collection was to go into the field as a lone participant observer, learn the
local language and try to get a feel for the overall connections, structures and functions
of all the components of a people's lives.
That would be the religious and the non-religious altogether as a single system.
Finally, the symbolists had, again, gone into the field, but their task was to listen
more closely to native accounts and try to see how people organized the world by symbolizing
its various components and then relating those symbols to each other.
Now, theories of data collection are all very well, but I can tell you, from my own experience
without a shadow of a doubt, that actual field work and ethnography is a very human enterprise.
And the ethnographer is merely one actor in a drama that might include many other actors.
At the very least, the informants, the inhabitants of the area into which one goes, are going
to be people who are getting on with their own lives, have their own agendas and may see
the field worker in a particular way.
In addition, there may be other actors on the scene, such as colonial administrators
and garrisons of soldiers, who play their own role in the overall dynamic.
Theory is inadequate for entering into this kind of multi-actor drama.
And perhaps there is no anthropologist who illustrates this better than the French scholar
Marcel Grilleau.
Marcel Grilleau had his own theory of ethnography and data collection.
When he went into Africa in the 1930s and 1940s, tracing a path all the way across the
French colonial regions from Dakar to Djibouti, he took a special interest in the Dogon tribe,
who inhabited the area of what is now the Sudan.
Over the course of many, many years, he returned to this area several times.
When he first began his excursions into Africa, he had his own theory of native interaction
and data collection that really doesn't reflect anybody else's theory that we have seen so
far.
In fact, the chronicler of Grilleau's career, James Clifford, has said we might attend to
a French school or even a Grilleau school of data collection.
This included taking a team of ethnographers into an area, not the lone participant observer
of the British functionalist school.
You then were able to post people in various places so that when large-scale rituals took
place, you could observe it from several angles.
He also wanted to make full use of whatever technology was available.
He loved photography.
He liked to get the bird's eye view on things.
His goal was to have an airplane available so that he could do aerial reconnaissance
over the areas where the people lived that he was studying.
But what makes him the man that we love to hate in this post-colonial era of scholarship
is that he was perfectly happy to use his status as a representative of the dominant
colonial power to coerce the cooperation of the people that he was questioning.
For example, he openly admitted that the people that he was interviewing were in a lower
position of power in relation to him.
He would say, here in Africa, the black man cannot strike the white man, otherwise consequences
will ensue.
He spoke about using police interrogation techniques to interview his subjects, separating
people from each other, confronting people with contradictory evidence brought in from
other people, putting down an aerial photograph of the area and berating people, saying, you
told me there were only three sacred sanctuaries in this area, but I can see from this aerial
photograph that there are 10.
Now you had better tell me the truth.
He almost cackled, as he described, how he was going to make the old balkers cringe before
him, how they would yield up their secrets unwillingly, how he was going to use his power
to get their cooperation.
It makes for some fairly uncomfortable reading, but what is fascinating about his story is
the twist that took place after he had been in the field about 10 years off and on.
In contradiction to the theory of data collection that he had put forward, things had actually
been happening as he developed a relationship with the dogon.
It turns out that when he put down his aerial photographs in front of them, he wasn't just
showing them where he had discovered all of their secret religious sanctuaries.
He was also showing them where they could go to find water.
He was giving them a useful overview of the lay of their own land.
By learning their language and by getting to know a lot of the tribal elders and chieftains,
he also had become very useful to the dogon as an intermediary or a liaison with the French
colonial government.
Knowing that Grille could speak to the French colonists in a way that they couldn't, they
could present their case to him knowing that he would go back to the French and report
their concerns.
In other words, Grille, by his presence as a foreigner among them, had become useful
to them in ways that actually made them feel very friendly to him.
So in 1947 a remarkable event occurred.
Without Grille having asked for it, the tribal elders approached him and said, we've decided
that we can really trust you.
And so we are going to stop telling you these kindergarten stories that we tell our children
that you have been collecting as examples of our religion, and we're going to let you
talk to one of our elders who will initiate you into our deeper knowledge.
They then sent him over to a blind elder named Ogottamelli who began then to reveal to Grille
a deeply philosophical system which Grille later described as worthy of Plato.
The result was a book that came out in 1948 called Conversations with Ogottamelli.
Now at this point, according to James Clifford, a radical change occurred in Grille's approach
to the material.
Prior to 1947, his approach had been primarily documentary.
He wanted to film things, photograph things, get descriptions of rituals and other events,
and get it all documented and archived.
Now his task became exegetical.
Gone was the police interrogation technique, the attempt to use colonial power to dominate
his informants and coerce their cooperation, techniques which he now knew had gotten him
only the most meager results.
Now he was an initiate.
Now he was a student sitting at the feet of an elder teacher who was giving him the deeper
knowledge of the Dogon elders.
After that period, Grille came to identify himself with the Dogon in some very interesting
ways.
He spoke at UNESCO conferences, for example, and defended the Dogon against the depredations
of the colonial powers.
And in a very interesting twist, at times when he might be speaking to a European audience,
there might very well be Dogon sitting in the audience who had come to France to study
at French universities.
Occasionally, one of them might rise and question Grille about his interpretation of certain
Dogon myths.
At that point, Grille's response would be, you have become too Europeanized, but I have
been inducted, initiated into the deep knowledge of your people, and essentially claimed to
be a spokesman for the Dogon in a way that the Dogon themselves living in Europe could
not match.
Now what all this goes to show is that you might go into the field with a certain theory
about how to talk to people, how to document things, how to collect and systematize your
data.
But the people among whom you work are living human beings, and they will certainly have
their own agenda, which might impact on the work one actually does.
This has happened in my own experience.
When I was doing field work in a Buddhist temple in Taiwan, I had an opportunity at one
point to have an interview with the abbot.
Now as I was getting ready with the questions that I wanted to ask, which were all based
on my own graduate studies in Chinese Buddhism, I found that once I arrived, several of the
monks and nuns came up to me and had their own questions, and they said, you should ask
him this, you should ask him that.
So I dutifully took all these things down, and when the time came for the interview,
the abbot came out and I began asking my questions and the questions that the monks and nuns
had given me.
In asking those latter questions, it became quite clear very quickly that the abbot was
not at all happy at these questions I was asking.
But it wasn't until after the fact that I realized that within the hierarchical structure
of this monastery, there were certain questions that the monks and nuns were intensely curious
about, about the abbot's past, what he had been doing prior to his ordination as a monk.
But these questions were simply not proper for disciples to ask their master within
this social structure, but as a foreigner in their midst who was only going to be among
them temporarily and an outsider to their system, they could use me to ask the questions
of the abbot that they themselves were not allowed to ask.
In a sense, it didn't matter what my own theory of fieldwork might be, I had been drawn into
a political and social situation and I had become an actor in someone else's drama.
As a human enterprise, it really can't be any other way.
Our second case study about fieldwork and data collection comes from the work of the
anthropologist Richard K. Nelson, who in the 1970s and 1980s did a series of field studies
among the Eskimos and the Athabaskan natives of Northwestern Canada and Alaska.
In a series of field researches that he did, including a year-long stay among the Koyakon
Athabaskans who live in the towns of Hoslia and Hughes, around the 63rd and 64th parallel
latitudes, he attempted to integrate himself into their society, learn their language,
and to find out as much about their worldview as he possibly could.
Now his situation in approaching the Koyakon was very different from that of Gryol among
the Dogon.
For one thing, he certainly did not have colonial powers backing him up.
The towns of Hoslia and Hughes were very isolated.
He describes having to walk and drive a dog sled for a hundred miles just to reach them.
He had nobody else from his own culture to back him up if any power imbalance occurred.
He had to actually adopt the people's lifestyle, and he complains at one point that much of
his own efforts at doing field work and taking notes was hampered by the fact that just to
survive he had to do all his own hunting and fishing, which were very time-consuming activities.
So once he got there, he simply could not play the hand that Gryol had tried to play.
I doubt that he would have wanted to even if he could.
So he starts from the point that Gryol adopted in 1947 after his conversations with Ogletameli.
He presents himself to the people of Hoslia and Hughes as a student, and in fact he doesn't
even use the word informants to talk about the people with whom he had contact.
He always refers to them as my teachers.
He learns from them at the rate that they are willing to teach him.
He tries very hard to work in their local language, even though most of them can speak
English.
And he tries to maintain a sense of humility that his own knowledge of their culture will
always be in a sense an outsider's knowledge and will always be very incomplete.
He is also quite upfront that he does bring certain methodological desiderata into his
work.
He says, for example, that he decided upfront that he was not going to report on any of
the negative aspects of Coyacan culture.
So even though there were some very bad people in the places where he lived and worked, he
simply omitted them from the study, being fully aware of the danger of presenting an
overly idealized picture of these people.
He also chose not to report on some of the more negative aspects of his experience there,
the bitter cold, the need to support himself by his own hunting and fishing, the hostility
he encountered from some of the younger people, and other problems.
The result of all this is what James Clifford would describe as an exegetical take on the
Coyacan.
In other words, it's not so much documentary as an attempt to interpret for a Euro-American
Western audience a worldview and a way of relating to nature that might be very foreign.
In order to do this, he was well aware of the fact that he needed to become as self-aware
as he possibly could.
He needed to allow the Coyacan material to challenge his own view in order to reveal
some of the deeper presuppositions that underlay the Coyacan view of the Northern Forest.
Here are some of the results that he came up with by using this method.
The Coyacan, in Nelson's account, are classic animists of a form that maybe the Victorian
anthropologists Frazier and Tyler would have recognized immediately.
They believed that the world was inhabited by spirits.
They believed that there was, for example, a spirit of the bear, a spirit of the marmot,
a spirit of the crane, even a spirit of the weasels and smaller animals that didn't really
form part of their own food economy.
They believed that these spirits pervaded the world and were omnipresent.
They believed that these spirits understood human speech and would respond to things that
people said.
As subsistence hunters and fishers, their lives were very dependent upon what we in
the West would call luck.
Now while they used the English word luck, what they meant by it was something non-random.
Luck for them was something that the spirits of the animals could either grant or withhold.
And so it was vitally important to pay attention to the kinds of things that would influence
an animal's willingness to either grant one luck or would incite them to take it away.
Out of this was born a whole series of taboos, constraints both on the way people acted and
on the words that they said.
It was very bad to brag about one's ability in hunting.
If one had taken a bear during the winter season of den hunting, then the spirit of
the bear might well hear what they had to say and decide to take their luck in bear
hunting away from them.
When this happened, then years might pass without any bears being taken at all.
Then inanimate objects could be infused with luck.
A person's mittens, a rifle, a fishing pole, any of these items could also be infused with
luck and this was a quality that could be taken from these things.
If for example, one loaned mittens to a fellow hunter or loaned a particularly lucky rifle,
then that person might actually take your luck away from you and you would lose all
the benefit of it.
Some of the actions that were forbidden had to do with the lives of women.
Women were seen as having a particularly problematic relation with nature and in particular with
the subsistence animals that they hunted for their living.
So if a menstruating woman stepped over one's rifle, the luck would leave the rifle and one
would not have any good luck in hunting and this could be a real threat in the pursuit
of one's livelihood.
So in many and various ways, Nelson lays out a view of the world very different from the
western rationalist view.
It's a world where animals and humans are not separated from one another.
Animals derive from humanoid beings in the distant time and so they are very much like
us.
They relate to us, they understand us and they can either cooperate with us in allowing
us to hunt them successfully or they can withdraw luck and threaten the livelihood of whole
families by not making themselves available for capture.
Now for all this openness to learn from the natives, there are still some very obvious
constraints on the way that Nelson went about his data collection.
We've seen some of them already.
He was very unwilling to report anything negative about the Koyakon people or about his experiences
with them.
But leaving that aside, let's bring the women's studies critique back into the picture for
a moment.
In reading Nelson's book, we do find that as a lone male ethnographer working among
the people, it is questionable that he had access to women in a way that would allow
him to get their side of the picture.
For example, in reading his book, we have both men and women saying, oh yes, it's very
bad luck for a menstruating woman to step over a man's rifle.
But what we don't hear is how the women interpret that symbolically and how they incorporate
that into their own overall worldview.
We are simply told straight up that the Koyakon believe that women can cause more bad luck
and therefore must have more constraints placed on their behavior in their speech and must
observe many more taboos than men.
But is it really so?
We really don't know because he never gives us any indication that he asked the women
what they thought about this and how they interpreted their own role in nature.
So even though we might feel more sympathetic to Nelson's approach than we would to Gryol,
what we do need to acknowledge is that field work is a human enterprise.
You are going to be interacting with a group of local people and part of what determines
the data that you will collect will be their own willingness to share things with you and
the use that they might want to make of you as an outsider who now is moving in their
own political and social circles and might be very useful in a number of ways.
Ironically, it is Gryol who calls our attention to this in a more explicit way than any other
anthropologist, sociologist, or psychologist that we have considered.
Perhaps it was Gryol's own theatricality and flair for self-promotion, but he is the
one who made it quite obvious that the field worker is a player among other players and
that the ideal of being a fly on the wall whose presence does not disturb the data in
any way is simply an ethnographic fiction that will never play out in the realities
of field work and ethnography.
