Greetings and welcome to the Teaching Company's Algebra 1 course.
My name is James Sellers and I'll be your Algebra 1 instructor.
My hope is that you find this course challenging, enlightening, and enjoyable.
As we begin this course together in today's lesson, I'd like to do a number of things.
I'd like to introduce myself to you, I'd like to introduce you to the general topics and
themes for this course so you have a feel for the mathematics we're going to look at.
I'd like to share a number of other thoughts about things like graphing calculators and
how to use the materials in this course.
And then I'd like to start our mathematical conversation with a review of sign numbers
and operations.
I think it's important that we actually do at least a little bit of mathematics together
today.
So, let me begin by sharing a few details about me.
I received my PhD in mathematics from the Pennsylvania State University, which is otherwise
known as Penn State University, in 1992.
I also met my wife, Mary, while we were both students at Penn State.
We actually got married while we were there.
And in 1992, I began to teach at a school called Cedarville College.
It's actually called Cedarville University now in Ohio.
I stayed there until 2001 when I came back to Penn State.
And I'm now there at Penn State as the Director of Undergraduate Mathematics.
I've been so since 2001.
Mary and I have five kids.
Two of them are in high school, two of them are in middle school, and one is in elementary
school at this time.
We've homeschooled our children for many years.
Now some of them are what we call dual enrolled, which means they do homeschool part of the
time and they do their local school, their public school, part of the time as well.
And we've really enjoyed the experience of being able to homeschool our kids, but we've
also enjoyed seeing them go into the schools and enjoy the classes they take there as well
as their extracurricular activities as well.
I love teaching.
I've been doing it for a long time.
And I hope that as we go through this course together, you'll notice that I love to teach.
And my hope is that as we work through the material together, that love for teaching
this material will translate into at least an enjoyment for you of the material.
Maybe not a love, but how about a strong liking of the material for you?
I've also had the privilege of writing secondary level textbooks in mathematics for a variety
of publishers.
Probably the best known one is Saxon Publishers.
Now that's enough about me.
I'd like to start talking about this course, this algebra one course, and what it is we're
going to do together as we walk through the course.
Basically the course is going to include a number of topics from what you might think
of as a traditional high school algebra one course.
But it's important that you notice that it can't cover all the topics that would be covered
in one year of algebra one at a high school.
After all, we really only have about 18 hours of lecture time together.
So the course is going to cover a lot of topics that you would see in that traditional algebra
one year at a school, but it's not going to be able to cover everything, at least not
in the depth that you would see at such a school.
But it will cover a lot of general topics that you would see.
And I'd like to tell you what those are going to be at this time.
First of all, we're going to spend a few lessons talking about some pre-algebra basics.
Things like order of operations, decimals, percents, variables, operations on algebraic
expressions, especially when exponents are involved, and the principles of graphing
in the Cartesian plane.
I think it's very important that we take a few lessons together just to make sure that
those pieces of information are nailed down so that when we move on to the algebra material,
you're ready to go.
So we'll spend a few lessons on that kind of material.
And then we'll transition to what is probably one of the best known topics of any algebra
one course.
And that's linear equations, linear functions, and graphs of linear functions, which of course
are lines.
That's where the word linear comes from.
And that really will be a major part of this course.
And we'll spend a lot of time talking from different angles about linear equations and
their graphs.
Then we'll transition a bit, and we'll talk about quadratic polynomials, quadratic functions.
Now, it sounds like some big words, it sounds like some scary words, but all it means is
that we'll be looking at polynomials or functions of the form ax squared plus bx plus c, where
a, b, and c are just some numbers.
So something like 7x squared plus 5x plus 2.
And we'll talk about solving equations that have those kinds of terms in them, and also
graphing what those look like as well.
And they look very different from lines.
They're very, very cool.
So we'll talk about quadratics after we talk about the material on linear equations.
And then from there, we'll talk about polynomials in general, which are basically just an extension
of talking about the linear and the quadratic material.
So we'll just kind of take that a little further.
And then we'll move on to something called rational expressions, rational functions.
And all a rational expression is, is a ratio, so first five letters of rational, ratio of
two functions, which are polynomials.
So that's kind of a natural progression after we've talked about these polynomials.
We'll talk about these ratios of polynomials, which are called rational expressions.
And we'll talk about their graphs as well.
And then we'll talk about radical expressions or radical functions.
And radical really just refers to roots, most particularly square roots.
We'll talk about what functions look like when you have square roots involved.
And we'll look at their graphs as well.
And we'll look at solving equations with square roots in them and so on.
And then at the end of our course, we'll shift gears pretty dramatically.
And we'll talk about sequences and pattern recognition.
And this is basically just looking at lists of numbers and trying to see if we can pick
out the pattern which was used to build that list of numbers.
It'll be a nice way to close out our course together.
Now, within each of the general topics that I just mentioned, like linear stuff and
quadratic material and so on, we're going to concentrate on several strands or
themes that will really go throughout the course.
So we'll see these same sorts of themes popping up every time we introduce a new
basic topic.
So here are what these strands or themes are going to look like.
First of all, I'm going to emphasize every time we come to a new set of material that
we need to master the basics.
I'm going to try to highlight why it is we're studying this.
What are the key ideas, the key concepts, the key rules?
And in fact, I'll even point out while we're mastering these basics, what are the key things
you've got to watch for as you do this material?
What are some of the pitfalls or the errors that are common when students are learning
this material?
So we'll really try to nail things down in not so much in the theoretical sense, but
in the sense that we can understand the bigger picture as we're walking through these
materials.
I'll also focus a lot on visualizing the graphs of each of these kinds of functions.
I think it's very important, especially if you're a visual learner, that you see what
the algebra looks like.
Often people think that algebra is just about manipulating symbols, moving X's and Y's
around on a piece of paper.
Well, there is a part of algebra that is all about manipulating symbols and solving
equations and so on.
That's very important, and I will emphasize that as we go through the course.
But I also want to emphasize this visual idea.
So we'll talk about graphs a lot, and we'll work through a lot of graphs, in fact, by
the time this course is over.
I'm also going to try to emphasize real-world examples and applying algebra to real-world
examples throughout the course.
So again, it's not just going to be one lesson on real-world examples.
We'll mention real-world examples over and over as we walk through this course.
And I think it's very important that you and I learn how to translate word problems, which
always seem to scare students in mathematics.
We need to be able to translate word problems into algebra and then use algebra to solve
those.
So we'll try to spend time over and over again looking at real-world problems or what some
people would call word problems.
Then one other strand that we'll look at in this course as we walk through the course
together is we'll try to do some critical thinking as we're dealing with the solutions
that we come up with.
You know, often in math, you get an answer to a problem, and then you don't know really
what to do with that or you just kind of move on to the next problem or maybe some homework
in a different course.
But it's very important once you get a solution or you get an answer to think critically, even
if it's just for a few seconds, does that answer make sense?
If the problem asked for someone's age and we come up with an answer of negative 12 years,
well that doesn't make a whole lot of sense.
So we're going to want to critically think about answers to especially word problems
to make sure we haven't done something silly, something wrong in our calculations.
So that'll be another strand as we walk through this course together.
Now we're starting out with this Algebra I course when our first lesson, I think it's
important to actually try to answer the why question.
That is, why should I study Algebra or why is Algebra important really?
Well, I'm going to give you several answers to that question.
I think it's good to hear these answers.
Maybe one of them will be one that you really like.
Maybe all of them will be answers you really like.
But I think it's important to see the answers to why Algebra is important from a lot of
different angles.
So first of all, the first year of high school Algebra is the prerequisite or the math course
that you need to take before you take lots of other higher level math courses, whether
it be Algebra II, whose name implies that you need Algebra I first, or it be Geometry
or Trigonometry or even Calculus.
According to several studies that have been conducted in recent years, students who master
Algebra I, Geometry and Algebra II in high school are much more likely to succeed in
college level math.
In fact, they're much more likely to succeed in college in general.
So it's very important that we lay a strong foundation in the Algebra I course and that's
what we're going to do together as we walk through this course.
But why is Algebra important in its own right?
I mean, the answer I just gave you is really more about a bigger picture of a student wanting
to be successful later on in high school or maybe even in college.
But why is Algebra important?
Well, I could actually share a lot of answers.
First of all, Algebra is important just in problem solving situations.
To be able to go from just arithmetic where you add up numbers or subtract numbers, multiply
numbers and move to equations that have variables in them, that allows us to solve lots of real
world word problems.
So that abstraction, to use a big word, allows us to move into these kinds of problems.
And these real world problems cross over many different disciplines.
In fact, Algebra underlies all the technology that we enjoy and it's needed in all of the
sciences.
Imagine all the formulas that you've probably seen in classes like physics, biology and
chemistry.
A lot of those are based on Algebra and we would need that Algebra then to go study these
other sciences.
But let me try to speak more practically about this question of why Algebra can be useful
or why it's important.
Take the fairly well-known equation D equals RT, D equals R times T. Where D is distance,
R is rate and T is time.
You may not have known it as D equals RT, but I can almost be certain that many of you,
most of you, maybe all of you have used this equation sometime in your life.
It can be used in a variety of circumstances to determine unknown quantities.
For example, let's say I'm driving for 5 hours at a rate of 60 miles per hour.
That means T equals 5 and R equals 60.
I can substitute those numbers in.
And the question is, how many miles will I drive?
Well, the answer is simple.
If I use D equals R times T, I'm going to drive D equals 60 for R times 5 for T and 60
times 5 is 300 miles.
It's that simple.
We know that by the end of that trip, I will have driven 300 miles.
Now okay, that was a really simple example, but I just used Algebra to solve that problem
because I used that equation D equals RT.
In fact, if we had been given any two pieces of information, D and R or D and T or R and
T, we could have solved for or figured out the other or third quantity.
We would have used some Algebra to do so.
And that's just one little example.
Let me give you some other examples where you really could use some Algebra even if
you didn't realize that that's what you were doing.
So let me give you a few examples.
Let's say you're out one Saturday night and you want to stop at your favorite fast food
place and buy some food and a drink, okay?
But you realize that you have almost no money.
In fact, you're scrounging through your car for change just to get enough money to buy
something.
You know that there's a certain classmate of yours, pretty cute classmate, in fact,
who's working at that restaurant tonight.
And to be honest, that's probably really your motivation for stopping, but you don't want
to be completely embarrassed that you don't have enough money in your hand to order exactly
the food you want.
In other words, you don't want to order too much food and then not be able to pay for
it.
And you also remember that there's some sales tax that's going to be added to your meal
cost.
So you're staring up at this menu trying to keep all of that in mind.
Can I buy that burger?
Can I get some fries with it, a large drink instead of a small drink?
And you've got to keep in mind that all you have in your hand is maybe $3 in change that
you scrounged out of your car, and you know that there's sales tax of 6%.
How much stuff can you order so that you don't overspend and embarrass yourself in front
of this really cute classmate?
Well, guess what?
You could actually write down an algebraic equation to tell you how much money you could
spend on the food up on the menu in order to make sure you keep everything below $3
once the sales tax is added in.
That would actually be algebra.
You may not think of it that way, but it really would be algebra because of the equation
that you'd be using.
Here's another example.
Your school, actually my children's schools, the middle school and the high school that
they attend, they give four grades at the end of each of the four marking periods.
In other words, they cut the year into four big segments, and at the end of each of those
four marking periods, my kids get a grade, let's say a grade in math and a grade in science
and a grade in history and so on.
Now let's say that you've made a deal with your parents that you get a new cool thing,
maybe a new iPod or a new cell phone or a new something as long as your end of the course
grade in math is an A. We all want grades of A in math.
I hope we do anyway.
And your end of course grade, in other words, the year end grade in math is exactly the
average of the four grades that you're going to get, one at the end of each marking period.
So let's say you're coming towards the end of the school year and you've got a 92 at
the end of the first marking period in math, and in math at the end of the second marking
period you had an 89, and then you had a 95 at the end of the third marking period.
Now you've made this deal that as long as the average of those four grades at the end
of the four marking periods or at least an A, you'll get this nice thing, whatever it
is.
Here's the question, once the smallest grade you can get at the end of the fourth marking
period to guarantee that you get an A for the whole course, well you could actually
write down an equation to answer this question and you'd solve it using a little bit of algebra.
Oh, you're just doing an average basically, but there's an equation that we could write
down easily to solve that and to answer the question, that would be algebra.
What about this?
You're working over the summer for a carpenter and tomorrow you're going to go to some work
at a new house that's being built.
And you have to make sure that the carpenter's ladder, let's say it's 10 feet long, will
fit into a certain space so that you can reach the top of an 8 foot wall, but at the same
time, not go out too far from the base of the wall because the space is actually in
a small hallway.
How far out from the base of the wall will you need to place the foot of the ladder so
that you get up against the wall just right?
Well, to answer that, you would actually use a very well-known formula which is known as
the Pythagorean theorem and it turns out that it's a quadratic equation.
I mentioned we're going to study quadratics in this course.
That would be algebra to figure out whether you could really put that ladder in that hallway
for the carpenter to keep on doing that work on that house.
And lastly, let's say you like to build rockets or just on a personal note, my boys like to
build something called potato cannons.
In fact, we have at least two different potato cannons at our house right now.
They're very cool contraptions, by the way.
Now let's say you're going to fire off one of these rockets or potato cannons straight
into the air right above your head and you're going to have this rocket then, or maybe a
potato, going up in the air vertically.
If you ignored any sort of wind resistance or any effect from the wind, here's a question.
How long would you have before the rocket, or maybe the potato, comes straight back down
and hits you in the head?
Or another question, how high will the object go in the air?
It's good to know how long it's going to take before it comes back down because it tells
you how long you've got to move out of the way.
Figuring out the answers to these kinds of questions involves algebra.
Well, also, what if you took this thing and fired it at an angle instead of straightening
the air, you sort of fired it out at some angle.
And you want to make sure that you're not going to actually hit your neighbor's house
in doing so.
Figuring out how far that rocket, or potato, or other projectile would go is all about
algebra.
You'd use some formulas, in fact, to figure out the answers.
And there's lots of other formulas in algebra that we often use.
Think about this.
A equals pi r squared.
I bet many of you know that that's the area of a circle with radius r.
And there's others.
Things like v equals pi r cubed, which is the volume of a sphere of radius r, or v equals
pi r squared h, where v is the volume of a cylinder, and the radius of the cylinder is
r, and the height of the cylinder is h.
Or things like c equals 2.54i, which helps you convert from inches to centimeters.
There are tons more of these equations out there.
And they're all about algebra.
And you know, without algebra, there would be no calculus.
And without calculus, much of what is done in physics and all sorts of areas of engineering
could not be done.
Whether it's designing machinery or designing electrical circuits, you wouldn't be able
to do it without calculus.
And therefore, you wouldn't be able to do it without algebra.
Well, you probably have lots of questions that we should ask and answer before we begin
really doing the math together.
So let me try to talk about some of those now.
Let me just ask a few questions that might be on your mind.
First of all, will this course require a certain calculator?
Well, I'd like to actually answer that question first by sharing a little bit of my view on
calculators in general.
I believe calculators can be useful.
But unfortunately, I think some students sometimes use them too much.
They rely on them too much to do basic calculations.
And because of this, I'm not going to focus on using calculators every time we're doing
every calculation and every lesson.
We will use one from time to time, and especially later on in the course, when we're doing
square roots and so on, I'll suggest that you pull out a calculator.
But it's not going to be a critical part of this course.
And I'm definitely not going to suggest any one particular brand or style of calculator.
So if you already have one, feel free to use it.
But please don't rely on it too much.
It's important that we be able to do some arithmetic in our heads and not just use a
calculator.
And while I'm talking about tools that we need for this course, let me point out right
now that we're going to use graph paper a lot.
I talked about how we're going to visualize the graphs.
You're going to want to sketch graphs using graph paper quite often.
And so if you don't have any graph paper yet, you might want to grab some before we
get on to some of the later lessons in this course.
OK, next question that might come to your mind.
What's the textbook for this course?
Well, that's a good question.
I don't actually have a particular textbook to suggest to you for this course.
There are lots of Algebra 1 textbooks on the market, and I'd encourage you to supplement
the work in this course with that kind of a text.
Or maybe you're in a course already in your high school, for example, that has a book.
Fine.
We're going to get a different book for our work together in this course.
The workbook that will accompany these lectures is meant to serve as a beginning guide, and
I'd strongly encourage you to use it.
But otherwise, don't go get a book just for our course here.
OK, how about this question?
How should I use the workbook with the DVDs?
And I think that's a good question.
Knowing how to use the DVDs and the workbook that have come to you is very, very useful.
I would suggest that every time you prepare to do a new lesson, that you briefly read
over the material in the workbook before you watch the lesson.
I would then go back to the workbook and reread that material a second time after you watch
the lesson, and then work through the exercises for that lesson that are there at the end
of the section of the workbook.
So read the workbook briefly first, watch the lesson on DVD, go back to the workbook
a second time, look over that material again, and then look at the exercises for that lesson
and complete them at that time.
By the way, while you're watching the lesson, if you'd like more of a challenge, you might
want to actually pause a lesson at some point and try to finish one or two of the examples
that I share with you before I show you how to do them.
I will walk through every example step by step, but if you'd just like to see if you're ahead
of me at that point, you might pause the DVD, you might do the example yourself, and then
turn the DVD back on and watch me go through the example.
It'd be a great way to confirm that you understand the material if you and I end up with the
same answer.
Okay, I think it's important for us to do at least a little bit of mathematics together
before we close this lesson today.
So I'd like to talk briefly with you about signed numbers and operations with signed
numbers.
And I hope this is really review for you, but if not, you may want to spend more time
on this topic on your own before you move into the next lesson in this Algebra I course.
So what do I mean by signed numbers?
Well, let's start by remembering the set of integers.
The set of integers or whole numbers is the set of natural numbers or counting numbers,
one, two, three, four, five, and so on, combined with their negative counterparts, negative
one, negative two, negative three, negative four, negative five, and so on.
And then the special number zero, which we often write in between the first two sets
that I mentioned, one of the easiest ways to visualize the set of counting numbers are
actually the set of integers is via a number line.
And you may have seen a number line before.
I hope you have.
So you can write your number line with zero in the middle and then the positive integers
one, two, three, four, five to its right, and then negative one, negative two, negative
three, negative four, negative five to the left.
And from the number line, we can see how the numbers relate in terms of size, relative
size with one another.
We know from previous experience, for example, that three is less than seven.
Well you know three is less than seven anyway.
If I've got three apples and you've got seven apples, then I have fewer apples than you.
But three is less than seven because on the number line, three is to the left of seven.
So actually that's how we might define three being less than seven.
So zero is less than five because zero is to the left of five on the number line.
And negative four is less than three because negative four is to the left of three on the
number line.
I realize that four is bigger than three, but negative four is less than three because
the negative four is on the left of three.
And that reminds us then of a function called the absolute value of a number.
It's often denoted with two small vertical lines around the number.
And one way to think of the absolute value is that it's simply the distance from the
number you're looking at to the origin, the origin being the zero on the number line.
So for example, absolute value of three is three because three is exactly three units
from the zero.
Absolute value of zero is zero because zero is zero units from the origin.
It doesn't move anywhere to get to itself.
And the absolute value of negative four is four because negative four is four units away
from the origin from zero.
So there we see a way to look at absolute values using signed numbers.
And from here, we can ask several things.
For example, how do you add signed numbers and how do you multiply two signed numbers?
Well, hopefully you've seen this before, but I just want to remind you of it because we
will be doing it a lot throughout the course.
First of all, the addition of two signed numbers, I think, is best described on a number line.
For example, what if you wanted to find four plus negative three?
Well, if you're doing that with a number line, you start at the four on the number line,
and then you want to add negative three units.
Adding negative three units means you want to move to the left three units.
So from the four, you come backwards or to the left three units.
Where are you now?
Well, you're on one.
And therefore, four plus negative three is one.
That's actually a way to define how to add signed numbers using this number line.
Let's try a second example.
What if you wanted to do negative five plus eight?
Well now you want to start on the number line at negative five, and you want to add eight
units.
So now you're going to move to the right eight units.
And when you do so, moving eight units over, you're going to land at three, positive three.
And so negative five plus eight is three.
Let's try one more.
What if you wanted to do negative six plus two?
Well, again, on the number line, you start at negative six, and now you want to add two
units.
So I'm at negative six, I'm going to move to the right two units because I'm adding
two.
And if I do that, I go from negative six to negative five, and then negative four.
And so, since that's my last number I've landed on, negative six plus two is negative
four.
And that's a way to see how to add and subtract signed numbers using a number line.
Well, what if you wanted to do multiplication and division?
Turns out with signed numbers, multiplication and division are even easier.
Here's the rule.
If the two signs of the numbers you're looking at are the same, then the outcome is going
to be positive.
But if the signs are different, then the outcome will be negative.
That's it.
That's the whole rule.
So let's do a few examples.
Four times three, we already know is 12, but that's the product of or the multiplication
of two positive numbers.
The answer comes out to be positive 12.
What if you do negative four times negative five?
Well, four times five is 20, but will the sign of the answer be positive or negative?
Well, since I'm multiplying a negative with a negative, the rule says that since the signs
are the same, the answer is positive.
So negative four times negative five is positive 20.
What about negative two times seven?
Well, two times seven is 14, but will the final answer be positive or negative?
Well, I have a negative number, negative two, being multiplied with a positive number, positive
seven.
When I have two different signs being multiplied together that way, the answer is negative every
time.
So negative two times seven is negative 14.
What about some division?
Let's try a few divisions.
What about negative six divided by negative three?
Well, six divided by three is two.
So the answer is going to be something like two, but is it positive two or is it negative
two?
Well, negative six divided by negative three, I've got the same signs on top and bottom,
and therefore the final answer is positive.
So the answer is going to be positive two.
What if I had something like 42 divided by negative seven?
Well, 42 divided by seven is six, that much we know, but now is it positive or negative
six?
42 on top is positive, negative seven on bottom is negative, different signs on top and bottom,
and therefore the final answer is negative, and so I get an answer of negative six.
And these are just some of the basics in which we'll build as we move through this Algebra
I course together.
There will be some other things that we'll talk about in terms of arithmetic basics that
we'll have to walk through, maybe things involving fractions, for example, operations on fractions.
You may have seen how to add and subtract, multiply and divide fractions in the past.
And we'll also talk about a lot of other small things with arithmetic, which is what we've
been doing here, adding, subtracting, multiplying, dividing numbers, but we'll use those, we'll
see those as we march through the lessons together.
I just wanted today to sort of get our feet wet and do at least a little bit of mathematics
today before we closed out our lesson.
Well, in today's lesson, we've talked about a number of things with regard to this course.
We've talked about the basic structure of the course, my philosophy on the Algebra I
course, and we've started our mathematical walk together with the discussion of signed
numbers and operations on signed numbers.
Next time, we're going to talk about order of operations, including powers and parentheses.
I look forward to seeing you then.
