As we prepare for our study of algebra, it's extremely important to understand some basic
facts about order of operations.
In today's examples, I'll focus on some challenges with order of operations in arithmetic, adding
subtracting, multiplying and dividing numbers as well as raising numbers to various powers.
These concepts will also be important when we begin to simplify algebraic expressions
later on.
So let's get started with an example which you might not consider an order of operations
problem but which is, in my opinion, very important.
So here's the example.
I want us to compute 7 plus 2 plus 5 plus 3 plus 5 plus 9 plus 8.
Now on the face of it, this looks straightforward enough, especially since the only operation
involved is addition.
One way to complete this problem is to simply start at the left with the 7 and then add
that to 2 and then add in the 5 and so on.
Then here's what we would have then.
7 plus 2 is 9 and then 9 plus 5 is 14, 14 plus 3 then would be 17, 17 plus the 5 would
be 22, 22 plus the 9 would be 31 and finally 31 plus 8 would be 39.
And that would be our final sum, 39.
And that's the right answer.
But I believe there's a second way to complete this problem which is just as appropriate.
And this approach relies on the fact that when you're adding or summing a long list
of numbers, the order in which you sum them does not matter.
Now it's very important to understand that this is not true for other operations like
subtraction or division.
But it is true for addition.
The order in which you add the terms does not matter.
So I'd like to suggest an alternate way to solve this problem and here's how.
Notice that there's a 7 and a 3 in the original sum.
I would suggest that we choose those two numbers and add them together to give us 10.
Then there's also a 5 and a 5 and I'd like to add those two together as well to give
us another 10.
And then the 2 plus the 8, if we choose to put those two together, we'll also get 10.
And of course adding to 10 is a pretty natural thing to do.
So our original problem could be seen as the following.
Take the 7 plus the 3 and group them together with a pair of parentheses mostly so that
we can just see that we've grouped them together and then do the same thing with the 2 plus
the 8 and the same thing with the 5 plus the 5.
At that point then we'll have 10 plus 10 plus 10 plus 9 and that's easily summed.
It's equal to 39.
In my opinion that's much simpler.
Maybe you'll find the first way of doing the problem just as easy.
That's fine.
You can do it that way.
But I think watching for those kinds of clues, hints to make the arithmetic easier on us
is a very wise thing to do.
As I said a moment ago, the trick doesn't work for subtraction and so I'd like to show
you an example which proves that.
So let's compute the following.
I'd like to take 10 minus 5 minus 3.
Now here's the right way to do it.
It's always good to try to do the right way first just to make sure it makes sense.
The right way is just to go left to right starting on the left with the 10 and moving
to the 5 and then the 3.
So that would be the following.
10 minus the 5, I'm going to put those in parentheses just so I can see that first.
10 minus 5 is just 5.
And now I would subtract the 3 from the 5 and I would have 5 minus 3 which is 2.
In fact, we could even see that on a number line.
So I'd like to do that now just so you can see how these positive and negative numbers
interact on the number line.
10 minus 5 minus 3 would be the following.
You draw your number line and you start at the 10, positive 10, which would be on your
number line.
10 minus 5 means that you want to move to the left 5 units.
So you start at 10 and you go 9, 8, 7, 6, 5.
Now you want to subtract 3 more, which means you want to move to the left again 3 more
units and you would get 4, 3 and 2.
And that is the correct answer, which is excellent.
So 10 minus 5 minus 3 is 2.
Now let me show you the wrong way or a wrong way to do this problem to illustrate order
of operations.
I could have grouped the 5 minus 3 on the end of the expression first and done 10 minus
the quantity 5 minus 3.
And that would have given me 10 minus 2 and of course that's 8.
Well obviously that's wrong.
The right answer is 2.
So we have to be careful when we're dealing with operations like subtraction and in fact
division as well.
The moral of the story is when you're adding and subtracting numbers, when there's some
mixing of the operations going on, go left to right.
It's the safest way to complete those problems.
Well let's try another example where there's a lot of mixing between addition and subtraction.
So let's do the following.
Let's take 10 plus 7 minus 5 plus 3 minus 18 plus 25.
Lots of mixing between the additions and the subtractions.
That's excellent.
With all of that mixing thrown in, we would be very wise now to simply start at the left
and move our way to the right.
So here we go.
We start at the 10 and we add the 7, we get 17.
And 17 minus the 5 is equal to 12.
12 then added to the next number which is 3 is 15, 15 minus 18.
That's negative 3 and then negative 3 plus 25 is equal to 22.
The right answer is 22.
Now you might have stopped and said, I think I'm safe to do the arithmetic just a little
bit differently.
And you might have said to yourself, OK, I could have started with the 10 added to
the 7, added to the 3, added to the 25.
So basically all of the positive numbers there added together.
That would have given us 45 if you add 10 plus 7 plus 3 plus 25.
Then from there with your 45, you could have subtracted the 5 to get 40 and then you could
do 40 minus 18 to get 22.
And that works.
The final answer here was 22, but I just want to warn you that when the problems get more
complicated later, when there are different operations floating around besides addition
and subtraction, you're going to want to be careful about the order in which you perform
your calculations.
OK, so we've seen some addition and subtraction in action.
What other operations are there?
Well, the next ones that come to my mind are multiplication and division.
So I'd like to look now at some examples that have some multiplication and division mixed
in.
Let's start with just a multiplication problem.
Let's just compute 3 times 4 times 5 times 5.
So I'm just multiplying 3 times 4 times 5 times 5.
Notice it's all multiplication.
And an interesting property of multiplication is that just as with addition, it doesn't
matter what order you multiply the numbers together.
So just like addition, I can do the multiplication in any order I want.
So I'm going to choose the following.
First I'm going to take the 4 and multiply it with the 5 and I'm going to get 20.
And that's easy enough.
And then 20 times the other 5 is 100.
That's also pretty straightforward.
And that leaves me multiplying 3 times 100, and the final answer then is 300.
Now you might wonder why I chose the 4 times the 5 as opposed to doing the 3 times the
4 first.
Well, the answer in my mind is pretty simple.
I chose 4 times 5 first because it equals 20 and that ends in a 0.
And of course, once you're multiplying numbers that end in 0, their products are pretty easy
to take because you just keep tacking zeros on at the end.
Well we could have multiplied that problem from left to right, and it would have been
fine.
Let's do that real quickly to make sure we've got the right answer.
I would take from left to right 3 times the 4, and if I group those with parentheses,
I can see that first I'll have a 12.
So now I have 12 times 5 times 5.
And now I could just take the 12 with the 5 and multiply those together.
12 times 5 is 60, and that leaves me 60 times 5, and that of course is equal to 300.
Well, that was our right answer.
So that works perfectly well.
But I just wanted to show you that with multiplication and only multiplication involved, you could
reorder the terms.
I think it's very important to watch for that as we move forward in this course.
Any time you can simplify your work in a legal way, from a mathematical perspective,
you should do so.
And with addition and multiplication, you can.
OK, so let's move to another example now that mixes multiplication and division.
So here's the problem.
I want to compute 7 times 4 divided by 2 times 3 divided by 6.
Now this has got a mix of multiplication and division throughout, and as with the example
we did with the addition and subtraction mix, we have to be very careful here.
And so the safest bet is just to go from left to right in this problem.
So that's what I'm going to do here.
Let's walk through the steps together to see what our final answer is going to be.
So we started with 7 times 4 divided by 2 times 3 divided by 6.
I'm going to group the 7 times 4 on the left with some parentheses.
Again, I'm just trying to identify that that's what I want to work on first.
And 7 times 4 is 28.
So now I have 28 divided by 2 times 3 divided by 6.
Now moving left to right some more, I'm going to take the 28 divided by 2 and work on it
next, and 28 divided by 2 is 14.
But now I have 14 times 3 divided by 6.
Again, we're just walking left to right through the problem.
And now I have 14 times 3 divided by 6, 14 times 3 is 42, and now I need to divide that
by 6, 42 divided by 6 is 7.
And that would be our final answer.
Well so far so good.
Let's try a bit more complicated problem now and look at an example where we mix a
addition, subtractions, multiplications, and divisions.
And the question we need to ask is, which operations get to go first?
So for example, let's say you were doing 10 divided by 2 minus 3 times 5 plus 7 times
2.
That's a pretty complicated mixture of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division.
So the question we need to ask ourselves is, do we just start on the left and work our
way to the right?
And the answer is definitely no.
So here's a rule that we now need to keep in mind for order of operations.
Multiplications and divisions take priority over additions and subtractions.
Let me say it a slightly different way.
Multiplications and divisions need to be done first before we ever do any additions and subtractions
in a problem like this one.
So for example, again, if I had 10 divided by 2 minus 3 times 5 plus 7 times 2, I would
start left to right, but I would only do the multiplications and the divisions first.
I'm going to skip the subtractions and the additions as I go and wait to do those in
some sense at a second level.
So let's start with the problem, working left to right and only do the multiplications
and divisions first.
Well I see that the first operation I meet is a division operation because it's got 10
divided by 2 at the beginning.
So I'm going to do the 10 divided by 2 and that's going to give me 5.
And so I'll be left now with 5 minus 3 times 5 plus 7 times 2.
Now walking left to right, I first see a 5 minus a 3.
I don't want to deal with that.
So the next thing I'm going to do is group the 3 times the 5, the multiplication involving
the 3 and the 5.
So now I have 5 minus 15 plus 7 times 2.
Where did the 15 come from?
It comes from the 3 times the 5.
Excellent.
Now I have 5 minus 15 plus 7 times 2.
While reading left to right, I see a minus sign, then I see a plus sign.
I need to ignore those at first.
Then I see a multiplication, 7 times 2.
That's what I want to do next.
So I have 5 minus 15 plus 14 and the 14 comes from 7 times 2.
Now notice what's happened.
We've done all the multiplications and divisions.
We now only have a subtraction and an addition to do.
And so to complete the problem, I simply now go back to the front, to the left and work
my way to the right.
So 5 minus 15, I do that first.
That's negative 10.
5 minus 15 is negative 10 plus the 14 at the end and negative 10 plus 14 is exactly 4.
So the final answer for that long problem we began with is exactly 4.
Let's do one more example of this type.
I think it's important to have the practice.
So let's do one more.
Let's do 10 minus 5 times 8 divided by 2 plus 17 minus 13 times 2.
That's a mouthful, I know.
And you probably are thinking, I am never going to see a problem this complicated.
Well, maybe, maybe not.
But the point is, if we can do a problem this complicated, we can probably handle all the
problems that are going to come our way at some point.
So let's start.
We have addition, subtractions, multiplications, and divisions mixed.
Our rule says we must do the multiplications and divisions first.
So as I start from left to right, I'm going to skip the subtraction that I see at the
beginning, and the first thing I'm going to do is multiply the 5 with the 8.
And when I do so, 5 times 8 gives me a 40.
So I now have 10 minus 40 divided by 2 plus 17 minus 13 times 2.
At that point, the first thing I then see is a division, 40 divided by 2.
And if I compute that, I get 20.
So I now have 10 minus 20 plus 17 minus 13 times 2.
Notice that almost all the operations now are additions and subtractions, but there's
that one multiplication at the end, the 13 times the 2.
And it needs to be done first.
And so we do it first.
13 times 2 is 26.
And now we have 10 minus 20 plus 17 minus 26.
Everything now is an addition or a subtraction.
And that means I can start at the beginning on the left and now just march my way through
left to right.
So 10 minus 20 is negative 10.
And then negative 10 plus 17 is 7.
And 7 minus 26 is negative 19.
And my final answer then is negative 19.
As I said, that was a very complicated problem.
And you may have had to work through that in little bits and pieces, but that's okay.
We're learning how to do this, we're practicing on some pretty complicated problems just to
make sure we have these things down.
Well, we've done addition, we've done subtraction, we've done multiplication, we've done division.
Are there any other operations that we can consider that we can do on numbers?
And the answer is yes.
There is one more that comes to my mind at least, and that's exponentiation or raising
a number to a power.
Now remember, in its most basic form, exponentiation is just repeated multiplication.
So you should think of things like 3 raised to the 2 as just 3 times 3, which is 9.
Or you could take a slightly more complicated example like 2 raised to the 5th power.
That's just 2 times 2 times 2 times 2 times 2, or 2 multiplied with itself 5 times.
And that's equal to 32.
So I want to work now with exponentiation as well as addition, subtraction, multiplication
and division.
And the first question I've got to ask is, well, what are the order of the operations?
How will these different operations be done and in what order will they be done?
And here's the new rule now as we introduce exponentiation.
Exponentiation gets priority over multiplication and division.
So exponentiation gets done before any multiplication and division.
And remember, multiplication and division get done before addition and subtraction.
That's a lot of words to say, and there are lots of big words, but it's OK.
We'll have these rules down pretty soon.
So let's look at a quick example.
Here's one that involves addition, multiplication and exponentiation.
And let's see how the order of operations works out.
Here's the problem.
Let's do 5 plus 3 times 4 raised to the 2nd power.
Some people would say 4 squared.
So we have 5 plus 3 times 4 to the 2nd.
OK.
Remember the rule now, exponentiation gets to go first over the multiplication and over
the addition symbol.
So the first thing we have to do is 4 to the 2nd power.
Well, 4 to the 2nd power is 4 times 4, 4 times 4, 16.
So we now have 5 plus 3 times 16.
Well we're down to an addition and a multiplication now.
Do you remember which one gets to go first now?
That's right.
It's the multiplication.
So it's not going left to right.
We actually see the multiplication first.
We have 5 plus 3 times 16 and 3 times 16 is 48.
And that leaves us with 5 plus 48.
We now get to do that.
It's the last operation anyway.
5 plus 48 is 53.
And that would be our final answer.
Well, I'd like to look at one more example in a similar way.
It also has an addition, a multiplication, and an exponentiation.
And I'd like us just to practice knowing which of these operations we should do first.
So here's the example.
I want to do 6 times 8 plus 9 raised to the 2nd power.
Or as some people like to say, 6 times 8 plus 9 squared.
OK.
I've got an addition, I've got a multiplication, and an exponentiation.
If I start the problem going left to right, I'll definitely make mistakes.
So I want to go by my order of operations rules.
Let me do that first.
Which operation goes first?
In the operations that are here, exponentiation takes priority.
It gets to go first.
So I want to look at the 9 raised to the 2nd power.
And when I do, I know that that's the same as 9 times 9.
9 times 9 is 81.
So now I have 6 times 8 plus 81.
Now which one goes first now?
A multiplication or an addition?
Well, it's the multiplication.
So notice here, for example, it would be wrong for us to do the 8 plus the 81.
Because we would be skipping over the multiplication to do 8 plus 81.
I promise you'll get the wrong answer if you do that.
So with 6 times 8 plus 81, I need to do the multiplication first.
6 times 8, well, that's equal to 48.
And now I have 48 plus 81.
And now I get to do that addition that I wanted to do.
48 plus 81, do a little bit of work there.
We're going to get 129.
So our final answer to that problem is 129.
Well, there's one last thing that we really should consider with order of operations.
And that is the idea of using parentheses.
I've already hinted at how important they are.
And we've used them a little bit today to help us isolate which part of the problem
we should do first.
So let's look at a quick example with parentheses just to see how the order of operations works
there.
So here's the example.
7 times the quantity 5 plus 3 and then minus 2.
Now notice the parentheses have been put in here for us.
And in fact, they enclose an addition symbol.
And so now the question is, what do we do first?
And here's the new rule that we need to keep in mind.
When parentheses have been inserted in an expression like this, the parentheses get
done first.
So they get done before exponentiation, and they get done before multiplication and division,
and they get done before addition and subtraction.
So let's go through this example quickly.
Now we have 7 times the quantity 5 plus 3, then minus 2.
The first thing we do is the 5 plus 3.
And that's going to give us 8.
So now we have 7 times 8 minus 2.
At that point, we do the multiplication next, 7 times 8, that would be 56.
And then we'll just have 56 minus 2, which is exactly 54.
So that quantity is equal to 54.
Now I'd like to show you very quickly before we move to another example what happens when
you ignore those parentheses.
Let's say that you just said, well, I'll just do the 7 times the 5 first.
I'm just going to ignore those parentheses.
At that point, you'd have 7 times 5, which is 35.
Then you would add the 3 to get 38.
And then you would subtract the 2 to get 36.
And that's nowhere near the right answer that we wanted of 54.
So when you see those parentheses, they must be done first.
And then all the other rules we've talked about follow from there.
Well, we haven't done much with anything other than positive integers in this lesson.
So I'd like us to look at an example now that involves fractions and a little bit of a reminder
of how we do operations with fractions certainly won't hurt us.
So let's look at the following example.
I want us to compute 1 half plus 3 fourths times 5 thirds minus 1 fourth squared, or
1 fourth raised to the second power.
Well I see an addition symbol.
I see a multiplication symbol.
I see a subtraction symbol and an exponentiation.
So we need to use the order of operations rules that we've already seen.
And what I'd like to do as we go through this example is just give you a quick reminder
of how these different operations work with fractions.
A little bit of a review won't hurt us.
So even with fractions, the order of operations rules are the same.
The exponentiation gets to go first.
And so that means I need to do the 1 fourth raised to the second power.
Now remember what that means.
When you raise something to the second power, it simply means that you multiply it with
itself.
So 1 fourth raised to the second power is 1 fourth times 1 fourth.
That's straightforward enough.
In fact, I would write it down on my paper that way.
1 fourth times 1 fourth until you get comfortable with this.
Well, how do you then multiply 1 fourth with another 1 fourth?
How do you do that product?
Well, remember what happens when you multiply two fractions.
Very important rule.
When you multiply two fractions, you basically just multiply the numerators and multiply the
denominators and that becomes your new fraction.
So in the case of 1 fourth times 1 fourth, the answer's numerator, top part, is going
to be 1 times 1.
That's just 1.
And by the way, that's an easy thing to forget as well.
I've seen a lot of students tell me that 1 times 1 is 2.
But remember, 1 times 1 is 1.
So the new numerator is going to be 1.
What about the denominator?
Well, you have a 4 times a 4.
You multiply those two together, you get 16.
So the 1 fourth raised to the second power is going to be 1 sixteenth, or 1 over 16.
Well now I have an addition, I have a multiplication, and I have a subtraction.
Which one do I do next?
I do the multiplication.
So I have 3 fourths times 5 thirds right in the middle of the problem.
I want to multiply those two together.
Well remember, we just talked about what you do.
You multiply the numerators together and you multiply the denominators together and that
gives you the new result.
So let's do that here as well.
The numerator 3 with the numerator 5 multiplied together gives you 15.
That's the new numerator.
The denominator 4 and the denominator 3 get multiplied together and that's 12.
So that quantity 3 fourths times 5 thirds is actually 15 divided by 12.
Now here's an important point to make.
That fraction is not in lowest terms.
It's not reduced.
15 divided by 12, both the 15 and the 12 have a 3 in them, which could actually be factored
out and cancelled.
And once you do that, that quantity will actually just be 5 fourths.
In fact, you might have seen that you could cancel the 3 in the numerator of the first
fraction and the 3 in the denominator of the second fraction and you would have had 5 fourths
as a result.
The point is that quantity is 5 fourths.
So what do you have?
You now have 1 half plus 5 fourths minus 1 sixteenth.
And so now you need to add a half, 5 fourths and then subtract 1 sixteenth.
Well, how does one add 1 half and 5 fourths?
Remember what you have to do?
You have to get what's called a common denominator.
So you have 1 half plus 5 fourths.
What's the common denominator there?
Well it's going to be a 4.
And so you have 1 half plus 5 fourths.
1 half is the same as 2 fourths by multiplying the top and bottom by 2.
So you really have 2 fourths plus 5 fourths, which is 7 fourths.
That's the front part of the problem.
And now you have only one operation to go, 7 fourths minus 1 sixteenth.
Wow, so now I need a common denominator between 7 fourths and 1 sixteenth.
So that common denominator is also going to be the 16 that you have in the second fraction.
7 fourths, when you move it to a denominator of 16, requires you to multiply the numerator
and denominator by 4.
And that means that 7 fourths would be the same thing as 28 over 16.
Where does the 28 come from?
It's the 7 times the 4.
So what you really have now is 28 over 16 minus 1 over 16.
And how does one subtract?
Once you have the common denominator, you simply subtract the numerators and keep the
same denominator.
28 over 16 minus 1 over 16 is 27 over 16.
And that fraction is in reduced terms.
You can't do anything else with it.
So your final answer for that problem is 27 over 16.
Now keep in mind, even with fractions, it's extremely important that you go through the
order of operations carefully.
You can't ignore those rules of exponentiation first, then the multiplication and division,
then the addition and subtraction.
Well in this lesson, we've seen lots of examples of order of operations with addition, subtraction,
multiplication, division, exponentiation, and the use of parentheses.
These are going to be extremely important as we talk about simplifying algebraic expressions
in future lessons.
Next time, we'll talk about converting between fractions, decimals, and percents.
