In our last lesson we spent time talking about slopes of lines and now in this lesson I'd
like to shift our focus a bit to studying the graphs of linear equations.
It's very important that we remember that algebra is much more than solving equations
and manipulating algebraic expressions, x's and y's and so on.
In particular, it's very important that we keep in mind the visual or graphing side as
we study algebra.
So as we get started, let me encourage you to get some graph paper if you don't have
it already.
It's going to be very, very helpful as we walk through the lesson today.
My main goal in this lesson is to introduce you to the slope intercept form of the equation
of a line.
In fact, we're going to do this in two directions today.
Sometimes we're going to start with the graph of a line and we'll write down its equation
and sometimes we'll start with the equation of the line and take that and draw the graph
that corresponds.
So let me start by sharing the definition of the slope intercept form of a line.
If M is the slope of a line and often the letter M is going to refer to the slope of
a line in this lesson and B is the y-intercept of the line, that's the place where the line
crosses the y-axis, then the slope intercept form of the equation of that line is going
to be y equals M times x plus B or most of the time I'll just say y equals Mx plus B.
So here's the picture you should have in mind as we think about y equals Mx plus B. If you
look at the image of the line before us, you'll see that there's a y-intercept.
That is the point where the line crosses the y-axis.
Notice that in this case, the point that it crosses the y-axis at is 0 comma 1.
It would be the one that y value that we would focus on for the letter B. The slope of this
line, how steep it is or how flat it is, that slope would be what we would call M. So with
that said, let's do some very specific examples to determine the slope intercept form of the
equation of a line.
So let's look at this line together.
We notice that it's got a y-intercept, it also has an x-intercept.
It turns out we don't need to worry about the x-intercept in fact, but to write down
the slope intercept form of the equation of this line, I'm going to need to know its slope
and I'm going to need to know its y-intercept.
Well the y-intercept is very easy to figure it out here.
It is B equals 3.
Notice the point where the line crosses the y-axis.
That point has coordinates 0 comma 3.
So B is 3.
Well that's half the problem.
Now I just need to find the slope which is this letter we're calling M in this lesson.
Now remember from the previous lesson that the slope is the rise over the run.
So it's the change in the y-direction divided by the change in the x-direction.
You can pick any two points that you want to find the slope of this line.
So I'm just going to pick two points.
One of them is 0 comma 3.
That's pretty clear from the graphic, but the other one I can choose whichever I want.
Well I'm going to choose 1 comma 5.
That point is also on the line.
Remember you have to pick a point on the line.
You can't just pick some point randomly out of the Cartesian plane.
But if you pick a point that's on the line you're good to go.
So I'm going to pick 1 comma 5.
My two points then are 0, 3 and 1, 5.
The slope formula that we saw in the previous lesson is y2 minus y1 over x2 minus x1.
And so the slope is going to be 5 minus 3 over 1 minus 0.
What does that give me?
It gives me 2 in the numerator and 1 in the denominator and 2 divided by 1 is 2.
Note that the same would have been found if you had used minus 1 comma 1 and 3 comma 9.
That's where the two points on the line differ from the two points we talked about earlier.
But we should get the same slope.
So let's see what we get then.
The slope is going to be using those two points, 9 minus 1 divided by 3 minus negative 1.
That gives us 8 on top, 9 minus 1 divided by 3 plus 1 or 4.
8 divided by 4 is 2.
And that was the slope we found earlier when we used the other two points that we mentioned.
So I can now write the equation of my line in slope intercept form.
Remember it's y equals mx plus b, m is 2, b is 3, so I have y equals 2x plus 3.
Well before we go anywhere to another example anyway, we should ask ourselves a question.
Does this answer make any sense at all?
Well the 3 at the end makes sense because that was the y intercept.
But what about the 2?
The 2 was the slope.
Well I can look at the line that we started with and I can see that the slope was definitely
positive because the line is going up as I read it from left to right.
I can't really tell so much about the steepness but it's about right.
Having a 2 for example as opposed to say 200 for slope, the slope had been 200, my line
would have been much more vertical.
So having a plus 2 there makes sense.
If we had found negative 2 for slope, we would have thought the line was doing this and that's
exactly the opposite of what we should have seen.
Okay, let's look now at a second example where we're trying to find the slope intercept form
of the equation of a line.
So we have a new line now.
Notice that it looks like it's slanting down as you read from left to right.
You should ask yourself, what does that mean about the slope?
Talk about that in just a second.
But before we go to the slope, let's ask this question.
What is the y-intercept?
Well the y-intercept looks like 1.
It looks like the line goes through the y-axis at y equals 1.
What does that mean about the point on the line?
At the y-intercept, the point has coordinates 0, 1.
Okay, so b is 1, that's great, that's half the problem again.
I just need m now, which is the slope, and once I have that, I can write down the slope
intercept form of the equation.
Now the line is going down like this.
What does that mean about the slope?
It means it's negative, very good.
So whatever I get for the slope at the end, I better get a negative answer.
If I get a positive answer, I've made a mistake.
Now the slope is also going to have to be relatively small because the line is somewhat
flat.
It's not like this for example, it's actually a bit flat.
So hopefully we'll see a slope that's relatively small and negative.
Now I need two points to figure out this slope.
Well I already have the point 0, 1, that was the y-intercept.
Do you notice there that there's also a pretty clear x-intercept?
There's a point where the line crosses the x-axis, and thankfully I can see the coordinates
of that point pretty well, they're going to be 4, 0.
I have to tell you, I often make mistakes about these coordinates.
I could have easily written down 0, 4 instead of 4, 0, but thankfully we got it right when
we said that the point was 4, 0.
So two points, 4, 0 and 0, 1, and once I have that information, I can find my slope m.
So m is going to be the change in the y's divided by the change in the x's.
The change in the y here is 1 minus 0, and the change in the x's is 0 minus 4.
The numerator then is just 1, and the denominator is negative 4, and of course that's just the
fraction negative 1 4th.
Hey, that's negative, which is fabulous, and it's also small, which is also fabulous
because that's exactly what we said we needed earlier.
We needed a small negative slope, and therefore the slope-intercept form of this equation
is y equals negative 1 4th times x plus 1.
Now let's move to another example.
I'd like to find the slope-intercept form of the following line, and I'm just going
to point out right now that it's a horizontal line.
The y-intercept is staring us in the face when you look at that graph.
Can you see what the y-intercept is?
B, the y-intercept, is going to be negative 2 because the line crosses the y-axis at y
equals negative 2.
So B is negative 2, that's great.
Now we need to know the slope of this line.
Well, do you remember what we talked about when we talked about horizontal lines and
slope?
We said that every horizontal line has a slope of 0, and therefore M in this example is going
to be 0.
That makes finding the slope-intercept form of the equation of this line easy.
It's going to be y equals Mx plus B, or y equals 0x plus negative 2, which is the same
as y equals negative 2.
So notice in this equation, the x term has disappeared.
This is very, very important.
The only thing you see is y equals some number.
There are no x's.
That's going to be very important as we study horizontal lines.
Their equations are always going to look like y equals negative 2, or y equals 5, or y equals
3, y equals just a number.
The x term will have disappeared, and that means we can see a very special form for a
horizontal line's equation.
Well let's transition a bit and look at the problem from the opposite direction.
So what do I mean by that?
Here's what I mean.
I want to take the equation of the line and hand that to us first, and then I want us to
be able to draw the graph of that equation.
So this is sort of the opposite skill to what we've been looking at so far in this lesson.
So here's the example I want us to look at.
Let's sketch the graph of y equals 5x minus 7.
Okay.
We want to sketch this graph, so the first thing we need to do, we need to take out a
piece of graph paper and draw our axes, our x and our y axis.
The x is the horizontal and the y is the vertical, and we need, if we can, to plot a couple points.
Because as soon as we could do that, we could just connect them to get our straight line.
Well the first thing we know from y equals 5x minus 7 is that the y intercept must be
at negative 7.
So I can immediately plot a point.
Now where in the Cartesian plane is it located?
It's located at the coordinates 0 for x and negative 7 for y.
So it's down on the y axis at negative 7.
Okay?
That's it.
That's one of my points, and now I just need one more point.
Again, if you can find two different points on this line, you'll be done.
Because once you find those two points, you can connect them with a straight line and
you're done.
So let's use the slope now to find a second point.
We know from the equation that was given to us that the slope is equal to 5.
That's the m, the number in front of the x.
And how do you think of 5?
You think of it as 5 divided by 1.
Now that ratio is the rise over the run.
So let's walk through what 5 over 1 is really telling us.
It's saying the denominator being the run or the horizontal direction means that when
I walk to the right, one unit, because the denominator is 1, I need to move up 5 units.
Okay?
The rise is 5 and the run is 1.
So every time I walk one unit over, I need to walk 5 up.
Or you might think of it this way, every time I walk 5 up, I need to walk 1 over.
Either way, you'll get to the same point up here.
So if I start with that y-intercept at 0, negative 7, and I move 1 unit over and 5 units
up, I'm going to be at the point 1, negative 2.
And again, if I start at 0, negative 7, and go up 5, and then over 1, I'm still going
to end up at 1, negative 2.
Now once you have those two points plotted, just take out a pencil, a straight edge, maybe
a ruler or something like that, and you can connect the two dots to make your straight
line.
Okay, let's look at another example like this, where you want to take the equation that you're
given and sketch the graph of that equation.
We're going to make it a little more complicated now by throwing in some fractions.
But don't worry, we'll be fine.
Here's the equation I want us to sketch.
Y equals negative 1 1⁄2x plus 7 1⁄2s.
Okay, now, as we did in the previous example, I already know what the y-intercept is.
These examples are all about interpreting the information that's been given to us from
the equation.
So my y-intercept is coming from the number at the end of the equation, that's the 7⁄2s,
and therefore I know one of the points on the graph is 0, 7⁄2s.
So I start at the origin, and I simply march 7⁄2s, which is the same as 3 1⁄2 units,
up the y-axis, and I mark a point.
Now I've got to get that second point in order to figure out how to plot the graph.
And so I'm going to now use the slope information.
And in this case, I'm going to use the negative 1⁄2, so that's m.
Now what does negative 1⁄2 tell me about the line in question?
How can I go from one point to the next on the line?
Well, by having negative 1 divided by 2, here's what I know.
Every time I move two units to the right, I've got to move down one unit.
Why down and not up?
It's because of that negative sign that's in front of the one.
So every time I move two units over to the right, I have to move down one unit.
Now again, if I had started at the same point and moved down one unit first and then two
to the right, I'd land at the same place.
The point is I can get to another point on this line if I start at the y-intercept and
go through the process that I was just describing.
So start at 0, 7⁄2 and move two units to the right and down one unit.
Well, what are the coordinates of that new point look like?
Well, they're going to be at 2, because I started at 0 and moved 2 over to the right.
What's the y-coordinate going to be?
It's going to be 7⁄2-1, because I had to go down one unit.
Well, what is 7⁄2-1?
I've got to be able to calculate that now.
7⁄2-1 is the same as 7⁄2-2⁄2.
And now with a common denominator, I can subtract 2⁄2 from 7⁄2, and I will have 5⁄2.
7⁄2-2⁄2 is 5⁄2.
So the point on the line with this 0, 7⁄2 is 2⁄5⁄2.
And now I have two points on my line, and I can plot both of those, just draw them in
on my grid.
Now, I want you to stare at those two points for just a second on your paper.
Notice that the line that you're going to draw that connects those two points will have
what kind of slope?
Is it going to be positive or is it going to be negative?
Well, the answer is it's definitely going to be negative because your line is going
like this.
So it's going down as you read it from left to right, okay?
And with a slope of negative 1⁄2, 1⁄2 is not that big, we would expect that the line
would have to be relatively flat, not steep like this, but pretty flat.
In fact, your line will be pretty flat.
And once you take the two points that you've drawn and just connect them, you'll see that
your line is a nice, flat, negative-sloped line.
Okay, now I'd really like to change gears in this lesson and spend a few minutes talking
about a different type of problem.
So here's the question I want to talk about.
It's still related to slope intercept form of lines, but I want to think about it from
a totally different perspective.
What if someone walked up to us and gave us not the equation of the line and not a graph
of the line, but a table of pairs of points on the line?
Could we find the slope intercept form of the equation of that line?
You might ask, why in the world would I care about such an example?
Well, the fact of the matter is in the real world, when you're doing science, when you're
doing lots of other things, what you get first is data.
You get information, which typically could be points on a graph, for example.
So we need to have the ability to actually have someone hand us data, which isn't very
visual and doesn't have an equation wrapped around it, and use that data to either find
an equation or plot the graph.
So here's the example I want us to start with.
I want us to find the slope intercept form of the equation of the line with the following
points.
Now in a table, when x is 0, y is 5, when x is 1, y is 3, when x is 2, y is 1, when x
is 3, y is negative 1, and when x is 4, y is negative 3.
Now don't let this table mess you up.
All that's happening is this is a shorthand way of writing down five points or five ordered
pairs.
And those ordered pairs would be 0, 5, 1, 3, 2, 1, 3, negative 1, and 4, negative 3.
OK, so from that table, I want us to figure out the slope intercept form of the line.
That means I need to figure out two things, the y-intercept, and I need to figure out
the slope.
All right, how do I get the y-intercept from the table?
Well, what is true about the y-intercept?
What's true about it is that it's on the y-axis, which means its x-coordinate must
be 0.
Now in the table that you were handed is one of the points going to have 0 as its x-coordinate?
Yeah, it is.
In fact, it's the first value that you were given.
The first point you were given was x equals 0, y equals 5, and therefore the y-intercept
of that line is going to be at b equals 5.
So you've now found half of the slope intercept form of this equation, and now what you need
is the slope, which we call m often.
Well, it looks like every time I increase the x by 1 in my table, I decrease the value
of y by 2.
Do you see that pattern in the table?
Every time the x's increase by 1 in the first row of the table, the y's go down by 2.
That means when the run changes by 1, the rise changes by negative 2.
So in fact, I should go like this, the rise goes down by 2, and therefore the slope is
going to be negative 2 divided by 1, which is negative 2.
So my m value is negative 2, and therefore the slope intercept form of this equation
is negative 2x plus 5.
I should say y equals negative 2x plus 5.
Remember, an equation always needs an equals sign.
Now you might say, well, you found that slope fast.
I didn't like that at all.
Okay, if you wanted to calculate the slope, you could have just taken two points out of
the table and done y2 minus y1 over x2 minus x1.
And we would have found the same result.
We would have found negative 2.
But as you're staring at table data, I want you to see if you can see patterns like the
one we saw.
And if you can see them the right way, you can see things like the slope.
So if you want to calculate it, please do, but you should get negative 2 for the slope
if you calculate it from the points.
Okay.
Let's do another example with one of these tables.
Let's get the practice.
Let's find the slope intercept form of the equation of the line with the following points.
Now we're only going to go with about three points here.
That's okay.
The table says that three of those points are negative 2 comma negative 2, 0 comma 4,
and 3 comma 13.
That's how we're going to read that data.
Now I want you to notice again that the y-intercept of this line has pretty much been handed
to us with no work, but we have to interpret it.
What's true about the y-intercept?
It's a point where the x-coordinate is 0.
In the table, do you have a point where the x-coordinate is 0?
Yes, you do.
It's the 1, 0 comma 4.
So b in this example is going to be 4.
You needed that for the slope intercept form of the equation.
Now you've got it.
So now again, you just have to find the slope.
So the question is, how do you calculate the slope in a case where the x is changing so
dramatically?
Notice in this table that the x's are changing not by 1, but by 2 or 3.
In the earlier table, in our previous example, the x's were just so friendly they were just
growing one at a time.
Here the x's are kind of bouncing around.
So how in the world am I going to figure out the slope?
Well, the answer is just pick two points out of the table and calculate the slope with
the rule we've already seen.
It doesn't matter which pair of points you choose as long as they're different points.
And in fact, we're now going to calculate the slope a couple different ways using different
data from the table just to make sure we get the same slope different times.
So here we go.
Let's use the first two points in the table, negative 2 comma negative 2 and 0 comma 4.
If I use those two points out of the table, here's the slope that I get.
Sum equals 4 minus negative 2 divided by 0 minus negative 2.
That's y2 minus y1 over x2 minus x1.
And if you simplify that a bit, you're going to get 4 plus 2 on top and 0 plus 2 on the
bottom, which is 6 over 2, which is 3.
So we could just stop here.
We could say, look, the slope is 3.
We're good to go.
But just for fun, let's try using two different points to see if we get the same slope.
So I'm going to use the 0 comma 4 and the 3 comma 13.
And I'm going to see if I actually get the same slope in the process.
In that case, using y2 minus y1 over x2 minus x1, the slope would be 13 minus 4 divided
by 3 minus 0.
13 minus 4, that's 9.
3 minus 0 is 3.
9 over 3 is 3.
Excellent.
We got the same slope, which we needed to get.
If this is the graph of a straight line, then the slope should be the same no matter
what two points we choose.
If we had gotten something other than 3, we would have known we made a mistake, in fact.
But just for fun, let's actually use the first point and the last point in the table, find
the slope using those just to make sure we've got this down.
So here we go.
Use negative 2 comma negative 2 and 3 comma 13.
Those are two points on my line.
Let's calculate the slope.
Using y2 minus y1 over x2 minus x1, I'm going to have 13 minus negative 2 divided by 3 minus
negative 2.
What does that give me?
The numerator becomes 13 plus 2 and the denominator becomes 3 plus 2.
That's 15 over 5.
When you simplify that fraction, you get 3.
So no matter how you calculate the slope, no matter which points you choose, your slope
in this example is going to be 3.
Now let's bring all the information together.
The slope is 3 and a while ago we found out that the y-intercept was 4.
And once we know that, we can write down the slope-intercept form of the equation.
It's going to be y equals mx plus b, or y equals 3x plus 4.
Now I'd like to look at another example that has this kind of form where we use a table
of data.
And so let's look at the following table.
Find the slope-intercept form of the equation of the line that has that information or has
those points on it.
So what's my table look like?
Well the points look like they're going to be 1, 4, 3, 4, 5, 4, 6, 4 and 8, 4.
So I want you to notice there that looks like a pretty special line because all of the y-values
look like they're the same.
Okay, let's see what kind of line this really is.
The first thing we've been doing in all these examples, what have we been doing?
We've been finding the y-intercept.
Wait a minute, how did we find the y-intercept?
It was the place where x was equal to 0.
Do we have x equals 0 in my table?
No.
Oh no, what in the world are we going to do?
Well don't worry too much, we're actually okay.
Let's think for just a second about what this line looks like.
If all the y-values are actually the same, then that means all the points are at the
same height above the x-axis.
What kind of line has all of its points the same height above the x-axis?
It's a horizontal line.
This table actually refers to a bunch of points on a horizontal line.
Now if it's horizontal and all of the points are 4 units above the x-axis, where's the
y-intercept?
The y-intercept is at 4.
So b equals 4.
Now I need the slope of the line.
Do you remember?
The slope of a horizontal line is m equals 0.
You could have calculated that using a couple of the points.
In fact if you used 3,4 and 8,4 then the slope would be 4 minus 4 divided by 8 minus 3 or
0 divided by 5, remember that's okay, that's equal to 0.
So the slope equals 0 and the y-intercept equals 4.
And therefore my equation is y equals 0x plus 4 or just y equals 4.
Now I'd like to move forward then and just finalize our lesson today by sharing with
you just a few closing thoughts.
First of all, notice that we've talked about the slope-intercept form of the equation of
a line today.
I want you to remember that you need two pieces of information for that.
You need the y-intercept which we often call b and you need the slope which we often call
m.
But with that in mind, let me point out something.
In almost every one of the examples we did today, the b, the y-intercept was given to
us.
In fact it was only in the last example when we didn't have that y-intercept handed to
us.
What would happen if we didn't know that value of b?
Well, we'd have to do more work to find it.
You can actually find it with a little algebra but it's not always easy.
And that means that the slope-intercept form is not always the best form of the equation
of a line.
It's okay to have and it's a good one to have but we might want to come up with a different
form of the equation of a line.
What does that mean?
It means that in the next lesson we're going to learn about other forms of the equation
of the line where we don't have to have the y-intercept and I'll talk about that in our
next lesson.
