As we continue to look at the graphical side of linear equations, I'd like to demonstrate
another form for writing the equation of a line.
It's known as the point-slope form of the equation, and it's very versatile.
In fact, I think it's more versatile than the slope-intercept form for the equation
of a line.
Let me show you what I mean with an example.
I'd like you to find the equation of the line given here.
Now, let me be clear about what this graph tells us and what it doesn't tell us.
First of all, we see that the line goes through the point 2, 0.
Now, that's on the x-axis, and so it's the x-intercept of the line.
Let's assume we were also told that the line goes through the point negative 2, 10-thirds.
That's up in quadrant 2.
From here, I'd like to work out the equation of the line.
Well, with the two points that have been given to us, we can calculate the slope relatively
easily.
We've been doing that now through a couple of lessons.
Let's go through the practice of calculating the slope once again with the two points that
we have, negative 2, 10-thirds and 2, 0.
With that information, we know that the slope is rise over run or y2 minus y1 over x2 minus
x1, so I can use my data and plug it into the formula.
The slope is going to be 10-thirds minus 0, all divided by negative 2 minus 2.
Well, the numerator is pretty easy to simplify.
That's just 10-thirds, and the denominator is negative 4.
Now, 10-thirds divided by negative 4 is the same as 10-thirds times negative 1-fourth.
If you write all that out, you'll see that the final answer there then is negative 10
divided by 12, 3 times 4 is 12, and negative 10 divided by 12 can be reduced to negative
5 divided by 6, because the 10 and the 12 both have a factor of 2 that can be canceled.
Now, I'm trying to get the equation of the line that someone gave me to start this problem.
I have found the slope, but I need one more piece of information.
And if I want to use the slope-intercept form of the line, I need to find the y-intercept.
Now, again, not the x-intercept, I know what the x-intercept is here, but I need the y-intercept.
That's what I need in the slope-intercept form.
But what is it?
Look back at the graph of the equation that was given to us.
Can you tell what that y-intercept value is?
Notice that it doesn't cross at a whole number value.
It's obviously somewhere between 1 and 2, but is it 1 1⁄2, 1.4, 1.6, 1 1⁄3, 1
1 1⁄2⁄3, 1 1⁄4⁄7?
I don't know where it is, at least not right now.
It's just not clear from the graph what that point is.
And that's the downside of the slope-intercept form of the equation of a line.
If you can't easily find the y-intercept, or if it hasn't been given to you, then the
slope-intercept form is a bit unfriendly.
Now, don't get me wrong.
We could go find the y-intercept with a little bit of algebra, but I think it's a better
form of the equation to write down when you write down the point-slope form.
And that's the subject of today's lesson, and so that's what I want to share with you
now as we move forward.
The definition of the point-slope form of the equation of a line that passes through
the point x1, y1, and has slope m is the following.
It's y minus y1 equals m times the quantity x minus x1.
Let me say a few things about that formula.
First of all, it's extremely important.
So as soon as you can, you should put that to memory.
The second comment I want to make is this.
The y1 and the x1 in the formula are going to be constants.
They're going to be the numbers that come from the point you were given.
The y and the x are going to be variables, so we'll leave those alone.
It gets a bit confusing when you see a y and a y1 and an x and an x1.
Don't worry about that.
Plug in the x1 and the y1 from the point that you have, and then leave y and x alone.
Now with this form of the equation of a line in our hands, we can actually write down the
equation of the line we were discussing a few minutes ago.
We found that the slope was negative 5, 6.
That's going to be the m value in our equation, and we already knew one point that the line
went through.
What was the point 2, 0?
Well, that's exactly the information we need to use the point slope form of the equation
of a line.
Using that formula, y minus y1 equals m times x minus x1, I can now write down the following
equation for this line.
It's going to be y minus 0, that's the y value of the point, 0.
Y minus 0 on the left equals negative 5, 6 times the quantity x minus 2.
Notice that that formula is perfectly fine for this line, that's the right equation,
but I could actually use a different point now and write down what appears to be a different
equation.
Remember, there was another point I said was on the line, and that was the point negative
2, 10 thirds.
Why not use that point instead of the point 2, 0?
The answer is, why not?
You can use it if you'd like.
So let's now write down the equation of the same line using that different point.
The equation is going to be y minus 10 thirds, that's the y value there, equals negative
5, 6 times the quantity x minus negative 2.
The x coordinate here is now negative 2.
So inside those parentheses, I'm going to have x minus negative 2.
If I simplify that equation just a bit, my new equation will be y minus 10 thirds equals
negative 5, 6 times the quantity x plus 2.
Now it would be very natural for you to say to me at this point, now wait a minute, we
just wrote down two equations for this line, y minus 0 equals negative 5, 6 times the quantity
x minus 2, and y minus 10 thirds equals the quantity negative 5, 6 times x plus 2.
Those don't look anything like each other, well they both have a minus 5, 6 in them and
they have a y and an x, but they look a lot different from one another.
You'd be right in saying that, but the fact is that the point slope form of the equation
of a line can look very different because it depends on the point you choose to use.
But we can also rewrite both of these equations in such a way that they look the same.
In fact, if we rewrote them a bit with some algebra and made them look like the slope
intercept form of the line, they would look the same.
Let me do that for you right now.
The first equation would look like the following, y minus 0 equals negative 5, 6 times the quantity
x minus 2.
Well, of course, y minus 0 is just y, so the left hand side becomes y, then it equals
negative 5, 6 times x minus 2.
Now I'm going to distribute the minus 5, 6 into the parentheses.
So I want to multiply the x by a minus 5, 6, and I want to multiply the negative 2 or
the minus 2 times a negative 5, 6.
And when I do that, the right hand side becomes negative 5, 6, x plus 10, 6.
Again, the plus comes from the minus in front of the 5, 6 and the minus in front of the
2.
And now I have the equation y equals negative 5, 6, x plus 10, 6.
10, 6 can be reduced just a little bit.
It's the same as 5 thirds, and it means that my equation is actually y equals negative
5, 6 times x plus 5 thirds.
Notice that that's in the form y equals mx plus b.
In fact, we now know that the slope is negative 5, 6.
I knew that already.
But I also know that the b is 5 thirds.
Remember what b is for?
It's the y-intercept.
So if you go back to the picture that we drew originally, we now know what that y-intercept
is.
It's 5 thirds or 1 and 2 thirds.
Remember I said it was something like 1 and 1 half or 1 and 1 third or 1 and 2 thirds?
Now we actually know what it is.
It's 1 and 2 thirds, and we found that thanks to the point-slope form of the line.
Now I had two equations that looked very different earlier.
I want to take the second one now and convert it from point-slope form into slope-intercept
form.
And I want to see what it looks like.
So let's do that here.
That second equation was y minus 10 thirds equals negative 5, 6 times x plus 2.
Now distribute the minus 5, 6 on the right-hand side again, and you'll have y minus 10 thirds
equals negative 5, 6x minus 10, 6.
Now that looks pretty complicated, but we're OK.
There's a constant on the left, which is negative 10 thirds, and there's a constant
on the right, which is negative 10 sixths.
I can add the 10 thirds to the right-hand side, and when I do that, my equation will
then be y equals negative 5, 6x minus 10 sixths plus 10 thirds.
Rewriting 10 thirds as 20 over 6 to get a common denominator, I'll then have y equals
negative 5, 6 minus 10 sixths plus 26.
Minus 10 sixths plus 20 sixths is actually plus 10 sixths.
And so I have y equals negative 5, 6x plus 10 over 6.
10 over 6 is the same as 5 over 3.
And so my equation is y equals negative 5 over 6 times x plus 5 over 3.
Do you remember that equation?
That's the same equation we found earlier when we took the first version of the point
slope form and rewrote it into slope intercept form.
So what have we seen?
We've seen that this point slope form of the equation of a line is more versatile because
it doesn't need the y-intercept, and it doesn't mind which point you use.
No matter what point you choose, you always have the same equation.
It might look different from another equation, but they actually are the same equation just
hiding underneath.
Now let's move now to another example where we can use the point slope form of the equation
of a line to our advantage.
Here's the example.
We want us to write the equation of the line that has slope 5 and passes through the point
negative 1 comma negative 3.
Well with the slope intercept form of the equation, we'd have difficulty because right
now I do not know what the y-intercept is.
No one gave it to me in the problem, but they did give me the slope and they did give me
a point.
And therefore I can use the point slope form of the equation to write the equation of this
line, and here's what it is.
It's going to be y minus the y value equals 5, that's the slope, times x minus the x value.
Well that's going to be y minus negative 3 equals 5 times x minus negative 1.
If you cancel out those negatives there, the y minus negative 3 becomes y plus 3, and the
x minus negative 1 becomes x plus 1.
So the equation is y plus 3 equals 5 times the quantity x plus 1.
Now let me share a few comments about the kinds of mistakes or pitfalls you can run into
as you're using the point slope form of the equation.
First of all, some students will accidentally switch the roles of the x and y coordinate
of the point when they're writing down the point slope form of the equation.
So for example, instead of writing y minus negative 3 equals 5 times x minus negative
1, some students will write y minus negative 1 equals 5 times x minus negative 3.
What they've done is switched to the x and the y coordinates at that point, and if you
do that you're probably going to get the wrong equation of your line, so please be careful
with that very common mistake.
And secondly, as I mentioned a few minutes ago, you can now write down the slope intercept
form of the equation of the line if for some reason you wanted it.
So for example, let's go back to the equation, y plus 3 equals 5 times the quantity x plus
1.
Then that formula becomes y plus 3 equals 5x plus 5.
That's the distributive property.
I've distributed that 5 into the x plus 1.
Now I can subtract the 3 from the left hand side over to the right hand side, and I'll
have y equals 5x plus 5 minus 3.
5 minus 3 is 2, and so I will have y equals 5x plus 2.
And notice that that is the slope intercept form of my line.
Now look at the graph that's on your screen, and you'll see the graph that had slope 5
and went through the point minus 1 comma minus 3.
Do you notice that it really does go through that point?
Notice also that it goes through the point 0 comma 2.
That was the y intercept that we found earlier.
But I want to point out, if you started down at minus 1 comma negative 3 and walked up
5 units and over 1 unit to the right, you would be at 0 comma 2.
Well walking up 5 and over 1 is the rise over run, 5 up divided by 1 over.
That's exactly the slope.
That's why the slope is 5.
And so those two points are definitely on this line because they match this slope information.
Many of you have probably heard of the phrase, two points define a unique line.
In other words, if I give you two points, you can draw exactly one straight line that
goes through those two points.
Well, it turns out, even if that's all someone gives you, the point slope form can be used
to find the equation of that line.
The slope intercept form typically is not going to be able to do that for you.
But the point slope form can.
So let's do an example that looks like that now.
I want us to find the equation of the line that passes through these two points, 3 comma
2 and negative 1 comma negative 5.
Well I would suggest that we use the point slope form of the equation.
We already have a point in hand, we actually have two points in hand.
So all we need is the slope and once we have the slope, we're set.
But the slope is a piece of cake here because we just need those two points that they gave
us.
So let's calculate the slope now and we'll be well on our way to finishing this problem.
The slope in this case, remember we often call it m, is going to equal 2 minus negative
5 divided by 3 minus negative 1.
Remember it's the y2 minus y1 divided by x2 minus x1.
Now 2 minus negative 5 is 2 plus 5, 3 minus negative 1 is 3 plus 1.
And therefore the slope here is 7 divided by 4.
That's positive 7 divided by 4 or 1 and 3 fourths.
And now we can just write down an equation for the line using the point slope form.
And you can use any point you want.
Well we were given two of them, one of them that we were given was the point 3 comma 2.
So I'm going to go ahead and use that one now to write down my equation.
The equation for my line would be y minus 2 equals 7 fourths times the quantity x minus
3.
Now, I could use the other point if we'd like, let's go ahead and do so.
That point was negative 1 comma negative 5.
And then my equation using the point slope form would be y minus negative 5 equals 7
fourths times the quantity x minus negative 1.
If I simplify some of those double negatives, the minus negative 5 and the minus negative
1 by changing them to plus signs, I'm going to have y plus 5 equals 7 fourths times the
quantity x plus 1.
I cannot stress enough that these two very different looking equations both represent
the same line.
Both of these equations would be valid answers to the problem we started with.
So it's not always the case that there's just one correct answer to a mathematics problem.
When you're using the point slope form of the line, you can have many different correct
equations.
It's just about which point you use.
The slope would all be the same.
The point you use might be different.
So just for fun, let's look at the graph of this line given the two points that we had.
Now as I showed a few minutes ago with other examples, look how difficult it could have
been to find the y-intercept of this line with just the information that was originally
given to us.
Remember, the only thing they gave us was two points on the line.
With that point slope form of the equation, we actually can find the y-intercept.
It turns out it's at the quantity negative 13 divided by 4.
Or if I wrote it as a mixed number, it would be negative 3 and 1 fourth.
Now if you look at the graph for just a moment, you'll see that it does appear that the y-intercept
crosses somewhere between negative 3 and negative 4.
So negative 3 and 1 fourth makes perfect sense.
But what if you would have had to find that yourself?
That would have been very, very difficult.
But once you have the equation, you actually can find that point.
Now I'd like to shift gears just a bit and look at problems related to the point slope
form of the equation of a line from the opposite direction.
What if we're given the equation of a line in point slope form?
Could we draw the graph of that line pretty quickly?
Well, it's all about interpreting what's in the equation that we're given.
So let's look at a few examples where we're given the equation and we interpret the information
we need.
So here's the first problem.
Let's graph the equation y minus 6 equals 1 half times the quantity x minus 3.
Well one key here is to recognize that this is the equation of a line and it's in point
slope form.
We have the slope sitting out in front and we have a point embedded there.
So we just need to be able to interpret what we've been given.
Well first of all, what's the slope of the line?
Well the slope is going to be that constant that's sitting in front of the right hand
side portion of the equation.
And in this case, that constant is 1 half.
So the slope is positive 1 half.
Well what else do we know?
Well we actually know the coordinates of a point through which the line passes.
And that point is 3 comma 6.
Again remember, the point it's passing through is not 6 comma 3.
That's a common mistake to make.
The point is going through or the line is going through the point 3 comma 6.
The 3 is in the x and the 6 is in with the y.
So the point we're going through is 3 comma 6.
Now we know the slope is 1 half and we know a point that we're going through is 3 comma
6.
If we started at 3 comma 6 and used the fact that 1 half is the rise over run, we can actually
find another point.
So starting at 3 6, we could go up 1 unit and over 2 units to the right.
And if we did that, we would be at 5 comma 7.
That's because 3 plus 2 is 5 and 6 plus 1 is 7.
Now you have two points and you can plot the line through those two points by just connecting
the dots once you've drawn the dots.
And so your line is pretty straightforward to draw at that point.
Notice that the y-intercept of the graph appears to be right around 4.5.
It looks like it's going through the y-axis between 4 and 5.
We could figure that out exactly using the point slope form of the equation, but that's
not what was asked of us.
So let's not fret over it for now.
Notice also that the x-intercept appears to occur at negative 9 comma 0.
And lastly, we should ask, does the graph even make sense?
Well it definitely goes through the point 3 comma 6.
It definitely has a positive slope because it's going upward as we read it from left
to right.
And notice it's not very steep.
It's not like this, for example.
It's kind of flat.
And so the fact that it had slope, positive one-half, seems to fit with the sketch that
we've made.
OK, with that said, let's look at another example of this type.
It's always good to try to do lots of examples in math of the same type just to nail down
the ideas.
So let's look at another example of this type.
I'd like us to graph the equation y minus 4 equals 7 times the quantity x plus 2.
Now again, we see that this is the equation of a line which is in point slope form.
That's good.
Now, let's interpret what's in the equation to help us understand how to graph the line.
Well, can you see the slope?
You see it sort of jumping out at you?
The slope in this case is 7.
That's that constant in front of the right-hand side of the equation.
Now, if the slope is 7, it means that our line is going to go in this direction as opposed
to this direction.
And it's going to be kind of steep.
We'll use that information in a second.
Secondly, I need a point through which the line travels.
All right, now, what would you say is a point?
Well, some of you might say, I think a point that it goes through is 2 comma 4.
You'd be close, but you'd be incorrect.
In fact, your graph would be very wrong if you had the line go through 2 comma 4.
Y is 2 comma 4, not one of the points.
It's that pesky plus sign in the original equation.
Remember something.
The point slope form of the equation of a line is y minus y1 equals m times x minus x1.
It's not y minus y1 equals m times x plus x1.
Do you see that difference of sign on the right-hand side?
That is a common mistake, so be careful not to miss that.
Now, you might say, well, what in the world am I supposed to do then?
I can't just erase that plus sign and make it a minus sign.
What do I do?
Here's what you do.
You take y minus 4 equals 7 times x plus 2 and rewrite the plus 2 as minus a negative
2.
And your equation then becomes y minus 4 equals 7 times x minus negative 2.
And now that you have the equation in that form, you can actually see what your point
is through which the line passes.
Do you see it?
It's negative 2 comma 4.
So the guess of 2 comma 4 was kind of close, but we needed a negative in front of that
2 in order to get the right point.
So I can now sketch the graph of this line.
It passes through negative 2 comma 4 and it has slope 7.
So to get another point, I start at negative 2 comma 4, I rise up 7 and over 1.
And if I go up 7 and over 1, I'm going to be at the point negative 1 comma 11.
Remember, that's what that 7 means.
It's like a 7 over 1.
So the rise is 7 and the run is 1.
And once I have those two points plotted, I can draw the graph and I'm done.
And once you've drawn it, you should again check that the slope of 7 seems to be making
sense.
The line needs to be going upward as you read it from left to right.
And now in this case, it should be pretty sharply upward as we go.
Well, I'd like to look at one more example trying to see how the point slope form of
the equation of a line can be used to graph a line that satisfies that equation.
So here's the equation I want us to look at.
Y minus 2 equals negative 3 times X minus 5.
OK, now this thing again is in point slope form.
I see Y minus a number equals a number times X minus another number.
So I'm in perfectly good shape for the point slope form of a line.
Now what's the slope?
Well, where is the slope located?
In the point slope form of an equation, it's located right in front of that X minus piece
on the right hand side.
And in this case, my slope is going to be negative 3.
That negative comes along with the slope.
So my slope really is negative 3.
Or to use the letter that we've normally used for that variable, M equals negative 3.
OK, now I have the slope.
I need a point.
There's a point there.
It's hiding.
It deals with that 2 and that 5.
What's the point that the line goes through?
It's not 2 comma 5.
It's 5 comma 2.
Remember, the 5 is first because it's with the X, and the 2 is second because it's with
the Y.
So now I know the slope.
The slope is negative 3.
And I know a point, 5 comma 2.
I can find another point on the line by starting at 5 comma 2, going down 3 units and over
1 to get to my next point.
Why am I going down?
Because the slope is negative 3.
So I go down 3 units and over 1 to the right.
And once I've done that, I can find my new point, which is 6 comma negative 1.
And once I have that point, I can draw my line, and I'm good to go.
And now if I do plot those 2 points and connect them, I'll see that my graph goes downward
like this as I read it left to right.
And it should go down because the slope here was negative.
Well, today we've seen a new way to write down the equation of a line.
It's called the point-slope form of the equation.
I really think it's a great way to write down the equation of a line.
It's very flexible.
It doesn't require me just to know the why intercept of my line.
So I would strongly encourage you to get comfortable with the point-slope form of the equation
of a line.
You'll certainly be using it again in future lessons.
Next time, I'd like us to apply what we've been learning about equations of lines, like
slope-intercept form and point-slope form, to some very special types of lines.
And those are called parallel and perpendicular lines.
I'll see you then.
