In this lesson I would like to look at relationships between very special types of lines and these
are called parallel lines as well as perpendicular lines.
First let's talk about parallel lines.
What's a good working definition of parallel lines?
Well how about this?
Two lines in the Cartesian plane are parallel if they never intersect one another.
You've probably seen this idea of parallel in the past either in another mathematics
class or just in the usual English usage of the word parallel.
Think about parallel streets maybe in the downtown of your city or the lines that are
on a football field which are parallel.
You might have even heard the phrase parallel universes to mean universes that don't intersect.
But that raises a question.
We've used it a lot in our English language but from an algebra perspective how can we
describe when two lines are parallel?
Well the following property is very helpful.
Two non-vertical lines are parallel if they have the same slope and different y-intercepts.
So if we just check on the slopes of the two lines and we make sure that the slopes are
the same but the y-intercepts are different then we know that the two lines are parallel.
So for example if I give you these two equations y equals 3x plus 2 and y equals 3x minus 4
I can tell you that those two lines will be parallel.
I haven't even seen the graphs yet but I know that the two lines really will be parallel.
Why?
Because they both have the same slope.
Do you know what that slope is?
That's right it's 3 but they have two different y-intercepts.
The y-intercept of one of the equations is 2, the y-intercept of the other one is negative
4.
Remember those two equations are written in what's called slope-intercept form.
Well because they have the same slope but different y-intercepts I know that those two
lines are going to be parallel.
And if you were to graph those two equations you'd actually see that they're parallel.
Just look at the graph and you'll see that the two lines will never intersect.
I'd like to turn to looking at a couple of examples where we're not sure if the two lines
are parallel and we have to do a little bit of algebra work in order to figure it out.
So let's start with the following example.
Take the two equations y equals negative 2x plus 7 and 10x plus 5y equals 12.
Those are two perfectly good equations of lines.
Let's figure out if those two lines are going to be parallel.
Well to do this I need to figure out the slope of each line.
That's the first thing that's important.
Remember to be parallel the two lines are going to need to have the same slope.
It's pretty clear that the line represented by the first equation has slope negative 2
because of the form of the equation as it was written.
The problem is what's the slope of the second line?
I've got to get a little bit of work done in order to figure that out.
Well I'd like to do some algebra to rewrite that equation into slope intercept form.
So let's do that right now.
The equation we started with was 10x plus 5y equals 12.
In order to get that in slope intercept form I need to get the y by itself preferably on
the left hand side.
So let's leave the 5y by itself on the left hand side.
How am I going to get that 10x out of the left hand side and move it over to the right
hand side?
I'm going to subtract 10x from both sides of the equation.
And if I subtract 10x from both sides of the equation the 10x on the left minus the
10x will be zero and that will be gone and the left hand side will just be 5y.
But on the right hand side then a negative 10x or a minus 10x is going to show up and
then I'll have to add in the 12 that was already there.
Remember I had to subtract 10x from both sides.
So the equation now is 5y equals negative 10x plus 12.
But I need to get that 5 away from the y.
Remember I want to isolate the y to use that language and how do I get rid of a 5?
Well I can either divide by 5 or multiply both sides by one-fifth.
And in fact that's the language I want to use.
Let's multiply both sides of that equation by one-fifth.
When I do that the 5 on the left hand side multiplied by the one-fifth will just become
a 1 and the left hand side will become 1y or just y.
The right hand side of the equation now is a little more complicated looking.
It's one-fifth times the quantity negative 10x plus 12.
Now I need to simplify that a little bit.
So how am I going to do that?
I'm going to distribute the one-fifth into the parentheses which means I'm going to
multiply the one-fifth with the negative 10x and I'm going to multiply the one-fifth with
the 12.
And when I do that my equation is going to become y equals one-fifth times negative 10x
plus one-fifth times 12.
Again, I've used the distributive property in order to do that.
And now let's simplify a little bit.
The one-fifth times the negative 10, well it's definitely going to be negative because
I'm multiplying a positive one-fifth times a negative 10.
So it's going to have to be a negative 10 times one-fifth, like I do a little bit of
cancellation between the 10 and the 5 and I'll be left with exactly 2 over 1 or 2.
Don't forget the negative sign.
And so I'm going to have y equals negative 2x plus one-fifth times 12.
Well one-fifth times 12 is just not going to simplify very well except that I can write
it as one fraction just squeeze it together and make it 12 divided by 5.
And once I've done that I have my second equation that we started with written in a new form.
It's written in slope intercept form as y equals negative 2x plus 12 over 5.
Now I need to notice something.
I have two equations now, both of them have been written in slope intercept form.
They both have the same slope, negative 2.
But their y intercepts are different.
One of them is at 7 and one of them is at 12-fifths.
With that information can we decide whether the two lines are parallel?
The answer is yes, we can.
They are indeed parallel.
They both have the same slope but they have different y intercepts.
So they won't ever cross one another, they'll just be parallel lines.
Well let's do another example, a similar kind of example except that now I want to find
the equation of a second line which is parallel to one that I've already been given.
So here's the problem.
Find the equation of the line that passes through the point 6,4 and is parallel to y
equals negative 3x plus 5.
So I already know one of the lines, it's y equals negative 3x plus 5, but now I want
the parallel line to that one which goes through 6,4.
Well the equation for this new line that's going to go through 6,4 needs to be in slope
intercept form.
If I can pull that off, thankfully the one I was given is in slope intercept form.
It's y equals mx plus b or y equals negative 3x plus 5.
We saw that slope intercept form back in lesson 10.
So I know the slope of the line that was given to me, it's got slope negative 3.
The new line then also needs to have slope negative 3, fabulous.
But how am I going to use that information to my advantage to find the equation of the
new line?
Well, you know the slope of the new line and you know a point that it's supposed to go
through that was the point 6,4.
What do you think you can use then to write down the equation of this new line?
The answer is the point slope form of the equation.
Great, so let's use the point slope form.
Let me remind you of what it was.
The point slope form said if you know a point x1, y1 and you know the slope of the line,
then the equation of the line is going to be y minus y1 equals m, that's the slope,
times x minus x1.
And that means in this case with slope negative 3 and a point 6,4 the equation of this new
line is going to be y minus 4 equals negative 3 times the quantity x minus 6.
Now let's simplify that just a little bit.
That's going to be y minus 4 equals negative 3 times x plus negative 3 times negative 6.
I've got to go ahead and do that distribution again of the negative 3.
And if I simplify that a little bit, I'm going to have y minus 4 equals negative 3x plus 18.
Now I'd like to write that in slope intercept form if I can, and if you stare at it for
just a second, it's very close to slope intercept form already.
In fact, the only thing that needs to be moved is that minus 4.
How do I get rid of a minus 4 on the left of that equation?
I add 4 to both sides of the equation.
When I add 4 to the left, I get y minus 4 plus 4, which is y minus 0, which is y, and
the right-hand side becomes negative 3x plus 18 plus 4.
Remember, if you're going to add 4 to the left, you've got to add 4 to the right.
Well, 18 plus 4 is 22, and so my equation comes down to y equals negative 3x plus 22.
Now, does that equation look like the equation of a line that's parallel to the equation
we began with?
Yes, they have the same slope, but they have different y-intercepts.
Well, I'd like to look at one more problem on parallel lines in this lesson, and this
time it's going to be a word problem.
So let me walk you through the words of the problem before we jump into the actual algebra.
So a construction company has been tasked with building a new road, which is to be parallel
to Main Street in your downtown.
A graph of the current street has already been plotted out in the Cartesian plane and given
to the construction company.
Now, in this graph, each horizontal step of length 1 represents 1 mile, so that if you
went from the point 2, 0 to 3, 0, you would travel exactly 1 mile in that direction.
And that's the same as moving from, say, the point 5, 1 to the point 6, 1.
Each unit left to right is exactly 1 mile.
The new road is supposed to be built 2 miles east of Main Street to avoid some of the buildings
that are directly east of Main Street.
You don't want your roads running right through the buildings.
So I want the equation of the line that is going to be the line for the new road 2 miles
east of Main Street.
Well, there's a lot to digest in those words, but we can handle it.
Let's just read through it a little bit at a time and pull out what it is we can find.
So let's start by figuring out what we need.
Well, we've been asked for the equation of a new line, which is going to represent this
new road.
No problem.
If I need the equation of a line, what do I have to find?
That's right.
I'm going to need a slope, and I'm also going to need a point that the line goes through,
and I'm going to have to keep one other thing in mind.
These two lines are supposed to be parallel, which means the slopes of the two lines have
to be equal to one another.
OK, so let's move forward from there, and let's see what it is we want to do.
What is the slope of Main Street on this grid?
Well, thanks to the grid, it's pretty easy to figure that out just by using rise over
run.
Let's pick out two points on the line which are kind of convenient to us, and then let's
figure out the slope.
So staring at this graph for just a moment, do we see any points on the line where the
line actually goes through the grid points?
Well, yes we do.
In fact, we see that the line goes through 0, negative 3, that is the y-intercept by
the way, and it also goes through the point 2, 1.
So we now have two points through which that line already runs.
That means the slope of that line is the following.
It's 1 minus negative 3 divided by 2 minus 0, and that's the same as 1 plus 3 divided
by 2, which is 4 divided by 2, which is 2.
And what does that mean?
It means that the slope of the first line was 2, and it means the slope of our new line
needs to be 2 as well.
So we now know the slope of the new line is going to be 2.
Remember the new line is for the new road that the construction company needs to build.
Well, from there I can use the point slope formula to determine the equation of this
new line, but I need a point on the line.
So let's go back to the problem now and ask ourselves, where is this line supposed to
go?
Well, it's supposed to go two miles to the east of Main Street.
Notice for example that the point 2, 1 is on Main Street, and that means if I go two
units to the right from there, I'll be on the point 4, 1 on the new road.
Well that means then I know everything I need to write down the equation of the line that
represents this new road.
It's going to go through the point 4, 1, and it's going to have to have slope 2 because
the slope of the line for Main Street was 2.
And therefore with the 4, 1 point and the slope of 2, I can use the point slope form
of a line to write down the equation.
It's going to be y minus 1 equals 2 times x minus 4.
Now let's simplify that just a bit to get it in slope intercept form.
Y minus 1 equals 2 times x minus 4 is the same as y minus 1 equals 2x minus 8.
The 8 comes from the 2 times 4.
So I have y minus 1 equals 2x minus 8, and if I just add 1 to both sides of the equation,
y will be by itself on the left because minus 1 plus 1 is 0, and on the right I'll have
2x minus 8 plus 1, and minus 8 plus 1 is minus 7.
So I have y equals 2x minus 7.
We see that this is the correct equation if we just plot the line for Main Street, which
was already given to us, and we plot the line for this new road, and we do so on the same
set of axes.
And if you look at that, you'll see that you've got two parallel lines, and the construction
company now knows where to put this road based on that grid.
Now I'd like to transition to the concept of perpendicular lines now as we continue
in this lesson.
Perpendicular lines are also a very special type of line, and so the first thing we want
to do is ask, well, what does it mean for two lines to be perpendicular to one another?
Well, from a graph perspective, it means that the lines intersect at right angles, so they're
going to make a symbol like this when they intersect.
That's what it means to be perpendicular.
But how do you notice when two lines are perpendicular if all you have are the equations?
In other words, they didn't give you the drawings for the lines, they just give you the equations
that tell you what the lines are.
Well, it turns out from an algebra perspective, we can figure that out once we know the equations.
And here's the property that we need to remember about perpendicular lines.
Two lines are perpendicular if the product of their slopes is negative one.
Now do you remember what product means?
The product is the multiplication of the two numbers.
So when we say two lines are perpendicular, if the product of their slopes is negative
one, it means that two lines are perpendicular if the slope of one of the lines times the
slope of the other line is exactly equal to negative one.
The sort of fancy mathematical way of saying that is this, the slope of one of the lines
must be the negative reciprocal of the other slope of the other line.
So that's a big phrase, let me just give you some small examples.
Three and negative one-third are negative reciprocals of one another.
Notice that one of them is positive and the other one is negative and three and one-third
are reciprocals of one another.
Five and negative one-fifth, they are also negative reciprocals of one another.
And lastly, two-thirds and negative three-halves.
They're also negative reciprocals of one another.
Notice that one of them is positive, the other one is negative and two-thirds and three-halves
are reciprocals of one another.
So for example, the lines given by these two equations are perpendicular.
Y equals two X plus three and Y equals negative one-half X plus five.
Look at the product of their slopes.
The product of their slopes is two times negative one-half.
And two times negative one-half is going to be negative one once you cancel those twos.
Notice that two over one and negative one-half are negative reciprocals of one another.
If you quickly sketch a graph of those two equations, you'll see this perpendicular nature
of the two lines, they're going to cross at 90 degree angles.
Similarly, if you had the lines given by the equations Y equals four-sevenths X minus
three and Y equals negative seven-fourths X plus eight, those two lines would also be
perpendicular to one another.
Their slopes using the equations are exactly four-sevenths and negative seven-fourths.
I know that because the two equations were already written in slope-intercept form, those
two slopes are negative reciprocals of one another.
They're clearly reciprocals if you ignore the negative sign, and one of them is positive
and one of them is negative.
So I'm definitely going to have two negative reciprocal slopes when I have four-sevenths
and negative seven-fourths.
And again, if you just draw a quick sketch of those two lines, you'll see that they
are indeed perpendicular.
Might I point out very quickly, if you think about it for a second, if you have two perpendicular
lines, one of them is going to have to have positive slope and the other one is going
to have to have negative slope so that they actually cross at 90 degree angles.
So you have to have one of them being positive and the other one being negative in order
to have perpendicular lines.
Remember, that's very different from parallel lines where the two slopes actually had to
be the same in order to get the parallel line pair.
So here, with perpendicular lines, I'm going to need one positive slope and I'm going to
need one negative slope so that the two will cross correctly.
Now, I can use this kind of information to obtain equations of lines which are described
to us in terms of being perpendicular to one another if I just think through how to
handle the negative reciprocal for the slope.
So let's look at an example where we would have to do that kind of a thing.
Let's find the equation of the line which is perpendicular to the line given by y equals
two-thirds x minus one so that the new line has y-intercept zero comma four.
Now we've been given the y-intercept of the new line so the slope-intercept form of the
line should be very straightforward to write down.
In fact, we know that the equation must be y equals mx plus four since the y-intercept
was given to us as zero comma four.
So the new line, which is supposed to be perpendicular to that other line, must have an equation
of the form y equals mx plus four.
Remember that that m is the slope of this new line.
Well, what is the slope of that new line?
It has to be the negative reciprocal of the slope of the line that was given to us.
What was the slope of the line given to us?
It was two-thirds.
So the slope of this new line must be the negative reciprocal of two-thirds.
And the negative reciprocal of two-thirds is negative three-halves.
So the equation of this new line must be y equals negative three-half x plus four.
And that line is pretty straightforward to draw.
It's got a y-intercept at plus four, and it has this slope of negative three-halves.
And if you sketch those two lines, which would be very wise in order to check your work,
you'll see that the two lines go exactly where they're supposed to go and that they're clearly
perpendicular to one another once you've drawn them.
Well, let's look at another example about these perpendicular lines very, very quickly
and see how things work out.
Here's the example.
Are the lines given by the equations y equals four-fifths x plus two, and y equals five-fourths
x minus one perpendicular?
y equals four-fifths x plus two, and y equals five-fourths x minus one?
Well, if you stop and think about it for just a second, we can actually answer this question
very quickly.
Notice that the two slopes are positive, four-fifths and five-fourths.
So they're both positive.
They're kind of small, four-fifths and five-fourths aren't very big numbers.
But since they're both positive, they can't be perpendicular to one another because the
slopes have to be negative reciprocals of one another.
I see that they're both reciprocals, four-fifths and five-fourths, but one of them has to be
negative and one of them has to be positive.
So don't fall into that trap of thinking, well, I saw four-fifths and I saw five-fourths.
The two lines must be perpendicular.
One must be negative in terms of slope, and the other must be positive in terms of slope.
So these two guys are not perpendicular.
Let me say it a different way.
If the slopes are both positive, four-fifths and five-fourths, then the two lines are actually
going to both go in this direction.
One of them might be like this and the other one might be like this, for example, a little
more steep because they have different slopes, but they're both going up.
They're both increasing because both slopes are positive.
If that's true, then they can't be perpendicular because, again, one must be going up like
this and the other must be going down.
Well, let's move on into a word problem that talks about perpendicular lines with the goal
of trying to see how we can incorporate perpendicular lines with one of these real-world or word-type
problems.
So in the graph that's given to you, the line represents a street in front of a house where
the house is being built.
The point on the y-axis represents the location of the front door of the house.
That point is not on the line, notice, but that's the point where the front door of the
house is going to be located.
The owner of the home wants to have a sidewalk built coming out of the front door, which
is perpendicular to the street.
So the question is, based on this grid, what is the equation of the line that will represent
that sidewalk?
And again, that sidewalk needs to be perpendicular to the street.
Okay, let's first figure out the slope of the line representing the street.
Of course, if we figure out the slope of the line representing the street, we'll know some
information about the slope of the line representing the sidewalk.
I want you to know that we don't need the full equation of the line representing the
street.
I only need its slope, so I'm not interested in its y-intercept.
I could probably find it very quickly, but I don't need it.
I just need the slope.
So let's get two points off of that line, which is representing the street, and let's
find the slope of that line.
Well, the y-intercept is there, 0 comma 5.
You can see that pretty quickly.
And another point that goes through the grid marks pretty nicely is the point 2 comma negative
1.
And 1 also goes through that grid line set pretty nicely.
With those two points in hand, I can get the slope of the street.
So the slope of the street is going to be 5 minus negative 1 divided by 0 minus 2.
We've been doing this a lot, haven't we?
But it's good to make sure we're careful about it as we walk through these calculations.
5 minus negative 1 is the same as 5 plus 1, which is 6.
Now of course, 0 minus 2 is negative 2.
So you have 6 over negative 2, which is negative 3.
Quick question.
Does the line that's in the graph that was given to us look like it has a negative 3 for
slope?
Yes, it does, because it's going down in this direction.
Now with the slope of that line given to us now, well, wasn't given to us, we calculated
it ourselves, we can now calculate the slope of the sidewalk line.
It has to be perpendicular.
The sidewalk has to be perpendicular to the street.
So the slope of the sidewalk line has to be the negative reciprocal of the slope of the
street.
The slope of the street is negative 3, and so the slope of the sidewalk is going to be
positive.
Remember, it has to be a different sign, and it has to be the reciprocal of 3.
What is the reciprocal of 3?
It's 1 third.
And therefore, the slope of the sidewalk line is going to be positive 1 third.
Now what are the coordinates of the point through which the sidewalk line is supposed
to go?
Well that was the little point down on the y-axis there, 0 comma negative 4.
Well I have a point on the line, and I now know it's slope, so I can now calculate the
equation of the line that represents the sidewalk.
Let's write it down very quickly.
It's going to be, using the point slope form, y minus negative 4 equals 1 third times x
minus 0, or y plus 4 equals 1 third x, which is the same as y equals 1 third x minus 4.
In fact, it might have been easier just to use the slope intercept form if you think about
it, since 0 comma negative 4 was the y-intercept of that line.
And if you plot both of these lines now in the same set of axes, you'll actually see
that you do get perpendicular lines.
The sidewalk and the street really will be perpendicular with one another.
Well we've spent several lessons now talking about linear equations.
We've talked about slope, we've talked about its importance and how to interpret it.
We've talked about the slope intercept form of the equation of a line, and the point slope
form of the equation of a line.
We've talked about graphs of lines in general, and the special types of lines called parallel
and perpendicular.
As best you can, you'll want to get comfortable with these parallel and perpendicular lines
as we continue through this course together.
Next time we're going to shift gears a bit from the graphical side of linear equations,
and we're going to start talking about how linear equations can be used to solve word
problems.
I'll see you then.
