We've talked a bit in previous lessons about ways that linear equations appear in real-world
problems and word problems of various sorts.
In today's lesson, I'd like to continue down that path and consider various examples where
real-world data comes into play.
In the process, we'll once again return to this theme of understanding multiple representations
of linear equations, whether it's tables of data or graphs or algebraic rules.
One way in which linear equations arise naturally in the real world is in the conversion of
units from one system to another.
Things like converting from inches to centimeters or miles to kilometers.
Things like that.
I'd like us to look at an example involving temperature conversions today.
So here's a table of values of temperatures in degrees Fahrenheit and degrees Celsius.
And what I'd like to do is find a linear equation which relates the degrees Fahrenheit to degrees
Celsius.
So let's look at the table for just a moment and make sure we understand what the table
is telling us.
First of all, we notice that when the degrees Fahrenheit is 32, then we have zero degrees
Celsius.
In other words, when F is 32, C is zero.
I want you to notice here that I'm using F and C as opposed to X and Y.
It's okay to have that.
We're just changing the variable so I can remember which one is Fahrenheit and which
one is Celsius.
So when F is 32, C is zero.
When F is 50, C is 10.
When F is 77, C is 25.
And when F or the degrees Fahrenheit is 212, C or degrees Celsius is 100.
So basically we have four ordered pairs here, 32, zero, 50, 10, 77, 25, and 212, 100.
Now the problem doesn't say this explicitly, but I want us to find a formula where F is
being treated as the independent variable, like X, like the number you plug into the
formula, and C is being treated like the dependent variable, like Y in most cases, where Y is
what comes out at the end.
We could also find a formula which does the exact opposite, where we treat C as the independent
variable or the variable you plug in, and we treat F as the dependent variable, the
one that comes out.
But that's another problem.
So let's only do one problem with this example.
Let's find this formula now where F is treated as the independent variable and C is treated
as the dependent one.
So let's start, first of all, by finding the slope of the line.
Now you might stop and say, well, how in the world do you know that this data is really
going to fit on a line?
Well, we could check all the possible pairs to confirm that the data really all fits on
one line by checking all the slopes and making sure they're the same.
But for the sake of time in this lesson, let me just promise you that they really all do
fit on a line and that the slopes really will all be the same.
If you'd like to check those later, you certainly can.
Well, if we know they're all on a line, then it means we just really need two points to
find the slope.
So I'm going to suggest we use basically the first two points in the table.
And they are 32, 0, and 50, 10.
Notice that I have the 32 in the first position in the ordered pair and the 0 in the second
position of the ordered pair.
Again, the degrees Fahrenheit is acting like the X and the degrees Celsius is acting like
the Y. Well, then I can calculate my slope using those two points just by doing Y2 minus
Y1 over X2 minus X1, except we're not using Xs and Ys.
So it's going to be something like the difference in the degrees Celsius divided by the difference
in the degrees Fahrenheit.
We can still handle it, though.
And that slope is going to be 10 minus 0 divided by 50 minus 32.
And now we need to simplify that fraction.
10 minus 0, that's straightforward, that's just 10.
50 minus 32 is 18.
And so our slope is 10 divided by 18.
However, that's definitely not in reduced terms because the 10 and the 18 are both even,
so I can factor a 2 out of both and cancel those 2s, and I'll be left with 5 divided
by 9.
That's in reduced form.
So my slope of the line in this example is going to be 5 divided by 9 or 5 9ths.
Well, next, I just need one point, and I can use the point slope form of the equation of
the line to find the equation we want.
You can pick any of the points that are in the table.
I'm simply going to pick 32 comma 0 as my point.
Let me give you a quick hint.
By choosing 32 comma 0, I'm going to make my arithmetic a little easier because that
0 is not really going to do a whole lot with the arithmetic.
So I choose that point somewhat carefully in order to make my work later on a little
bit smaller.
Then my equation of the line is going to be c minus 0 equals 5 9ths times the quantity
f minus 32.
So that's the point slope form of this line.
And again, since I'm not using x's and y's, we have to be a little bit careful where we
put the numbers, but notice that the 32 was a Fahrenheit reading, and it went with the
f in the term f minus 32, and the 0 was a Celsius reading, and it went with the c minus
0.
Now c minus 0 is just c, so my formula looks like c equals 5 9ths times f minus 32.
If you notice, that's an equation of my line.
I'm actually done.
I've finished that part of the example.
I can plug in any value of f now, anyone you choose, even one that's not on the table,
and I can tell what the value of c will be.
Now if you're not satisfied with whether all the data points actually fit on the line,
you can easily check by simply plugging in the coordinates of each point and confirming
that the equation is satisfied.
I'm not going to do that for all the points, but you know, let's check one just to make
sure we did the work right.
Let's take one of the points off of the table and see if it really satisfies the equation
that we just found.
So let's take the point 77 comma 25.
Remember 77 is a Fahrenheit reading, and the 25 is a Celsius.
So I'm going to plug in 77 for f and 25 for c, and I'm going to see if that equation gives
me a true statement.
When I plug in those values to the formula I found, I'm going to have 25 equals 5 ninths
times 77 minus 32, and now I need to simplify.
I see the 77 minus 32 in parentheses.
My order of operations tells me I must do that first, and 77 minus 32 is exactly 45.
Now I have 5 ninths times 45, and if I factor out a 9 from that 45, it will cancel with
the 9 that's in the denominator of 5 ninths.
And what I'll be left with on the right-hand side is simply 5 times the other 5 that's
coming out of the 45.
I'm just going to have 5 times 5, and that means I have 25 equals 25, and that's definitely
a true statement.
And so we're good to go.
That one point definitely lives on the line that we found, and that equation again was
c equals 5 ninths times f minus 32.
Now I'd like to use this information.
We worked pretty hard to get that equation, so let's use it to find something else.
For example, let's determine the temperature in Celsius which would correspond to 80 degrees
Fahrenheit.
You might actually be somewhere today where it's 80 degrees Fahrenheit.
Maybe you need to know what the temperature is in Celsius, so we'll do that in a moment.
And secondly, I'd like to determine the temperature in Fahrenheit if someone tells us that it's
40 degrees Celsius.
So those two problems are kind of different, but we can use the same equation to figure
them both out.
So let's do the first problem.
To do that first problem, I simply am going to replace f by 80, and I'm going to solve
it for c.
Notice how nice it is now to use these letters f and c rather than x and y, because I don't
have any confusion as to where the 80 is going to go.
It's a temperature in Fahrenheit.
It's going to go in for the variable f.
So we were pretty smart in using f and c here.
It makes our life simpler later on.
Well, I'm going to plug in 80 for f into the equation I had.
The equation I had was c equals 5 ninths times f minus 32.
So that's going to become c equals 5 ninths times 80 minus 32.
80 minus 32 is 48.
So I have c equals 5 ninths times 48.
Now 9 and 48 don't have any common factors that are really going to allow me to do any
reduction.
So I'm just going to write 48 as 48 divided by 1, and I'm going to multiply 5 ninths with
48 divided by 1.
When I multiply two fractions like that, I simply multiply the numerators together and
I multiply the denominators together.
The numerator will then become 240.
5 times 48 is 240, and of course the denominator is just 9 because 9 times 1 is 9.
And now I can actually do a little bit of simplification there.
240 divided by 9 is actually 80 over 3.
Well, actually that tells me something then.
The fact that I could do that simplification means there really was a little bit of cancellation
that I could have done with the 9 and the 48.
But notice, it's OK.
We just did the cancellation here.
If we had done it earlier, we would have come up with the same answer.
So in fact, I could have canceled out a little bit between the 9 and 48, but it really is
OK.
What does that tell me now?
C equals 80 over 3, it tells me that the value in Celsius for the temperature 80 degrees
Fahrenheit is basically 80 over 3 degrees.
Well, I've never heard a weatherman say 80 over 3 degrees in my life, but if I wrote
that as a mixed number, it would be 26 and two-thirds degrees, which is basically about
26.66.
It's not exact, but it's approximately 26.66 degrees.
So that's my conversion, 80 degrees Fahrenheit is about 26.66 degrees Celsius.
Now there was a second problem that I mentioned a few moments ago, and that was this.
What if we knew that the degrees in Celsius was 40 and I wanted to find the degrees in
Fahrenheit?
Well, what would we do now?
Well, we're going to approach the problem in a similar way.
But this time, the 40 is a value for C. So I'm going to plug that in for C, and then
I'm going to find F. I'm going to solve for F. We can do that.
Let's go for it.
The original equation was C equals 5 9ths times F minus 32.
We're going to plug in 40 for C, so the left-hand side becomes 40, and now I've got to get
F by itself.
Notice that there's only one variable now.
It's the F.
Anything else is a number throughout that equation.
So how am I going to isolate F or get F by itself?
Well, the first thing I need to do is get rid of that 5 9ths that's sitting out in front
of the F minus 32.
The most straightforward way to do that is to multiply that term by 9 5ths, the reciprocal
of 5 9ths.
Because when I multiply 5 9ths times 9 5ths, everything will cancel, and I'll just have
a 1.
But remember, if you multiply one side of an equation by 9 5ths, you must multiply the
other side of the equation by 9 5ths as well.
So the left-hand side will become 9 5ths times 40, and the right-hand side is simply
going to become 1 times F minus 32.
The 9 5ths and the 5 9ths will cancel each other out.
And so your equation is 9 5ths times 40 equals F minus 32.
How does 9 5ths clean up?
I sure hope it cleans up some.
Well, 40 has a 5 in it.
In fact, 40 is 8 times 5.
So if I cancel those 5s, I'll be left with 9 times 8 on the left-hand side, and 9 times
8 is 72.
So my equation is now 72 equals F minus 32.
And notice that the F is almost by itself now.
What would we do to get the F by itself?
Well, we need to remove that minus 32.
What's the opposite of subtraction?
Addition.
So if I add 32 to both the left and the right-hand side, the right-hand side will simply become
F. The left-hand side becomes 72 plus 32, which is 104.
So let's interpret what we just found.
When you have 40 degrees Celsius or 40 degrees C, it equals 104 degrees Fahrenheit.
We should quickly check that with a plot of our linear equation to make sure that point
lies on the graph.
So I've drawn very quickly a plot of that graph here, and we should check to make sure,
at least if we can just see it somewhat generally, whether 104 comma 40 lies on the graph.
The point really is 104 comma 40, not 40 comma 104, because we're treating the Fahrenheit
values as the X values and the Celsius values as the Y values.
Excellent.
Well, let's move on to another example, which is also related to temperature, but in a very,
very different way.
So here's the example.
It's known that the boiling point of water depends on the altitude at which we're boiling
the water.
In other words, if you're down in a valley versus on top of a mountain, the actual boiling
point of water or the temperature at which the water will begin to boil differs.
It's also known that the relationship between boiling point and altitude is actually linear,
so the points will live on a straight line.
Given that the boiling point of water is 100 degrees Celsius at sea level and approximately
91.6 degrees Celsius at 8,000 feet above sea level, I want to know what the boiling
point of water is in Denver, Colorado at Mile High Stadium.
Well, this is a great question with lots of nuances, so we should start by asking the
following.
What is the linear relationship that describes the boiling point of water in degrees Celsius
and the altitude above sea level in feet?
Okay, so let's take some time to define our variables.
It's always important to lay out what the variables are going to be.
So let's let H be the height above sea level in feet and let's let B be the boiling point
temperature of water in degrees Celsius.
What I'd like us to find is a linear equation which treats the H as the independent variable,
like the X, and it treats the B as the dependent variable, like the Y.
Well, the first thing we need to do if we want to find the equation of a line is to find
the slope.
And since the B is acting like the Y here, the slope is going to be change in B over
change in H. So what does that give us?
Well, if we use the two points that I gave you earlier, change in B over change in H will
be 100 minus 91.6 divided by 0 minus 8,000.
If you simplify that just a bit, the numerator becomes 8.4, the denominator becomes negative
8,000, and you're left with a slope of negative 0.00105.
Now just real quickly, when we draw the line later on, it means that the slope being negative
is going to make us go down like this.
And since the slope is pretty small and close to zero, the line will actually be pretty
flat, but it does have to go down.
Now can we find an equation for the line?
Well we have two points, 0 comma 100 and 8,000 comma 91.6.
Notice that being at Z level is the same as being at H equals zero.
That's an assumption I've made there, but it's a very, very important one.
And that means that the Y intercept, or I should say the B intercept, is easy to find
because we have that point given to us when H is zero.
Since we have the intercept, I would suggest we just write down the slope intercept form
of the equation of this line.
Here it is.
B equals negative 0.00105 times H plus 100.
Remember where that 100 came from?
It came from that point which had zero and 100 in it.
Now we need to use this equation to find the value of B, the boiling point, when the H,
the height, is one mile.
Mile high stadium is called mile high stadium because it's one mile above sea level.
But wait a minute, we have to be very careful of our units.
This is a very important part of today's lesson.
We must always watch our units.
And how have we been measuring height in this example?
Well, we've been doing it in feet, so we need to convert one mile into feet.
It turns out that one mile is exactly 5,280 feet.
So we need to use H equals 5,280 in the equation for the boiling point.
And that means that the boiling point of water at one mile high above sea level is given
by B equals negative 0.00105 times 5,280 plus 100.
If you do some arithmetic there, B becomes negative 5.544 plus 100 or 94.456 degrees Celsius.
Now we should make sure that this thing actually makes sense.
So let's go back to the data, the information that we had to begin with.
At sea level, which was 0 feet, the boiling point is 100 degrees.
At 8,000 feet above sea level, the boiling point will have dropped to 91.6 degrees Celsius.
One mile 5,280 feet is somewhere between 0 and 8,000, and it's closer to the 8,000 than
it is to the 0.
So I would expect my answer to be somewhere between 100 degrees and 91.6 degrees, but
probably closer to the 91.6 than to 100.
The answer that we found, 94.456, is between 100 and 91.6, and it's a bit closer to the
91.6 than the 100.
And this gives us confidence that the result that we found is in the right ballpark.
And if, for example, we had found a temperature of 5,000 degrees, we would have known that
we were wrong because it should have been between the temperatures that we'd already
seen.
Okay, let's look at another example, this time starting with a graph which models a situation,
and let's see if we can go from there to solve a real-world problem.
Here's the example.
A child is standing at the top of a tall building and accidentally releases a helium
filled balloon, which then rises steadily above him.
The graph that you see here shows the height of the balloon above the ground for several
minutes.
I want you to notice that the x-axis here represents the time in minutes.
From the moment the child lets go of the balloon, and the y-axis represents the height of the
balloon in feet above the ground.
I'd like us to take some time just to look at this graph and make sure we understand
what it tells us before we do anything else.
Remember, one of the important things I want us to constantly think about is how we represent
linear equations in different ways, and one of those ways is with the graph.
So let's think about what the graph actually tells us.
First of all, how high off the ground was the child when he released the balloon?
Well, if you think about what the graph is telling me for a second, that answer is,
the y-intercept.
Why is that?
Because at that point, 0 comma 100, the time is zero.
And time equals zero is the time when the child let go of the balloon.
So the value of 100, which is that y-intercept, tells me that the height of the building,
or the height at which the balloon was as soon as it was released, is exactly 100.
So the child was on a relatively tall building when he actually let go of the balloon.
Next question.
What is the rate at which the balloon goes up?
The balloon is taking off.
We've been told that it's going at a steady rate.
So if it's going to go along this straight line in terms of time versus its height, then
what's going to tell us the rate at which the balloon goes up?
Answer?
It's the slope.
That's exactly the interpretation of this line.
The slope tells us the rise over the run, or the ratio of the change in the height or
y value to the change in the time.
So the slope is telling me the ratio of change in height over change in time.
And that's basically telling me that the units for the slope are feet per minute.
So what's the slope of the line?
Well, look at the graph once again.
After two minutes in the air, the balloon has gone from being 100 feet off the ground
to 500 feet off the ground.
Now I want you to notice that the line goes through the point 2,500.
That's how I know that after two minutes, the balloon is 500 feet off the ground.
And therefore, the slope must be 500 minus 100 divided by 2 minus 0, or 400 divided
by 2, which is 200 feet per minute.
So the balloon is moving at about 200 divided by 60, or 20 divided by 6, or 10 divided
by 3 feet per second.
When I divided by that 60, I went from minutes to seconds.
It's going about 3 and a third feet per second.
That's not a bad pace.
Now let's look at another example where we want to involve a graph as we march through
the problem together.
Here's the example.
Suppose an elevator starts at the top floor of a building, which is 800 feet high.
And suppose it goes down at a steady rate.
After 15 seconds, the elevator is 560 feet above the ground.
Here's the question.
How long will it take the elevator to reach the ground, or to reach the ground floor?
Well, one of the biggest keys here in the language that was given to us is that the elevator
is going down at a steady rate.
A steady rate or a constant rate is mathematical jargon, which tells us we're dealing with
a linear equation, which relates the height of the elevator to the time it takes to go
down.
Given that we know we'll have a linear equation, we know we just need two pieces of data, two
points that lie on the line.
So let's start by defining some variables again, which will help us draw this line and
get a feeling for what's happening with the elevator.
Let's let x be time in seconds, and let's let y be height above the ground in feet.
So x is telling me the time that the elevator is moving, the amount of time that the elevator
is moving, and y is telling me how high the elevator is above the ground.
And we were given two pieces of information, namely when the time is zero, the elevator
is at 800 feet, remember that's when we started running the elevator, so time equals zero,
and when the time was 15, the elevator was 560 feet above the ground.
These two points have to lie on the line.
From those, I can figure out the slope, right?
Let's do it very quickly.
It's going to be 800 minus 560 divided by zero minus 15, or 240 divided by negative
15, which is exactly negative 16, and in this case that's going to be feet per second.
So the elevator is traveling at a rate of negative 16 feet per second.
Now we should pause.
What does that negative sign actually tell me?
Well, simply put, the negative sign is telling me that the elevator is going downwards.
That's all it's telling me.
So it's going down at a rate of 16 feet per second.
Now from there, I can get an equation for the line using the slope intercept form of
the equation.
Why?
Because zero comma 800, which is one of the points on my line, is the y intercept of the
line.
And we know the slope, we just figured it out.
So we can figure out the equation of the line now very straightforwardly.
y equals mx plus b is the slope intercept form of the equation of the line, and that's
going to be y equals negative 16x plus 800.
Now we can sketch that graph.
Here's a sketch, and from it, we were asked to determine how long it would take for the
elevator to be on the ground.
Well, how high is the elevator off the ground?
If the elevator is on the ground, answer zero feet.
So what I want to know is, what is the x value when y equals zero?
Well, what does that mean about the graph of this line?
That's exactly the x intercept of the graph of this line, right?
When y is zero, you're somewhere on the x axis.
So I'm looking for the x intercept of this graph.
Well look at the graph.
I tried to plot it carefully on some graph paper so that we could try to see where that
cross is made, and in fact, if you look at the x axis, it appears that the x intercept
happens when x equals 50.
Now let's interpret that.
X equals 50 is 50 seconds.
So the graph is telling us that once the elevator started going down at the very top of the
building, it took exactly 50 seconds for it to reach the ground floor.
And we should confirm that with the equation very quickly.
Our equation was y equals negative 16x plus 800.
If I want y to equal zero, I can let that left-hand side be zero, and I'll have zero
equals negative 16x plus 800.
Subtracting 800 to the left-hand side will give me negative 800 equals negative 16 times
x.
How do we get the x by itself?
We divide both sides by negative 16, and the left-hand side will then become negative
800 divided by negative 16.
Because I have two negatives there, they will cancel each other, so my final answer will
be positive, and 800 divided by 16 is 50.
So indeed, x equals 50 seconds is the correct answer.
Well, we've taken some time today to talk about some real-world problems and how they
relate to linear equations, and we'll continue this theme as we move on to the next lesson.
I'll see you then.
