In many of the earlier lessons you and I have looked at in this course, we've been studying
polynomials.
When we were studying linear equations and their graphs, we were studying polynomials.
And when we were studying quadratic equations and their graphs, we were also studying polynomials.
Now I've avoided using that word very often, but what I'd like to do today is to talk more
about what a polynomial is and what we know about the family of polynomials and polynomial
functions in general.
So we should start by explaining what a polynomial really is.
And in the process, I want us to also understand what a polynomial is not.
It's just as important that we see what isn't a polynomial in order to understand what is
a polynomial.
So let's start with a working definition of a polynomial and use it in some examples.
So it's going to sound a bit technical, but bear with me, we'll try to tease it out a
little in just a few moments.
A polynomial in the variable x is an expression of the form a sub 0 plus a sub 1 times x plus
a sub 2 times x squared plus dot dot dot plus a sub n times x to the n.
I know that sounds technical, but let's understand what it means.
Each of the numbers a sub 0, a sub 1, a sub 2 up to a sub n are simply that.
They're numbers.
They might be positive.
They might be negative.
They might even be 0.
Those are going to be called coefficients.
And all of the powers on x have to be positive integers.
That's actually the most important part of this definition, that each of the powers on
the x's must be positive whole numbers.
Now the other only other comment I want to make about that definition is the little dot
dot dot that's right in the middle.
What is that signifying?
Well, we didn't write down every one of the terms.
There might have been 100 different terms to write down in that sum that I showed you
a moment ago.
So in order to collapse the notation or to try to squeeze it some, I've put that dot dot
dot in to show that there might have been other terms in the middle that we simply have
not written down explicitly.
So that's just there almost like a shorthand or a contraction to try to squeeze in the notation
just a little bit.
Now, you might think that everything I've just said is extremely confusing.
In fact, your eyes might even be glazing over at this point.
But don't do that.
Let me show you some examples.
You know, I've taught math for a long time, and I find that sometimes a few examples can
help make the definition make a lot better sense.
So let's just look at some examples and see some polynomials in action.
First of all, 5 minus 27x is a polynomial.
5 is a number.
Minus 27 is a number.
Notice that the only power of x you really have here is x to the 1.
That's inside the 27x.
And of course, 1 is a positive integer.
So that power on x is perfectly fine for this to be a polynomial.
5 minus 27x is a polynomial.
And notice something.
It's actually linear.
We would have seen that during our linear equation lessons a long time ago.
Here's a second example.
4 plus 7x minus 3x to the second power.
That is also a polynomial.
4 is a number.
7 is a number.
Negative 3 is a number.
And notice the powers on x are x to the 1 and x to the 2.
And 1 and 2 are both positive integers.
So 4 plus 7x minus 3x squared is also a polynomial.
And it's a quadratic polynomial because the highest power is 2.
The highest power on x is that 2.
Well you would have seen quadratics for several lessons in this course already as well.
So you see, for many, many lessons, you were studying polynomials.
It's just that we were studying very special ones, linear and quadratic.
Here's another example of a polynomial.
3 minus 10x plus 10x squared plus 100x to the fifth.
Now before I go anywhere, let me make several comments about the polynomial I just showed
you.
First of all, some of you may have already seen these kinds of functions.
And you might be saying, hey, I thought I was supposed to write polynomials with the
largest power of x first and then write all the smaller powers later on.
So for example, we might write 4 plus 7x minus 3x squared as negative 3x squared plus 7x
plus 4, where the powers on the x actually go down.
I want to point out that those two things are the same polynomial.
It's just that in one case, we've written the powers going in one direction.
And in another case, we've written the powers of x going down.
In fact, either of those ways of writing it is perfectly fine.
But for the most part, we'll probably write our polynomials so that the powers actually
do go down, starting with the highest power on x and then writing them from there in lower
powers.
Why would we care about which order to write things in?
Well, in theory, it doesn't matter.
But it turns out that the highest power on x is extremely important when it comes to
polynomials.
In a few minutes, I'm going to tell you why.
And because of that, I'm going to go ahead and write my polynomials most of the time
with the powers on x, starting at the largest one and then going down from there.
Now, I want you to also notice that it was OK to have positive and negative coefficients.
Remember, coefficients are the numbers in front of the powers of x.
The sign of those coefficients doesn't matter.
So I had a negative 10 as a coefficient.
I could have a plus 100 as a coefficient.
Those are perfectly fine in polynomials.
So don't worry about the signs of the coefficients so much.
Also, you may have noticed that in the example I gave you negative 3 minus 10x plus 10x
squared plus 100x to the fifth, it looks like I actually missed some terms.
I don't see an x cubed in there.
I don't see an x to the fourth as well.
And so you might be saying, wait a minute, he must have made a mistake.
Is that a typo?
The answer is no.
You just want to think of those terms as actually having coefficients of 0.
If you wrote in 0x cubed, it wouldn't change the polynomial.
But because of that coefficient of 0, I don't really need to write in that term.
So it's OK if you don't see some of the powers of x in the middle because you can just think
of them as having a coefficient of 0.
Now let me make one more kind of radical comment about polynomials.
And that is that the coefficients in front of the terms can be any real numbers that
you want.
So for example, square root of 3 times x to the fifth minus 1 fourth x to the fourth
plus 19x is also a perfectly good polynomial.
The key is not so much what the coefficients are.
The key is that the exponents on the powers of x need to be positive integers.
So I want to see things like x to the one, x to the two, x to the three, x to the 20,
and so on.
I'm not as worried about where the coefficients come from.
Now I want you to notice that I said the phrase in the variable x when I gave my official
definition of the word polynomial.
But there's nothing special about x.
We could use a different variable if we wanted, like a y or z or t or anything else.
So for example, y cubed plus 8y squared plus 2y minus 17, that's a polynomial.
It's just in the variable y at that point.
And t to the fifth plus t to the fourth plus t plus 1 is also a polynomial, but in that
case, we've used the variable t instead of the variable x.
OK, now some of you might be saying, well, it looks like just about anything could be
a polynomial.
And if you think that, well, you might think that because I've shown you so many examples,
but you'd be wrong if you thought that just about any algebraic expression can be a polynomial.
So what I'd like to do now is show you some examples of algebraic expressions which are
not polynomials to help you start to see the contrast between what is a polynomial and
what isn't.
So here's an example of something that is not a polynomial, x to the 1 third plus x
plus 2.
Now given the comments I made over the last few minutes, can you tell why that's not a
polynomial?
Well, it's not the 2 and it's not the x in the middle.
It's the x to the 1 third.
That 1 third is not a positive integer.
Now it is positive, but it's not an integer.
1 third is a fraction.
And because of that, I'm not allowed to have 1 third as an exponent on one of the x's.
It's not allowed to be a power of x if I want a polynomial.
So x to the 1 third plus x plus 2 cannot be a polynomial.
It is not a polynomial.
And in the same sort of way, the function square root of x is also not a polynomial.
Because square root of x equals x to the 1 half and 1 half is not a positive integer.
1 half is a fraction.
So square root of x, although it's a perfectly good function, is not a polynomial.
That's the key.
Now, let's look at some other things that are not polynomials just to give you a feeling
for some of the things that can't be polynomials.
How about x to the negative 2 minus 3 times x to the negative 1?
Well, what keeps that from being a polynomial?
It's not the minus 3.
I'm allowed to have negative coefficients in front of powers of x.
So the minus 3 is not keeping that from being a polynomial.
What is keeping that from being a polynomial is the negative exponents on x, the negative
powers, like the negative 2 and the negative 1.
Those negative powers keep x to the minus 2 minus 3 x to the negative 1 from being a
polynomial.
So when I'm talking about polynomials in this lesson today, I'm not imagining things
like x to the negative 2 or x to the negative 1.
That would not be allowed.
All right?
Let's try another example of something that's not a polynomial.
What if you take x squared plus 2x and divided by x cubed plus 1?
Now, I need to point out x squared plus 2x by itself is a polynomial.
And x cubed plus 1 by itself is a polynomial.
But as soon as you take the ratio of those two things, x squared plus 2x divided by x
cubed plus 1, that quantity, that ratio is no longer a polynomial.
You will not be able to write that as a sum of terms where you just have x's raised to
positive integer values.
And therefore, x squared plus 2x divided by x cubed plus 1 is not a polynomial.
I will point out that there are a few times, very rare cases, where you can divide one
polynomial by another to get a polynomial back.
But those are extremely rare.
And in the case that I showed you, the specific example I've shown you, that is definitely
not going to be a polynomial.
So once you start to think about the definition and these examples of things that are polynomials
and things that are not polynomials, I hope you'll see that a polynomial is actually a
pretty particular thing.
Not every algebraic expression you write down gets to be a polynomial.
Now before we go forward, I want to mention two other vocabulary terms that are closely
related to polynomials that are extremely important.
So let's get those here.
First, the degree of a polynomial is the largest power in the polynomial.
So for example, the degree of 14x to the fifth plus 23x to the fourth minus 102x plus
19 is 5.
The degree of that polynomial is 5.
Notice that you have to be careful when you're looking for the degree.
For example, what if I wrote this polynomial, 1 plus 3x plus 4x squared minus 8x cubed?
The degree of that polynomial is 3.
I have to go look in that thing for the highest power of x.
And if I look carefully, I'm going to see the 3 on the negative 8x cubed.
And so the degree of that is 3.
Similarly, if I wrote down 2 minus 10x plus 8x to the fourth minus 5x squared, the degree
of that polynomial is actually 4 because the highest power on any of the x's there is a
4.
Remember that the order that I write down the terms in the polynomial is not what matters.
If I want to find the degree, I've got to be very careful and look for the largest power
on the x.
Hopefully, the polynomial has been written in such a way that that largest power is in
front.
Remember I talked earlier about putting the largest power in front and then writing all
the other powers later.
If I wrote it that way, then the degree is easy to find.
But if it hasn't been written that way, if the terms have been sort of jumbled up a
bit, then I have to go find the degree very carefully by looking for that largest power
of x somewhere inside the expression.
Now there's a second vocabulary term that's really common when we're studying polynomials
and that's called the leading coefficient.
So what is the leading coefficient?
Well it's the coefficient or number in front of the term which contains the largest power
of x.
So for example, if I gave you the polynomial 14 x to the fifth plus 23 x to the fourth
minus 102 x plus 19, the leading coefficient is the number in front of the highest power
of x.
The highest power of x is the x to the fifth.
So the leading coefficient in that polynomial is 14.
The leading coefficient of 1 plus 3x plus 4x squared minus 8x cubed would be the negative
8 that's in front of the x cubed.
And the leading coefficient of 2 minus 10x plus 8x to the fourth minus 5x squared would
be plus 8 because that 8 is sitting in front of the highest power of x which is the x to
the fourth.
So you can see that the degree and the leading coefficient are somewhat linked because they
all, they both sit in the same term.
And if you actually write your polynomials with that highest power of x in front and
then all the other powers later on, you'll see that the degree is very easy to find.
It's the power on that x and the leading coefficient is in front of all of the other terms.
And that's one reason some people call it the leading coefficient.
That leads the polynomial if you've written your terms in that way.
Now I'd like to shift gears a bit and talk about the aspects of the graphs of polynomials
that we can talk about.
So I'm not going to try to look at too many specific examples as I talk about their graphs
but I want to talk in general terms about the graphs of polynomials.
One thing we can say is that the graph of a polynomial never breaks and it never has
a sharp corner.
I want to repeat that because it's very important.
The graph of a polynomial never has any breaks in it and it never has any sharp corners.
So for example, I want to show you a few graphs of polynomials.
I'm not trying to show you these in all their exact detail necessarily but I would like
you to at least get the general feel for what these graphs look like.
So let's start out with the graph of x cubed minus 3x squared plus 2x plus 1.
Again, I don't want you to worry about actually drawing it yourself.
I just want you to get a feeling for what the graph looks like.
And I want you to notice that it's a nice smooth curve.
It's got a little bit of up and down to it but notice that it does not break.
There are not pieces broken apart in it and you also don't have any sharp corners.
Nice smooth edges as you look at the graph.
Let's look at another example of a polynomial graph.
Let's take x to the fourth minus 5x squared plus 2x.
And again, I want you to notice the graph comes down.
It makes some nice smooth curves and it goes back up.
No breaks in the pieces and no sharp corners either anywhere on the graph.
Now let's take another one.
This one might look a little strange as a polynomial but I wanted you to get the feeling
for a polynomial that might have a lot of ups and downs to it.
So here's the polynomial, 1 over 200 times x to the sixth minus 29 over 200x to the fourth
minus 325th x cubed plus 43 over 50x squared plus 6 fifths x, it's a lot to say.
But the graph actually has a lot of very nice features.
Again you see the graph comes down.
It's going to make a lot of different ups and downs, hills and valleys so to speak.
And then it takes off again.
But I want you to see that you don't have any breakage in the graph and you don't have
any sharp corners in the graph.
Everything is nice and smooth.
Now why do I mention these breaks or sharp corners?
Because if you look at the graphs of functions that are not polynomials, you will start to
see things like breaks or sharp corners.
In the case of sharp corners, let me mention the function x raised to the two thirds power.
Let me point out again x raised to the two thirds power is not a polynomial because two
thirds is not a whole number.
And if you look at the graph of x to the two thirds, you'll see that it looks a bit like
a nice curve on one side and a nice curve on the other.
But when they meet at the origin, you actually do get a sharp corner.
And that sharp corner immediately tells you that you're not dealing with a polynomial.
So there's an example of a perfectly good function, but its graph has got that sharp
corner and that reminds us that x to the two thirds is not a polynomial.
Okay, let's look at another graph.
And again, I'm not trying to get us today to see how to draw these graphs.
I just want you to get a feel, visual feel for what's happening with these graphs.
Let's look at this function, x squared plus 1 over x squared minus 1.
Remember a few moments ago I said when you take the ratio of two polynomials like you
do here, x squared plus 1 divided by x squared minus 1, you often do not get a polynomial
in return.
That ratio is not itself as one thing, a polynomial.
Well, let's look at its graph.
And when you do look at the graph, you actually see that it's broken into three different
pieces.
There's a piece in quadrant 1.
There's a piece in quadrant 2.
And then there's a upside down sort of u shape that is right around the y-axis below
the x-axis.
The fact that the graph is broken into those pieces like that tells us that we're looking
at the graph of something which is not a polynomial.
So it's very important that we see that polynomials have these nice smooth curves, no sharp corners,
no broken pieces, but that the graphs of many, many other types of functions do have either
sharp corners or broken pieces.
Now next I'd like to talk about the domain of a polynomial for just a moment.
Remember the domain of a function is the set of things we're allowed to plug into the function
or the set of allowable input values for the function.
It turns out that every real number is in the domain of a polynomial.
You're allowed to plug in any real number you want into a polynomial.
That's not true of other kinds of functions.
For example, you can't plug x equals negative 2 into the function y equals the square root
of x.
Why?
Because the square root of a negative number, like the square root of negative 2, doesn't
make any sense.
So x equals negative 2 is not in the domain of the function y equals square root of x.
Similarly, you can't plug the value x equal 1 into the function y equals x squared plus
4 over x squared minus 1.
Why?
Because if you try plugging in 1 into that function, the denominator is going to become
0.
1 squared minus 1 is 1 minus 1, which is 0.
And of course, you can't divide by 0.
And therefore, x equals 1 is not in the domain of the function y equals x squared plus 4
divided by x squared minus 1.
But in a polynomial, no matter what the polynomial is, it doesn't matter what you try to plug
in.
You're not going to end up with things like division by 0.
You're not going to end up with negative numbers under radical symbols.
And so the domain of a polynomial is the set of all real numbers.
We can actually plug in any value that we want into the variables in a polynomial.
And from a graphing perspective, then, it means that there aren't any gaps in the graph.
There aren't any places on the x-axis where the graph just sort of disappears or breaks
apart.
So what else can we say about graphs of polynomials?
I think this is a really good set of topics to talk about before we close out our lesson.
What about the number of x-intercepts of a polynomial?
We talked about how many x-intercepts you could have with linear graphs and with parabolas,
which were the graphs of degree 2 polynomials or quadratic polynomials.
What about if you have a polynomial with a much bigger degree?
Well, here's the fact that we can quote, the number of x-intercepts of the graph of
a polynomial is at most the degree of the polynomial.
The number of x-intercepts doesn't have to equal the degree.
It just has to be less than or equal to the degree.
So for example, if I took a bunch of graphs with degree 4, I could then have either no
x-intercepts, one x-intercept, two x-intercepts, three x-intercepts, or four x-intercepts.
I could not have, for example, five x-intercepts if the polynomial I start with only has degree
4.
For example, if you look at the graph of x to the fourth plus two, you'll see that the
whole graph stays above the x-axis.
So the graph of x to the fourth plus two has no x-intercepts.
By the way, I need to make a quick comment here.
X to the fourth plus two, when you graph it, looks like a parabola.
It's got that same U sort of shape.
It turns out in very technical terms that it's not a parabola.
I know it looks like one, but the ends actually go in a slightly different direction if you're
looking at x to the fourth plus two compared to something like x squared plus two.
Oh, I know they all go up.
In both cases, the ends go up.
But in one case, the ends are going to be somewhat flatter as they go up, and in the
other case, they'll be sharper.
So the graph of x to the fourth plus two is not officially a parabola.
Now what if you looked at the graph of x to the fourth?
That's also a degree four polynomial.
And if you look at that graph, you'll see that it actually just sits right on the x-axis,
and therefore only has exactly one x-intercept.
So we've seen an example of a degree four polynomial that has no x-intercepts and an
example with exactly one x-intercept.
If you plot x to the fourth minus 2x squared plus one, you'll have exactly two x-intercepts.
If you plot 2x to the fourth minus 4x squared, you'll actually have exactly three x-intercepts,
and you get a sort of soft W shape in order to do that.
And if you plot the graph of 2x to the fourth minus 4x squared plus one, you'll have exactly
four x-intercepts.
So you really can have zero or one or two or three or four x-intercepts if you have
degree four polynomials.
But what you can't have is five or more x-intercepts if you're plotting a degree four polynomial.
And actually we can say a little bit more about the graphs of polynomials besides just
the number of x-intercepts they have.
The comment can also be made that the ends of the graph of a polynomial never flatten
out.
They never just sort of get horizontal, if you will, or close to horizontal.
The ends of the graph of a polynomial will eventually either go up to plus infinity or
go down to negative infinity.
Also we can actually say what happens to the ends if we look at the degree of the polynomial.
If the degree of the polynomial is even, like in the case of a quadratic polynomial where
the degree is exactly two, then both ends either go up together or they both go down.
Remember in the parabola case, the ends go up or they both go down.
If you look at all of the examples we looked at a moment ago of degree four polynomials,
you'll notice that both ends eventually went up or both ends eventually went down.
Now I don't know what's happening in the middle by the way.
When I say that the ends go up, it might be the case that both ends go up but in the middle
the polynomials graph makes a bunch of ups and downs, a bunch of hills and valleys.
I'm not talking about what's happening in the middle, I'm talking about what's happening
on the ends.
Now if the degree is odd, what happens to the graph of the polynomial then?
Well if the degree of the polynomial is odd, then it turns out that one of the ends goes
up and the other end will go down.
Now it might be in the other direction but ultimately one end goes up and the other end
goes down.
If the sign of the leading coefficient, remember what the leading coefficient is, it's the
number in front of the term of highest power on x.
If the sign of that leading coefficient is positive, then it turns out that the end on
the left will be going down and the end on the right will be going up, something like
this.
If the sign of that leading coefficient is negative, then I know that the graph will
actually change in its orientation.
The left hand end will be going up to plus infinity and the right hand end will be going
down to negative infinity.
So when my degree is odd for a polynomial, it means that the ends go in different directions.
One goes to plus infinity, one goes to minus infinity.
Now again, that's just the ends.
I can't really say a whole lot about what's happening in the middle of the graph of a polynomial
but I can say definitely what happens in the ends as I look at the graphs.
Now I really should ask the question, what is it that is true about the leading coefficient
that makes the ends behave in that way?
And what I want to say today is this.
If you're looking at a polynomial and you want to know which term is the one that controls
the others or is dominant, it turns out that it's the term that has the highest power on
x.
And that's because if you plug in a really, really large number for x, and I don't mean
like x equals 100, I mean x equals 100 million, then you'll find that the term with the highest
power on x is actually going to give you the biggest contribution to the polynomial.
When you plug in large values of x and you think about the graph, it means that you're
plugging in large values of x either on the positive side or large values of x on the
negative side.
And so the point is that what happens out on the ends is going to be affected the most
by the term where the power on x is highest.
If you think about it, 100 million to the fifth is much bigger than say 100 million squared.
You might have been happy with either 100 million to the fifth dollars or 100 million
squared dollars, but I promise 100 million to the fifth is much, much bigger than 100
million squared.
Well, we've talked enough about end behavior, we talked about x intercepts and so on with
the graphs.
In fact, we spent time today talking about a lot of properties of polynomials.
When we remembered that, we used to talk about linear polynomials.
We may not have called them polynomials, but that's what we were talking about.
And quadratic expressions, which were quadratic polynomials, we've learned a lot of other
vocabulary terms today like degree and leading coefficient, and I tried to help us see or
visualize different parts of the graphs of polynomials, especially what's going on with
the ends.
Next time, we're going to talk about the algebra side of polynomials.
We'll learn how to add, subtract, multiply, and even divide polynomials, and that's a
very important part of our study of polynomials.
So I look forward to talking with you then.
