In our last lesson, we discussed polynomials in very general terms.
I would now like to spend a good bit of time in this lesson talking about the algebra side
of polynomials, how we add, subtract, multiply and divide polynomials.
In the process, we're going to look at several examples of how to complete these operations
on these polynomials and we'll see that much of what we discussed in the lessons on linear
and quadratic expressions can be done with these larger polynomial expressions.
So let's take these operations one at a time and start with adding polynomials.
You've already seen everything you need to know about how to add two polynomials.
Basically, you just need to combine like terms.
So with that rule in mind, let's look at the following example.
I'd like us to simplify 7x to the fourth plus 5x squared minus 2x plus 3, that's one polynomial,
plus the other polynomial 8x to the fourth minus 9x cubed plus 15x squared plus 12x
plus 27.
The key here is that we must look for like terms and what are the like terms in this
case?
They are the terms where the powers on x are the same.
So we just need to be careful to combine those right terms together and again, the like
terms will be the ones where the powers are the same.
So I see a 7x to the fourth and then I see an 8x to the fourth and the other polynomial.
I can combine those two by adding them and I'll have 7 plus 8 equals 15.
So that'll give me 15x to the fourth.
The negative 9x cubed actually doesn't have another term with which to combine, but that's
not a problem.
Just leave it there by itself and move on to some of the other terms.
5x squared plus the 15x squared will give me 20x squared.
Then I see a negative 2x and it has 12x with which it can be combined and negative 2x plus
12x is plus 10x.
And lastly, I see a constant 3 and I see another constant 27 and those two can be added together.
3 plus 27 is 30.
When I take all of those pieces and glue them back together, my final answer is going to
be 15x to the fourth minus 9x cubed plus 20x squared plus 10x plus 30.
And that's the sum.
Notice that almost all the terms actually had another term with which to be combined.
The negative 9x cubed did not, but it just came along for the ride, so to speak.
And at the end, it showed up as a negative 9x cubed as part of the final solution.
No problem at all.
So that example was pretty straightforward.
Let's try another one very quickly.
Let's simplify 5x to the fourth plus 18x squared minus 10 plus 6x cubed plus 7x squared plus
8x.
Again, I'm adding these two polynomials together and all I really have to do is combine like
terms.
And when I do that, I see again that some of the terms have pieces that they can combine
with and other terms really don't.
But when I combine the like terms that have the same powers on the x's, I should get as
a final answer 5x to the fourth plus 6x cubed plus 25x squared plus 8x minus 10.
Now with those two examples done, let's answer the following question, which is kind of interesting
to talk about when it comes to the degree of the polynomials.
How does the degree of the sum of two polynomials relate to the degrees of the two polynomials
that you started with?
In other words, if you look at the degrees of the two separate polynomials that you added
together, and then you look at the degree of the final answer, how do they relate?
And the answer is that the degree of the sum is always going to be the larger of the two
starting degrees.
So the degree of polynomials actually doesn't get any bigger when you add two polynomials
together.
In the first example we did, the two polynomials we started with both had degree 4, and the
final answer that we got also had degree 4.
In the second example, one of the polynomials had degree 4, and the other one had degree
3.
We added them together, the final sum, the final answer, simply had degree 4 as well.
Now addition then is pretty straightforward.
What about subtraction?
Well with subtraction you still need to keep in mind this idea of combining like terms
just like you did with addition, but there's one more little thing you've got to watch
for, and that is you must keep an eye on distributing the minus sign that comes in from the subtraction.
This is a dangerous pitfall, so it's something you really have to watch for, and what I'd
like to do is complete a couple examples for you just so we can watch for the distribution
of that minus sign.
So let's do the following example.
Simplify 17x to the fourth plus 5x squared minus 2x plus 3 minus the polynomial 8x to
the fourth minus 9x cubed plus 15x squared plus 12x plus 27.
So we have a couple of polynomials there, kind of long polynomials, one is being subtracted
from the other.
We have to be careful to distribute that minus sign correctly, so my suggestion is going
to be that we just first distribute that minus sign completely, and once we have that done
we can then combine the like terms.
If you distribute that minus sign you're going to have the following, 17x to the fourth
plus 5x squared minus 2x plus 3 minus 8x to the fourth plus 9x cubed minus 15x squared
minus 12x minus 27.
Basically all of the signs inside that second polynomial get switched either from plus to
minus or minus to plus.
Now once you've written the problem in this new way there's no doubt about what the sign
of each term is.
So all you need to do now is combine the like terms and we're done.
So we start looking for common powers of x again, and I see a couple of powers that
are of the form x to the fourth.
There's a 17x to the fourth minus an 8x to the fourth.
When I combine those two together since 17 minus 8 equals 9, I know that 17x to the fourth
minus 8x to the fourth equals 9x to the fourth, so that's fine.
9x cubed doesn't have another x cubed to combine with so the 9x cubed just sits by itself.
5x squared minus 15x squared is going to be negative 10x squared.
5 minus 15 is negative 10, so that combination is going to give me negative 10x squared.
Negative 2x minus another 12x is negative 14x, so that's fine, and 3 minus 27 is negative
24.
You know, when you're doing these problems and you have all of those terms laid out
on a piece of paper, I sometimes like to actually take a pencil as I'm looking for the like
terms and once I spot those like terms, circle them or cross them out or something just so
I can see that I've actually used all the terms.
If that would help you, I would encourage you to do it as well.
Once you've combined all those like terms together, your final answer is going to be
9x to the fourth plus 9x cubed minus 10x squared minus 14x minus 24, and there you go.
You've subtracted one polynomial from the other.
Now notice in the example we just finished that the degree of the result is not any larger
than the degrees of the polynomials that we started with.
So just like with addition, when you subtract two polynomials, the degree doesn't change.
In fact, the degree of what you end up with is simply going to be the degree of one of
the polynomials you started with, the larger degree in fact, of the two degrees that you
started with.
Now, I'd like to do one more subtraction pretty quickly because this distribution of
that minus sign can really cause fits for some folks.
So let's do one more example together of subtracting one polynomial from the other.
Let's look at x cubed plus x squared plus 1 minus the polynomial negative 5x squared
plus 7x.
Now, I'm going to tell you again, I think the first thing to do is to distribute that
minus sign from the subtraction.
And when you do that, you're going to get x cubed plus x squared plus 1 minus the negative
5x squared minus 7x.
And of course, the minus negative 5x squared is the same as plus 5x squared.
So what you really have is x cubed plus x squared plus 1 plus 5x squared minus 7x.
Now if you're looking for like terms there, there's actually only a couple.
The x squared and the 5x squared can be combined together to give you plus 6x squared and then
everything else just comes along so that your final answer is simply x cubed plus 6x squared
minus 7x plus 1.
OK, we've talked about addition and subtraction.
They're pretty straightforward.
You combine the like terms and with subtraction, you've got to watch for that minus sign being
distributed.
What I'd like to do now is move on to multiplying polynomials.
Now I'd like to start with an example where all we do is multiply one longer polynomial
by a monomial.
In other words, just one term being multiplied into the other polynomial.
So here's the example I have in mind.
Let's expand or multiply out 3x squared times the polynomial 6x cubed minus 4x squared
plus 7.
So I have a polynomial inside the parentheses and then I have a little single term polynomial
3x squared on the outside and I want to multiply that out and get a new polynomial.
Well, to be honest with you, this is just the distributive property.
It's just a bit expanded given the size of the polynomial inside the parentheses.
But the idea is I simply need to distribute that term on the outside into all of the other
terms on the inside of the parentheses.
It's very doable as long as we just walk through the steps.
And I want you to remember something.
When you multiply two powers of x together, you simply add the exponents.
So let's do this problem.
First let's distribute the 3x squared into the parentheses.
And when I do that, I'm going to have 3x squared times the 6x cubed plus 3x squared
times the negative 4x squared plus 3x squared times the 7.
And what I've done is just paired off 3x squared with each and every term that was inside the
parentheses.
And now I need to combine each of those little products.
So let's start with 3x squared times 6x cubed.
First of all, 3 times 6 is 18.
And secondly, x squared times x cubed, when I multiply x squared with x cubed, I add
the exponents.
2 plus 3 is 5.
So that term is going to combine.
The 3x squared and the 6x cubed will combine to give me 18x to the fifth.
Similarly, 3x squared multiplied with the negative 4x squared is going to give me negative
12 times x to the fourth because the exponent 2 added to the other exponent 2 gives me an
exponent of 4.
So that's going to give me negative 12x to the fourth.
And lastly, 3x squared times 7 is simply 21x squared.
So my final answer here when I multiply this one term into that other polynomial is 18x
to the fifth minus 12x to the fourth plus 21 squared, 21x squared, and I'm done.
Let me make a quick comment here before I move on to my next example.
And I want to comment again about these degrees.
Notice that the degree of the polynomial 18x to the fifth minus 12x to the fourth plus
21x squared is actually 5.
The degree of that polynomial is 5 thanks to the x to the fifth term.
That degree is not exactly the same as the degrees of the polynomials that I started
with, is it?
The degrees I started with were 2 from the 3x squared and 3 from the 6x cubed.
Notice something special, though.
The degree 5 that I ended up with from the 18x to the fifth term, that degree 5 is exactly
the sum of the two degrees that I started with.
2 plus 3 equals 5.
So here's a very interesting fact about multiplying polynomials that's very, very different from
adding and subtracting polynomials.
When you multiply two polynomials together, the degree of the new polynomial is actually
the sum of the degrees you started with, and that means the degrees actually get bigger.
So multiplication is a way to build polynomials of big degree from polynomials with smaller
degree.
That's a cool feature of multiplication with polynomials.
You can actually keep building up and getting bigger and bigger degrees as you go.
Now, I'd like to look at a second example involving multiplication of two polynomials,
but this time we're going to multiply a polynomial with two terms times a polynomial with three
terms.
And basically, this is just like foil that we saw in previous lessons, but it's a bit
more involved because we have more terms inside.
So here's the specific example I'd like to look at.
Let's multiply out or expand x squared minus 7 times x cubed plus 9x squared minus 5x.
So I want to now multiply this out and get one polynomial at the very end.
The key here is that just like when we were foiling two binomial expressions, we have
to make sure that every term in the first polynomial, in the first set of parentheses,
is multiplied with every term in the other set of parentheses.
So for example, the x squared has to be multiplied with each of the three terms inside the second
set of parentheses, and the 7 must be multiplied with each of those three terms as well.
So when we're all done doing all the multiplying out, we'll actually end up with six different
multiplications that we have to perform.
Once we've written all six of those out, we can then combine like terms.
So here's what we would have.
The x squared from the first set of parentheses would have to be multiplied with the x cubed,
so I'll have x squared times x cubed, added to x squared multiplied with the 9x squared,
and then I'll add to that x squared multiplied by the minus 5x.
At that point, I've taken the x squared from the first set of parentheses and multiplied
it with every term in the second set of parentheses.
So that's done.
Now I must multiply the 7 in the first set of parentheses with everything in the second
polynomial, but don't lose the minus sign in front of the 7.
And so from that 7, I'm going to have minus 7 times x cubed, minus 7 times 9x squared,
minus 7 times negative 5x.
And if you stare at what we have up to this point before we multiply it all out, you'll
see that we actually have six different things now to do, starting with the x squared times
x cubed and ending up with minus 7 times negative 5x.
Six terms was exactly how many we were supposed to have as we did this multiplication.
Now let's do the multiplication.
You would have x squared times x cubed.
That's x to the fifth because 2 plus 3 equals 5, so you have a term x to the fifth.
The second term is going to be plus 9x to the fourth because x squared times x squared
is x to the fourth.
Next you'll have a minus 5x cubed and then a minus 7x cubed minus 63x squared plus 35x.
You get a plus 35x at the end because of the minus 7 times the minus 5.
Multiplication of two negatives gives you a positive.
And now when you combine all those terms, you're going to have x to the fifth plus 9x
to the fourth minus 12x cubed minus 63x squared plus 35x.
And these kinds of problems deserve lots of practice when you start multiplying all these
things out.
So I'd like to move right to another example where we can see how to do this multiplication
of two polynomials.
Here's the example I want us to look at.
Let's expand or multiply out x squared plus 2x plus 3 times x squared minus 4x minus 6.
Again, each term in the first polynomial must be multiplied with each term in the second
polynomial.
That means I'm going to end up with nine different things to multiply together, three
from the first with three from the second.
So let's just jump right into it.
You're going to have an x squared times an x squared plus x squared times negative 4x
plus x squared times negative 6 plus, now I need to multiply the 2x with everything.
So I'm going to have plus 2x times x squared plus 2x times negative 4x plus 2x times negative
6.
And then I'll end with plus 3x squared plus 3 times negative 4x plus 3 times negative 6.
And when I combine all that together, I'm going to have x to the fourth minus 4x cubed
minus 6x squared plus 2x cubed minus 8x squared minus 12x plus 3x squared minus 12x minus 18.
There are nine different terms there, some of which are like terms with others inside
that big conglomeration.
And so now I need to very carefully put all of those terms together.
And when I do so, looking for like terms, I'm going to end up with x to the fourth minus
2x cubed minus 11x squared minus 24x minus 18.
Okay, I'd like to move on from here to some examples using division.
So division of polynomials can actually be much more complicated than addition or subtraction
or even multiplication can be.
And it turns out that division of polynomials is very, very important as we move on to other
types of functions.
So what I'd like to do now is move forward to some division problems involving polynomials.
Okay, so let's look at the following example.
I'd like to simplify x squared plus 10x plus 21 divided by x plus 3.
Now what I'm going to do here is actually long division with these polynomials.
So you may remember long division with numbers, with whole numbers.
I'm actually going to do long division here with these polynomials.
So here's how I'm going to begin.
I'm going to start by drawing my division symbol and inside that I'm going to put the
x squared plus 10x plus 21.
On the outside of the division symbol I'm going to write my x plus 3.
And at this point now I want to see how many times does x plus 3 go into x squared plus
10x plus 21.
The key is to look at the x in x plus 3 and ask how many times does that x go into x squared?
Well, what is x squared divided by x?
It's simply x.
So in other words, x times x is x squared.
I'm going to then write an x on top of the division symbol just because x times the x
in the divisor equals x squared.
And now I'm going to ask myself, if I had that x and I multiplied it with x plus 3,
what would I get?
And what I would get is x squared plus 3x.
That's one of these multiplication problems that we just saw a moment ago.
And I would write that x squared plus 3x directly under the x squared plus 10x.
And now do you remember what you do at this point when you long divide numbers?
You subtract.
And so I would subtract the x squared plus 3x from x squared plus 10x.
But at this point I have to remember to subtract all of the x plus 3.
So I have to do the distribution of that minus sign as I go.
And when I do so, I'm going to have x squared minus x squared goes away.
10x minus the 3x will give me 7x.
And now I have a 7x underneath my subtraction symbol, if you will.
And I then have to do what?
Well, I have to drop the next term.
Remember when you did long division of numbers, you would drop the next digit.
So I now drop down the plus 21.
And I have 7x plus 21.
I now ask myself a similar question.
How many times will the x in the x plus 3 divide into the 7x from 7x plus 21?
Well, x goes into 7x exactly 7 times because 7 times x is 7x.
I would go above my division symbol then and write plus 7.
And now I have to ask myself, what does that 7 equal when I multiply it with x plus 3?
So I'm going to take my 7 now and multiply it with x plus 3.
And I'm going to have 7x plus 21.
And I'm going to write the 7x plus 21 just below the 7x plus 21 that was already there.
And now I subtract again.
We're following the same pattern of long division
that we've seen when we did long division of whole numbers as well.
It's just a little more complicated because we have polynomials.
But here's the key now.
When you subtract, what are you left with?
The answer is you're left with 0.
And your remainder here is 0.
And that means that you're done, of course.
And your answer is x plus 7.
When you divide x squared plus 10x plus 21 by the quantity x plus 3, you get x plus 7.
Now here's a question for you.
How would you check your answer?
Well, do you remember how you checked long division problems that you used to do with whole numbers?
You would multiply.
And that's exactly what you do here as well because multiplication is the opposite of division.
And in this case, I would multiply the x plus 7 with the x plus 3.
And I would hope that I get x squared plus 10x plus 21.
But x plus 7 times x plus 3 is very straightforward to do with foil.
You've already seen foiling with those kinds of products.
And in fact, if you foil that, you will exactly get x squared plus 10x plus 21.
Now, that example was pretty clean.
There was zero remainder.
But zero remainders are not very typical.
So I'd like to look at another example now where the remainder is a little messier.
So here's the example.
Let's find x cubed minus 6x squared plus 19x minus 4 divided by x minus 2.
OK, now this problem, again, sets up the way the earlier example set up.
We draw our division symbol.
We put the x cubed minus 6x squared plus 19x minus 4 underneath that division symbol.
And we put the x minus 2 out in front.
It acts like our divisor for this division problem.
And now I ask myself, how many times does the x on that outside quantity divide into the x cubed?
Or to say it a different way, what would I have to multiply the x by in order to get x cubed?
And the answer is, you would have to multiply it by x squared.
So I write an x squared above my x cubed.
And now I take that x squared and multiply it with the whole of x minus 2.
And I'm going to get x cubed minus 2x squared.
And that amount gets written right below the x cubed minus 6x squared.
This is exactly how you did long division with whole numbers.
It's just that we have all this polynomial stuff now floating around.
But we can do it.
Let's keep going.
What do we do now?
We subtract that x cubed minus 2x squared out of the x cubed minus 6x squared.
And if you keep in mind that you have to distribute that minus sign when you do the subtraction,
you'll see that the x cubed minus x cubed is 0, which is what you wanted.
And you'll have negative 6x squared plus 2x squared from distributing that minus sign.
And negative 6x squared plus 2x squared is negative 4x squared.
And that goes in the next level.
Now you have to drop the next term.
You would have dropped a digit if you had been doing long division with just whole numbers.
But now we drop the next term, which is plus 19x, so that we now have negative 4x squared plus 19x.
And now we repeat the process.
How many times will the x from the divisor divide into negative 4x squared?
And the answer is exactly negative 4x times.
And if I multiply x minus 2 times the negative 4x, I'll have negative 4x squared plus 8x.
It's plus 8x because of the negative 4 times the negative 2.
And so now I have the negative 4x squared plus 19x.
And I must subtract from that negative 4x squared plus 8x.
Again, I have to distribute that minus sign through.
But when I do that subtraction, I'll have minus 4x squared plus 4x squared, which is 0, and 19x minus 8x, which is 11x.
Positive 11x.
And now what do I do?
I drop the next term.
And in this case, that's going to be a minus 4.
And so I now have 11x minus 4.
And I need to ask myself, how many times will the x from the x minus 2 divide into the 11x?
Well, the answer there is pretty straightforward.
It's exactly 11 times because 11 times x is 11x.
So I write a plus 11 above my division symbol.
And now I say, what is plus 11 times x minus 2?
Well, that's exactly 11x minus 22.
And I now subtract that.
Remember, we're just repeating the same steps as we walk through the problem.
When we subtract the 11x minus 22 from 11x minus 4, the 11x's, of course, will cancel to give me 0 there.
But I'll have minus 4 plus 22, because I have to subtract.
And I'm then left with plus 18.
But I don't have any more terms to drop down.
And so it means that plus 18 is actually my remainder.
And so the division is actually done.
My final answer is x squared minus 4x plus 11 with a remainder of 18 in this case.
So instead of having a remainder of 0, we actually have a remainder of 18.
Not a problem.
It does happen.
And in fact, it happens quite often when you divide one polynomial by another polynomial.
Well, today we've seen addition of polynomials and subtraction of polynomials, multiplication
and division of polynomials as well.
We've seen how the FOIL operation that we saw before can actually be extended to multiplying
larger polynomials together.
And we've talked about how you can divide one polynomial by another, although that might
be a bit messy at times when you do so.
But this discussion of division of two polynomials actually leads us to our next lesson, which
is on something called rational expressions.
So I'll see you then as we discuss these rational expressions.
