In our last lesson, we discussed performing different operations on polynomials.
We added, subtracted, multiplied, and divided.
And today, in this lesson, I'd like to really focus on division of polynomials.
When we divide polynomials, we create very interesting new functions called rational functions.
A rational expression or a rational function is a ratio of two polynomials.
So it's basically just one polynomial divided by another polynomial.
So for example, x squared plus one divided by x squared minus one is a rational expression or a rational function.
And so is something like x to the fifth plus 4x divided by x to the fourth plus one.
In this lesson, I'd like to spend some time talking about how to simplify rational expressions whenever we can.
And then I'd like to talk about adding and subtracting rational expressions.
To be honest, the same tools that worked when you were simplifying fractions that just involved numbers,
as well as the tools you used to add and subtract numerical fractions will work with rational expressions as well.
But because of all the variables that are floating around, there's a little bit more complication when we're adding and subtracting rational expressions.
So let's get started as we walk through several examples today.
First, let's spend some time talking about simplifying rational expressions.
So let's just look at a very straightforward example.
Let's simplify x times x minus two divided by the product of x plus one times x minus one times x minus two.
Now, I want you to notice that I've sort of started with a nice example where all the terms, both the numerator and the denominator are already in factored form.
That's very helpful to us because once we see these terms, these factors, we can start looking for cancellations.
And that's one of the biggest ways we're going to simplify one of these rational expressions.
I want you to notice that there's an x minus two term in both the numerator as well as the denominator.
And because those x minus twos are factors of the numerator and denominator, I can cancel them.
And what that'll leave me with is x divided by x plus one times x minus one.
And that's as simple as we can get it. So that's the final answer to this example.
But before we leave the example, I want to mention something.
You might be saying to yourself, should we multiply out that denominator before we stop with this example?
The answer is actually no.
There's really a good deal of information that we know from the factored form of that denominator.
And we'll use that information when we start talking about graphs of rational functions in a few lessons.
So anytime you can leave something in factored form, you probably ought to do so.
And so let's leave that example exactly as it is.
Now, I'd like to look at a few more examples of simplifying rational expressions.
So let's go on to this example.
Let's simplify 4x plus 12 divided by 9x plus 27.
Okay, the key in any problem like this is to start factoring the numerator and the denominator.
I was sort of nice to us in the previous example because everything was already factored.
But I want us to now factor numerator and denominator here,
and then let's see if there's any sort of hidden factors that are in common with the numerator and the denominator,
and then we'll cancel those out.
So let's focus on the numerator first.
What can we factor out of the numerator?
Well, notice that there's a 4 in both 4x and 12, and so I can factor out that 4.
And when I do so, I can rewrite the numerator as 4 times the quantity x plus 3.
Think about it.
If you were to distribute that 4 back in, you would have 4x plus 12, and that's what we started with.
So the factored form of the numerator is 4 times the quantity x plus 3.
Now, what about the denominator?
Well, if you stare at the denominator for a moment, you'll see that there's a 9 in both pieces of that denominator,
so we can factor out a 9 from the denominator and get 9 times x plus 3.
So the expression I started with can be rewritten in an equivalent way as 4 times x plus 3 divided by 9 times x plus 3.
And now if you stare at that for a second, you realize there was actually a common term hiding in both the numerator and denominator
as factors of the numerator and denominator, and that's the x plus 3.
So I can actually cancel that x plus 3 now from the top and the bottom.
I don't know if you saw that coming, but it's done.
And now our original expression is actually simplified to just the numerical fraction 4 divided by 9.
So what we started with was a lot more complicated looking than 4 9ths, but that's actually the final answer in that example.
OK, let's move to another example, a similar type.
Let's simplify 5x minus 10 divided by x squared minus 4.
By the way, these kinds of simplifications are very important, so I don't mind going through several examples as we walk through this lesson.
We really need to be able to simplify these kinds of rational expressions.
To begin, we just need to factor the top and the bottom, the numerator and the denominator.
That's almost always going to be the first step that we'll do here.
The numerator is pretty straightforward to factor.
There's a 5 in common with both pieces of that numerator, and so if I factor out the 5, I'll be left with 5 times x minus 2.
That's the numerator.
Now leave it alone for a moment.
Let's look at the denominator.
The denominator is actually a difference of 2 squares.
It's x squared minus 4, and we've seen in our previous lessons on factoring that we can factor x squared minus 4 as x minus 2 times x plus 2.
And therefore, the expression we started with is equivalent to or the same as 5 times x minus 2 on top divided by x minus 2 times x plus 2 in the denominator.
Now you see that the x minus 2 is a factor of both the numerator and the denominator, and so those x minus 2s can cancel.
They cancel with one another, and it leaves us with 5 divided by x plus 2.
And that's our final answer in that example.
Okay, let's try an example that's a bit more complicated now and see how these same steps will work to simplify another rational expression.
Here's the one I want to simplify.
x cubed minus x squared minus 6x divided by x squared plus 5x plus 6.
Okay, now I can imagine some of you having the following thought come right to your mind.
Wait a minute, I didn't learn how to factor polynomials that have degree 3.
Look at that numerator.
It actually has an x cubed in it.
What in the world am I supposed to do with that?
Well, okay, good thought, but before we get too worried about it, let's look at that numerator polynomial more closely because actually you know how to handle that numerator.
So notice that there's an x in all three terms of the numerator, and that means that an x can actually be factored out of that numerator.
And it leaves us with a numerator of the form x times x squared minus x minus 6.
Notice the x squared minus x minus 6 is in the parentheses there is quadratic, and you know how to handle quadratic polynomials.
So there's an x out in front, fine, just leave it there for a moment.
It's a factor in the numerator, and now let's attack that polynomial inside the parentheses, x squared minus x minus 6.
After you think about it for a moment, you kind of refresh your memory on how we factor quadratic polynomials.
You'll find that x squared minus x minus 6 can be factored as x minus 3 times x plus 2.
If you don't believe me, FOIL, multiply out via FOIL the x minus 3 times x plus 2, and you'll see that you get exactly what you want.
And that means that the numerator now is equal to x times x minus 3 times x plus 2.
And now you have completely factored the numerator that you might not have thought you could factor originally.
So that's all set.
Now let's not worry about the numerator for a moment.
Let's look down at the denominator.
We have a quadratic polynomial there, x squared plus 5x plus 6.
I'd love to be able to factor it.
Again, I want to think about it for a moment.
I'm going to have an x plus something times another x plus something.
And in this case, it's going to be x plus 2 times x plus 3 because 2 times 3 gives me the 6 and 2 plus 3 gives me the 5.
And that means that the rational expression I started with, which was kind of messy looking when we began,
can be rewritten as x times x minus 3 times x plus 2 divided by the product x plus 2 times x plus 3.
And now once you've got it written in this factored form, which is equal to what you started with,
you see that there's an x plus 2 as a factor in both the numerator and denominator.
And those x plus 2s can be canceled.
And once you cancel them, you're left with x times x minus 3 all divided by x plus 3.
Now at this point, I'd really like to share a potential pitfall with you, actually two of them.
First with the example we just did, I'd like to point out that some students might quickly jump to canceling an x minus 3 with an x plus 3.
Don't do that.
You've got to watch those signs.
You'll be OK as long as you're careful about it, but you've got to be careful that everything has the same sign.
So you wouldn't want to cancel the x minus 3 with the x plus 3.
There's a second pitfall that you actually really need to worry about in the sense that a lot of students make the following mistake.
So let me show you an example that you might misrepresent the first time you do it.
Let's just look at it slowly and carefully, and then we'll go from there.
Here's the example.
I want to simplify x squared plus 2x all divided by 2x.
Now, what some students have done in my career in teaching, I've watched them do this, is that they will want to immediately see those 2x's cancel from one another.
And so they'll cancel the 2x's, they'll scratch them out, and what they're left with then, they think, is x squared plus 1 divided by 1, or just x squared plus 1.
I can't scream no loud enough if someone does that, because that's not correct.
You can't cancel those 2x's from the numerator and the denominator, because the 2x in the numerator is not a factor of the whole numerator.
In other words, that 2x in the numerator is not being multiplied with something else, it's being added with the x squared.
So you're really not allowed to cancel those 2x's.
So you should back up from the problem as you start it, and you should ask yourself, how can I factor the numerator, and how can I factor the denominator if needed, and then cancel from there.
So don't cancel those 2x's.
Be very careful when something is added like that, like the 2x's being added in the numerator, you cannot just cancel those 2x's.
Now, let's step back and actually do the problem correctly.
We started with x squared plus 2x divided by 2x.
There's a common x in the numerator that you can factor out.
So that means the numerator can be rewritten as x times x plus 2.
And the whole expression then can be written as x times x plus 2 divided by 2 times x.
And now you can cancel, but you're going to cancel the x's, because there's an x in the numerator that's a factor, and there's an x in the denominator that's a factor.
The x in the denominator is being multiplied with the 2.
And when you cancel those x's, you're left with x plus 2 divided by 2.
And x plus 2 divided by 2 is the final answer, and it's the correct answer.
Now, there's one more pitfall.
It's not as common, but it's still very important for us to note.
And so let's look at one more example of simplifying these rational expressions.
I want to simplify x divided by the quantity x squared plus 3x.
So the first thing I want to do is look to factor both numerator and denominator.
Of course, the numerator is already factored, because it's just x.
But the denominator has an x that's common in both the x squared and the 3x.
So I can factor that x out of the denominator, and my rational expression can then be written as x on top divided by x times x plus 3.
At this point, I can cancel the x on top with the single x in the denominator, and it leaves me 1 in the numerator divided by x plus 3.
Sometimes students will incorrectly want to write this as just x plus 3, as if the x plus 3 was actually in the numerator.
But I need you to notice that the x plus 3 is actually in the denominator.
It started in the denominator, it's still in the denominator.
So your final answer is exactly 1 divided by x plus 3.
Keep that x plus 3 in the denominator.
That's where it belongs.
You want to be careful as you do that.
Okay, we've done a lot of examples just simplifying rational expressions.
What I'd like to do now in the remainder of our lesson is to move on to adding and subtracting some rational expressions.
So let's move on to the following example.
Let's add 4x divided by x minus 2 and 5x divided by x minus 2.
Now, the key thing you need to remember when you're adding any fractions, whether they have just numbers in them or they have variables in them,
is that when you want to add or subtract those fractions, you've got to get common denominators.
In this case, we're starting with a nice straightforward first example.
The denominators are already the same.
So all I have to do then is add the two numerators.
And when I do that, 4x plus 5x equals 9x.
Thankfully, those are both like terms, right?
There's an x and an x in both of those.
So 4x plus 5x is just 9x.
And it's that simple.
What we started with is just equal to 9x divided by x minus 2.
It might look a bit ugly at first with that x minus 2 in the denominator,
but overall, the same process as if you were just adding fractions that involved numbers.
Okay, so let's try a slightly more complicated example.
This time, a subtraction example.
So here it is.
I want us to simplify 7x minus 2 divided by 3x plus 6 minus x plus 7 divided by 3x plus 6.
Now, notice that this is a subtraction now instead of an addition.
And so I have to make sure that my denominators are the same.
I have to have common denominators, as some people would say,
before I can actually perform the subtraction.
Well, the denominators are the same.
So I can just go ahead and subtract the numerators and we'll be done.
But don't forget, when you have that subtraction, you have to distribute that minus sign
throughout the term x plus 7, the second numerator, if you will.
So here's what I'm going to have.
I have 7x minus 2 divided by 3x plus 6 minus x plus 7 divided by 3x plus 6 equals one fraction.
Denominator is going to be 3x plus 6.
The numerator is going to be 7x minus 2 minus x minus 7.
I get minus x minus 7 from distributing that minus sign that was sitting in front of the quantity x plus 7.
And once I've distributed that minus sign, I can then combine the like terms
so that the numerator, 7x minus 2 minus x minus 7, becomes 6x minus 9
because 7x minus x is 6x, minus 2 minus 7 is minus 9.
And my new fraction is 6x minus 9 divided by 3x plus 6.
Now, you might be tempted to just stop, so I'm done.
Everything's finished.
But even though your work is correct up to this point,
there's still actually the possibility that things can be simplified.
So before we stop, let's start factoring the numerator and the denominator,
and let's just see if there's any cancellation that can happen.
Well, the numerator's definitely got a 3 in it, and I can factor it out
because 3 goes into 6 and 3 goes into 9.
When I factor that 3 out, I have 3 times 2x minus 3.
That's my numerator, and I can't do anything else with 2x minus 3 at this point.
The denominator has a 3 in common with the 3x and the 6,
and so the denominator can be rewritten as 3 times x plus 2.
And now I see that there's a factor of 3 on top, and there's a factor of 3 on the bottom.
And those factors can be canceled, and it leaves me with 2x minus 3 divided by x plus 2.
And I can't emphasize this pitfall enough, so I'm going to say it here.
Don't cancel those 2s.
I see a 2 with the 2x, and I see a 2 down in the denominator,
but they're not factors of the top and bottom.
They're being added to other parts of the numerator and denominator,
so they're not factored out, and they can't be canceled.
So what we had was exactly all we can get, and once it's done, it's done.
Now, what happens if the denominators aren't so nice?
I mean, the examples I just gave you had the same denominators,
so it didn't seem like those problems were very complicated.
What happens if the denominators are different?
Well, you do the same thing you would have done if you were adding or subtracting fractions with numbers.
You get a least common denominator.
So let's look at the following example to kind of get our feet wet with getting these least common denominators.
Let's simplify 4 divided by 25x plus 23 divided by 100.
Now, notice that the denominators are different, that's the first thing you must notice,
and therefore you've got to get a common denominator.
And so I'm going to start by factoring the two denominators to see what the factors of each one are.
So here we go. 25x is just 5 times 5 times x, and 100 is 2 times 2 times 5 times 5.
And that means that my least common denominator is going to need a 5 times 5.
It's going to need an x, and it's going to need a 2 times 2.
And when I multiply 2 times 2 times 5 times 5 times x, it means I'm going to have 100x.
100x needs to be my denominator.
So I now need to rewrite both fractions with 100x as the denominator.
Let's do that.
The 4 over 25x needs an extra 4 multiplied with the 25.
If I multiply a 4 in the denominator, then I must multiply a 4 in the numerator as well,
so everything stays balanced.
And that means that 4 over 25x is going to be the same as 16 over 100x.
16 is 4 times 4, and 100 is 25 times 4.
So that fraction is 16 over 100x.
The other fraction, 23 divided by 100, simply needs an x thrown into the denominator to get 100x there.
If you multiply the bottom by x, you must multiply the top by x, so that that fraction becomes 23x divided by 100x.
And now you have two fractions being added, which both have the same denominator of 100x.
And therefore, you can add the numerators, and you'll just get 23x plus 16 in the numerator, all divided by 100x.
And notice something, you cannot do anything with the 23x plus 16 to try to simplify it, because they're not like terms.
The 23x has an x in it, the 16 doesn't.
And therefore, your final answer in this problem, when you add those two things together, is just 23x plus 16, all divided by 100x.
Okay, let's look at another example where you want to add, and you've got two different denominators, and let's see what happens.
Let's simplify x divided by 2x plus 1, plus 5 divided by x minus 1.
Now, immediately I look at those denominators, and they're not the same.
So I've got to get the least common denominator before I can ever do this addition.
In this case, the two denominators have nothing in common in terms of factors.
And so the least common denominator is simply going to be the product of the two denominators you started with.
So the denominator I'm going to end up with is 2x plus 1 times x minus 1.
Now, if that's the denominator I need, then I have to go back to the original two fractions and rewrite them with those two, with that denominator, the 2x plus 1 times x minus 1.
So let's do that. The first fraction was x divided by 2x plus 1.
I need to multiply that denominator by an x minus 1, and if I multiply the denominator by x minus 1, I must multiply the numerator by x minus 1 as well.
And therefore, that first fraction is going to become x times x minus 1, all divided by 2x plus 1 times x minus 1.
Okay, leave that one alone for a second. Let's now look at the second fraction.
We had 5 divided by x minus 1. It needs a denominator of 2x plus 1 times x minus 1.
So I have to multiply the denominator by 2x plus 1.
If I do that, I must multiply the numerator by 2x plus 1 so that everything stays balanced, and that means that the second fraction becomes 5 times 2x plus 1, all divided by 2x plus 1 times x minus 1.
Now, it looks like we've really just messed everything up, but what we've done in the process is to get the two fractions to have common denominators.
And once they have the same denominator, I can simply add the numerators and I'm done, which means up to this point, my problem now becomes x times x minus 1 plus 5 times 2x plus 1, all divided by the common denominator 2x plus 1 times x minus 1.
Now, what has to be done? I now just need to simplify the numerator and I'm done.
So let's just focus on the numerator now for just a moment. I have x times x minus 1 plus 5 times 2x plus 1.
Well, I can distribute the x into the x minus 1 to get x squared minus x, and I can distribute the 5 into the 2x plus 1 to get 10x plus 5.
And now I can combine the like terms, and the only terms that are like terms are the negative x plus 10x, and that's going to give me 9x, and therefore the numerator becomes x squared plus 9x plus 5.
And that means that the final answer is x squared plus 9x plus 5, all divided by 2x plus 1 times x minus 1.
Now, I said final answer. You might be asking, well, maybe that simplifies. Maybe I could have factored the numerator and canceled with something in the denominator.
You could try that, but it turns out that in this example, it won't happen. There is no good cancellation between the numerator and the denominator.
There's really no good factorization of the numerator. So you can work on that, but it turns out that what I've given you there is actually the final answer to that example.
Now, let's look at another example. It's got some more complication to it as we try to do the subtraction. So here it is. Let's simplify x divided by x squared minus 9 minus x divided by x squared plus 6x plus 9.
Now, again, anytime I want to do a subtraction like this or in addition of two rational expressions, I have to get common denominators.
So I need to make the two denominators look the same, and the way to do that is to start by factoring each of the denominators and see what we have.
So let's look at the two denominators. x squared minus 9 is a difference of two squares, and so it factors as x minus 3 times x plus 3.
Good. That's what the first denominator looks like in factored form.
The second denominator is x squared plus 6x plus 9, and that's actually a perfect square trinomial because it factors as x plus 3 times x plus 3, or just x plus 3 squared.
And so if I need to figure out my LCD, my least common denominator, I know that I need an x minus 3, and I'm actually going to need an x plus 3 squared.
And therefore, my common denominator really is x minus 3 times x plus 3 squared.
Now, I've got to go back to the original fractions and rewrite them with this common denominator. So let's do that together.
First, let me rewrite the original problem as x divided by x minus 3 times x plus 3 minus x divided by x plus 3 squared.
Now, all I've done there is factored the denominators, but that helps me to see now what each denominator needs to have multiplied with it in order to get the common denominator.
So once I've got it written that way, let's now walk through and get the common denominator.
The first fraction needs an extra x plus 3 so that it ends up with an x plus 3 squared in the denominator.
If I multiply by an x plus 3 in the denominator, I have to multiply by an x plus 3 in the numerator.
And so the first fraction is going to look like x times x plus 3 divided by x minus 3 times x plus 3 squared.
Excellent. Leave that alone now and let's look at the second fraction.
The x over x plus 3 squared, what does it need in order to have the correct common denominator?
Well, it needs an x minus 3. That's the factor it's missing.
So I'm going to multiply the denominator and therefore the numerator as well by x minus 3.
And when I do so, the second fraction becomes x times x minus 3 divided by the common denominator,
x minus 3 times x plus 3 squared.
Wow! Now we have a common denominator.
Both fractions have the same denominator and therefore I can combine the numerators under this one denominator and I'll be done.
So what does my fraction look like?
It's going to look like x times x plus 3 minus x times x minus 3 all divided by x minus 3 times x plus 3 squared.
Now I've got to distribute all these pieces in the numerator.
So let's do that pretty quickly.
I have x times x plus 3.
That's going to become x squared plus 3x.
Now let's be very careful with the second numerator.
It's minus x times x minus 3.
So I've got to watch that minus sign for a second that's out in front of the x.
When I combine all that, here's what I'm going to get.
I'm going to get minus x squared because of the x times x.
And then I'm going to have plus 3x.
Now where'd the plus come from?
It's coming from the minus out in front of the x with the minus out in front of the 3.
And the negative times the negative will give me a positive.
And the x times 3 is 3x.
And therefore my numerator is now x squared plus 3x minus x squared plus 3x.
And the denominator is just x minus 3 times x plus 3 squared.
Now combine the terms in the numerator.
Actually there's a lot of things you can combine.
x squared minus x squared, 0.
They cancel each other out.
3x plus 3x is 6x.
And so your final answer is 6x divided by x minus 3 times x plus 3 squared.
Notice there's no other cancellation that you can do there.
There's no factor of x in the denominator, for example,
which is going to cancel with the x up in the numerator.
And no numbers in the denominator are going to cancel with that 6.
And therefore your final answer really is 6x divided by x minus 3 times x plus 3 squared.
Well, we've looked at a lot of examples today of simplifying rational expressions,
how to add rational expressions, and how to subtract those rational expressions.
We've noticed that we've had to factor numerator and denominator as we've gone
to see if there's any cancellations that can take place.
And that's a very important tool for simplifying rational expressions.
We've got to be careful that we correctly cancel.
And I talked a bit about some examples of doing it the wrong way, so to speak.
And when adding or subtracting these rational expressions,
we notice that we have to have a common denominator,
just like we did when we were dealing with just fractions with numbers in them.
We're going to continue talking about rational expressions in our next lesson,
and we'll talk about multiplying and dividing them.
I'll see you then.
