In our last lesson, we spent a good bit of time talking about how to do algebra with
rational expressions, especially how to add and subtract two rational expressions.
In this lesson, I want to continue down the path of talking about these rational expressions,
but this time I want to talk about multiplying and dividing rational expressions.
So let's look at a very basic example of multiplying two rational expressions as we get started
with this lesson.
I want to multiply negative 3 divided by x squared times negative 5 divided by 12x to
the seventh.
So these two rational expressions, these two ratios, if you will, and I want to multiply
them together.
Well, as we've seen when we multiply fractions that just have numbers in them, the same rule
is going to happen here with rational expressions.
Namely, we're just going to multiply the two numerators and we're going to multiply the
two denominators, and then we're going to do any reductions that are possible.
That same thing would happen with numbers if you just had fractions with numbers.
You'd multiply the two numerators and the two denominators together, and then you'd
see if you could do any canceling.
So let's do that here with negative 3 divided by x squared times negative 5 divided by 12x
to the seventh.
Well, if I multiply the two numerators together, I'm going to have negative 3 times negative
5, that's positive 15, and if I multiply the two denominators together, I'm going to
get 12x to the ninth.
Remember, why is it x to the ninth?
Because when you multiply x squared times x to the seventh, you actually add the exponents
to get x to the ninth, 2 plus 7 is 9, and therefore you have 15 divided by 12x to the
ninth.
Now, you might think you're done, but you want to look now for any cancellation between
the numerator and the denominator, and in this case, there aren't any x's in the numerator,
so you're not going to be able to do any canceling with that x to the ninth in the denominator,
but the number 15 and the number 12 actually have a common 3 in them, 15 is 3 times 5,
and 12 is 3 times 4, and you can factor out those 3's and cancel them, and what you're
left with in is 5 on top divided by 4x to the ninth, and that's that.
You've multiplied the two rational expressions you started with, and you've come up with
a new rational expression, 5 divided by 4x to the ninth.
Now, I'd like to look at another example where more simplification can occur thanks
to factoring, and factoring is going to be a very good friend of ours throughout this
lesson.
So let's look at the following example.
I want to multiply 3x plus 1 divided by 4 and 8x divided by 9x squared minus 1.
So these two rational expressions, and I'm going to multiply them together.
Then I'm looking for cancellations.
One of the first things I want to do is factor as much as I can, and so the first thing I
really want to do is factor that denominator in the second rational expression, 9x squared
minus 1.
Now, if you think about that for just a second, it turns out it's a difference of two squares
because it's equal to 3x minus 1 times 3x plus 1, and so that denominator will actually
factor into the product of 3x minus 1 times 3x plus 1.
Now, before we start to multiply everything together, we should look for any cancellation
that can be done.
And one of the first things you might notice is that the 4 in the denominator of the first
rational expression can be canceled with the 8 in the numerator of the second expression.
In fact, if you cancel a 4 out of both of those terms, the 8 will become a 2, and the
4 in the denominator will simply become a 1.
So now you've done some cancellation already before you ever started multiplying the two
numerators together.
Also, there's a 3x plus 1 in the numerator of the first term, and there is a 3x plus
1 in the denominator of the second rational expression, and those 3x plus 1s can also
be canceled because everything here is being multiplied together.
So I cancel those 3x plus 1s, and now you actually have a whole lot of simplification
that's taken place.
What's left?
Well, what's left is a 2x in the numerator and a 3x minus 1 in the denominator, and believe
it or not, that's your final answer, 2x divided by 3x minus 1.
There's no further simplification that you can do in that problem, and therefore you've
multiplied those two things perfectly.
Now let's look at another example where we might have to do just a little more work in
order to multiply two rational expressions.
So here's the example I want to look at.
Let's multiply 3x plus 7 divided by 5x plus 10 by x squared plus 7x plus 10.
Now hopefully some of you are thinking, wait a minute, I thought we were supposed to multiply
two rational expressions together.
Well, the first thing was rational, but that second one's not a rational expression, it's
just a polynomial.
We saw polynomials a few lessons ago.
Well, you'd be right if you said that, but now the question is, how would you handle
that situation?
Well the answer is, turn that polynomial into a rational expression.
How would you do that mathematically?
The answer is, divide it by 1.
In other words, give it a denominator of 1.
And then what you would have in this problem is multiplying 3x plus 7 divided by 5x plus
10 times x squared plus 7x plus 10 divided by 1.
Now it's a little artificial looking because dividing by 1 doesn't really do anything mathematically.
But what you've now done is given yourself two rational expressions to multiply together.
And once you've done that, you can see that you want to just multiply the numerators and
you want to multiply the denominators and do any simplifying you can and you'll be done.
So before you start multiplying out, because you could start just multiplying everything
out in one big step right now, before you do that, I would suggest you actually look
for any cancellations.
And well, how are you going to do cancellations?
You're going to need to factor everything.
Factoring is going to be our best friend in this lesson.
So let's start factoring every piece that we can in this problem and see if anything
will cancel before we move on.
Well, the 3x plus 7, you're not going to be able to factor anything out of that.
But the 5x plus 10, you actually can factor a 5 out of both the 5x and the 10.
And if you do that, that denominator will become 5 times the quantity x plus 2.
OK, that's fine.
What about the second rational expression, that x squared plus 7x plus 10?
You hopefully can factor that as well.
If we can't, fine.
But it's kind of begging us to try to factor it.
And if you try to write down x plus something times x plus something to factor x squared
plus 7x plus 10, hopefully you'll realize pretty quickly that the factors 5 and 2 when
multiplied together give you 10 and 5 plus 2 when they're added together give you 7.
And therefore, x squared plus 7x plus 10 factors very nicely as x plus 5 times x plus 2.
So that numerator can now be written in that factored form.
Now you've actually factored everything.
And so you should look for any cancellations that you can do.
Can you do any?
Sure.
If you see the x plus 2 that's in the denominator of the first rational expression and the x
plus 2 that's in the numerator of the second, those two x plus 2s can be canceled with
one another.
And what you'll be left with then is 3x plus 7 divided by 5 times x plus 5 divided by 1.
At this point, there's really no other cancellation to do.
So let's multiply now the numerators together and multiply the denominators.
The numerators multiplied together will just give you 3x plus 7 times x plus 5.
Just glue them together if you will.
And they'll be divided by 5 times 1, which of course is just 5.
And so you've now actually simplified this product with no trouble.
Now let me remind you of a pitfall that I mentioned in a previous lesson.
You might think that you could cancel those 5s.
You can't cancel those 5s because the 5 in the numerator is being added with an x.
And so it's not a factor.
It's not multiplied with something else.
It's actually being added with that x.
And therefore those 5s, the 5 in the numerator with the 5 in the denominator, cannot be canceled.
And so your final answer is just 3x plus 7 times x plus 5 divided by 5.
That's our final answer.
Now one more thing before we go on.
Whenever possible, you should always leave an answer like the one we just had in factored form.
Unless the problem tells you to multiply everything out, you really should leave your answers in factored form.
There's a lot that we know from the factored form of either a polynomial or a rational expression.
So I would strongly encourage you to always leave these kinds of problems and these kinds
of answers in factored form.
So leave the answer the way we talked about it when we close that example.
Now let's use what we've just done with the previous examples with a word problem.
So here's the word problem I want us to look at.
A rectangular box has side links that are labeled the following way.
One of the sides is labeled a squared minus 9 divided by a squared minus 6a plus 9.
Another side is labeled a plus 2 divided by a squared minus 1.
And the third side is labeled a minus 3 divided by a squared plus 3a plus 2.
I want us to find a simplified formula for the volume of this rectangular box.
So we're going to try to find a formula for the volume.
It's going to have a whole bunch of the variable a in it.
And we're going to try to simplify it as much as we can.
Well, we know that the volume of a rectangular box is exactly the product of the length, the width, and the height.
In other words, we've seen the formula before, v equals l times w times h.
So the volume formula that we want here is the product of the three rational
expressions that we were given, the three that I quoted just a moment ago.
A squared minus 9 divided by a squared minus 6a plus 9,
multiplied with a plus 2 divided by a squared minus 1.
And that's multiplied by a minus 3 divided by a squared plus 3a plus 2.
Now, I could start just multiplying everything out and
see afterwards whether there's any cancellation that could take place.
And believe me, if you just start multiplying all that out,
you're really going to have a lot of work.
It's not going to be fun.
And in fact, it's not going to be the most efficient way to do the math.
As an important tip, you need to remember this.
You should always look to factor and reduce first and
then multiply whatever's left later.
Multiply second, factor and cancel first.
So let's start by factoring everything we can and
see if there's any cancellation that we can do.
Notice that the first rational expression that's in this big product
factors as a plus 3 times a minus 3 divided by a minus 3 whole thing squared.
So the numerator was a difference of two squares, and
that's why it factors as a plus 3 times a minus 3.
And the denominator, a minus 3 whole thing squared,
is actually one of these perfect square trinomials.
Now notice that both the numerator and
the denominator then have a common a minus 3.
So the first thing you can do is cancel the a minus 3 and
the numerator with one of the a minus 3's in the denominator.
Remember, a minus 3 squared is a minus 3 times a minus 3.
And if you write it out that way,
you can see that you can cancel one of the a minus 3's in the denominator
with the a minus 3 in the numerator.
And that first piece then simply becomes a plus 3 divided by a minus 3.
Great.
Notice also that the last rational expression can be written as a minus 3
on top divided by the product a plus 2 times a plus 1.
We get some factorization there.
So at this point with some of the things I've already said,
we now have a plus 3 divided by a minus 3 times a plus 2 divided by a squared
minus 1 times a minus 3 divided by a plus 2 times a plus 1.
Notice that we can cancel one of the a minus 3's from the top and the bottom.
There's an a minus 3 in the numerator, well on the right.
There's an a minus 3 in the denominator on the left.
And we can also do the same thing with a factor of a plus 2.
And that's going to leave us with a plus 3 divided by a squared minus 1 times a plus 1.
Now, we're actually really close to the final answer.
But if you really want to write the answer in its most factored form,
you should rewrite the a squared minus 1 that's in the denominator as a plus 1 times a minus 1.
Because then you could rewrite the whole answer as a plus 3 divided by a plus 1 times a minus 1 times a plus 1.
And if you wanted to combine that just a little bit, you could put those a plus 1's together
and write your final, final answer as a plus 3 divided by the a plus 1 squared times a minus 1.
And again, I would leave the answer in that factored form.
It'll be very, very helpful for us as we continue in future lessons together.
Now, we've done multiplication.
We've done several examples of multiplication, in fact.
And now I'd like to turn the corner and talk about division of rational expressions.
Well, there's one kind of important rule we need to remember when you're dividing one fraction by another fraction.
And that is this.
Let me just put it in symbolic language.
If you want to do a divided by b and divide that by c divided by d,
it's the same as taking the denominator fraction and flipping it up and multiplying by it.
So a divided by b divided by c over d equals a over b times d over c.
So I've taken my denominator fraction and flipped it up.
And here I'm assuming that b is not 0, c is not 0, and d is not 0.
So I never end up with any division by 0.
Basically, division by a rational expression is the same as multiplying by the reciprocal rational expression.
So I can turn any division problem in this lesson into a multiplication problem and then do exactly the kinds of things that I just did in the examples we just completed.
That's great.
So let's go into an example of division of rational expressions.
Let's divide x squared plus 13x plus 40 divided by x minus 7 by the rational expression x plus 8 divided by x squared minus 49.
OK, so remember now what we're doing is x squared plus 13x plus 40 divided by x minus 7 divided by x plus 8 over x squared minus 49.
That is the exact same thing as x squared plus 13x plus 40 over x minus 7 multiplied by or times x squared minus 49 over x plus 8.
So I've flipped up that other fraction and now I'm multiplying instead of dividing.
And that's easy to do.
We've just done several examples of the multiplication.
So let's now simplify that product.
We've converted our division into a product.
Well, to simplify, what are we going to do?
We're going to factor as much as we can and then cancel all the terms that we can before we do any multiplications.
So let's start doing some factoring now.
And the first thing we should notice is that the numerator x squared plus 13x plus 40 can be factored as x plus 8 times x plus 5.
If you think about foiling x plus 8 times x plus 5, you'll realize that the 8 plus 5 is going to give me 13 and the 8 times 5 will give me 40.
So the first numerator can be rewritten as x plus 8 times x plus 5.
The denominator underneath it is x minus 7.
I can't do anything with that.
Let's now move to the second numerator.
Well, it's x squared minus 49 and that factors as x minus 7 times x plus 7.
So it's a difference of two squares as we've seen several times in our lessons.
So that's the new numerator on the second fraction.
And of course, the denominator is x plus 8.
Now you've factored everything.
Start canceling as much as you can.
Well, I see x plus 8, one in the numerator in one fraction, one in the denominator of the other fraction.
I can cancel those.
So I'm going to get rid of those x plus 8.
I can also cancel an x minus 7 in a numerator with an x minus 7 in a denominator and those will cancel.
And what I'm going to be left with is x plus 5 times x plus 7 basically divided by 1 because when I cancel the x minus 7 in the denominator, it gets replaced by a 1.
When I cancel the x plus 8 in the denominator, it gets replaced by a 1 and 1 times 1 is 1.
And that means that I'm left with simply x plus 5 times x plus 7 over 1, which is the same as x plus 5 times x plus 7.
So here's a cool thing about this example.
We started with two pretty ugly looking rational expressions, one dividing the other.
And once we were all done with it, we ended up with this really pretty polynomial, x plus 5 times x plus 7.
And that's a really clean answer.
Leave it in factored form and let's move to another example.
So let's do another one of these divisions of rational expressions.
I want us to divide x squared plus 10x minus 11 over x squared plus 12x plus 11 by the quantity x minus 1.
That's all I want to do.
Now, how am I going to handle the fact that the x minus 1 is a polynomial rather than a rational expression?
I mean, I thought we were supposed to be dividing by a rational here.
All I gave us was x minus 1 as the thing to divide into the more complicated rational expression.
Well, remember, x minus 1 is the same as x minus 1 divided by 1.
And once you write it with a denominator of 1, you have a rational expression.
So what you're really looking at is x squared plus 10x minus 11 divided by x squared plus 12x plus 11 divided by x minus 1 divided by 1.
Well, I can rewrite that division problem as a multiplication.
Remember, we take the second piece and we flip it, we take its reciprocal and we multiply by that reciprocal.
And so the original problem becomes a multiplication problem, which is x squared plus 10x minus 11 divided by x squared plus 12x plus 11 times 1 over x minus 1.
And now I've written it as a very nice product.
What do I do next?
Well, now I do exactly what I was doing with the other examples.
I'm going to factor and I'm going to cancel as much as I can and I'm going to see what's left.
So let's take this product now and start factoring any of the polynomials that I see, either in the numerator or the denominator.
Again, I have to say, don't just start multiplying everything out.
It'll really mess up the mathematics, factor first, cancel, and then whatever's left over you can put together.
So let's start the factoring process.
Well, in the numerator of the first fraction, I have x squared plus 10x minus 11.
That factors, if I write it as a product of two binomials, it factors as x plus 11 times x minus 1.
Again, you can check that to make sure that if you foiled x plus 11 times x minus 1 out, you would get back x squared plus 10x minus 11.
The denominator, x squared plus 12x plus 11 factors as x plus 11 times x plus 1.
You know, 11 doesn't have a whole lot of factors.
In fact, about the only thing you can do with 11 is write it as 11 times 1.
So the fact that the denominator, x squared plus 12x plus 11 factors as x plus 11 times x plus 1 was just about the only way it could have factored.
Now, I've got the first fraction written as nice factored numerator and a nicely factored denominator.
And of course, the second fraction is just 1 over x minus 1.
There's nothing I can do with that.
What should I do next?
I should now start canceling as much as I can from the numerator and the denominator.
Well, what do you see?
Well, first I see some x plus 11.
There's one in the numerator and there's one in the denominator.
Let's cancel the x plus 11.
And that's going to leave you with x minus 1 over x plus 1 times 1 over x minus 1.
Do you see any other canceling that can be done?
Yeah, sure.
Cancel out those x minus 1s.
Go ahead.
And once you're done with that, you're left with 1 over x plus 1 times 1 over 1.
When you cancel that x minus 1 from the denominator, you really ought to write in a 1 there.
That's really what's happening.
And now, if you multiply those fractions together, you'll just get 1 over x plus 1.
And of course, there's not a whole lot to simplify with 1 over x plus 1.
So your final answer really is 1 over x plus 1.
OK, let's look at a third example where we're trying to do this same sort of simplification again.
And the example I want us to look at is actually a conglomeration.
That's a big word.
It's just going to involve all of the things that we've been looking at.
Addition and subtraction maybe as well as some division as well.
So let's try to simplify the following rational expression into one clean looking rational expression.
So here's what we're going to look at.
Simplify the following.
2x plus 3 over x minus 1 minus x plus 2 over x plus 1 all divided by 3x plus 2 over x minus 1 plus x plus 4 over x plus 1.
Now, when you first see that, it probably just frightens you to think,
how in the world am I going to simplify that?
Well, we're going to take it one step at a time.
So bear with me as we walk through the problem together.
We can really do this, I promise.
And it's a nice example because it's going to bring together all of the things we've been looking at with rational expressions,
both adding and subtracting as well as some of this division and multiplication.
So let's do it together.
The first thing I want us to do is look at how we would combine just the numerator.
Let's just see if we can make the numerator into one fraction.
Right now, it's a fraction minus another fraction.
So let's do that subtraction together.
I want to look at 2x plus 3 over x minus 1 minus x plus 2 over x plus 1.
Now, when we subtract two fractions, what is the first thing we have to do?
Well, the answer is we've got to get a common denominator.
So what is that common denominator going to be in this example?
It's going to be x minus 1 times x plus 1.
They don't have any factors in common.
So the only thing you can do with a denominator of the form x minus 1 and a denominator of the form x plus 1 is simply multiply them together.
Once you've done that, your new fractions are going to look like 2x plus 3 times x plus 1 divided by x minus 1 times x plus 1.
There we had to multiply top and bottom by x plus 1.
Minus x plus 2 times x minus 1 over x minus 1 times x plus 1.
There we had to multiply by an x minus 1 on top and bottom.
And again, why did we do all that?
Because now I have common denominators.
And so I can combine these two fractions into one fraction since they have the same denominator.
And when I do that, I'm going to have 2x plus 3 times x plus 1 minus x plus 2 times x minus 1 all divided by one denominator x minus 1 times x plus 1.
Now, I've been telling you to keep things in factored form and so on.
But at this point, if you want to simplify that numerator, you actually have to multiply everything out and combine like terms.
So here is a case where I really do need to now multiply everything out and see if the subtraction of the one piece from the other will clean up that numerator.
So let's do it.
2x plus 3 times x plus 1 is going to give me 2x squared plus 2x plus 3x plus 3.
I just foiled is what I did there.
Then the other piece, x plus 2 times x minus 1, is going to give me x squared minus x plus 2x minus 2.
But did you see that minus sign that was out in front of that?
That has to be distributed to all of those terms that I just mentioned for the second piece.
And therefore, the numerator is actually really equal to 2x squared plus 2x plus 3x plus 3 minus x squared plus x minus 2x plus 2.
And the denominator is still just x minus 1 times x plus 1.
Now, combine like terms.
Now, there's a lot of terms in that numerator and some of them are like terms and so we can combine.
Notice a 2x squared minus an x squared that gives me plus 1x squared.
There's a 2x plus a 3x plus an x minus 2x.
That's plus 4x and the constant terms are just plus 3 and plus 2 and that's plus 5.
And now that numerator becomes just x squared plus 4x plus 5.
And so the numerator of the original problem is now one fraction.
It's not two fractions that are being subtracted.
It's one fraction.
And that one fraction is x squared plus 4x plus 5 divided by x minus 1 times x plus 1.
Okay, stay with me.
Now we're going to keep moving on this.
We can do it.
We're now going to attack that denominator.
The denominator was 3x plus 2 over x minus 1 plus x plus 4 over x plus 1.
Let's now combine this into one fraction as well and see what we get.
Well, I'm going to need the same common denominator x minus 1 times x plus 1.
And once I get that common denominator, I'm going to have the following.
3x plus 2 times x plus 1 divided by x minus 1 times x plus 1 plus x plus 4 times x minus 1
divided by x minus 1 times x plus 1.
Now I have a common denominator.
I can glue the two fractions together by adding them and that just means adding
their numerators and that means I'll have 3x plus 2 times x plus 1 plus x plus 4 times
x minus 1 divided by that common denominator x minus 1 times x plus 1.
Now foil out everything in the numerator and combine like terms.
And when you do that, you're going to have 3x squared plus 3x plus 2x plus 2 plus x
squared minus x plus 4x minus 4.
I basically foiled twice and now I have a numerator which can be combined by like terms.
See how we're adding up all these different ideas, adding and subtracting and in a minute
we'll be doing some division as well.
So when I combine my numerator, I'm going to have 4x squared that comes from 3x squared
plus x squared plus 8x minus 2.
And that's what the numerator now becomes.
It really cleans up pretty nicely.
4x squared plus 8x minus 2 and that's all divided by x minus 1 times x plus 1.
Now let's recap what we've done so far.
We started with what looked like a pretty complicated numerator divided by another
pretty complicated denominator.
And we've rewritten them now as one fraction divided by another fraction.
Well that just feels like one of the examples we just did a moment ago.
So what do we do when we have one fraction divided by another fraction?
We take the denominator fraction, we flip it up, we take its reciprocal and we multiply.
And that means at this point I'm down to doing this problem.
x squared plus 4x plus 5 divided by x minus 1 times x plus 1 times x minus 1 times x plus
1 over 4x squared plus 8x minus 2.
Now look what happens with those x minus 1s and x plus 1s.
They actually cancel.
And when they do, you're going to be left with x squared plus 4x plus 5 divided by 4x
squared plus 8x minus 2.
The only thing you can do to that is actually factor out a 2 from the denominator.
It's not going to cancel with anything in the numerator.
But you could rewrite your final answer as x squared plus 4x plus 5 divided by 2 times
the quantity 2x squared plus 4x minus 1.
And to be honest with you, that's as reduced as it's going to get.
And that's your final answer.
Now you might be saying to me right now, man that was a lot to do.
Those were a lot of examples to digest.
But I hope that by looking at all these examples, mixing in, multiplying and dividing rationals
with a little bit of adding and subtracting rationals as well, that you'll get a better
feeling for how to do these kinds of problems.
They can take lots of steps, but if you take them one step at a time, you can actually get
through it.
Well, in this lesson, we've talked about multiplying and dividing rational expressions
from lots of different angles.
And now that we've spent so much time on performing algebraic operations on rational expressions,
I want to spend some time on graphing rational expressions.
And that's what we'll start doing in the next lesson.
