In the last few lessons, we've spent time discussing how to simplify and combine rational functions
and rational expressions.
Now I'd like to talk about what the graphs of these rational functions look like.
We've talked about the graphs of lots of functions in this set of lessons, linear functions
which had lines and quadratic functions which were parabolas, and we talked a bit about graphs
of general polynomials as well.
In all those cases, we started with plotting some special points, maybe the x-intercepts
or the y-intercept, and in the case of parabolas, the vertex.
We just then connected the dots to finish sketching our graphs.
In this lesson, we're going to talk about the most interesting looking graphs that I
think we're going to see in this course.
And in today's lesson in particular, I want us to learn some of the tools we need to successfully
sketch the graphs of lots of different rational functions.
So today's lesson is more about building the tools in our toolbox than it is using those
tools.
We'll do that in a later lesson.
But for today, I just want you to work with me on what the tools would be to sketch the
graphs of lots of different rational functions.
Well, what would those tools be?
Well, we're going to want to find the x-intercepts.
Those are very helpful.
And we're going to find some things that we'll call asymptotes.
And I'll tell you what the asymptotes are a little later in this lesson.
By the end of the next lesson, we'll see lots of different graphs of rational functions.
But for now, let's talk about some of these basic tools that we need to start graphing
these rational functions.
I'm going to warn you, I want you to be patient and work with this material with me as we
walk through the lesson.
There are lots of tools we need in order to sketch these graphs.
So let's start out by talking about how to find the x-intercept of a rational function.
So let's just jump right into an example and get us started.
Let's find the x-intercepts of the graph of y equals x squared minus 11x plus 24 divided
by x squared plus x minus 20.
Now let's remember, what's true about the x-intercepts of the graph of a function?
Well, the x-intercepts are points that live on the x-axis.
So they are points where the y value has to be 0 so that the point never leaves the x-axis.
And that means that you and I want to solve an equation like 0 equals x squared minus
11x plus 24 divided by x squared plus x minus 20 if we want to find the x-intercepts.
In other words, if you want to find the x-intercepts of one of these functions, you set y equal
to 0 and solve for x.
Now, what do you do to try to solve this equation for x?
It looks kind of messy.
Well, there's one way to actually clean it up really fast.
And that is, you multiply both sides of the equation by the denominator.
In other words, multiply both sides by x squared plus x minus 20.
Well, let me ask you a question.
If you multiply the left-hand side 0 by x squared plus x minus 20, what are you going
to get?
Well, you're going to get 0 because 0 times anything is 0.
So the left-hand side is still 0.
What's going to happen on the other side when you have a denominator with x squared plus
x minus 20 and you've multiplied by x squared plus x minus 20?
What will those two terms do?
They'll cancel with one another.
And that means you're left with just 0 equals x squared minus 11x plus 24.
So let's just pause for a moment.
If you go back to the original problem, we're down now to just checking when the numerator
of the function we were given equals 0.
Practically speaking, that's pretty much what you want to do in order to find the x
intercepts of any one of these graphs.
Set the numerator equal to 0 and solve for x.
I might say a little more about that later with some examples, but basically, setting
the numerator equal to 0 will help us find those x intercepts.
So now let's go back to that equation and solve for x.
We had x squared minus 11x plus 24 equals 0.
Just flip things around.
That's OK.
Nothing wrong with that.
And now what do I want to do to solve for x?
I'm going to factor the left-hand side.
And the left-hand side factors as x minus 8 times x minus 3.
You can check that with foil if you'd like.
And that's equal to 0.
And that means that x minus 8 is 0 or x minus 3 is 0.
And that means that either x equals 8 or x equals 3.
Guess what?
You just found the two x intercepts for the rational function we started with.
One of the x intercepts is at the point 3, 0, and the other one is at 8, 0.
Congratulations to your first set of x intercepts for a rational function.
Now let's move to another example where we find the x intercepts of a rational function.
Let's look at this function.
Y equals x minus 2 times x plus 3 divided by x minus 5 times x plus 1.
Well as I said in the earlier example, what we really need to do to find the x intercepts
is to set the numerator equal to 0 and solve for x.
But here's a small warning.
The first thing you need to do is to make sure there isn't any cancellation between
the numerator and the denominator.
In this case, there isn't any cancellation between the top and the bottom.
And everything is already factored for us, so we can pretty quickly see that there aren't
any cancellations.
So all I'm going to do now is set the numerator equal to 0 and solve for x.
And it's already factored.
So you have x minus 2 times x plus 3 equals 0.
And that means either x minus 2 equals 0 or x plus 3 equals 0.
And if you move those constants around, it tells you that x equals 2 or x equals negative
3.
And that means that you have 2x intercepts.
The graph is going to cross the x-axis at x equals 2 and x equals negative 3.
Now if you had a piece of graph paper, you could actually plot these intercepts as the
start, the very start, of graphing the rational function we started with.
Well, I guess the real start would be drawing the axes.
But once you've drawn the axes in, you could plot these two intercepts on the x-axis.
In fact, you could plot lots of other points by hand.
But as is often the case with rational functions, the coordinates of the points can get a bit
messy.
Imagine trying to plug 7 in for x in the function I gave you at the beginning.
And it really would get quite messy trying to figure out what y is.
But if you filled in the graph, you'd get a pretty crazy-looking graph, I promise.
It would look something like the following image.
But before you freak out and say, oh, my word, I don't want to work on this, don't
get too intimidated.
We have lots of tools, as I've already said, that we're going to learn in order to be able
to come up with this wavy, disconnected, bizarre-looking graph.
I don't want you to get overwhelmed.
Be honest, after we do a couple lessons together, you'll be able to draw that graph yourself
from scratch.
So stay with me as we build these tools together.
The x-intercepts are just one tool of many that will help us to actually build these
kind of graphs.
I just wanted you to see one of those graphs, though, so you could see how interesting I
think they are and how different they are.
They're broken into pieces, and they go in all sorts of directions.
But we'll get to the point where we can actually build those together.
Let's look at one more example where we find x-intercepts.
Let's find the x-intercepts of the graph of y equals 1 divided by x minus 2.
Now as we've already done in the earlier examples, we need to set the numerator equal
to 0 and solve for x.
That means we're looking at 1 equals 0.
Now when is 1 equal to 0?
Answer?
Never.
What does that mean?
Well, here's what it means.
It means that the graph doesn't have any x-intercepts, or to put it more visually, the graph never
crosses the x-axis.
And that's pretty cool.
And if you want to look at a sketch of the graph, you can see one here.
Notice that what you have are two different pieces, one of which up in quadrant 1 comes
down and tries to hug the x-axis, but it never, never crosses it.
It just sort of gets really, really close to it.
And the other piece of the graph comes up from underneath the x-axis, and it also looks
like it's trying to touch it, but it never does.
There's never an x-intercept here, even though the pieces of the graph get really, really
close to the x-axis.
Now let's look at one more example about x-intercepts for equations that are rational expressions.
I want to find the x-intercepts of y equals x minus 5 times x plus 3 divided by x minus
5 times x plus 7.
Now before we jump into setting the numerator equal to 0, we do have to look for these cancellations.
And in this case, I've already written everything in factored form for you, you can see a cancellation.
The x minus 5 factors have to be cancelled before we do anything else.
And this is really important.
We need to remember that throughout this example, we can never plug in x equal 5 into the equation
because the equation is undefined at x equals 5.
To use fancier language, we could say that the number 5 is not in the domain of the original
function because plugging in 5 in the original function would cause division by 0.
So here's a very important point to make.
In the graph of this equation, you actually have an open circle or a hole poked into the
graph at x equals 5.
And we have to remember then, as we go through the example, if we were really trying to graph
it ourselves, that we don't have an x-intercept there, we actually have this little open hole
because plugging in x equals 5 would have caused division by 0.
Now once we've made that mental note that we can't plug in x equals 5, we can then rewrite
the equation after some cancellation as y equals x plus 3 divided by x plus 7.
And now I can set the new numerator equal to 0 to find the x-intercepts.
Well that's just going to be x plus 3 equals 0 which is the same as x equals negative 3.
One x-intercept, x equals negative 3.
And a quick sketch of the graph will show you that it really only does cross the x-axis
at one place and it crosses the x-axis at x equals negative 3.
OK, so we've talked about x-intercepts, we've talked about several examples with those.
I'd like to move now to some other tools that we're going to need when we're sketching
the graphs of these rational functions.
The next thing I'd like to talk about is called a vertical asymptote.
Now here's the idea of a vertical asymptote.
By the way, did you notice in some of the graphs we've already seen in this lesson that
the pieces of the graphs looked like at times they were just taking off either in the sort
of plus infinity direction or in the negative infinity direction?
Those pieces are trying to get very, very close to a certain vertical line and that
vertical line is what we're going to call a vertical asymptote.
From a practical perspective, if you have a line x equals c, which is a vertical asymptote
of the graph, then as the values of x get really, really close to the number c, the
values of the function, the y values, get huge and they get huge fast.
They either go to plus infinity or they go to minus infinity.
So let's do a quick example to think about what's happening with a vertical asymptote.
Let's do some numbers here.
Let's think about the graph of y equals 1 divided by x minus 2.
I want you to notice that we cannot plug in x equals 2 in this function because that would
cause division by 0.
But what happens when you plug in numbers for x, which are really close to 2?
For example, what if you plugged in x equals 2.0000001?
Well, that's really close to x equals 2 and by the way, it's just to the right of x equals
2 on the number line.
Think about it.
2.0000001 would be just to the right of 2.
If you plug that in, you're going to have y equals 1 divided by 2.0000001 minus 2.
What does that equal if you simplify?
Well you get 1 divided by 0.0000001 and if you do that reciprocal and actually calculate
what that fraction is, you actually get 10 million.
Now that is huge and that's the y value.
So when x is 2.0000001, the y value is going up to 10 million.
So what's happening in the graph?
As the x values get really, really close to 2, say coming in from the right of 2, the
y values are taking off really, really fast to plus infinity.
Now we could ask a very similar question if we took x values that are close to 2 but
from the left.
Like if you plugged in 1.99999, if you do that and you calculate the numbers again, you'll
find that you're going to get a negative large number and it's going to be negative this
time because 1.99999 minus 2 is actually negative.
It's small but it's negative and so when I take the reciprocal of that, I'll get a negative
very large number.
And so when I'm plugging in x values to the left of 2, the y values are dipping down negative
but big and that's why the arms of this graph actually do like this and one piece goes up
and the other piece goes down right around the vertical line x equals 2.
So that x equals 2 is what we call a vertical asymptote.
It acts almost like a barrier, like a wall that keeps the two pieces of the graph from
getting close to each other and in the process the graph takes off in one direction, sometimes
both sides go up together in the same direction, sometimes they go in opposite directions and
depending on the function we're looking at, we have to decide where the pieces of the graph
actually go.
So it's important to realize that a vertical asymptote is actually not part of the graph
of the rational function.
Let me say it again, the vertical asymptote really acts more like a wall through which
the graph can't pass, it's like a natural border for the graph.
So although the vertical asymptote is not really a part of the graph, we can use it as a very
important tool to find sort of where the graph is going to go, where the borders of the graph
are.
And they're very helpful, these vertical asymptotes, when we're looking at graphs of
rational functions.
Now how do you find a vertical asymptote in general?
Well, do you remember the example I just did, 1 over x minus 2?
What did I look for there?
I looked for a value of x where the denominator equaled 0.
So that's exactly what I want to do every time I want to find a vertical asymptote.
I'm going to take the rational function I'm given, I'm going to cancel out everything
that I can, and after I've done the cancellation, I'm going to look for the values of x which
make the denominator equal to 0.
Or to put it a different way, the values of x that would cause division by 0 in my rational
function.
OK, so before you feel overwhelmed, let's just pause and do another example or two where
we find some vertical asymptotes.
So let's do the following.
Find the vertical asymptotes of y equals x squared minus 4 divided by x squared minus
9.
And before we do anything here, I've got to factor those numerator and denominator so
that I can check for any cancellation.
Well, if I do the factoring, and it's pretty straightforward because I've got differences
of two squares there, the new way of writing the rational function is going to be y equals
x minus 2 times x plus 2 all divided by x minus 3 times x plus 3.
There's no cancellations.
So once I see that there aren't any, I go looking for my vertical asymptotes.
They will occur at the values of x where I get 0 in the denominator.
So I'm going to look at x minus 3 times x plus 3 equals 0.
Well, that's x minus 3 equals 0, or x plus 3 equals 0.
And that's the same as x equals 3, or x equals negative 3.
Now again, I'm not expecting you to be able to draw this graph right now, but if you just
check out this sketch of the graph, you'll see that the pieces of the graph are trying
to get really, really close to the vertical lines, x equals 3, and x equals negative 3.
The pieces of the graph do not touch or cross those two vertical lines, but they act almost
like a border for the graph, and once we know where those are, it helps us to actually sketch
the graph.
By the way, while you're looking at that graph, do you see where the x-intercepts are?
They're at 2 comma 0 and negative 2 comma 0, and where did those come from?
They came from setting the numerator equal to 0, and once we do that, we can see that
x equals 2 and x equals negative 2 are exactly the x-intercepts.
So there's two tools.
Those two tools, the x-intercepts and the vertical asymptotes, help us to start to get
a picture for where we can draw the pieces of a rational functions graph.
Very good.
Now, before we close the lesson, I want to talk about another tool that we need when
we're graphing rational functions.
You see how the pieces of these graphs are trying to go sort of up and down, but you
also might have noticed that out on the ends of the graph, it looks like the pieces of
the graph are leveling off, as if there's also some sort of imaginary or non-existent
line that's there that's keeping the edges of the graph or the ends of the graph from
going anywhere else, but just sort of leveling off.
It turns out that a lot of these rational functions have graphs which have what are
known as horizontal asymptotes as well, and they're horizontal because they're flat like
this, and they're asymptotes because they, again, serve as places where the graph can
get very, very close, but actually not cross, not touch.
So I would like to talk now about these horizontal asymptotes and how we find them and how they
serve as a border for a graph of a rational function.
So let's look back again at the graph of x squared minus 4 divided by x squared minus
9.
Now, we talked about the vertical asymptotes at x equals 3 and x equals negative 3, but
now I want you to focus on the ends of the graph and look at where they seem to be leveling
off.
They look like they're leveling off not the x-axis, but actually just above the x-axis.
In fact, it looks like they're getting bordered by the horizontal line y equals 1.
If you believe me with that, I'll tell you that you're absolutely right.
That's exactly what's happening.
Y equals 1 is actually acting like a natural border for the graph at the ends.
So the question you should ask is, where does y equal 1 come from?
Well, I'll tell you exactly where y equals 1 comes from as the equation of our horizontal
asymptote.
Go back to the original equation.
Y equals x squared minus 4 over x squared minus 9.
Here's what I want you to do when you're finding a horizontal asymptote.
I want you to erase all of the terms in the numerator and all of the terms in the denominator,
which are not the dominant terms.
Now just a reminder, the dominant term in the numerator is the x squared and the dominant
term in the denominator is the other x squared.
It's an easy way to think of it.
The dominant term is the one that has the highest power of x.
So in this case, it's going to be the x squared on top and the x squared on the bottom.
Once you've erased everything else, you're just left with y equals x squared divided
by x squared.
Well, wait a minute, x squared divided by x squared, everything cancels out and you're
left with y equals 1.
And that's exactly the equation for the horizontal asymptote in this example.
So to find a horizontal asymptote, we simply take the rational function that was given
to us, we erase all the terms in the top, which are not the dominant term, and we erase
all the terms on the bottom, which are not the dominant term, and we just simplify.
And if we have a horizontal asymptote, it'll simply fall out in front of us.
So let's look at another example then to find this kind of a horizontal asymptote.
Find the horizontal asymptote for this function, y equals 6x cubed plus 18x squared minus 10x
plus 7 divided by 3x cubed minus 5x plus 9.
Now I've purposefully given you a pretty messy looking rational function there because I
wanted us to remember how to find these horizontal asymptotes.
How do you do it?
You take the numerator and you throw out all the terms, which are not the dominant term.
That means in the numerator, the only term that's going to stay is the 6x cubed.
In the denominator, you throw out all the terms, which are not the dominant term.
The dominant term in the denominator is 3x cubed because x cubed was the largest power
of x in the denominator.
And now look, you have the equation, y equals 6x cubed divided by 3x cubed.
The x cubes cancel and you get 6 over 3, which is 2.
And bottom line, y equals 2 is the horizontal asymptote for that graph.
Now it's very important to remember that the graph of a rational function is allowed to
cross a horizontal asymptote in the middle of the graph.
The key is that the graph doesn't cross a horizontal asymptote at the ends of the graph.
Let me repeat that.
We talked about these horizontal asymptotes acting like a border or a barrier keeping
the edge or the ends of the graph from wobbling around.
That's very true for a horizontal asymptote.
Out on the ends of the graph, the edges of the graph will smooth right out.
They might come from underneath, they might come from above, but eventually they're just
going to hug that horizontal line.
They're not going to touch it.
They're going to get very, very close.
But what happens in the middle of the graph has nothing to do with the horizontal asymptote.
So you might have a horizontal asymptote which is not getting crossed out at the ends, but
in the middle the graph is allowed to cross it as much as it wants.
So keep in mind, horizontal asymptotes only act as borders on the edges of the graph,
not in the middle of the graph.
Now let's look at another example of finding a horizontal asymptote.
Remember, we're just building tools that are going to help us draw these graphs on our
own one day.
So here's the next example.
Find the horizontal asymptote of y equals 5x squared plus 3x plus 80 divided by 4x cubed
minus 27x squared plus 18x.
Now again, I've given you purposefully a pretty messy looking rational function, but I wanted
you to think about how to find the horizontal asymptote here.
To find the horizontal asymptote, I'm going to keep the dominant term in the top and I'm
going to keep the dominant term in the bottom.
And that means I'll be left with the equation y equals 5x squared divided by 4x cubed.
I've erased all the other terms.
Now this erasing of all the other terms is only to find that horizontal asymptote.
I can't get rid of all the other terms if I actually want to plot the graph.
But to find the horizontal asymptote, I throw out all of those other terms and I'm left
with 5x squared over 4x cubed.
Now let's cancel.
When you do so, you'll have the equation y equals 5 over 4x.
Now I want you to notice something about this example compared to the others.
We now have some x's still inside the equation.
Notice in the first couple of examples, all we had was y equal to number.
Now we have y equals something still with x's in it.
And now I need to ask you this question.
If you have something like 5 over 4x and you want to plug in an x that's way out on
the edge of the graph, some number x that's really, really large, what will happen to
the fraction 5 divided by 4x?
Let's say you wanted to plug in x equals 1 million and look at 5 over 4 times 1 million.
If you take out a calculator and look at 5 divided by 4 times 1 million, you're going
to find that the number is going to be very, very close to zero.
It's going to look like 0.00000, a lot of zeros, and then something else.
So as x gets very, very large out here, 5 over 4x is actually going to get close to
zero because the 4x is getting huge.
And therefore, in this case, when you have y equals 5 over 4x and you're looking for
the horizontal asymptote, it turns out that the horizontal asymptote is y equals zero
because that 4x quantity in the denominator is going to get huge humongous as the x gets
really big, either out in the positive direction or out in the negative direction.
In fact, I can actually give you a rule for when you end up with y equals zero as your
horizontal asymptote.
Then the dominant term on top of your rational expression has a degree which is smaller than
the dominant term on the bottom.
Then the horizontal asymptote occurs at y equals zero.
Let me say that again.
If your dominant term on top has, say, degree 3 and your dominant term on the bottom has
degree 4, then your horizontal asymptote is going to be y equals zero.
Did you notice in the first couple of examples where we found horizontal asymptotes, the degree
on top and the degree on the bottom were actually the same?
In that case, you'll get a different equation.
But when the dominant term on top has smaller degree than the dominant term on the bottom,
then you will always have the horizontal asymptote y equals zero.
And if you look at the graph of the equation we started with in that example, you'll see
that the two ends of the graph are getting very, very close to the line y equals zero.
You remember what y equals zero is?
It's the x-axis.
And you now see that the two pieces on the ends of the graph are actually getting very,
very close to the x-axis.
Again, out on the ends, it looks like they're touching the x-axis when in fact they aren't.
Now, I'd like to look at one more quick example trying to find a horizontal asymptote as we
close out our lesson together.
Let's look for the horizontal asymptote of y equals x to the fourth plus one over x
plus one.
I keep my dominant terms to find a horizontal asymptote, and that means I'm going to look
at just y equals x to the fourth divided by x, which means I have y equals x cubed.
Now, here's a question.
As x gets really, really large, what does x cubed do?
If you plug in a number like x equals one million into x cubed, you'll get one million
cubed, and that's going to get even bigger, which means in this graph's case, as we take
x's that are out on the edge in either direction, the graph doesn't flatten out.
It actually takes off.
It either goes up to plus infinity or it goes down to minus infinity.
Let me say it to you as another part of our horizontal asymptote rule.
Here it goes.
When the dominant term on top now has higher degree than the dominant term on the bottom,
then there is no horizontal asymptote.
Let me say it again.
If you have a rational function and the dominant term on top has higher degree than the dominant
term on the bottom, then there will be no horizontal asymptote, which means out at the
ends, the graph is not going to flatten out.
It's actually going to take off and go either to plus infinity or minus infinity on both
sides of the graph.
Well, in this lesson we've talked about the basics, just some elementary tools for graphing
rational functions.
We saw how to find the x-intercepts of a rational function by setting the function's numerator
equal to zero and solving for x after we did our cancellations.
We saw how to find vertical asymptotes for a rational function, which basically occur
at the values of x where the denominator equals zero.
And we saw how to find these horizontal asymptotes by looking at the ratio of the dominant term
on top and the dominant term on the bottom.
We're going to continue talking about these same ideas in the next lesson when we put
all of these tools together and actually sketch some graphs of rational functions from scratch.
Don't worry, I'm going to guide you through it step by step.
I look forward to talking with you then.
