In some of our earlier lessons, especially the lessons that dealt with quadratic functions
and the Pythagorean theorem, radical expressions showed up.
What do I mean by a radical expression?
Well, anytime you see a root symbol, like the square root symbol, then you're looking
at something we call a radical symbol, and therefore, we would have a radical expression
if we had a square root in it.
In this lesson, I want to talk more about radical expressions, how to simplify them,
and how to perform operations on them, like multiplication and division, addition and subtraction.
We've already done some work along these lines, but here I want us to take the topic much
further.
As I've emphasized in some of our earlier lessons, it's extremely important that we
know our arithmetic facts in order to quickly simplify these radical expressions.
So let's start by spending some time just simplifying some of these radical expressions,
and you'll see what I mean about arithmetic facts coming into play.
Let's simplify the square root of 162.
Now one question you should ask is, how do I start the process of simplifying a square
root like that?
Well, just as we've done with some of the other lessons, we want to start by factoring
162, and in particular, if I can find a perfect square factor hiding inside of 162, I'll
know that I can take that off or peel it off as part of the square root.
So for example, if I started factoring 162, I'd probably take out a 2 first because I
see that 162 is even.
At that point, I would know that 162 equals 2 times 81.
I could find that 81 by some long division if I had to, just doing 2 goes into 162 with
some long division.
And once I see that 81, I should stop.
If I know my arithmetic, I know that 81 is a perfect square because it's 9 times 9.
I'm going to stop factoring at that point because that 81 is a nice perfect square.
And since 162 equals 2 times 81, I know that square root of 162 equals the square root
of 2 times 81.
And now that square root can be pulled into two square roots multiplied together.
In other words, it's the same as square root of 2 times square root of 81.
But the square root of 81 is 9, and therefore I would have the square root of 2 times a
9.
Specifically, we're going to take that whole number 9 and move it out to the front of the
square root of 2.
And therefore, my final answer would be 9 times the square root of 2.
And that's the simplification of the square root of 162.
Square root 162 equals 9 times the square root of 2.
Let's try a second example in the same way.
Let's simplify the square root of 80 x to the 7th.
We might as well throw a variable in there.
In the previous example, we were just dealing with some numbers.
So now I want to be able to simplify or whittle down the square root of 80 times x to the 7th
as much as I can.
Again, the idea is I want to look at perfect squares that could be inside either the 80
or the x to the 7th.
Well, the first thing I'm going to do is immediately split the square root of 80x to the 7th into
two square roots, the square root of 80 times the square root of x to the 7th.
By doing that, I've actually split the problem into two little pieces, the square root of
80 and the square root of x to the 7th.
And I can handle them separately, and then at the end, just multiply everything together.
So let's start by looking at the square root of 80.
Let's start factoring it and see if we can factor in such a way that we see some perfect
squares hiding inside of 80.
So 80 is equal to 2 times 40, and that's equal to 2 times 2 times 20, and that's equal
to 2 times 2 times 10, and then the 10 can be whittled down as another 2 times 5, and
that means that 80 is equal to 2 times 2 times 2 times 2 times 5.
We can't factor that down any farther.
Now the question is, are there any perfect squares inside there?
And the answer is yes if you look at those 2s that are out in front of the factorization.
In fact, I could rewrite my factorization now as 16 times 5 if I just multiply back
up the 2 times 2 times 2 times 2.
And why would I multiply those up to give me 16?
Because 16 is a perfect square.
I know that 16 is 4 times 4.
And therefore, I can rewrite the square root of 80 in this way.
Square root of 80 equals square root of 16 times 5, and I can split that up into square
root of 16 times square root of 5, and the square root of 16 is just 4.
And so the square root of 80 would just be 4 times the square root of 5.
You're not going to be able to simplify square root of 5 at all, and so I've simplified square
root of 80 as 4 times the square root of 5.
Now I need to look at that other square root, which was the square root of x to the 7th.
We're not finished yet until we look at that piece as well.
I've got to think about how to write x to the 7th to pull out any square perfect squares
that are hiding inside of it.
Well, let me point something out.
x to the 7th is the same as x to the 6th times x to the 1st because 6 plus 1 is 7.
Remember when you multiply these kinds of things, you add the exponents.
Now why did I peel off x to the 6th like that?
Well because x to the 6th is a perfect square.
x to the 6th equals x cubed times x cubed, or x cubed whole thing squared.
And therefore, by peeling apart the x to the 6th and the x, I can simplify the square root
of x to the 7th as square root of x to the 6th times x, which is square root of x to
the 6th times the square root of x, and the square root of x to the 6th is just x cubed.
And therefore, square root of x to the 7th is x cubed times the extra square root of
x.
Now, I have to take these pieces and glue them back together, so let's do it.
Square root of 80 x to the 7th is exactly square root of 80 times square root of x to
the 7th.
But from the work we just did, I now know that that's 4 times the square root of 5 times
x cubed square root of x.
Now typically we're going to take all the stuff that's not a square root and put it
out in front, and then put all the square roots together.
And that means I could rewrite everything as 4x cubed times the square root of 5 times
the square root of x.
And if I want, I could put those two square roots together, and my final answer would
be 4x cubed times the square root of 5x.
That's as simple as you're going to get the original problem to look.
Now, the next question we should ask is this, what if we wanted to perform operations on
radical expressions, like adding them, multiplying them, and so on?
How are such expressions simplified?
Well, that's a good question.
So I want to start doing some examples with some operations, and it turns out that multiplication
and division are actually easier to do with square roots than addition and subtraction,
believe it or not.
So I'm going to start with some examples that are multiplication or division first.
We'll look at some addition and subtraction later on.
Let's do the following.
Simplify square root of 98x to the fifth times the square root of 18x cubed.
Okay, let's start by simplifying each piece separately as much as we can, and then we'll
see if we can actually simplify later on after we've done this first step.
So the first thing I want to do is the square root of 98x to the fifth.
Well, 98x to the fifth, ignoring the square root for just a second, is the same as 2 times
49, that's the 98 part, times an x to the fourth times x.
Now, I've written it that way because you'll see in a moment that I'm seeing some perfect
squares in there, like that 49, it's 7 squared.
And as soon as I see that, I can start to peel out pieces of this square root, which
are going to allow me to get rid of some of the square root symbols.
So here we go.
Square root of 98x to the fifth is square root of 2 times 49 times x to the fourth times
x.
Each of those can now be separated into their own square root, and I'll have square root
of 2, square root of 49, square root of x to the fourth, and square root of x all multiplied
together.
But the square root of 49 is 7, so I can just pull that 7 out in front, and the square root
of x to the fourth is exactly x squared, because x squared times x squared is x to the fourth.
And therefore, this first piece, square root of 98x to the fifth, can be simplified as
7x squared times the square root of 2x.
Okay?
Now let's look at the other piece in the original problem, square root of 18x cubed.
Well, 18x cubed can be written as 2 times 9 times x squared times x.
Again, you could write this in a lot of different ways, but I'm trying to write it so that I
can see some perfect squares hiding inside 18x cubed as factors.
And by writing 18x cubed as 2 times 9 times x squared times x, I see that the square root
of 18x cubed equals the square root of 2 times the square root of 9 times the square root
of x squared times the square root of x.
And the square root of 9 is the same as 3, I can just pull that out in front, and the
square root of x squared is the same as x, because x times x equals x squared.
So I can pull an x out in front, and what I'm left with is a square root of a 2 and
a square root of x, which I can't really simplify.
So the square root of 18x cubed, I'm going to rewrite as 3 times x times square root
of 2x.
Now the problem started with me wanting to multiply these two larger terms and simplify
as much as possible.
So now let's take the two simplifications that we've already written down and multiply those
together and then see if there's any more simplification that we can do.
So we have square root of 98x to the fifth times square root of 18x cubed.
That equals 7x squared times the square root of 2x times 3x times the square root of 2x.
That's what we found earlier.
And now let's start multiplying things together.
The 7 times the 3 gives me a 21, the x squared times the x gives me an x cubed, and now the
two square roots can be recombined, and when I multiply them together, I get square root
of 4x squared, 4 coming from the 2 times 2, and the x squared coming from the x times
x.
But wait a minute, 4x squared is a perfect square, because 2x times 2x is 4x squared.
And that means that the square root of 4x squared can be rewritten as 2x.
So this whole thing simplifies as 21x cubed times 2x.
And now I can just multiply that out just a little bit more.
21 times 2 is 42, x cubed times x is x to the fourth, and so my final answer is 42x
to the fourth.
And now I want you to notice something about this problem before we move on.
We started with a product of, a multiplication of, two pretty ugly looking square roots to
start, and the answer has no square roots in it at all.
It just ended up being 42x to the fourth.
Is that a problem?
Absolutely not.
It's a perfectly good answer.
It just meant that when we simplified, everything cleaned up nicely, and there were no square
roots left.
Okay, now let's move to an example where we do a division that involves square roots.
Again, division and multiplication actually are relatively clean compared to addition
and subtractions with square roots.
So I want to look at a simplification problem now with division in it.
So let's look at square root of 75t to the ninth divided by 12t cubed.
Now the square root of a fraction like that is the same as the square root of the numerator
divided by the square root of the denominator.
They're allowed to split a square root of a fraction into two square roots divided by
one another.
And so my problem is the same as the square root of 75t to the ninth divided by the square
root of 12t cubed.
By the way, you could also just simplify what's inside the square root symbol to begin with
and then go from there.
But I'm choosing in this example just so I can show you different things to split this
into two square roots and then do the simplification there.
So let's look just at the numerator now, square root of 75t to the ninth.
Well, 75t to the ninth is the same as 3 times 25 times the t to the ninth.
So I know immediately that I can take square root of 75t to the ninth and rewrite it as
square root of 3 times square root of 25 times square root of t to the ninth.
The square root of 25 will pop out in front as a 5, right, because 5 times 5 is 25.
So I can rewrite that as 5 square root of 3 times the square root of t to the ninth.
But the t to the ninth can be rewritten as t to the eighth times t.
It's kind of the same trick we were using in the earlier example.
And at that point, I'll split the square root of t to the ninth into square root of t to
the eighth times the square root of t.
Why?
Because the square root of t to the eighth is a perfect square.
That's t to the fourth, because t to the fourth times t to the fourth is t to the eighth.
And therefore, this thing simplifies as 5 times t to the fourth times the square root
of 3 times the square root of t.
There was an extra t at the end.
And so this is simply 5t to the fourth times the square root of 3t.
That's the numerator.
Now, let's look at the denominator quickly.
Square root of 12t cubed.
I'm going to write the 12 as 3 times 4.
I could have written it as 2 times 6, but neither 2 nor 6 is a perfect square.
So that's a pretty useless way of writing 12.
But 12 being written as 3 times 4 is helpful because 4 is a perfect square.
So let's rewrite the square root of 12t cubed as square root of 3 times square root of 4
times the square root of t cubed.
That square root of 4 is a 2, so let's just pull a 2 out in front of everything and we'll
have 2 times the square root of 3 times the square root of t cubed.
Let's think about how to write this t cubed.
Let's write it as t squared times t so that we can get at least part of it to be a perfect
square.
And at that point, we'll have 2 times square root of 3 times square root of t squared times
square root of t.
The square root of t squared is just t because t times t equals t squared.
And so this all simplifies as 2t times the square root of 3 times the square root of
t or 2t times the square root of 3t.
And that means the original problem now is just equal to 5t to the fourth square root
of 3t on the top divided by 2t square root of 3t on the bottom.
Notice something.
I have a square root of 3t on the top as a factor, I have a square root of 3t on the
bottom as a factor.
What can I do with them?
Cancel them.
Cancel them as quickly as you can.
And you'll be left with 5t to the fourth divided by 2t, which will cancel just a little bit
more.
You can get rid of 1t on the top and bottom.
And you're left with 5t cubed divided by 2.
And that's your simplification.
Let's look at a second example really quickly with division just to show a little more of
this simplification.
Let's simplify 5 square root of 2 divided by square root of 25x.
Now to start, I see that my denominator is exactly the same as 5 times the square root
of x because 25 is just 5 times 5.
So I would have 5 times the square root of 2 divided by 5 times the square root of x.
And of course, the 5s can be canceled at that point.
And so I would just have square root of 2 divided by square root of x.
At this point, I have to share an important comment that's related to these kinds of problems.
It's often the case that textbooks and even math teachers do not want us to leave a radical
symbol like the square root symbol in the denominator.
In my opinion, this is more of a preference than it is a mathematical requirement.
But even so, I'd like to use this example to walk through what to do to get rid of that
square root in the denominator because some of you will have teachers or you'll read in
textbooks that you're supposed to be getting rid of any square roots in the denominators.
So we're now going to do what's called rationalizing the denominator.
I know it's a big phrase, but that's exactly what we do in order to get rid of that denominator
square root.
Let's rationalize the denominator.
But what you do to do that is multiply the numerator and the denominator of your fraction
by some expression which will remove the radical symbol from the denominator.
In this case, I want us to multiply both the top and the bottom by the square root of x.
So here's what you'd have to do.
You'd have square root of 2 divided by square root of x, that's what you started with, and
you would then multiply by the fraction square root of x over square root of x.
Now square root of x over square root of x is just one, right, because they have the
same numerator and denominator.
But once you do that multiplication, what do you get?
Well you get square root of 2 times the square root of x on the top divided by square root
of x times square root of x on the bottom.
And that means the top is just square root of 2x, but the bottom is now square root of
x squared, and that's just x.
And therefore your final answer is actually square root of 2x divided by x.
Notice what you've done.
You've gotten rid of the radical symbol in the denominator.
There is no square root in the denominator any longer, and that means you've rationalized
the denominator.
Okay, so we've done multiplication and we've done some division.
Why don't we look at adding and subtracting with radicals now, and let's just see what
the main points are as we walk through it.
First of all, the key to these kinds of additions and subtractions is to look for like terms.
We've heard that phrase a lot, haven't we?
In this case, you're going to be looking for things like 3 times square root of 2 plus
5 times square root of 2.
Those are going to be like terms because they both are just some square roots of 2 being
added together, just like 3 bananas and 5 bananas would give you 8 bananas.
So we're going to be looking for like terms like that as we do these additions and subtractions.
So 3 square root of 2 plus 5 square root of 2 would actually be 8 times the square root
of 2.
That would work fine.
We're going to have 3 square root of 7 plus 4 times the square root of 2.
In that case, you can't simplify it all because the square root of 7 and the square root of
2, they're both square roots, but they're very different square roots, just like apples
and oranges are very different fruits, even though they're both fruits.
So 3 square root of 7 plus 4 square root of 2 would not be simplifiable at all.
You'd have to leave it as it is.
So let's look at some examples now of trying to simplify these sorts of additions and subtractions.
Let's start with the following.
Simplify 11 square root of 3 minus square root of 12.
Now you might start out by saying, well, square root of 3 and square root of 12, they've got
different numbers under the radical symbol, so you just told me that they're not like
terms, and therefore I can't do anything about it.
Well, you're right in saying that 3 and 12 are different numbers, but before we start
to finish the example by doing nothing to it, we should see if there's any simplifying
of each individual square root, and maybe, just maybe, like terms will pop up.
Let me show you what I mean.
That square root of 12 that's in the original problem is the same as square root of 4 times
3.
So I can split that into square root of 4 times square root of 3, and of course square
root of 4 is just 2.
So I really have 2 times the square root of 3.
What that means is I can replace the square root of 12 in the start of the problem with
2 times the square root of 3, and the problem then becomes 11 square root of 3 minus 2 square
root of 3.
Guess what?
We now have like terms, and so we have 11 things minus 2 things.
That means we're left with 9 things, and in fact, 11 square root of 3 minus 2 square
root of 3 is exactly 9 square root of 3.
So be careful.
It may not look like you have any like terms, but in fact, they may be hiding underneath
waiting for you to find them.
Now let's do another example, same kind of thing.
Let's simplify 13 times the square root of 5 minus 3 square root of 125 plus square root
of 100.
OK.
Let's start by simplifying each square root to see if we can do any sort of like term
sorts of things.
Well, the square root of 5 at the beginning, I can't do anything with that, so let's leave
it alone.
The square root of 125, OK, I've got to do my arithmetic now.
I need to find a square in there if there is one, and 125 is equal to 25 times 5.
Well, 25 is a perfect square, and so I can split that into square root of 25 times square
root of 5.
The square root of 25 is 5, and so I have 5 times the square root of 5.
So the second term can be written as 3 times the square root of 125 equals 3 times 5 square
root of 5 or 15 square root of 5.
Perfect.
Now I see that the first two terms really did have like terms.
We'll come back to that in a second.
The third term is square root of 100, which of course is 10, because 10 times 10 is 100,
and what I want you to notice there is that there's no square root of 5 attached to it.
It's just flat out 10.
So what you have with the original problem is the following.
13 square root of 5 minus 3 square root of 125 plus square root of 100 equals 13 square
root of 5 minus 15 square root of 5 plus 10.
Now those first two terms have like terms in them, because they both have a square root
of 5.
13 square root of 5 minus 15 square root of 5 is negative 2 square root of 5, and that
means your final answer is negative 2 square root of 5 plus 10.
I want you to notice that the 10 cannot be combined with the other piece, because one
of the terms has a square root of 5 in it and the other one doesn't.
They're not like terms any longer.
So your final answer is negative 2 square root of 5 plus 10.
Now I'd like to look at another example which will highlight a very important common pitfall
that you see sometimes when I'm working with students on these kinds of things.
So here's the example.
I want us to simplify square root of 3 plus square root of 5.
That's it.
That's all I want to do.
Simplify square root of 3 plus square root of 5.
Now I've known some students who will say that the square root of 3 plus the square root
of 5 equals the square root of 3 plus 5, which is the square root of 8, and then they'll
start to simplify from there, pull out a 4 and so on.
Unfortunately, the first step in that logic to say that the square root of 3 plus the
square root of 5 is the same as the square root of 3 plus 5 is completely wrong.
You can't add across the square root symbols.
So in fact, square root of 3 plus the square root of 5 is as simple as it gets, and it
is not equal.
It is not equal to the square root of 3 plus 5.
So in fact, the example I just gave you can't be simplified anymore.
The final answer would have to be square root of 3 plus the square root of 5.
Of course, you can multiply across square root symbols, right?
Square root of 3 times the square root of 27 is the same as square root of 3 times 27,
and you could do manipulations with that.
That would be the same as square root of 81, and that would be 9.
All of that mathematics was fine.
I can multiply inside and through the square root symbols.
I cannot add, though, and I can't subtract across those square root symbols.
So be very, very careful as you're working through these kinds of problems.
You don't want to mix up what you are and are not allowed to do.
Now, we've done some multiplications and divisions, some additions and subtractions, but we kind
of did them separately.
So the next thing I'd like to do is actually mix in some of these operations together, and
to do that, let's look at this example.
Let's simplify the following.
Square root of 3 times the quantity 5 times the square root of 3 plus 7.
Now, how would you start to simplify that kind of an expression?
Well, what you're going to need to do is take the square root of 3 that's on the outside
and multiply it through with all the terms on the inside of the parentheses.
Do you know which property we use in order to do that?
It's called the distributive property.
We've talked about the distributive property before in this course.
So in this case, let's distribute the square root of 3 into the parentheses.
Well, to do that, I'm going to have square root of 3 times the 5 square root of 3 plus
square root of 3 times 7.
And if I look at that for a moment, I realize that that's the same as 5 times the square
root of 3 times 3 plus 7 times the square root of 3.
And 5 times square root of 3 times 3 is the same as 5 times square root of 9.
And that is just 5 times 3 because the square root of 9 is 3.
And so this simplifies to 5 times 3 plus 7 times the square root of 3.
And of course, 5 times 3 is 15.
And so our final answer is 15 plus 7 square root of 3.
Again, you can't simplify that any farther because the 15 doesn't have any square root
of 3s in it.
And the other term does have a square root of 3 in it.
So we can't take that any further.
We can only go to that point and we can't simplify any farther.
OK.
Now I'd like to do another example where we mix up some additions and subtractions with
some multiplications.
In this case, I'd like to expand the following.
2 times the square root of 7 plus square root of 5, that's going to be one thing.
And then I'm going to multiply that with square root of 7 minus square root of 5.
Believe it or not, if you look at that for a while, you'll realize it's an example of
foiling.
Even though you don't have any letters in there, any variables, you have one thing plus
another thing times one thing minus another thing.
So you're going to just foil the pieces and see what you get.
So let's foil these together.
You get 2 square root of 7 plus square root of 5 times square root of 7 minus square root
of 5.
To do that, the F part of the foil will give me 2 square root of 7 times square root of
7.
The O will be minus 2 square root of 7 times square root of 5.
The I, the inner pieces, will be plus square root of 5 times square root of 7.
And the L will be minus square root of 5 times square root of 5.
That was just foil.
And now all you need to do is simplify.
Well, 2 square root of 7 times square root of 7 is just 2 times 7 because the square
root of 7 times the square root of 7 is square root of 49, which is 7.
So the first term simplifies to 2 times 7.
The second term is minus 2 square root of 35.
The third term is plus square root of 35.
Those 35s are coming from 5 times 7.
And the last term is minus 5 because square root of 5 times square root of 5 is the square
root of 25, which is 5.
So what you really have is 14 minus 2 square root of 35 plus square root of 35 minus 5.
And the 14 minus 5 that are on the ends can actually be combined together to just give
you 9.
And the two middle terms are like terms because they both have a square root of 35 in them.
You have negative 2 square root of 35 plus 1 square root of 35.
And that equals negative 1 square root of 35.
And so your final answer in this example is 9 minus square root of 35.
Now, I'd like to look at a very special example of foiling very quickly with you as we close
out this lesson together.
Here it is.
Let's expand square root of 3 plus square root of 11 times square root of 3 minus square
root of 11.
Well, notice that the two terms look a lot alike.
The first set of parentheses has a plus sign, the second set of parentheses has a minus
sign.
Otherwise, all the numbers are the same.
When you have a square root plus a square root and then a square root, the same square
root minus another square root, in this case, square root of 3 plus square root of 11 and
square root of 3 minus square root of 11, when they just differ by their middle sign
in the middle, you have what are called conjugates of one another.
I want to see what happens when I actually multiply these things out.
square root of 11 times square root of 3 minus square root of 11, I'm going to foil
again.
So let's do the foil.
First, I'm going to have square root of 3 times square root of 3, then minus square
root of 3 times square root of 11 plus the inner part, square root of 11 times square
root of 3, and then minus square root of 11 times square root of 11.
Let's simplify.
When you simplify, you'll just get three as the first term,
minus square root of 33, plus square root of 33, minus 11.
Now, let's combine like terms.
Look at the two middle terms,
minus square root of 33, plus square root of 33.
What are they gonna do?
They're gonna cancel.
They become zero because you have
minus one of them, plus one of them.
And that means all you're left with is three minus 11,
which is negative eight.
And notice what happened.
You started with a problem
that had a whole bunch of square roots floating around.
And by the end of it, when you simplified,
all of the square roots disappeared.
And the reason that is,
is because you were basically looking
at a difference of two squares
when you started the process.
We talked about difference of two squares
over a number of different lessons in this course.
So it's a really cool application
of difference of two squares.
Well, in today's lesson, we've spent a lot of time
getting comfortable, I hope, with radical expressions,
with simplifying them, and also looking at
how to add, subtract, and multiply, and divide them.
We'll continue talking about radical expressions
as we move into our next lesson together.
I'll see you then.
