In our previous lesson, we studied radical expressions and how to combine and simplify
those kinds of expressions.
I want us to continue studying the algebra related to radicals by solving equations which
contain such radical expressions in this lesson.
We're going to call those kinds of equations radical equations.
But before we jump to the examples, I need to mention a very important fact that we're
going to use throughout the lesson, and that fact is this.
Whenever x is greater than or equal to zero, the square root of x squared equals x.
So you have square root of x, whole thing squared, equaling x, as long as x is greater
than or equal to zero.
Now, I want you to notice that this fact is not true when x is negative.
And the reason for that is the square root on the left does not make sense if you try
to plug in an x that is negative, right?
The square root of negative 9 doesn't make any sense.
And so the fact that I've shared with you, square root of x squared equals x is only
true as long as x is greater than or equal to zero.
But I'm going to use that often as we walk through today's lesson.
So let's get started with a straightforward example just to illustrate the approach we
have in solving these kinds of radical equations.
Here's the example.
Let's solve the equation square root of x minus 7 equals 2.
Now notice that the minus 7 is not underneath the square root symbol.
That would be a very different equation.
Here the minus 7 is actually separate from, it's basically telling us to subtract 7 from
the square root of x.
So don't put that minus 7 underneath the square root symbol.
That would be very different.
The first thing I'm going to do in solving any of these kinds of equations in this lesson
is to do what I like to call isolating the radical.
In other words, I want to get that square root symbol by itself on one side of the equation.
And if I can, put everything else on the other side of the equation.
In this case, I can do that.
And the way I want to isolate the radical is by adding 7 to both sides of the equation.
The left-hand side will then just be square root of x, and the right-hand side will become
2 plus 7 or 9.
And so our equation that we started with is now the same as square root of x equals 9.
And now we have isolated that radical.
We've got it by itself.
Once we have done that, we now square both sides of the equation, and I'm going to use
that fact that I mentioned just a moment ago at the beginning of the lesson.
And when I do, and I square both sides of the equation, I'm going to simply have x on
the left-hand side equals 9 squared, or x equals 81.
So my solution in this example is 81.
Now it's going to be very, very important in this lesson that we check our answers.
I've been saying this throughout the course that we should always stop when we can and
check to make sure that our work is correct at the end of each problem.
In this example, it's extremely important that we check our answers, and that's because
even if we do all the math perfectly fine, there will be times when some numbers tell
us their solutions when they're really not.
So let's check our answer here just to make sure that 81 really is a solution to the problem.
We go back to the original equation, square root of x minus 7 equals 2, and we plug in
81 for x.
And when we do that, we'll have square root of 81 minus 7 equals 2.
Square root of 81 is 9, and so what I really have is 9 minus 7 equals 2, or 2 equals 2.
And of course 2 does equal 2.
That's a check, and that means that 81 really is a solution of that equation.
So we're good to go there.
Now let's look at another quick example of solving a radical equation, and here it is.
Let's solve square root of t minus 2 equals 5, and we're going to solve that in this case
for the variable t.
There's no x's here, but the variable is t, so we're going to solve for t.
Now I want you to notice a couple things before we even get started.
First of all, notice that the square root is already isolated.
In other words, the left-hand side of the equation is just a big square root symbol.
So we don't have to do anything in this case in terms of isolating the radical.
Secondly, I want you to notice that the minus 2 is actually under the radical symbol this
time, whereas in the first example, that minus 7 was on the outside.
Here minus 2 really is underneath that radical symbol.
That's very, very important.
Then what I need to worry about is, at this point, squaring both sides of the equation.
I'm going to use the fact that we talked about at the beginning of the lesson, and I'm just
going to square both sides.
So here we go.
I've got the radical isolated on the left-hand side already, and so we simply do that squaring.
And when I do, I'm going to have square root of t minus 2 whole thing squared equals 5
squared.
And as long as I remember now that t minus 2 needs to be non-negative, in other words,
it has to be greater than or equal to 0, I know that the square root of t minus 2 squared
just equals t minus 2, and the right-hand side is 25.
I like to think of it this way.
When I take a square root and I square it, it's as if the squaring and the square rooting
sort of cancel one another out.
And when they undo each other like that, I'm just left with what's underneath the radical
sign.
In this case, that's t minus 2.
So my equation has become t minus 2 equals 25, 25 coming from 5 squared.
And now how do I solve for t?
Well, this is just reminiscent of our linear equations lessons several lessons ago.
That's all this is as a linear equation.
t minus 2 equals 25, I add 2 to both sides, and when I do, I get t on the left-hand side
equals 25 plus 2, which is 27.
So my final answer in this example is t equals 27.
But again, I have got to check to make sure it really is a solution.
In this lesson, that's going to be important.
So let's go back to the original equation and plug in t equals 27.
The original equation was square root of t minus 2 equals 5, plugging in 27 for t gives
me square root of 27 minus 2 equals 5.
The left-hand side simplifies to square root of 25, and that, of course, is 5.
And so I have the equation 5 equals 5, and that works.
And therefore, I really do have a solution there, and everything was fine.
Now before I go to the next example, I want to ask a quick question about the example
we just did.
We started with square root of t minus 2 equals 5.
Some of you might be asking, well, why wasn't t equals negative 23 a solution to this equation?
After all, if I plug in negative 23 for t, I'd have negative 23 minus 2, and that's
negative 25, and I know that the square root of 25 is 5.
So why isn't t equal negative 23 a solution?
Well, it's because of that little negative sign out in front of the 23.
In fact, if you do plug in negative 23, what you're really saying is that the square root
of negative 25 equals 5.
You can't lose those signs.
And the square root of negative 25 isn't 5.
In fact, that negative sign underneath the square root causes a huge problem, because
the square root of a negative number does not exist as a real number.
There is no real number that you can multiply with itself to give you negative 25.
That's exactly what a square root is.
It's a number that you multiply by itself or with itself to give you the number under
the square root symbol, just like square root of 49 equals 7 because 7 times 7 equals 49.
But what real number would you multiply with itself to give you negative 49?
There just isn't such a number.
So square root of negative 25 is not equal to 5 because of that negative sign, and therefore
t equals negative 23 is not a solution because it's going to give you a negative number inside
the square root symbol.
Okay, so let's watch those signs carefully, and let's work on this next example then to
see how we would solve the following equation.
Let's solve square root of x plus 3 equals square root of 5x minus 9.
Now I think this is an interesting kind of equation because in the earlier comments I
said let's start by isolating the radical, and by that I mean getting the radical all
by itself.
Unfortunately here, there are actually two different radical symbols.
So it's a little hard to isolate the radical because there isn't just the radical, there
are actually two of them.
So what do we do?
We just quit, we throw up our hands.
No, don't worry about it at all.
What you don't want to do is move both of the square root symbols to one side or the
other.
You should keep them separate and just not worry about this isolating the radical.
In fact, all you really want to do is start by squaring both sides.
So when we see two square roots like this, we don't want to put them together on the
same side of the equation.
We leave them separate and we simply move on to the step that squares both sides.
Let's do that.
We start with square root of x plus 3 equaling square root of 5x minus 9, and we square both
sides.
And when we do, the squaring kills off or cancels out the square rooting.
And so all you're left with is x plus 3 equals 5x minus 9.
And that is a linear equation.
And we have solved these kinds of equations several times before.
So let's go ahead and solve this linear equation now.
We're going to have x plus 3 equals 5x minus 9.
If I subtract an x from both sides, it will cancel out the x that's on the left-hand side.
And of course, on the right-hand side, I'll have 5x minus x, which is 4x.
So my equation becomes 3 equals 4x minus 9.
Now I want to get that x by itself, and so I need to add 9 to both sides.
And when I do, the 9 on the right-hand side will cancel, and the left-hand side will become
3 plus 9, which is 12.
So my equation is now 4x equals 12.
And if I divide both sides by 4, I'll simply have x equals 12 over 4, or x equals 3.
So my solution, or at least what I hope is the solution, is x equals 3.
To check that it really is a solution, I'm going to go back to the original problem or
the original equation and plug in 3.
The original equation was square root of x plus 3 equals square root of 5x minus 9.
And that means when x is 3, I have square root of 3 plus 3 equals square root of 5 times
3 minus 9.
That says that square root of 6 is the square root of 15 minus 9, or square root of 6 equals
square root of 6.
Does the square root of 6 equal the square root of 6?
Yes, it does.
And therefore, I'm good to go.
3 really is a solution here.
By the way, I don't know what the exact value of square root of 6 is, but here's what I
know.
Square root of 6, whatever it is, equals the square root of 6, whatever it is, because
they're the same thing.
So even though I don't know exactly what square root of 6 is, I do know that it equals itself,
and therefore I really do have a check that x equals 3 is a solution of the original problem.
Now you might be saying to me, you know, every time we've checked our solutions, everything
has worked out.
Why do you keep making me do that?
Well, let's do the following example, and hopefully you'll see why it is that I keep
worrying about or checking whether I really do have solutions.
Here's the example.
Let's solve the equation 3x equals 2x plus the square root of 4x plus 5.
So the 4x plus 5 is all underneath one square root symbol.
In this example, I do need to begin by isolating the radical.
Notice that the radical on the right-hand side has another term next to it.
That would be the 2x that's added to it.
So I need to get rid of that 2x from that side.
How do I move that 2x out of the way?
I subtract a 2x from both sides of the equation, and the equation will then become 3x minus
2x equals square root of 4x plus 5.
Now 3x minus 2x can actually be simplified because the 3x and the 2x are like terms,
and 3x minus 2x is just 1x.
So my equation really is x equals the square root of 4x plus 5.
Now I've isolated the radical.
There's just one square root symbol on the right-hand side and nothing else with it.
So what do I do next?
I square both sides of this equation.
And when I do, the left-hand side becomes x squared because I had to square that side.
So I have an x squared on the left, and the right-hand side gives me the square root of
4x plus 5 squared.
And when I square that square root, they cancel each other out if you will, and the
right-hand side is just 4x plus 5.
So my equation is x squared equals 4x plus 5.
Now that's not a linear equation like the first couple of examples we've done today,
but it's a quadratic equation, and we know how to solve quadratic equations from our
previous lessons as well.
So let's solve this equation for x.
I have x squared equals 4x plus 5.
Do you remember what we do when we solve such a quadratic equation?
We want to move all the terms over to one side or the other.
In this case, I'm going to move them all over to the left, and by how am I going to do that?
I'm going to subtract a 4x from both sides, and I'm going to subtract a 5 from both sides.
And when I do, I'll have the equation x squared minus 4x minus 5 equals 0.
Now you have lots of ways to solve this.
Quadratic formula, completing the square, there are lots of tools you've seen, but the
one that I think is best here is factoring.
I think that's a really good choice.
So let's factor the left-hand side.
In this case, the quadratic polynomial that's on the left factors as x minus 5 times x plus
1, and that is set equal to 0, because that's the right-hand side of the equation.
x minus 5 times x plus 1 equals 0 is the same as x minus 5 equals 0 or x plus 1 equals 0,
which means x is 5 or x equals negative 1.
So it looks like we have two solutions here, x equals 5 and x equals negative 1.
But as I've been saying, you've got to check them.
So let's go ahead and go back to the original equation and plug in these two numbers and
let's see if indeed both of them are solutions.
So we have 3x equals 2x plus the square root of 4x plus 5, plug in x equals 5 everywhere,
and you'll have 3 times 5 equals 2 times 5 plus the square root of 4 times 5 plus 5.
How does that simplify?
Left-hand side is 15.
Right-hand side is 10 plus the square root of 20 plus 5, and the right-hand side then
is really 10 plus square root of 25.
Well, square root of 25 is 5.
So what you really have is 15 equals 10 plus 5.
That's 15 equals 15.
Excellent.
X equals 5 really is a solution, so you should keep that.
Now let's check that x equals negative 1.
Plug in negative 1 to the original equation and you have 3 times negative 1 equals 2 times
negative 1 plus the square root of 4 times negative 1 plus 5.
How does that simplify?
Well, you're going to have negative 3 equals negative 2 plus the square root of negative
4 plus 5.
That's the same at the end of the right-hand side as the square root of 1.
Negative 4 plus 5 is 1.
Square root of 1 is 1.
And that means that what you're really saying is negative 3 equals negative 2 plus 1.
Be very careful.
Negative 2 plus 1 is negative 1.
And that means that what you're saying is negative 3 equals negative 1.
That is no good.
That does not work.
Negative 3 does not equal negative 1.
And that means that what we plugged in there, x equals negative 1, really isn't a solution.
We have a name for one of these sort of imposter solutions.
We call them extraneous solutions because they really don't work even though you think they
would.
And an extraneous solution is not a solution at all.
So we're going to throw out x equals negative 1 as a solution and we're only going to keep
x equals 5.
The original equation only has one solution and that's x equals 5.
Now let's try another example where we have to be very careful about whether we have any
solutions, maybe even any solutions at all.
Here's the example.
I want us to solve 8 plus square root of 4y equals 4.
It looks like a perfectly good radical equation.
What's the first step?
The first step is to isolate the radical.
To do that, I'm going to subtract 8 from both sides of the equation to get rid of that
8 at the beginning.
And that's going to give me then square root of 4y equals 4 minus 8.
I got rid of the 8 on the left by subtracting both sides by 8.
And that simplifies a little bit to square root of 4y equals negative 4.
OK, I've isolated the radical.
I have the radical symbol on the left all by itself.
Now what do we do?
Well, we square both sides of this equation and we use the fact that we've been using
that we can just square both sides and the square will sort of cancel out the square
root.
And when I do that, I get 4y on the left equals negative 4 squared on the right.
Now negative 4 squared is negative 4 times negative 4 and that's positive 16.
So my equation is now 4y equals 16.
I need to get y by itself.
Well, to do that, I just divide by 4 on both sides of the equation and when I do that,
I'll have y equals 16 over 4, which is 4.
So it looks like y equals 4 is my solution and we could just move on, but that would
be very unwise here.
We need to check whether y equals 4 really is a solution.
Go back to the original equation, 8 plus square root of 4y equals 4, plug in 4 for y because
we think that's our solution and we'll have 8 plus square root of 4 times 4 equals 4 and
that's the same as 8 plus square root of 16 equals 4.
That's 8 plus 4 equals 4 because the square root of 16 is 4 and that says that 12 equals
4.
Well, that's no good.
12 doesn't equal 4.
What does that mean?
It means that this y equals 4 is an extraneous solution.
It's not a solution at all.
It's an imposter.
It's just faking that it's a solution basically.
So we need to throw it out and that means we need to ask the question, what are the solutions
then of the original equation?
The answer is there aren't any solutions of that equation.
The y equals 4 was the only candidate for a solution and it was no good and therefore
we actually don't have any solutions at all in that equation.
Okay, I'd like to try another example now which is a bit more complicated because of
what's under the radical symbol.
It's not too bad though.
So let's look at the following example.
I want us to solve square root of 2x squared plus 8x minus 33 equals x.
I want to solve that for the variable x.
Now I've done several examples with you in this lesson.
What's the first step?
The first step is isolating the radical.
It's already done because the left hand side is just one big radical symbol.
So what's the next step?
The next step is to square both sides of the equation because that squaring will cancel
out the square root on the left hand side.
And when I do that, it's going to leave me just 2x squared plus 8x minus 33 equals the
right hand side squared.
Well that's just x squared.
So what I've done is I've converted this radical equation to an equation that just has quadratics
in it.
And now I can start solving this quadratic equation the way I've done in previous lessons.
What's the first step?
The first step is to get everything to one side.
So I'm going to subtract an x squared from both sides of the equation.
That's going to cancel out the x squared that's on the right.
And on the left, I'll have 2x squared minus x squared.
And that's just plus 1x squared or just plus x squared.
And that means that the left hand side really is x squared plus 8x minus 33 equals 0.
So I now need to go down and look at that equation x squared plus 8x minus 33 equals
0 and solve for x.
Well the left hand side's quadratic, so let's try to factor it really quickly.
And if I do, I realize that it will factor as x plus 11 times x minus 3 equals 0.
Well that means that x plus 11 equals 0 or x minus 3 equals 0.
And that means that either x is negative 11 or x is 3.
So we have two possible solutions.
Let's check each one separately and see if we really do have any solutions at all.
The first thing to do is to go back to the original equation and plug in negative 11.
And when I do, I'm going to have square root of 2 times negative 11 squared plus 8 times
negative 11 minus 33 and that all equals negative 11.
Now I want to pause for just a second because some of you are probably saying there's no
way I want to do that calculation on the left hand side.
That looks really, really messy.
Well guess what?
I'm claiming that we don't have to do it.
And what I'm claiming is that negative 11 is actually an extraneous solution.
And here's why.
Think with me for just a second.
On the left hand side, I have a square root.
It's a square root of a big ugly thing, but it's a square root nevertheless.
And a square root is always going to be positive.
On the right hand side of that, I have negative 11.
And negative 11, of course, is negative.
So here's the question to ask.
The left hand side is the square root of something which has to be positive.
The right hand side is negative 11, which is negative.
Can a positive number ever equal a negative number?
Absolutely not.
And therefore, that equation is not going to hold.
So negative 11 is not a solution.
Or we call it an extraneous solution, which means it's not a solution.
Now we've checked that negative 11 doesn't work.
Let's check that 3 works.
I hope it works anyway.
Let's try.
Check to the original equation and plug in 3.
You'll have square root of 2 times 3 squared plus 8 times 3 minus 33.
And that all has to equal 3 because you plug in 3 for x.
Now let's simplify.
The left hand side becomes square root of 18 plus 24 minus 33.
That's the same as the square root of 42 minus 33.
And that, of course, is the same as the square root of 9 because 42 minus 33 is 9.
So your equation is now down to square root of 9 equals 3 or 3 equals 3.
Does 3 equal 3?
Yes, it does.
And that means what we plugged in, x equals 3, really is a solution.
And since the negative 11 didn't work,
it means that x equals 3 is the only solution to the original equation.
And that's great.
Now in the time that we have left in our lesson today,
I'd like to look at one more example of solving a radical equation.
Now this example is going to have us combine a couple of ideas.
And in particular, we're going to look at some foiling really quickly.
So here goes the example.
Solve the equation square root of x plus 7 equals square root of x minus 8 plus 3.
Now I've been saying in several examples that the first thing to do is to isolate
the radical.
Unfortunately, we have two radicals here again.
So there's no way to isolate the radical.
So just leave that alone for now.
The second step we've been taking in our examples is to square both sides.
So what I'd like to suggest is that we now square both sides of this equation.
When we do, we're going to have square root of x plus 7 squared equals a large term squared.
And that large term is going to be square root of x minus 8 plus 3.
And we have to square that whole thing.
Now the left-hand side is just a square root being squared.
And so that's just going to give me x plus 7 on the left.
On the right-hand side, there's a bit of a mess because of the plus 3 there.
I can't simply start canceling the square root with the square.
What I need to do on the right-hand side instead is to rewrite square root of x minus 8 plus
3 squared as two copies of the same thing multiplied together, namely square root of
x minus 8 plus 3 times another square root of x minus 8 plus 3.
Now why would I do that?
Well it turns out that once things are written that way on the right-hand side, you can foil.
You might not have thought to do that in a natural way, but you really can foil now
because you have a binomial times another binomial, two terms times another two terms.
So what we're going to do now with this equation is leave the left-hand side alone.
It's just x plus 7 and set it equal to whatever we get when we foil the right-hand side.
So let's now foil that right-hand side together.
Once the f terms in foil are going to be square root of x minus 8 times square root of x minus 8,
then the outside terms will give me 3 times square root of x minus 8.
The inside terms also will give me 3 times the square root of x minus 8, and then the
l terms will just be 3 times 3, which is 9.
Well guess what?
You actually made progress here because the right-hand side now can be simplified as the
following.
Square root of x minus 8 squared now really is just x minus 8 because you've got a square
root being squared.
So the right-hand side starts out x minus 8.
Then the middle terms on the right-hand side are like terms.
3 square root of x minus 8 plus 3 square root of x minus 8 is 6 square root of x minus 8.
That's great.
And then you just have a plus 9.
That means the right-hand side can be simplified as x plus 1 plus 6 square root of x minus
8.
Where did the plus 1 come from?
It's coming from the minus 8 plus the 9 that's out on the end.
And when you do negative 8 plus 9, you get the 1.
So your equation now is x plus 7 equals x plus 1 plus 6 square root of x minus 8.
You might say, well, I didn't accomplish anything at this point.
But you did because the original problem had two square roots in it.
Now you only have one square root.
You've sort of killed off one of the square roots, if you will.
And that's very cool.
Now you can start as if this is the start of the problem and isolate the one radical
that's there and then work through the problem exactly the way you've worked through the
other examples.
So let's go back to where we were, isolate the radical, and work through it.
We had x plus 7 equals x plus 1 plus 6 square root of x minus 8.
Subtract the x and the 1 over to the left-hand side.
Guess what?
When you subtract those x's, you'll actually get no more x's on either the left or the
right-hand side because the x with the x plus 7 and the x with the x plus 1 will cancel
each other out.
Subtracting the 1 from both sides will give you a 6 on the left because 7 minus 1 is 6
and therefore this equation simply becomes 6 equals 6 square root of x minus 8.
Now you're almost done in terms of the isolation of the radical.
Divide both sides by 6 to get rid of the 6 on the right-hand side and you'll have 1
on the left equals square root of x minus 8.
You have a 1 on the left because 6 divided by 6 is 1.
So now you just know that 1 is the square root of x minus 8.
What do you do now?
You square both sides.
That's what we've been doing all through this lesson and when you do, you get 1 squared
equals just x minus 8.
Square root of x minus 8 being squared gives you x minus 8.
And so you have 1 equals x minus 8 because 1 squared is 1.
Dividing 8 to both sides gives you 9 equals x or x equals 9.
I could say it either way.
And so it looks like I have a solution.
X equals 9.
Whew, after all that work, I sure hope it really is a solution.
Let's check it quickly as we close out our lesson today.
Start with the original equation, square root of x plus 7 equals square root of x minus 8
plus 3 and plug in 9 for x.
When you do that, the left-hand side becomes square root of 9 plus 7, which is the square
root of 16, which is 4.
The left-hand side is 4.
The right-hand side becomes square root of 9 minus 8 plus 3, which is the same as square
root of 1 plus 3, which is 1 plus 3 because the square root of 1 is 1 and 1 plus 3 is
4.
Guess what?
4 does equal 4.
So hooray, x equals 9 really is a solution of that pretty complicated equation that we
started with.
In this lesson, we've talked about solving radical equations or solving equations that
contain radical expressions.
We've seen that one of the key features is to isolate that radical term and then to square
both sides.
And we've also seen that it's very, very important that we always check our solutions
to make sure that they're real solutions and not just faking being solutions.
In the next lesson, we're going to talk about how to graph functions which contain radicals.
I'll see you then.
