In our previous lesson, we started talking about sequences, what they are, how to recognize
patterns in them, and special types of sequences called geometric sequences and arithmetic
sequences. We saw how to write down a rule for any geometric sequence and a rule for
any arithmetic sequence as well. In this lesson, I want to continue talking about sequences
and finding patterns in them, and I want to focus our attention on ways to actually build
the formula for certain types of sequences, even if it's not clear what the pattern might
be when we first look at the terms in the sequence. The recipe that I'm going to show
you only works for certain types of sequences, but it is still a very useful and valuable
tool. By the end of the lesson, you'll see a really nice use of systems of linear equations,
which we talked about several lessons ago. In fact, it might be wise for you to pause
at this point and review our lessons on solving systems of linear equations, and then come
back to this lesson. That's how important systems of linear equations will be as we
go through today's lesson. So, let's get started by reminding ourselves
of a few facts we learned in the previous lesson. First, a sequence is simply a list
of numbers that I will often write as a sub 1, a sub 2, a sub 3, and so on. Remember,
those numbers, 1, 2, and 3, and so on, are simply subscripts, which are acting like labels
to remind me that I have a first number, and a second number, and a third number in the
list, and so on. And remember, each of those numbers is called a term. A sequence which
is built term by term by adding the same number each time is called an arithmetic sequence.
So, for example, the sequence 2, 5, 8, 11, 14, 17, and so on is an arithmetic sequence.
In the previous lesson, we built a formula for this sequence, and we wrote it down as
f of n equals 3 times n minus 1 plus 2. Remember, the 2 comes from being the first term in the
sequence, and the 3 is the common difference, which is the amount we added to each term
to get to the next term. So, for example, we had f of 1, which would give us our first
term, equaling 3 times 1 minus 1 plus 2, which is 3 times 0 plus 2, which is 2, and
that really is the first term in that sequence. Then the second term would be found from f
of 2, and that would be 3 times 2 minus 1 plus 2, which is 3 times 1 plus 2, which is
3 plus 2, which is 5, and that really is the second term in the sequence. Let's check one
more. f of 3 would be the third term, and if we plug in 3 for n, we would have 3 times
3 minus 1 plus 2, which is 3 times 2 plus 2, which is 6 plus 2, which is 8, and that's
the third term in that sequence. Now, for the rest of this lesson, I want to talk about
common differences, but I want to talk about them in a slightly different way by calling
them first differences of a sequence. And here's what I mean by that. Let's go back
to that sequence 2, 5, 8, 11, 14, and so on that I was just talking about a few moments
ago. I now want to look at the differences between the terms. So what I mean by that
is, for example, I want to look at 5 minus 2, and of course that's equal to 3, and then
8 minus 5 is 3, and 11 minus 8 is 3, 14 minus 11 is 3, and 17 minus 14 is also 3. Notice
that all of those differences are the same. I just said 3 a whole bunch of times, but
of course they're the same because they are the common difference that we talked about
in the previous lesson. So when these first differences are always the same, it means
that you have an arithmetic sequence, and the formula for that nth term is going to
be a linear formula. What do I mean by that? Well, if you look at the formula that we came
up with in the example I just gave you, it had a variable n in it, and that degree of
that polynomial was 1 because the formula was 3 times n minus 1 plus 2, and the highest
power of n that you see there is the n raised to the first power that's inside the parentheses,
n to the 1 minus 1. So what we had there was really a linear function or a linear polynomial,
3, 1. But this leads us actually to a very cool question which I want to talk about for
today's lesson. What if the first differences are not the same, but somehow later differences
are the same? Let me show you what I mean with the following example. I want us to find
a formula for the nth term of this sequence, 3, 6, 11, 18, 27, 38, 51, 66, and so on. I
want to give you lots of terms here because we're going to be doing a lot of calculations
between the terms, and so I want to make sure that the pattern is clear as we go looking
at this sequence. Now, this sequence is not like any of the ones that we've seen before.
Certainly not a geometric sequence, and why is it not a geometric sequence? Well, think
about it. To be geometric, you have to be able to multiply by the same number to get
from each term to every other term, and that means in this example, to get from 3 to 6,
you'd have to multiply by 2. If this sequence is geometric, it means that to get from 6
to 11, you'd have to multiply by 2 as well, but 6 times 2 is 12, not 11, so this sequence
is not geometric. Interestingly enough, it's also not an arithmetic sequence. Again, let's
look at it. If you look at the difference between 6 and 3, that's 3, but the difference
between 11 and 6 is 5. 11 minus 6 is 5. Well, you don't have a common difference then, because
remember, to have an arithmetic sequence, you have to be able to add by the same amount
from term to term every time you go from one term to the next. And in this case, to go
from 3 to 6, you have to add by 3, but to go from 6 to 11, you would have to add 5.
So this thing is not arithmetic either. So what do you do? You just quit? Well, no. Let's
do the following. Come down and look at all of the common differences between the numbers
as we look at them one term at a time. If you look at the difference between the 6 and
the 3, you'll see that it's a 3. Fine. The difference between the 11 and the 6 is a 5.
OK, let's build them all. The difference between 18 and 11 is 7. 18 minus 11 is 7. The difference
between 27 and 18 is 9. From 38 down to 27 is 11, if you do 38 minus 27. 51 minus 38
is 13. And 66 minus 51 is 15. OK, now those numbers are all different. 3, 5, 7, 9, 11,
13, 15. That didn't help us at all. At least it doesn't look like it helped us. But here's
what I want you to do. Let's go one step further. Let's now take the 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15 and
let's look at the differences between those numbers for just a moment. OK, 5 minus the
3 is a 2. Fair enough. 7 minus 5 is also a 2. That's interesting. And the 9 minus 7
is 2 as well. In fact, 11 minus 9 is 2. 13 minus 11 is 2. And 15 minus 13 is also 2. What
do we see? We see that what are called the second differences are the same. What are
the second differences? Well, we started with our sequence. We took a set of differences
to get the 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15. That set of numbers is called the first differences.
And then we took differences of those. We subtracted those from one another. And that
new set, which was just 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, those are called the second differences.
Now the second differences here were all the same. What does that tell us about the formula
for the terms in the sequence that we have? Well, here's what it tells us. It turns out
that the formula for the nth term in this sequence is a degree 2 polynomial where the
variable is going to be n here. It's going to be a quadratic polynomial. Why? Because
by having to do two sets of differences to get the same answer every time, our polynomial
formula will have to have degree 2. It's not because all the numbers there were 2. It's
because I had to do two layers of differences in order to get the same number. That's how
I know that the polynomial formula will have to have degree 2. Now that is a huge hint.
And here's why. It means that my formula for the terms must have a quadratic term in it,
an n squared in it, and maybe it'll have an n in it, and it might have a constant in it.
In other words, the formula is going to look like f of n equals a n squared plus b n plus
c, where a, b, and c are just some numbers. Okay? Well, how do we figure out a, b, and
c? I mean, I haven't really told you a whole lot, have I? Well, in fact, I have. Because
now that you know that the formula looks like that, we can use our knowledge of solving
systems of linear equations in order to find a, b, and c. And that's why I warned you that
you might want to review solving systems of linear equations as we go into this lesson.
Now, here's how we're going to use solving systems of linear equations to figure out
this problem. First of all, I know that f of 1 is 3. In other words, the first term in
the sequence that we started with is 3. So f of 1 is 3. But if I go to that formula,
f of n equals a n squared plus b n plus c, and I plug 1 into that, I'll know that f of
1 equals a times 1 squared plus b times 1 plus c. Okay? Well, what does that mean? Well,
I know that f of 1 equals 3, and I know that f of 1 equals a times 1 squared plus b times
1 plus c. That means the 3 has to equal a times 1 squared plus b times 1 plus c, because
they're both equal to f of 1. And if I simplify that a times 1 squared plus b times 1 plus
c, I'm really just going to get a plus b plus c. And that gives me an equation. I now know
that a plus b plus c must equal 3. I have no clue what a, b, and c are yet. They're just
those coefficients in the formula, but I know that their sum a plus b plus c must equal
3. Now let's keep that equation off to the side for just a second, and let's now see
if we can build a second equation. We now also know that f of 2, the second term, has
to equal 6. Go back and look at the sequence we started with. The second term equals 6.
So f of 2 is 6. But f of 2 in the formula is also equal to a times 2 squared plus b
times 2 plus c, because I'm plugging in 2 for n. Now what is a times 2 squared plus b
times 2 plus c? Well, it's exactly the same as 4a plus 2b plus c. The 4 and the 4a comes
from 2 squared. Well, f of 2 is 6, but f of 2 is also 4a plus 2b plus c. And that means
that 6 equals 4a plus 2b plus c. Guess what? You just build another equation that involves
the a, the b, and the c. Let's put that equation to the side now. We now have two equations
with a's, b's, and c's. If we could find a third one, we actually can start working
on getting a, b, and c, and we're constructing them from scratch. So let's get a third equation
now. Let's plug in 3 to the formula. What would have to happen? Well, first of all,
the third term in the sequence is 11. So f of 3 is 11. That's one thing we know. But
f of 3, if I go back to the formula, is equal to a times 3 squared plus b times 3 plus c.
And if you simplify that pretty quickly, you're going to get 9a plus 3b plus c equals
11. And so f of 3 equals 9a plus 3b plus c, and f of 3 equals 11. And so I can build
that third equation. 9a plus 3b plus c equals 11. Now, I've got three equations in hand
and I have three unknowns. And now the question is, how do I solve this kind of a system? Notice
that I have three equations and three unknowns. In most of what we did in our earlier lessons
on solving systems of linear equations, we only had two equations with two unknowns.
But it's not a problem. We're going to just have to do a little bit more work in order
to finish this, but we really can do it. So stay with me as we now solve this system of
linear equations. Okay, subtracting the first equation from the second gives me a new equation.
3a plus b equals 3. Notice that we've accomplished something very important. I've eliminated
the variable c. If that may remind you, I hope, of when we solved systems of linear
equations by elimination. Now I know that 3a plus b equals 3, or that b equals negative
3a plus 3 by subtracting that 3a over to the other side. But I could have also subtracted
the second equation from the third equation in the original system of equations. And by
doing that subtraction, second equation from the third equation, I would have had 5a plus
b equals 5. And again, I have eliminated that c. And now I really have two equations with
just the unknowns a and b. And that goes back to our previous lessons. I can now substitute
negative 3a plus 3 in for b in this second new equation. So I had 5a plus b plus b plus
5. And now I'm going to replace b by negative 3a plus 3. What does that give me? It gives
me 5a plus negative 3a plus 3 equals 5. Or 5a minus 3a plus 3 equals 5. Let's simplify
a bit. 5a minus 3a, that's 2a. Then I have 2a plus 3 equals 5. Subtract 3 from both sides
of that equation and you'll have 2a equals 2, because 5 minus 3 is 2. Dividing both sides
by 2 gives me a equals 1. And now you've found, you actually constructed by yourself the first
coefficient in this formula. a was the coefficient in front of the n squared term in the formula
f of n equals a n squared plus b n plus c. You now know that that coefficient in front
of the n squared term is 1, because a equals 1. But if a equals 1 and b equals negative
3a plus 3, then I can actually find b by plugging in 1 for a in that equation. I have b equals
negative 3a plus 3. Plugging in 1 for a gives me b equals negative 3 times 1 plus 3. Or
b equals negative 3 plus 3, that means b equals 0. Guess what? You now have 2 of your
coefficients, because you now know not only that a is 1, but that b equals 0. And by the
way, that means your formula is f of n equals 1 times n squared plus 0 times n plus c, which
I can just write as f of n equals n squared plus c. Now, remember what we're doing. We're
trying to find the formula for the terms in that sequence we started with. So we're almost
there. We just need to calculate c. We'll go back to any of the three equations we started
with. How about a plus b plus c equals 3 and plug in a equals 1 and b equals 0. And at
that point, you'll have 1 plus 0 plus c equals 3, or 1 plus c equals 3, which means c equals
2. You now have the full formula in front of you for these terms. f of n is going to
equal 1 n squared plus 0 n plus 2, because c was 2. And that simplifies to f of n equals
n squared plus 2. Now, I would suggest that we actually check that that formula is exactly
what we get for these terms. So let's do that with the first few terms in the sequence,
just to make sure it checks out. If you plug 1 into the function f of n, you'll have 1
squared plus 2, which is 1 plus 2, which is 3. That was the first term. What about the
second term? Well, plug in 2 to the formula, and you'll have 2 squared plus 2, which is
4 plus 2, which is 6. And that gives us confidence that we're on the right track. Plug in 3 to
check for the third term, and you'll have 3 squared plus 2, which is 9 plus 2, which
is 11. Great. Plug in 4. Why not? 4 squared plus 2, which is 16 plus 2, which is 18.
And that was the fourth term in the sequence. Let's check one more. Plug in 5 to look for
the fifth term, and you'll get 5 squared plus 2, which is 25 plus 2, which is 27. And we
have the right formula. So you might say, ah, who cares? What's so great about that?
Well, the thing that's great about it is I would have never been able to guess that formula,
but you and I actually built it from scratch from using one basic principle. And that principle
was if you have a sequence whose second differences are all the same, then a formula for the nth
term is going to be a degree 2 or quadratic polynomial. In fact, if you have a sequence
that needs you to take 3 differences, 3 sets of differences in order to get the same differences,
then a formula for the nth term is going to be a cubic or degree 3 polynomial. And in
fact, if you have a sequence that needs you to take 4 sets of differences in order to
get all the same differences, then the formula for the nth term is going to be a degree 4
polynomial, and so on and so on. The formulas for each of these can be found by solving
a system of linear equations. Now, it might be a big system of linear equations, but in
fact, that's all you're really going to need. Now, let's look at another example of this
pretty quickly. I want us to determine just the degree of the formula for the nth term
of this sequence, 2, 18, 52, 110, 198, 322, and so on. I just want to know the degree
of the formula, the degree of the polynomial that I'll need for describing the terms in
this sequence. Well, first off, it's definitely not geometric. I just want you to notice this
is not a geometric sequence. Remember what a geometric sequence would need. You'd have
to be able to multiply the 1 number to get up to 18. Of course, you'd have to multiply
by 9 then to get up to 18, because 2 times 9 is 18. But to be geometric then, I would
have to take the 18 times the 9 to get up to the next number. Well, 18 times 9 is much
bigger than 52, so it's definitely not geometric. Well, is it arithmetic? Maybe it is. Let's
check what we would have to add term by term to have an arithmetic sequence. To get from
2 to 18, I would add 16. Well, if I add 16 to 18, I'm only going to get 34. I don't
get 52. Therefore, this is also not an arithmetic sequence. I'm suggesting that the next thing
we do is start taking some differences and do it level by level and see if we ever get
to the point where the differences all become the same. Start with your sequence, 2, 18,
52, 110, 198, 322, and so on. Let's take the first set of differences. 18 minus 2 is 16.
52 minus 18, 34. 110 minus 52 is 58. I know these are kind of big, but just do them by
long hand and you'll be fine. 198 minus 110 is 88. And 322 minus 198 is 124. Now, those
are definitely very different differences. So we have to keep trying. Let's go to the
next level and take differences now of what we just found and see what we get. 34 minus
16 is 18. 58 minus 34 is 24. That's kind of a bummer. I was hoping we get the same number,
but that's okay. Let's keep calculating along this level and just see what we get. 88 minus
58, that's 30. 124 minus 88 is 36. Okay, I got 18, 24, 30, 36. Let's just try one more
level and see what happens. 24 minus 18 is 6. 30 minus 24 is also 6. And 36 minus 30
is 6 again. And it turns out if you do a whole bunch of these, you'll find that at this third
level of differences, you have found the same difference, 6 followed by 6 and 6 and 6 and
6 and so on. And that means that our hint is a formula for the polynomial, which is going
to give me the terms in the sequence, is going to have degree 3 because we had to do three
sets of differences before we found that they were all the same difference. Now, as a side
note, let me make a few comments about the example that we just finished about the degree
being 3. Since the formula for the terms really will be a polynomial of degree 3, it means
that the formula is going to look like this. f of n equals a n cubed because it's degree
3 plus b n squared plus c n plus d, where the a, the b, the c and the d are all some
numbers that I don't know yet. So it turns out that I would have four unknown quantities,
a, b, c and d. And if I wanted to solve for those, I would have to write down four equations.
You always need the same number of equations as the unknowns. Now, building four equations
here can be done. It's a little bit laborious, but it can be done. And it turns out if you
use the first four values of the sequence we started with, the equations would be a
plus b plus c plus d equals 2, 8a plus 4b plus 2c plus d equals 18, 27a plus 9b plus
3c plus d equals 52, and 64a plus 16b plus 4c plus d equals 110. Notice that the right
hand sides of those equations are exactly the first four terms of the sequence, 2, 18,
52, 110. Now, that is not a friendly looking system of equations. I'll actually give you
that. But it turns out that this system can be solved for a, b, c and d, just like we
solved the previous system in the other example. Now, I wouldn't ask you to solve that largest
system in this course, but you could do it. If you were just going through it long enough,
you could solve that system. You have the tools to do it. And it turns out that the
solution is actually really, really clean, believe it or not. If you solve that system,
you'll find out that a equals 1, b equals 3, c equals 0, and d equals negative 2. Those
are all pretty nice coefficients. And that means that the formula is f of n equals 1n
cubed plus 3n squared plus 0n, because c is 0, minus 2, or just n cubed plus 3n squared
minus 2. Now, given that I've told you that formula, I'd actually like to check to see
if that works. I mean, I'd just be curious to know if we've got the right formula here.
Let's plug in 1 and see if we got the first term back. If you plug in 1, you'll have 1
cubed plus 3 times 1 squared minus 2. And that's the same as 1 plus 3 minus 2, or 4
minus 2, which is 2. Was the first term 2? Yes, it was. Perfect. Let's now plug 2 into
the formula and see if we get the second term back. We'll have 2 raised to the third power
plus 3 times 2 squared minus 2. And that's equal to 8 plus 3 times 4, which is 12, minus
2. 8 plus 12 minus 2 is 20 minus 2, which is 18. That was the second term. Excellent.
Let's plug in a 3 to see if we get the third term back. Get 3 raised to the third power
plus 3 times 3 squared minus 2. And that's the same as 27 plus 3 times 9, which is another
27, minus 2. 27 plus 27 is 54, minus 2 gives you 52. And that checks. Now, I'm going to
plug in a 6 to see if we can get the sixth term correct. Why not? Let's just jump to
over to the sixth term. That means I'm going to plug a 6 in to my formula. And what do
I get? I'm going to have 6 raised to the third plus 3 times 6 squared minus 2. 6 to the third
is a 6 times another 6 times another 6, and that's 216. Then the middle term is going
to be 3 times 6 squared, or 3 times 36. That's 108. And then I'm going to subtract 2. So
I have 216 plus 108 minus 2. Well, 216 plus 108 is 324, minus another 2 on the end is
322. Was the sixth term 322? Yes, it was. So it checks. This formula really works. And
again, it would be impossible to guess that as the formula. But by using these systems
of linear equations, we can actually construct that formula, which I think is really, really
cool. Now, I can imagine that you're thinking a couple different thoughts. First of all,
that's really gross. I mean, it looked really messy, and I don't want to think about solving
those really big systems of linear equations. But again, the beauty of this is that we didn't
have to be creative. We could just do the work and apply the recipe to find the formula.
Sometimes in math, you don't have to be pretty about it or elegant about it, just effective
and efficient. And in fact, this really did work. So, OK, we weren't creative, but we
got the formula. And that was the goal. And I think that's an important thing to know.
You might also be thinking that all of the interesting sequences out there must be like
the ones that I've shown you over the last two lessons, where the differences between
terms become constant or something along those lines. Well, that would be a bad assumption.
And I want to show you a very well-known sequence, which defies all of what we've seen so far.
Look at this sequence. 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, and so on. Now, maybe it
works just like all the others have in this lesson. So, let's try building those first
differences. 1 minus 1 is 0. 2 minus 1 is 1. 3 minus 2 is 1. 5 minus 3 is 2. 8 minus
5 is 3. 13 minus 8 is 5. And 21 minus 13 is 8. OK, those are definitely not common,
so they're not the same, I mean. And therefore, I don't have a degree 1 formula. But let's
try the second level. Let's just take the differences of what I just calculated. And
if you do, you'll notice that starting with the 1 and the 1 again, 1 minus 1 will be 0
again. 2 minus 1 will be 1. 3 minus 2 will be 1. 5 minus 3 is 2. And 8 minus 5 is 3.
So again, I didn't get the same differences. Might I point out to you what's really happening?
What's really happening is that the differences are exactly the original sequence. They're
just repeating over and over. So, as you keep taking differences at level after level
after level, you're just going to get the same sequence back. And therefore, this sequence
defies this sort of idea of building the formula the way I did earlier in this lesson. Turns
out this sequence is several centuries old, and it has a name. It's called the Fibonacci
sequence. And it's been around since at least the 13th century AD. It's a really cool sequence,
but it doesn't fit into the mold of the other kinds of sequences we've looked at today.
In fact, its formula, if you think about how those terms were working, its formula is really
interesting. 1 plus 1 is 2, and then the 1 plus 2 is 3, and then the 2 plus 3 is 5, and
3 plus 5 is 8, and so on. So the terms are being built by adding a pair to get the next
one, and then adding a pair to get the next. So for example, 21 plus 34 is actually the
next term up, 55. And the formula you're using to build those terms is actually known as
a linear recurrence. It's possible to find a formula for a linear recurrence, but the
mathematical tools that we need are beyond this course to do that. So we won't worry
about that formula today.
Well, I hope you've seen in this lesson that the subject of sequences is a really rich
one, a very enjoyable one. We've learned today about more pattern recognition and also how
to build patterns or formulas for the nth term of a sequence, basically from scratch
in some cases. In the process, we've developed our inductive reasoning skills some more,
and we've seen some nifty uses for things like systems of linear equations. And now
we've come to the end of our course, and I'm so thankful that you worked with me on
this Algebra 1 material, and I wish you the very best as you continue in your mathematical
journey.
