unsereniaid yn yng意思.
Diolch yn fawr, Ilein 장.
O transg exploited.
Mae hyffordd ychydig?
Ffondataeth ond, mae'r ddysgu eich morhinig ar ythgriff.
dw i dw i.
Rwy'n cael ei wneud o'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r rhaid i'r
rhaid wneud classrooms.
Fydda'ch gweithio ystod?
mewn ddechrau.
Can we begin? Quiet!
Hello, please speak into this.
Okay, thank you.
Edwyddon nid o gweithio.
That's why they asked me to introduce him.
His work on topological quantum field theory using churned simons is just sensational.
If you've ever read any of his papers after about three pages,
you're in an entirely new world and an exciting one.
So you can look forward to a terrific talk of Ed's entitled, if I can find it here.
Super Remount Surfaces Revisited.
Thanks.
So, thanks very much, is for the kind introduction.
And it's an honor to be invited here to speak at this wonderful conference in honor of the Gelfan Centennial.
And I'll be talking about Super Remount Surfaces, as is mentioned.
Specifically worked with Ron Denaggy showing that the modular space of Super Remount Surfaces is not split.
Can you hear at the back?
Okay.
And, well, this topic was more popular in the 80s.
So, if you're my age or older, there's a decent chance you might have heard talks about Super Remount Surfaces back in the 80s.
And you probably think of it as a subject that came and went without any enduring residue.
On the other hand, those of you who are much younger perhaps have not even heard the names phrase Super Remount Surfaces.
I might say at the outset I discussed many topics in mathematical physics with Gelfan.
First in 1983, actually, when I was at a seminar once speaking about supersymmetry and Morse theory.
But I never discussed Super Remount Surfaces with him, so I don't know to what extent he was interested in them.
So, since the topic may not be that familiar, I thought I'd begin with a few words explaining why as a physicist we might be interested about Super Remount Surfaces,
and then we'll get into some math.
But I don't want to assume that you're all familiar with quantum fields and perturbation theory for quantum fields.
However, I'll assume that you're familiar with partial differential equations of mathematical physics such as the Einstein equations or the Yang-Mills equations.
So, these are nonlinear classical wave equations, but when you interpret them quantum mechanically, they're interpreted in terms of quantum mechanical particles,
a very large number of such particles, with the number of particles in a classical wave being of order one over Planck's constant,
where Planck's constant is very small near the classical limit.
But the founders of quantum electrodynamics find men in his generation.
Well, okay.
So, the classical nonlinear partial differential equation gives an approximate account of the behavior of all these particles,
but as a quantum physicist you want to do better.
And the subject where you do better is called perturbative quantum field theory,
where you calculate quantum corrections to the classical partial differential equation.
So, the founders of quantum electrodynamics, that means Feynman in his contemporaries around 1950,
learned that to compute quantum corrections, you don't need to study all the particles at once.
You can consider a few particles at a time in what Feynman called an elementary process.
So, elementary processes are studied via Feynman diagrams.
For our purposes, a Feynman diagram is just a graph that's endowed with a Romanian metric and used in a quantum calculation.
So, I've drawn a graph here.
Actually, I drew a graph with no external lines for simplicity,
but generically one would consider some lines that go off to infinity.
But there's a Romanian metric on the graph,
and in one dimension the only invariant of a Romanian metric is the length since there's no room for curvature.
So, I've labeled some of the edges of the graph by a positive real number, T1, T2 or T3, which is its length.
I didn't label all nine of them in this graph because I got tired, but anyway,
we imagine that there's a positive real number for each edge.
So, we'll call them the moduli of the graph.
They're the moduli of the Romanian metric on the graph up to a few morphism.
Now, to do a quantum calculation associated to a graph, we integrate over a lot of data.
The moduli of the graph, a map from the graph to spacetime and various other details.
But to simplify, for today we're just going to forget everything else and say that we do a quantum calculation
by integrating over the moduli of a graph.
And we won't explain exactly what's being integrated.
And then after integrating over the moduli of a graph, you sum over all possible graphs.
Now, one thing we observe at once is that the moduli space of a graph is not compact.
Each length parameter could go to either zero or infinity.
So, if it goes to zero, the graph degenerates to a graph with a smaller number of lines,
and if it goes to infinity, the graph blows up in another way.
These two limits play completely different roles in physics.
So, when t is large, it can be interpreted as the time a particle travels,
and t going to infinity means that the particle travels a macroscopic time so that we can see it.
So, even without the details, let's just accept that the behavior for t goes to infinity
is part of what makes quantum field theory work.
Instead for t going to zero, the graph degenerates, its topology jumps.
And here we run into the technical complications of quantum field theory,
the shortest in singularities and ultraviolet divergences.
They have both good and bad aspects.
Well, the good thing about the ultraviolet divergences, from a modern point of view,
not so much for the people who live through it in the 30s and 40s,
is that it's difficult to tame them, and as a result, most classical field theories
do not correspond to quantum field theories.
It may not be immediately obvious why that's good,
but it's actually one of the main reasons that physics made so much progress in the 20th century.
For example, the part of the standard model of particle physics that describes the weak interactions
was invented on the basis of very skimpy experimental clues
plus the difficulty of taming the short distance singularities.
In other words, there were very limited experimental clues,
and if every classical theory had made sense quantum mechanically,
the clues would have been hopelessly inadequate.
But because anyway most classical theories didn't work quantum mechanically,
that plus very limited experimental clues made it possible to invent
the weak interaction part of the standard model.
So this was crucial among other things in leading the founders of the standard model
to introduce non-Abelian Yang-Mills gauge theory, among other things.
Now, on the bad side, the bad part of the fact that generic theories can't be quantized,
is that one of the theories for which the short distance singularities
can't be tamed, or at least that's the best we understand,
is general relativity, Einstein's theory of gravity.
So the known framework for quantum field theory doesn't work for gravity.
Now, the fact that the ultraviolet divergences are hard to tame
is one aspect of a more general fact,
which again is one of the main reasons that so much progress was made in the last entry.
The framework of quantum field theory is extremely tight.
It fits together consistently,
but in such a tight way that it's virtually impossible to change anything.
In my opinion, there's only been one significant idea
about changing the framework of quantum field theory, and that's string theory.
So in string theory, the Feynman graph is replaced by a Riemann surface.
So the next picture aims to give an idea of this.
So I've drawn a particular Feynman graph.
This graph happens to have three lines and two loops.
And I've drawn a corresponding Riemann surface,
where I've thickened each line in the Feynman graph into a tube,
and where there was a vertex for the graph, I've joined the tubes smoothly.
So this graph with two loops has turned into a Riemann surface of genus two.
And 19th century mathematicians discovered that a Riemann surface of genus two
has three complex moduli.
In other words, up to isomorphism, it's classified by three complex parameters,
which I've called tau one, tau two, and tau three.
And if a Riemann surface does look like this, in other words,
three long tubes glued nicely together,
then the imaginary parts of the towels match the t's.
And the towels also have real parts,
which in hyperbolic geometry would be twist angles,
which we don't need so much for the moment.
So in the large t region,
which is where the physical interpretation of quantum field theory comes,
we can approximate a Feynman graph by a corresponding Riemann surface.
So you could capture this idea by saying that the Feynman graphs of quantum field theory
are what are sometimes nowadays called the tropical limit of the Riemann surfaces of string theory.
But in string theory there are no short distance singularities
because there's no analog of the degeneration of a Feynman graph
when the t's go to zero.
The most precise statement of this is the existence of the Deline Mumford
compactification of the moduli space of Riemann surfaces.
This moduli space can be compactified while allowing no degenerations
except for the ones that occur when the imaginary parts of the towels go to zero.
In other words, there are degenerations that correspond to the physical interpretation
of quantum field theory, but there are no degenerations
that correspond to the tactical difficulties.
Now because Riemann surfaces match Feynman graphs in the tropical limit,
string theory has a physical interpretation similar to that of quantum field theory,
but without the short distance singularities.
The framework turns out to be even tighter than what for physicists
is the familiar framework of quantum field theory.
And because it is even tighter, well there are a number of crucial differences,
but the main reason for the interest in the theory, apart from its beauty
and what's proved to be its mathematical power, is simply the following.
In this framework, general relativity is inevitable
while being impossible in ordinary quantum field theory.
Here when I say general relativity, I mean general relativity
as an approximation that's good under ordinary conditions.
Is unavoidable in string theory while it seems to be impossible to get that in field theory?
But unfortunately, explaining that, well, it would be a conceivable course
for the rest of the lecture, but it wouldn't get us to super Riemann surfaces.
Now there's one more crucial detail I should tell you,
which is that to really make the theory work,
you have to use not classical Riemann surfaces, but super Riemann surfaces.
I'll explain what they are in a moment.
In string theory, you have to integrate over the moduli space of super Riemann surfaces
together with more data such as a map to spacetime.
Just as when we had the graph, we integrated over the moduli of the graph
plus more stuff I didn't describe,
so here we integrate over the moduli space of super Riemann surfaces
together with more stuff.
Physicists usually approach super Riemann surfaces in terms of super gravity,
but again, that would take us too far afield.
Instead, I'm going to describe them as was done by their inventors in the 1980s
in terms of Z2 graded or super algebraic geometry.
So for this, we replaced commutative algebra by Z2 graded commutative algebra.
A Z2 graded ring has even generators x1 and xm
and odd generators theta1 up to theta n.
Odd means that they're odd under the Z2 grading,
non-zero under the Z2 grading,
even means they're even under the grading,
but instead of commuting, the theta's anti-commut with each other.
So the Z2 graded super commutative ring generated by these variables
with the Z2 graded version of commutativity
is called the ring of functions on Cn slash m.
So Cn slash m is affine space within even,
or to physicists, bosonic generators,
an m odd or fermionic generators.
Now a complex super manifold of dimension n slash m,
so just as in ordinary algebraic geometry,
perhaps we should say just as in complex analysis,
you can take local pieces,
a complex manifold with the etopological space
that locally is isomorphic to Cn for some n,
with gluing functions that preserve the notion
of what's a holomorphic function.
So here we make a similar definition.
A complex super manifold in the complex topology
is locally isomorphic to Cn slash m.
And we can construct examples.
Okay, as in algebraic geometry,
we could also introduce affine spaces.
Let's take actually with what I said
about the complex analytic definition.
We can construct examples using any method
that we might use to construct examples
of ordinary complex manifolds.
For example, an ordinary complex manifold
can be defined by an equation.
That's, for example, a homogeneous equation
in homogeneous coordinates of Cpn.
So the homogeneous coordinates of Cpn are all even variables.
We could similarly introduce a Z2 graded version
of complex projective space
with odd as well as even homogeneous coordinates.
So Cpn plus 1 slash 2 is what you might guess.
It's a, it's described in terms of n plus 2
even and two odd homogeneous coordinates.
And then we could define a complex super manifold
of dimension, even dimension n and odd dimension 2
by an equation in the homogeneous coordinates
of this super projective space.
So what would this equation be?
Well, it has a part that only depends
on the bosonic variables.
Since the equation itself is going to be even,
we have to, we can make an even function
of the odd variable's Thetas.
We only have two odd variables here,
so Theta 1 times Theta 2 is the only even function
of the odd variables.
And then to get the degree right,
we have to multiply by a degree n minus 2
polynomial in the remaining even variables.
Now, so suppose we have an equation like this.
Well, there's a corresponding ordinary object
where we simply set the odd variable,
infinitesimal variable to 0 everywhere.
So the fancy way to say this is that
if m is a super manifold defined over a field,
as opposed to 1 defined over a ring with odd elements,
it always has a natural reduced space
that's an ordinary algebraic variety.
The structure sheaf of the reduced space
is the structure sheaf of m
divided by the sheaf of nilpotent elements,
the ideal of nilpotent elements.
So the ring homomorphism from functions on m
to functions modulo nilpotent functions
corresponds to an embedding of the reduced space in m.
So in ordinary algebraic geometry,
since i is the shape of functions
advantage on the reduced space,
you'd say that the normal bundle
to the reduced space in m is i mod i squared.
So here we say the same thing,
that the normal bundle is purely odd.
It's a vector bundle of rank 0 slash m
where m is the odd dimension of capital M.
So if you're given an ordinary algebraic variety m
and a vector bundle on it,
whichever we now consider to be odd,
you can start with an ordinary vector bundle,
but think of its sections as being odd functions now.
You can construct a super manifold that's said to be split.
Roughly it's the total space of a vector bundle
over the reduced space with fibre v.
The precise definition is that
the sheaf of functions on this split manifold
is the sheaf of functions of the exterior algebra
over the reduced space.
So this split object s
is like an ordinary vector bundle except the fibres are odd,
but it has the property like an ordinary vector bundle,
but there's a natural holomorphic projection
from the split model to the reduced space.
And again, just as if we were dealing with an ordinary vector bundle,
this projection is the left inverse of the inclusion
of the zero section in s
in the sense that pi composed with that inclusion is 1.
So a super manifold m
with a holomorphic projection,
pi to its reduced space that obeys this condition
is said to be projected,
and m is said to be split
if it's actually isomorphic to the corresponding split model.
To get an idea what this means,
let's go back to our example of a hyper surface
in projective space defined by this equation.
Well, the reduced space is divided out by nilpotent functions,
which means that you throw away the second term.
So the reduced space is the hyper surface pn equals zero
in an ordinary projective space.
And we can get a projection,
which with two odd variables is the same as a splitting,
from x to its reduced space
if there were a change of variables
that removes the thetas from the equation.
But if you think about it a bit,
you'll see that there isn't any change of variables
that globally will let you eliminate this second term
from this equation.
So if you could make a change of variables
to eliminate the second term,
then the allowed values of the x's
are the independent of the thetas,
and we define our projection
as just the forgetful map that forgets the thetas.
But we can't actually make a change of variables
that reduces the equation to a purely even one
without any odd variables.
But although we can do it globally,
there's no problem locally.
We just cover the reduced space by open sets
on which the derivative of the polynomial p
with respect to the ith variable is non-zero.
And then upon restriction to that set,
we split the restriction of x
by a simple change of variables
where we divide by dp dx
that does remove the thetas from the equation.
So we can remove the thetas from the equation
locally but not globally.
So that construction gives us a splitting of x
locally in each of the use,
but on intersections they don't agree.
And if you analyze what's involved
in trying to correct these splitting so they agree,
you'll find out that the obstruction is a certain
one-dimensional co-amology class
on the reduced space
with values in what I've indicated.
Except that I think that what is m here
is called x everywhere else in that sentence.
So in the specific case of this hyper-surface x,
a co-amology class is not zero
and x is not split.
Now, our example was a little simple
because the odd dimension was two
and therefore if i is the sheaf of nilpotent functions,
i cubed is identically zero.
In general, on any super manifold,
you can define a co-amology class of mega two
which determines whether there exists a splitting mod i cubed.
And as such, a mega two is the first in a series
of obstructions to splittings or projections.
So if you can split, again,
m reduced is meant to be x reduced,
if you can split x mod i cubed,
you would then ask if you can split mod i to the fourth
and you run into further obstructions.
But for today's lecture, we only care about
the first obstruction, a mega two,
which is the obstruction to a splitting mod i cubed.
And I say a splitting or a projection
because a mega two actually obstructs
either a splitting or a projection.
So the vanishing of a mega two
is a necessary criterion for a splitting or a projection
and it's the only criterion that Denoggin and I used
in studying the moduli space of super-remon surfaces.
So all you really need to know later on
is that if you do a necessary condition for x to be split
or projected is that it's projected mod i cubed
and that's controlled by this one-dimensional co-amlogic class.
Since we'll be rather schematic,
you don't really later on need to know exactly the details
of how to define a mega two.
But we do have to talk a little bit about
what are super-remon surfaces.
So, well, a super-remon surface
is a special case of a complex super-monofold.
That's one reason we started by talking about
complex super-monofolds.
A super-remon surface is a complex super-monofold
of dimension one-slash-one, one even and one odd dimension.
But a generic one-slash-one dimensional
complex super-monofold is not a super-remon surface.
A super-remon surface obeis a very subtle additional condition.
In general, a complex super-monofold of dimension one-slash-one,
well, any complex super-monofold has a tangent bundle,
but if S is of dimension one-slash-one,
then its tangent bundle is of rank one-slash-one.
In other words, the tangent space at a point
is a Z2 graded vector space with one even and one odd dimension.
S is said to be a super-remon surface
if the tangent bundle, TS, has an odd sub-bundle D.
In other words, D is of rank zero-slash-one.
That's everywhere non-integrable.
So a sub-bundle of the tangent bundle in ordinary geometry
is called a distribution.
And integrability means that the lee bracket
of the sub-bundle with itself is contained in that sub-bundle.
So here what requires the opposite of integrability.
So require that D is everywhere unintegrable.
Well, the analog of the lee bracket
since D is odd is not a commutator but an anti-commutator.
And the anti-commutator is possible for a single object.
So a one-dimensional sub-bundle of the tangent bundle
in ordinary geometry is trivially integral.
But a zero-slash-one-dimensional sub-bundle in odd geometry
is not necessarily integral
because the anti-commutator of an odd section
with itself is not necessarily zero.
Now, so if D bracket D is not a multiple of D,
well D bracket D is even since D was odd,
and since the tangent bundle was of dimension one-slash-one,
if D bracket D is linearly independent of D,
then D and D bracket D together would give a basis
of the tangent bundle.
Non-integrability means that the tangent bundle has a sub-bundle
and the quotient is generated by D squared.
Non-integrability means that D squared
is everywhere linearly independent of D,
so it everywhere generates the tangent bundle mod D.
So D is called an odd distribution.
It defines what's called a super conformal structure on S.
And exactness of the sequence means that D is everywhere unintegrable.
So this definition was given almost 30 years ago.
The most detailed published paper, at least from the 80s,
is by Rosalie Schwartz and Voronov.
An equivalent notion was defined by Friedan.
And there's a lot of work from the 80s,
much of which wasn't published by Deline, Manin, and others.
So I should give a typical example
of an everywhere non-integrable odd distribution.
So in local coordinates x and theta, so x is even and theta is odd,
let D be the sub-bundle of the tangent bundle generated by this section,
the derivative with respect to theta plus theta times the derivative with respect to x.
So we see that D squared is the derivative with respect to x.
So not only is D squared everywhere non-zero,
but it's everywhere linearly independent of D.
So D and D squared give a basis of the tangent bundle,
and that means that the distribution curly D generated by capital D
is everywhere non-integrable.
It's not hard to prove that complete non-integrability means
that locally any D takes this form.
In other words, on a super-remount surface,
you can always find local coordinates x and theta,
such that the distribution has a generator of this form.
Those coordinates are not unique.
They're unique up to the action of what's called, well, infasomally,
they're unique up to the action of the super-vericera algebra.
If s is a super-remount surface,
then its reduced space is an ordinary remount surface of complex dimension 1,
and complete non-integrability can be used to show
that the normal bundle to the reduced space is a spin bundle.
That's a square root k to the half of the canonical bundle k of the reduced space.
So a super-remount surface has a spin structure which may be even or odd.
So, if you haven't seen this definition before,
it takes some time to become comfortable with it,
and I don't have much of a shortcut to offer it today.
I'll just tell you a couple of facts in a moment,
but first I'll make the following remark.
One is that this concept is needed in string theory,
and secondly that super-remount surfaces
lead to a much closer analogue of the classical theory of remount surfaces
than you'd get if you considered arbitrary complex super-manifolds of dimension 1 slash 1.
I'll just give a couple of examples.
So, on a complex manifold, a divisor is a sub-manifold of dimension 1,
and roughly it's prime if we can't build it out of different components.
On a remount surface, there's a natural one-to-one map
between a point and a prime divisor.
That wouldn't work on a general 1 slash 1 complex super-manifold.
A prime divisor has co-dimension 1 slash 0,
and therefore dimension 0 slash 1,
but a point has co-dimension 1 slash 1.
So, on a general generic complex super-manifold,
points and divisors are different things.
But on a super-remount surface, there's a natural correspondence
between points and divisors.
That's because if s has an odd distribution,
if s has an odd sub-bundle d of rank 0 slash 1,
then to a point in s, you can associate a sub-manifold of dimension 0 slash 1
by asking that it passes through p in the direction given by the fiber of d at p.
Since d is unintegrable,
you can't partition s according to the leaves of d.
But individual leaves still make sense,
and there's a unique leaf that passes through p.
So, to every point p, there is a corresponding divisor,
which is a 0 slash 1 dimensional variety that contains p,
and whose tangent space is the fiber to d at p.
And if d is completely non-integrable,
you can show that this gives a one-to-one correspondence
between points and prime divisors.
A second example arises if we look at the...
try to find the analog of the Jacobian of an ordinary Riemann surface.
If s is a super-manifold of dimension 1 slash 1,
we can try to imitate the usual construction of the Jacobian of an ordinary Riemann surface,
starting with the usual sequence of sheaves,
where the map from O to O star is the exponential.
So, if it's true that the only global functions are complex constants,
then you can imitate the usual definition
and associate to a 1 slash 1 dimensional super-manifold,
a complex torus of dimension g.
But generically, this complex torus is not an abelian variety.
However, if s is a super-manifold surface,
then j actually is a principally polarized abelian variety,
just as in the classical theory.
So, in particular, it can be described by a symmetric period matrix
of positive imaginary part.
But the fun comes in, which is that the Schottky relation,
so, in classical geometry, a generic principally polarized abelian variety
isn't a Jacobian because a necessary condition is that
the period matrix should obey what's called the Schottky relations.
So, a super-Riemann surface has a super-period matrix,
but it doesn't generically obey the Schottky relations.
Well, it has a super-period matrix under the condition that the only global function,
under this condition,
that the global functions were just the ground field C.
So, that condition, however, is nontrivial.
It implies that the spin structure is even and that the reduced space
is not along what, classically, is called the theta null divisor.
So, super-Riemann surfaces have a modular space
that was studied by Deline in the 80s.
It reduced space is the modular space of ordinary Riemann surfaces with spin structure.
So, now, it's natural to ask, well, a basic question about any complex super-Riemann fold,
and here our complex super-Riemann fold is the modular space of super-Riemann surfaces,
is whether it can be constructed in an elementary way from classical objects.
In other words, is it projected or split?
So, if so, then the modular space of super-Riemann surfaces
is a much less interesting object mathematically, especially in the split case.
If the modular space of super-Riemann surfaces were split,
that would mean that this space wouldn't,
you wouldn't really have to consider this space as an independent entity in its own right.
Well, it means that it would be a standard type of object
that you could construct from classical ingredients.
Conceivably, the theorem saying this modular space was split would be useful.
Maybe if you had a natural constructions that gave rise to super-Riemann surfaces,
then the natural splitting of the modular space might be important.
But the modular space, per se, would be much less interesting if it were split,
and somewhat less interesting if it was projected.
On the other hand, in string theory, a projection might have been useful.
So, if you had a projection of the modular space of super-Riemann surfaces
to its reduced space, that could be the starting point of super-string perturbation theory.
In other words, integration over this modular space, one strategy,
to first integrate over the fibres of a hypothetical projection.
And in low genus, this is actually a useful approach.
So, practical calculations for small genus, most notably by Docher and Fung in genus 2,
are actually done by finding in low genus a projection from super modular space to its reduced space
and integrating first over the fibres of the projection.
So, if super modular space were split in general,
then a possible approach to super-string perturbation theory in general would be to use that strategy.
So, this last consideration, which is that a splitting, if it exists,
might be a framework in general for super-string perturbation theory,
was the motivation for my work with Denaggy.
And it seemed reasonable to expect that the answer was negative,
that super-string perturbation theory cannot be based in general on a projection,
but it seemed clarifying to prove this.
So, there were a couple reasons that I'd come to suspect the answer was negative.
One is that although projections and splittings do exist in low genus,
they tend to have funny properties,
which suggested to me that when you went to higher genus, they wouldn't exist.
And the second is that, to simplify slightly,
although you can calculate in low genus using a projection,
this makes some crucial properties such as space-time supersymmetry hard to understand.
And it seemed to me to be harmonious to believe
that you shouldn't really base super-string perturbation theory on that,
and that part of that would be that a projection didn't really exist in general anyway.
And when you work with super-ringman surfaces,
it's very difficult usually to find any simplifying property at all
that isn't strictly needed for the theory to hang together consistently
and to make sense in string perturbation theory.
And since a projection was actually not needed,
I actually came to suspect it didn't exist.
Now, there's an important detail, which is the following,
that the modular space of super-ringman surfaces,
just like the corresponding classical space,
has a natural Deline Mumford compactification.
But we showed it to be non-projected
without any consideration of this compactification.
Non-projected is a stronger statement than non-split.
We showed it to be non-split, but in particular,
sorry, non-projected, and therefore in particular non-split,
without considering the compactification.
For the compactification to be projected would only be a stronger condition.
But we wanted to address the question of whether there was a projection
if you ignore the compactification,
because even a projection that behaves badly over the divisor at infinity
could conceivably be used in super-string perturbation theory,
so we wanted to know whether such a thing existed.
Now, the reason I spent a few moments telling you
why I suspected that the answer was negative is the following.
What you have to do here depends completely on what you think the answer is.
If you think that the modular space of super-ringman surfaces is projected,
then to prove this, you probably need a clever construction of a projection.
And there was an obvious obstruction to trying to prove that,
which was the lack of clever such ideas.
But if you think that the modular space of super-ringman surfaces is non-protected,
then to prove this, you just need to do a detailed calculation
showing that some obstruction is non-zero.
And the most obvious obstruction is the lowest one,
the obstruction to a projection mod i cubed.
And since this obstruction is a one-dimensional cohomology class,
if it's not zero, it's restriction to some curve in the reduced space
is going to be non-zero.
So one has led to suspect that you could prove that the super modular space
is not projected by setting the restriction of omega-2
to a compact curve in the reduced space.
Well, how do we make such a compact curve,
which would be a one-parameter family of super-ringman surfaces
with a compact parameter space?
In the case of ordinary-ringman surfaces,
suppose you want to make a family of ordinary-ringman surfaces
with a compact parameter space,
and these ringman surfaces aren't allowed to degenerate
because we're trying to work in the ordinary moduli space,
not in its lean and mumford compactification.
So we want a one-parameter family of smooth ringman surfaces
with a compact parameter space.
There are a variety of standard constructions.
One standard method is to start with a fixed ringman surface C
and construct a family of covers of C.
Actually, I was lucky to attend a lecture by Cree Shaver several summers ago
because it was handy to know about these constructions.
So a case that works well for us is to pick a single point in C
and to construct, for example,
a triple cover of C ramified only at P.
So there wouldn't be a double cover with only one point of ramification,
but there's no problem in making a triple cover with one point ramification.
That's because a triple cover is a representation of the fundamental group.
And ramification means that M, for example,
is a cyclic permutation of three objects.
Well, it wouldn't work for a double cover
because, well, the group of permutations of two objects is a billion,
so all these combinators would go away and M would have to be one.
But for triple covers, the group of permutations is non-a-billion,
so there's no trouble picking M to be a cyclic permutation
and then finding A's and B's that obey this.
So there's no problem finding a triple cover
with only a single point of ramification.
There isn't a unique one
because there are finitely many choices of the A's and B's up to conjugacy.
But up to conjugacy, there's a finite set of such triple covers.
Ramified only at a given point P.
So this will work as long as we consider ramification of odd order,
but three is a useful odd number, for example.
So for every point P, there's a finite set T sub P
of triple covers ramified only over P.
T sub P labels the solutions up to conjugacy of that equation,
where S3 is the group of permutations of three letters.
I'll probably go back to...
Yeah, you can dim the lights.
Now, there's another lucky fact about odd numbers,
which is that in the case that the ramification is all of odd order,
a spin structure on C determines a spin structure on the cover of C tilde.
That relies on the following fact about ramification of odd order.
If y to the k is x, then dx is this,
where if k is odd, then y to the k minus one has a natural square root,
because k minus one is even.
And the natural square root means that you have to crack
by a factor of y to the k minus one over two,
but a spin bundle on C doesn't quite pull back to a spin bundle on C tilde,
but it can be corrected by power of the ramification divisor
to make a spin bundle on C tilde.
So if C is given a spin structure,
and C tilde is constructed by a cover with only ramification of odd order,
then C tilde gets a natural spin structure.
So the pairs, which are P and TP,
so a point in TP was a solution of our equation for a ramified cover.
I wrote a finite ramified cover.
The sentence is true, it confused me though.
So the choice of a point,
we want to construct cover C tilde of C with ramification only at one point,
but to choose such a cover,
we need to pick a point P to gather with some additional data.
So the additional data gives us an unramified cover of C,
which I'll call C prime,
and then C prime parameterizes a family of TP covers C tilde to C,
which are ramified only at one point.
So if C has genus G, then C tilde has genus 3G minus one.
So we've constructed a family of remun surfaces of genus 3G minus one
with a compact parameter space,
and moreover, if we pick a spin structure on C,
then all the curves C prime come with spin structures.
So this is a classical construction for remun surfaces,
but it also works for super remun surfaces.
If W is a super remun surface and P is a point,
then P determines a divisor because of the map
from points to divisors that we talked about before.
If we're given a super remun surface W and the divisor d sub p,
okay, now it makes sense to talk about a ramified cover,
ramified over a divisor.
But for super remun surfaces,
it only works well for odd order ramification,
and the reason is that basically a super remun surface in particular
has a spin structure,
and as we essentially discussed a moment ago,
spin structures only work well for odd order ramification.
So if we're given a super remun surface and a point p,
we can construct a triple cover,
which will be a super remun surface W tilde,
just ramified over the divisor d sub p.
So in this way, we get a compact family of super remun surfaces
of genus 3G minus 1,
with a compact parameter space B.
B is an un ramified cover
of the super remun surface we started with.
So a quick statement of what Danagin I did
is just that we computed the pullback of omega 2 to B,
and by showing this pullback to be non-zero,
we showed that the moduli space of super remun surfaces
is not projected.
Well, the way I've stated it,
is to move it for genus 3G minus 1,
but by using a different ramification pattern,
we showed that the result holds for all genus at least 5.
So the steps in the argument were all fairly elementary,
but maybe we don't want to explain them in too much detail,
so I'll just say a couple of things.
First of all, to get anywhere,
you need to have something which has a non-zero omega 2.
Well, genus 2, you see, the classical moduli space is affine,
so trivially, genus 2 is projected,
but more than that, it actually has a nice projection
that was used by Docher and Fung.
Genus 3 and genus 4, I would presume,
are not projected, but we didn't prove that.
So in genus 3, there is a construction of a compact family of curves,
but it's a little bit abstract and hard to use.
So we didn't try to do any calculations.
So we needed to know something was not projected.
In other words, something had to have a non-zero omega 2,
and then we proved that something else that we were interested in
had a non-zero omega 2.
So the basic object that was not projected in our calculation
was the following.
What X be a family of superamon surfaces
that depend non-trivially on a single odd parameter eta?
So C01 is speck of the ring C of eta,
the ring generated over the complex numbers
by an odd parameter eta.
And then we consider a family, a non-constant family
of superamon surfaces over C01.
So the fibres of this map X to C01 are superamon surfaces
and have dimension 1, 1,
so the total space has dimension 1, 2.
And 1 slash 2 is big enough so that omega 2 might be non-zero,
and in fact it is.
So I won't show you the proof,
because I think it would be unilluminating
if you're not familiar enough with superamon surfaces.
But it's a very short proof using complete non-integrability.
So the co-amology class that represents the fact that our family is non-constant,
so the fact that our family is non-constant
means that a certain class is 0,
an odd element of H1 of the tangent bundle of fibres non-zero,
and the class which being non-zero makes this family non-constant
can be reinterpreted as omega 2 of X,
showing that omega 2 of X is not 0.
So this is an easy way to construct a non-split super manifold,
any 0 slash 1 parameter family of superamon surfaces.
Another useful fact is that if X is a super manifold
with a omega 2 of X non-zero,
then any unriomified cover has the same property.
This would be trivial if X prime were a Galois cover,
because then, given...
Well, maybe...
Perhaps I'll leave it at that.
So we use this for the case that X is what I just told you about,
and X prime is the cover of X
that's determined by the topological data we discussed,
a choice of triple cover with one point of ramification.
And eventually we have a super manifold X prime
with a omega 2 of X prime non-zero
and an embedding of X prime into the modular space
of superamon surfaces for some higher genus.
Now that doesn't immediately imply what we want,
because in general, if a super manifold contains a sub-manifold
and a mega 2 of X prime non-zero,
it doesn't follow that the big super manifold Y is non-projected.
We actually had a counter example earlier in the lecture
with Y being projective space
and X prime being a generic hyper surface.
But there is an easy condition that makes this work.
If Y contains an X prime with a mega 2 of X prime non-zero,
and moreover the normal sequence for the embedding of X prime and Y splits,
then it's true that Y has to be non-projected.
So for our X prime that's constructed
by considering triple covers of a genus G superamon surface,
the normal sequence for its embedding in M3G-1 does split,
which we learned by comparing the triple cover of ramon surface
to its Galois closure.
And that's how we learned that a mega 2 of the modular space was non-zero.
And therefore that the modular space is not projected
or in particular not split.
So what do we learn from this?
Well, I've already told you, but just to recapitulate.
For physics, the inexistence of such a projection
confirms that we shouldn't expect to base super string perturbation 3
in general on a projection to the reduced space.
For mathematics, I think it makes the modular space
of superamon surfaces more interesting.
It can't be constructed in an elementary way for more classical objects.
Thank you.
APPLAUSE
Any questions?
So, some of the sedental numbers can be constructed as integrals
of some object over everything.
Yes.
If you add in numbers which can be constructed as integrals
over superamon surfaces, do you expect to get an object less?
The question was this, in algebraic geometry,
let's say on a compact algebraic variety,
periods of a holomorphic differential.
You've got a great model in the one form.
Yes.
APPLAUSE
I think you've got the same numbers.
I would be curious what Maxim's proof was,
but the answer I was going to give was the following.
If you take a section of the Berezinian, first of all,
I don't believe you've got more numbers
because you can reduce from...
I'm curious about Maxim's proof, actually,
but you can reduce from super geometry to ordinary geometry
at the cost of introducing poles.
So, what is a holomorphic volume form on the super manifold?
What have periods, which will be the periods
of some differential of the second kinds
with poles that don't have residues on the reduced space?
That's my answer.
I'm not sure what Maxim's answer is.
I didn't understand the reference to Freedan.
Freedan at the 1985 proceedings?
Well, regrettably, Freedan and other physicists
didn't pursue it as much as it might have been,
but if you look at the proceedings of the conference
held in 1985 in Santa Barbara,
Freedan gives the definition of super-remon surfaces,
which sounds different from the algebra-geometric definition
I gave, but actually is equivalent.
He described the local structure he wanted
and basically he said a super-remon surfaces
is a one-one super manifold
that is given by gluing together the local pieces he described
by super-conformal mappings.
And there's a lot of interesting,
well, there are a number of interesting later papers
in the physics literature which I did not try to explain today.
For the modelized space of super-remon surfaces
you're asking what's the normal bundle to the reduced space?
Well, the normal bundle to the reduced space
is something you can describe classically.
It's H1, it's fiber is H1
of the ordinary remon surface
with values in T to the one-half.
Is there a class of the evidence
super-remon surfaces
that's used in the same way
that the super-remon surfaces
are used in the classical one-one super-remon surfaces?
So the question was
if I can recommend interesting conditions
on super geometry in higher dimensions.
I'm afraid my passion about super-remon surfaces
is too great for me to be able to answer that question.
The only other answer I could have possibly thought of
is to tell you about super-gravity in higher dimensions
which might suggest some interesting constructions.
But depending on your mathematical interests
I don't know how interesting you'd find them.
I'm sure there are different answers
but I can't do better right now, I'm afraid.
We have our coffee break
and in the session I'm going to come on reference.
Thank you.
We announced that this is the break
and the last chance for you to get tickets
to the banquet.
Everybody, there is no ticket
so just come and get your ticket if you haven't yet.
And we started three turns
and it would be a recollection
that we have to start on the side
and then go on to the other side.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
