So, these are our lectures that Grotendie gave in 1973.
He had announced that he was leaving the organized practice of mathematics.
He was raising money for Servivre Vivre, his ecological group, and so he gave a series
of lectures, several lectures over several years.
This picture is actually in Montreal in 1971, but it's close to, so it's close to this time.
In Buffalo, he gave three series of lectures.
He gave a series on topos.
He gave a series on algebraic geometry and one on algebraic groups.
I have not listened to the other two series closely enough to figure out exactly what
was scheduled.
He did say at one point that the only one he was thinking about was the series on topos.
The others were routine, and even the series on topos clearly begins as just an introduction
to the subject.
He's simply recounting what's in SGA.
SGA4 had just been gone to press earlier that year, after years of editing, and he clearly
began simply recounting what's in SGA4.
It was scheduled for 10 hours, we'll come to how we know that.
The introductory lectures then ran 16 hours, and then there are 17 more hours of a small
group on tape.
We know the tapes are not quite complete.
It's not perfectly clear to me how incomplete, but I think substantially complete.
So here's what he has to say.
When I started on categories around 55, now you might think he didn't start in 55.
You might have thought that when he wrote, résumé des résultats assentières dans
la terre et des produits tantres arrières topologiques et des espaces nucléaires,
when he writes these things, you might think he's already involved with categories in 1952-1953.
And indeed, he's giving functorial universal descriptions of certain vector spaces.
He wants to characterize, well, he was given this problem to explain some theorems in functional
analysis, and he decides there's this key property that really the key to those theorems
is to understand tensor products in vector spaces.
And so he's going to do this by categorical means.
But in 1973, he does not call this category theory.
He clearly not.
He's saying he began in 55.
This is not because he's uncertain about the dates.
This is because of what happened in 1955.
In 1955, he wrote what's called his Kansas paper.
Also he substantially wrote what's called Tohoku, although that appeared in 1958.
In the 1955 Kansas paper, he's approaching cohomology.
Because I think probably everybody here knows, his early work on functional analysis, he
was assigned this as a dissertation topic.
But then what he's done in 54, 55, he takes up the Baye conjectures under Sarah's influence,
wants to find a cohomology theory.
It seems to me pretty clear that Baye did not really believe there could be a cohomology
theory that would prove his conjectures.
He thought it was a great way to think about the conjectures, but he didn't really believe
you could do them that way.
Whereas Sarah did, Sarah thought you could find such a cohomology theory.
Any convinces Grotendijk of this.
But clearly, for reasons I won't go into here, it wasn't going to be much like existing
cohomology theories.
You were going to have to somehow find what was the key, what was the core of cohomology,
and get that to work.
So Grotendijk is trying to revisit and visit cohomology.
And in the 55 Kansas report, he wants to do this, including non-commutative cohomology,
a cohomology with non-commutative coefficient groups.
He's going to do it by interpreting groups and torsors.
We'll talk a little bit about that in a minute.
Tors is another name for principal fiber bundles.
He wants to interpret these in categories of sheaves of sets.
Every topological space has a category of sheaves of sets.
He wants to look at that.
And here he is clear, a sheaf is a local homeomorphism.
Already we have a problem with language.
Grotendijk speaks a very colloquial English.
He has, I think, to most American ears, a German accent, which is not that surprising.
Because even if he was speaking French during the years he learned English, he was probably
learning it from German speakers.
And he seems to have learned it with a German accent.
But he speaks a very colloquial English.
And he says etal space over and over again.
There are two French words, etale, and etal.
And Grotendijk has absorbed the English speaker's habit of pronouncing them alike.
He just says etal for both.
Now he means, throughout these lectures, he means etale.
He never explicitly talks about comme etale here.
I haven't listened to enough.
I haven't heard him saying it in the algebraic geometry lectures either, but I haven't listened
to them exhaustively.
I'm going to write with two accents, and I'm going to say etal space, because he always
pronounces it etal space.
But the word more properly etal doesn't occur in these lectures anyway.
So a sheaf is an etal space, a sheaf of sets.
So for example, you have a circle, an etal space is a space stacked smoothly above it
so you might have this spiral stacked above it.
Any little bit of this is just stacked one-to-one over a little bit of the circle is the idea.
Or here, again, any little bit of this, this is a double cover, and any little bit of it
is stacked one-to-one over a little bit of the circle.
So these are etal spaces.
Now certainly much more complicated things can happen.
But again, I don't know the background of everybody here, the people I know here don't.
But anyway, I don't know the background of everybody here.
You can see that this thing is sort of unwinding the circle, OK, that's great.
You're saying locally it's just like a line, but it has this periodicity.
So I hope it's plausible that this is a good way of unfolding a space to get easier access
to it.
And it was a standard method in topology, well, from the time Groteniek arrived in Paris.
In the Kansas paper, he's interested in the functorial behavior of sheaves of sets.
The category of sheaves on one space, well, you have a topological space x, a topological
space y, you have a continuous map between them.
And this induces a functor in the other direction.
It is now the inverse image functor of F. That's the one he talks about in the Kansas
paper.
I have not read that paper closely enough to see if you can find some anticipation of
the direct image functor.
Of course, he says some of the same things that we would now say with the direct image
functor.
But he's very interested in the fact that if you interpret some group here, if you interpret
some group here, this carries it over to an interpretation of groups here.
So groups in this category become groups in that category.
And this happens in a very nice way, a functorial way, which you know what that is, you know.
So he's interested in that.
The functorial behavior, that's his word.
The paper's written in English.
But he does not attempt any intrinsic characterization of categories of sheaves of sets.
You've got a topological space x.
You know what's meant by a sheave of sets on x, and they form a category.
He uses properties of those categories, but he doesn't try to describe them by any categorical
properties.
He just knows what they are.
Now in 1973, in the Buffalo Lectures, he says that in 1955, he did characterize various
kinds of structures, monoids, groups, rings, et cetera, in all categories with suitable
exactness properties.
I made a few notes to myself about what to be sure and say about the, yeah.
As a historian, you look at something like this and you have to say, well, did he really?
Sometimes people, you know, they remember, you know, 18 years later, he might be projecting
back ideas that worked on his earlier thinking.
You have to expect that because exactness properties are pretty abstract.
In 1955, exactness properties seemed, you know, the existence of products, the existence
of direct sums, the existence of all direct limits, all inverse limits.
I won't go into what these are because if you know them, you know them, and I'm not
sure.
But in 1955, those seemed like very abstract things, and so you might think, what did he
really do this in that abstraction?
But I think when you look at the evidence, you have to say yes, he did.
And the reason for that is, well, besides that you can see in the 1955 paper, he doesn't
declare this as a general program, but you can see that kind of thinking going on.
You can see that by 1955, naïve exactness was, at least for Grotendijk, much more intuitive
than the nuts and bolts of sheaves.
It's really an easier way to think about it, and it was already easier for Grotendijk
in 1955.
So if we want to interpret a group in a category, I'm not going to worry about describing...
Oh, nuts and bolts, the mechanics, getting your hands on every little part and fitting
them all together, like the screws and the bolts and the nuts that fit onto them, getting
your hands on everything that's going on in a sheave category is kind of complicated.
But if you say what is a group, well, you take an elementary textbook, well, elementary
and abstract algebra textbook, it'll say a group is a set, and it's got a binary operator
to itself.
But Grotendijk clearly sees, it doesn't matter that this was called a set.
We know what it is to take the product of two sheaves on Y. We know what it is to take
a map from that to the sheave itself on Y.
These kinds of diagrams, it's much...
And then we say, well, look, there should be a unit element of the group.
These kinds of diagrams are easier to think about than the detailed meaning in a given
sheave category.
And you can see Grotendijk already in 1955 is good at thinking about these kinds of diagrams
in a sheave category.
He can get his hands on the particulars when he needs to, but he's really good at not
needing to, which is absolutely how you would do it today.
So I think it's really true that in 1955, he did characterize a lot of these kinds of
algebraic structures in all categories with suitable exactness.
We'll be talking more about that.
This is a quote from 1973, according to the type of structure we are working with, monoid,
torsor, topological space.
Those are examples he was giving around there in the tape.
We will have to assume that our categories see admit certain types of direct or inverse
limits and that certain axioms are satisfied on these limits.
And these will be the categories on which these structures make sense in a way.
I will try to make this more precise or we will try together.
And here, we see more evidence that this is not a hindsight projecting these things
back onto the past because in 1973 and indeed today, there's not much use interpreting topological
spaces this way.
That has never worked out to any valuable purpose.
He's saying it because he did think it in 1955.
He's certainly not saying it because it worked out well later.
It didn't work out well later, it hasn't worked out well to this day.
You could do it in any topos, but it hasn't been valuable.
So I take this as evidence that his memory here is accurate.
This is what he was thinking in 1955.
Monoid is like a group, but it doesn't have inverses, a torsor, oh, I didn't describe
what a torsor is.
A torsor looks like a group, but it hasn't got a selected unit element, so it's sort
of a group that's invariant under being rearranged.
I won't go into details on that again if you know them.
He really is saying that I'm going to interpret groups in any category with enough abstract
properties.
Basically, what does that mean?
You can interpret groups in any category that has a terminal object that is one that
everything has a unique arrow to and has products of its objects.
I won't give the precise definition.
If you've got those two structures, you can interpret groups.
There might not be any groups in a given category that has those structures, but you
can say what it means to be a group in that category, or again, there may, and in chief
categories there are, and they're very important.
He says, these were the kind of things I was fumbling over a long time ago when I started
on categories around 55.
So for Grottendijk, this is category theory.
Using categories of topological vector spaces, that's not really category theory.
It's functional analysis.
Using universal properties of various objects in categories of topological vector spaces,
again, not category theory, functional analysis.
But interpreting new kinds of structures in a category C, especially when the category
C was defined just by abstract exactness properties, not by what the things in it are made of,
that's category theory and general nonsense.
He calls it general nonsense fairly often in the lectures.
This is, I'm stressing this because there's been a fair amount of discussion of whether
Grottendijk would ever have called himself a category theorist.
Well, he doesn't use the term category theorist, but he does describe his work as category
theory fairly often in these lectures.
Another quote from 1973, this general nonsense, you see, to make it a mathematical statement
would be kind of awkward.
In fact, Chevrolet had a seminar at the very beginning of IHES around 58 or 59, and he
spent a year trying to define algebraic structures that can be described in terms of certain
types of inverse limits, certain types of direct limits, and making universal constructions,
et cetera.
It was a pretty bad mess.
So I don't think I will try to make it really mathematics, like this idea of making it really
mathematics.
I don't think I'm going to do it.
What is important is to get the general idea and have the correct, how shall I say, thought
patterns for these situations so as not to use time and energy doing involved things.
Now I will say, as the idea is developed, other people took the advice that he gave
an SGA for, the lecteur a priori de donner un sens mathématique à la phrase précédente,
which has to do with interpreting things.
Nous conseillons lecteur de l'explicité, Grotendieck is not saying nobody should develop
this precisely.
He is saying he's not going to develop it precisely.
And people have, as the ideas have become more important, I mean, you had Olivier Caramello
in the same lecture series has put a lot of work into making these things mathematics.
But Grotendieck is not going to try to make this really mathematics.
But he even, he does say you should do it in SGA4.
Now as to serious general nonsense, the Tohoku paper 57, I guess it appeared in print in
58.
Okay, well, I mean, he spent a while trying to get it into print.
He says he had the idea in 55.
It characterizes injective objects in certain categories.
I won't go into what injective objects are.
It's a pretty simple idea to define.
Finding them is another thing.
It does not interpret structures like groups in categories.
That's not what he's doing in this paper.
But it axiomatizes the categories.
These are not concretely given categories.
Of course, he talks about concretely given examples that motivate the work.
But the theorem does not deal with concretely given categories.
It deals with categories that are defined entirely by exactness properties.
They say there's concrete examples, but it doesn't.
They're axiomatized by exactness properties.
Oh, I didn't put.
As I put here, in the Kansas paper, he handled chief categories by exactness, but he didn't
define them that way.
Here he defines the categories of interest by exactness.
He defines an AB5 category.
AB5 categories are important for uses in cohomology, in topology.
These are a kind of category that was already important for doing cohomology as it existed
in the Carton seminar.
It's an additive category.
It's a category where you can add arrows to each other, and it satisfies some other properties.
It has all finite, direct, and inverse limits.
Images are isomorphic to co-images.
It has arbitrary direct sums.
It has filtered increasing families of subjects that have stable direct limits, and there's
a reason I'm rushing over these definitions, which is that if you don't already know them,
you're probably not going to, they're not going to mean a lot to you, and that's okay.
I will say, although someone who was there might disagree with me, that in 1958, when
Grotendieg published this, it was not obvious why those would be the properties you would,
it's obvious why they worked.
You could see those are the properties he used in his proof.
There was not any prior reason to think that those would be the properties that would work.
While there was a kind of prior reason, which is how Grotendieg found it, these were the
properties that Reinhold Baer had already used some years before to embed every group,
every abelian group in an injective group, every module in an injective module.
These were categorical analogs of the properties Baer had already used to prove a much more
special case of the same theorem.
Grotendieg, he doesn't have to invent these properties.
Well, he invents them, he generalizes them, he puts them in categorical terms, but he
can more or less read them off of Baer's proof, which I think was in 1948.
That's where they come from in 1948.
We're going to see properties like this come back for other reasons later on, but I do
want to say that in 1958, people looking at this list of properties thought, well, the
only reason for that list is that it works.
There's no conceptual reason why that would work.
It's just what does work.
These properties let Grotendieg handle objects in these abstract categories pretty much the
way algebraics handle modules.
That's supposed to say the way, I don't know why it says this way.
It's just lifted from how Baer already handled modules.
Notice that Grotendieg is not building these out of elements or sections the way mathematicians
use sets.
He was sort of building sheaves out of what are called their sections, sort of the way
we standardly use elements of sets.
None of that is going on in the Tohoku paper.
Of course, the two papers get together well.
They're on the same project, but they're on slightly different aspects of it.
Grotendieg can now tell you any AB5 category that meets these in one other technical condition,
which Grotendieg calls technical a lot.
Any category meeting these in its other technical condition has a cohomology theory, a unique
canonical cohomology theory.
But this paper gives no clue where those categories come from.
The Kansas paper was talking about where categories sort of like this might come from, although
it was published before he had this result.
The categorical idea of Topos, as he describes it in Buffalo 1973, this is what he wants
to call people's attention to.
I mean, picturing what's going on here, besides that he's a little disaffected from mathematics,
he's announced he's not going to do any more of it.
He's now in Buffalo, New York, where he knows people like him a lot, a few people like him
a lot.
That's why he got invited.
He's going to tell them roughly what a Topos is.
He's going to say, he's going to repeat this a lot.
I'm only going to quote about 8% of the times he says this, and that will already seem like
a lot.
The essential properties of the category of sheaves of sets on a topological space, which
I have tried to convey because he said it a lot already by this point, is that it shares
essentially all exactness properties of the category of sets.
He says this over and over again, oh sorry, he says this over and over, and then he adds
at least those expressed by direct limits with arbitrary indexing diagrams and finite
inverse limits.
He's going to keep saying all properties and then take some of it back.
So the notion of a Topos, E, should be that E shares the exactness properties of the category
of sets in so far as direct limits and finite inverse limits go.
Moreover for technical reasons, one has to assume that in E there's a small subset, not
as big as the whole universe we're working in, which is generating, and he keeps calling
it technical and I'm not going to go much more into that.
The yoga one finally gets to is essentially the following.
The category of sheaves on a topological space is just as good with a grain of salt.
As far as exactness properties are concerned as the category of sets, the grain of salt
is that this is, oh and I would say everything in italics here is direct quote from the tapes.
The italics are quotes of the tapes.
The grain of salt is that this is true for all commutation relations, exactness properties
involving arbitrary direct limits, which may be infinite, and also inverse limits provided
we take only finite inverse limits.
And then we're now eight and a half hours into the series and this is how I know it
was planned to be 10.
What shall we do?
We're supposed to finish next time.
I will speak about intrinsic properties of topoi and will not have much time for getting
topoi from sites.
Actually I need two more sessions and it might be nice to have one time or two on relations
between topoi and algebraic structures.
This is also quote, I stop without really having said anything about topoi.
He wants to do this other topic because he says to give a type of algebraic structure
seems to be the same as to give a topos, the so-called classifying topos.
So this seems to be a kind of equivalence relation between algebra and topology.
And he's very interested in that at this point.
So these sessions were three hours long.
I think when he says this at hour 8.5, this is my evidence that it was originally scheduled
as a 10-hour series.
One half session but he says, oh, what are we going to do?
We're supposed to finish next time but I'm not going to get done.
So now what does he want to do?
If we take it that these sessions are three hours, what he wants now is 13 hours of introduction
of topos and then three more on relations between topoi and algebraic structures.
So he's now envisaging 16 hours, as you say, at the total rent of 33 hours.
So again, it's a category with the exactness properties of sets so far as concerns arbitrary
direct limits and finite inverse limits.
And so how did he pick those with the exactness properties he was going to use?
He tells us.
It will turn out that arbitrary inverse limits also exist.
They're always going to be there.
And the arbitrary inverse limits are kind of generous.
They go beyond what I said that a topo should share the exactness properties of sets in finite
inverse limits and arbitrary direct limits.
So there really is a problem of why does he say arbitrary direct limits and finite inverse
limits when arbitrary inverse limits also exist?
The only answer I can see, I mean, I think it's a correct answer, is these are the properties
used in Tohoku if you drop additivity.
He's simply, he's saying the Tohoku properties, those are the properties I'm going to use
to define topos.
And this explains a peculiar line in Rekholtz's Semi, where Grotendeek, he spends some time
on topos.
He spends very little time on a billion categories, but he does say at one point, what is an a
billion category?
Well, it's a category that has essentially the properties of a topos.
And if you come to this knowing the material, you think, no, it doesn't have the properties
of topos, but it has the exactness properties, the same exactness properties that he used
to axiomatize topos, except it's also additive, which a topos is not.
He comments over and over that infinite direct limit, infinite inverse limits don't work
as nicely in a topos as they do in sets.
In particular, if you have an infinite product of epimorphisms, think of this as on two maps.
An infinite product of them in sets is also an epimorphism, at least if you have the axiom
of choice.
But in a sheaf category, very commonly not.
A finite product will still be an epimorphism, but an infinite product of epimorphisms will
not be an epimorphism in general in a sheaf category.
So there's another reason to limit the inverse limits to the finite.
Only the finite ones work nicely.
But I think the original reason he did limit it was that's what he used in Tohoku.
Well eventually he gives this euro axioms on a topos, and he gives the site definition
of a topos.
And I'm not going to go into that here because he tells us in the lectures.
So here's the notion of a topos, which is slightly technical.
He's not against it, but I think it's kind of intuitive though, he says, to take the
vague notion which intuitively makes more sense, the one where you have all direct limits
and finite inverse limits.
He says, I have a tendency to forget which properties you're all uses.
Well here they are, a locally small category with small generating set, all finite limits,
all small co-products, disjoint and stable, stably effective equivalence relations.
You know, if you're a little bit used to the subject, you don't forget those anymore.
But Grotendijk tended to forget them.
And if you're not very used to the subject, if you're not very used to the subject, don't
worry about absorbing these because Grotendijk has already told you they're kind of technical.
What you want to think of, I guess I should say more intuitively, arbitrary direct limits
means you can take a union of any number of these things, take any set of these things,
you can make a union of that whole set as one of these things.
And any set of, any one of these things, you can collapse it down along any equivalence
relation.
But inverse limits are basically products.
You cannot expect to take an infinite product of these things.
Well there's that complication.
Actually there is going to be an infinite product of them, but you don't want to look
at it because it's not going to work well.
So what you want to be thinking is, whatever I'm doing, I can take arbitrary sums of these
things, I can take the co-product over any set, I can combine infinitely many of them
as long as it's a set.
But products, I'm only going to take products of a finite number.
Other limits, I'm only going to take those on a finite number.
That's what you should be thinking, he's telling you.
And this is already over the limit of what the lectures were scheduled to reach.
So there's the categorical idea in a nutshell.
He also has a geometrical idea.
He says, the intuition is the following.
Viewing objects of a topos as being something like a tall spaces over the final object of
the topos.
And the induced topos over an object is just the object itself.
This is the way I think one should handle the situation.
What is the, so the objects of sheaf x, well if x was the circle, the objects are things
like the spiral going over it or the double cover going over it.
The objects are also spaces that map nicely onto this thing.
What is the induced topos?
The induced topos on a given object, a, is all the arrows to a in that topos.
Again, this is not something, a lot of you will be familiar with these ideas.
I'm not going to try to explain them very well to people who aren't.
But what I want you to get from this is, and a tall space over a circle is some space.
It is a space that's kind of stacked neatly over the circle.
And he's saying you should think of the objects in any topos as being sort of stacked neatly
over the final object, the one that everything maps to.
That's the way I think we should handle the situation.
One should handle the situation.
He says it's a funny situation because in strict terms, you see, the language which
I want to push through doesn't make sense.
But of course there are a number of mathematical statements which substantiate it.
Okay what doesn't make sense here?
First of all, to say that all objects are atall spaces, they're not all atall spaces.
I mean, he's lots of topos, they're not atall spaces by the existing definition of atall
space.
But Groten-Diek is going to urge that we should redefine that.
And the objects are the induced topoi.
I mean, an object in the huge category of all of these things, an object here is not the
same as the huge category of all maps to that object.
But he's saying you should think of them as the same because there are a number of mathematical
statements which will substantiate that.
Even though it can't be quite right, but it's the way you should be thinking about these
things.
So this means that every object in a topos, every arrow in a topos makes the domain an
atall space over the co-domain.
Because every arrow in a topos, well, if A was an object here, some object here, then
A becomes the final object in the induced topos of maps to A here.
So every object in a topos is final object of some other topos.
And every arrow to it becomes an object in this induced topos.
So he's really saying you should think of all maps in a topos as making the domain an
atall space over the co-domain, which clearly does not always do in the existing definition
of atall space.
But that's what he's saying.
He wants you to think of.
It's a funny situation.
It doesn't make sense.
But there are many mathematical situations that confirm it.
He intends a major generalization of atall space.
His favorite example of a topos is the topos of G sets for a group G. He wants sets acted
on by a group.
Let our group be the integers mod 4.
OK, really a pretty, a nice small group to think about.
What are the integers mod 4?
Now, Z mod 4, if you want to think of the set of elements, it's got 0, 1, 2, and 3.
And you do addition modulo 4.
So 1 plus 1 is 2.
2 plus 2 is 0, because it's 4, which is 0 here.
2 plus 3, well, that's 5, but that's 1 mod, so it's 1.
So what does a G set look for?
Well, here is a simple G set for Z mod 4.
You could think of it as having, it's got four points, and the element 0 of the group
acts by leaving each one where it is.
To act the element 0 on this group, leave everything where it is.
To act the element 1 on this group, move everything one step.
To act 2, move everything two steps.
Three move everything three steps.
To act 4 on it, move everything four steps, but that takes it back where it was.
You might as well have moved it zero steps.
So this is well defined for integers mod 4.
That's one simple G set.
But another one is where you've just got two elements.
To act 1, you move it 1.
To act 2, you move it 2.
So 2 already takes it back where it used to be.
But the point is that 4 also takes it back where it used to be.
And then you've got another one where everything leaves the point alone.
So every G set is some set of orbits like this.
These are the orbits.
A G set is any set sized combination of these orbits.
Now, these are not Atal-A spaces over each other.
These are group actions.
Over a given point, especially, look at what these stack over a fixed point.
Over this fixed point, you get an orbit.
Well, any set of orbits, if your G set was some bigger collection of orbits,
they're all stacked over there.
So each orbit is Atal over every quotient of it.
That's the reform he's suggesting.
Now, this slogan that objects of a topos are Atal spaces over the final object.
I will point out that SGA4 had already explored reasons this might not work well
for all cases.
It might work well only for what are called petitopos.
He had already explored reasons why it might be limited.
Lavire has pursued this, but there is still no general definition of a petitopos.
There are canonical cases.
There are clear cases that petitotopos of a scheme.
Petitopological topoi, but there's no general definition of petitopos.
And Grotendijk actually explored that some in an exercise in SGA4.
It's a several step exercise.
And the last step is to buy a chocolate medal for the author of these exercises.
Medaille en chocolat.
You're supposed to buy him one for these exercises.
So he evidently liked those exercises.
So what I want to stress here is that it's likely that in 1973,
Grotendijk did not believe this would work well for every topos.
And he's not concerned with whether it works well for every topos.
He is concerned to say it's a good general way to think about topos.
But it works very well for what are called pitiatal sites.
With the generalization that he's offered, do I have a, yeah.
The thing is that etal sheaves put galois orbits over single points of a scheme.
So it's like when we're having those G sets all etal over a single point,
you have to notice that what's etal over a point may actually have a group action on it.
And this is how the idea of topos was born.
And now we know the birthday.
It was Monday, April 21st, 1958.
Unless Pierre tells me I'm completely wrong about this.
And you're going to have to really argue to convince me, and maybe you won't.
I hope you won't.
It was born that day.
Jean-Pierre Serre gives a talk that day.
He's concerned with getting vacohomology groups.
He and Grotendijk are concerned with it.
Lots of people are interested in the project.
I don't know how many other people were actively pursuing it, but
they're actively pursuing it.
And that day, he presents decisive progress on getting the one-dimensional
co-homology groups, just the one-dimensional case.
By using what he calls un-ramified covers.
Okay, I didn't get a lot of sleep.
I have trouble with ours anyway, but he gets the one-dimensional case.
Grotendijk comes up right after the talk.
Serre has recorded this in a publication that we now have.
Grotendijk comes right after the talk and says, that's going to give all of them.
That's going to work in every dimension.
And Serre, this is also recorded, and I believe him.
He says, that was a little hard to believe.
Because he says, I knew how hard I worked to get the one-dimensional case.
And I just didn't think it could be done in higher dimensions.
But Grotendijk had a reason.
Grotendijk now knew the Vey etalspaces.
Between his Kansas paper and his Tohoku paper,
if he knows what the etalspaces are, he knows the co-homology.
Any reasonable definition of etalspace will give a co-homology, and
he knows how to do it.
But he comes up with axioms for a generalized topology.
You're going to have a small category of generators patched together by direct
limits and finite inverse limits.
This is almost like taking a set of subsets of a topological space.
Think of the, well, and patching them together by unions and well, and intersections.
Arbitrary unions and finite intersections.
So now it's starting to look like open subsets of a topological space.
Compare the idea of a sub-base for a topology, where you need those unions,
and it's got to be closed under intersections.
A sub-base doesn't even, you're going to need intersections.
But also compare the Tohoku axioms, because we were talking about arbitrary
co-limits, co-limits are like unions.
Finite limits, limits are like intersections.
So now the Tohoku, it's Tohoku, I'm just gonna go to pronunciation.
That now the Tohoku axioms start to take a more conceptual form.
Now they start looking like the standard definition of a topological space,
in this context.
Only we're not going to be talking about unions and
intersections of subsets of a point set.
We're going to be talking about co-limits and limits of some category of generators.
It's trivial that if this works at all, the a billion group objects in that
category will be an AB5 category.
That's just built right in.
And he knows that every AB5 category has a canonical co-homology.
He's already proved, in the Tohoku paper, he proved this gives a co-homology.
And he's sure it will be the correct vacal homology.
And here again, we have Sarah's description, I think very apt description.
Grotendijk in those days was always optimistic.
But it's not a groundless optimism, this is what he's sure of.
He said, so what are un-ramified covers?
Well, we've already seen one.
If we're covering the circle, unfortunately,
I can't draw the difference between a disc and a circle.
This is just a circle, it's just a line.
And you have this double cover over of it.
Now, over any point, you get two points and
they can be switched by a Galois action.
You have a Galois action switching this thing all the way around.
So above a point here lies an orbit.
This is Sarah.
This is Sarah talking about topological spaces, in particular about algebraic
varieties with a Zariski topology.
This is one of the generators.
Grotendijk, now the thing is because it's algebraic geometry, and
Sarah wants these to be algebraic varieties mapped onto this.
Because it's algebraic geometry, these will have to be finitely many layers.
Basically, they need to be roots of polynomials.
There's only finitely many roots for a polynomial.
Grotendijk says, that's what won't give us an AB5 category.
We've got to take arbitrary co-unions.
We've got to take arbitrary unions of these.
We'll get a sheaf category by allowing arbitrarily many of these things.
But locally, each part of it will be an unrammified cover.
And I am convinced, and we'll be happy to talk about this at more length,
that Grotendijk gets this picture during Sarah's talk,
sees that it looks like a sub-base for a topology, and says,
yeah, we can make this happen.
And that's why he goes up and says, this will work in all dimensions.
So there we have the birthday.
I don't know what time that seminar was.
I did verify it's a Monday.
I have not checked what the weather was that day, but
you can find those things out.
60 years.
60 years ago.
Yes, yes, 60 years ago last week, this is the 60th birthday.
I announced that on Facebook.
I couldn't find a more appropriate forum.
Now, developments by three years later.
There is a shortage of published documentation of the next few years.
Well, shortage, I guess there's always a shortage, depending on how much you want.
There's less than I would like to see.
But by three years later, he's realized some things.
A tall space is in topology.
It's not true.
This one has this nice property.
Take anything here.
Above it, it looks like two copies of what was there.
But in topology, that's not generally required.
In topology, it may be that one of these things goes off to infinity.
So that when we look at what's happening over this part, well,
that doesn't look like two copies of this part.
But around any point up here, there's a neighborhood.
So it's no longer true that over any small part of the base,
it just looks like copies of that thing stacked over each other.
It is true that any point in the space over the base has a neighborhood that
looks just like the part it lies over.
So Grotendieke said, OK, that's a little different.
So we have to, instead of the finite un-ramified maps that Sarah used,
let's use flat un-ramified maps.
And I will thank Sarah also for pointing this out to me.
One of the first times I talked to him, we talked about etomaps.
And the first thing he wanted to tell me about etomaps
was they're like finite etomaps, but they're
trivial in the fibers, not in the base.
He wanted to get that out.
And I think that change was made.
Sarah did to me.
Yeah, it was like, say, the first thing he wanted me to know.
Also, Grotendieke failed to find what
he says a certain number of exactness axioms, which
imply all the others one would want to deal with.
He can't make that axiomatic approach work.
And in hindsight, we'll see sort of why.
He couldn't get it to work.
Well, it's those gyro properties that he tends to forget.
He didn't think of them in the first place.
So provisionally, this word provisional is a quote both
from the Buffalo Lectures and from Rekholtze Samai.
This is the provisional definition of topos,
is the one he comes up with.
He says, instead of axiomatizing this category of sheaves,
let's construct the sheaves by saying
how many copies of each generator lie in a sheaf
and how they're patched together.
He said, I'm going to actually construct these etals
so that I can get the same amount of the same amount
of these etals spaces out of the generators.
I would like to have taken co-products in a category,
but you can't take co-products in a category
if you don't know what the category is.
You can't just say, I want the co-product of these
if you don't know in what category.
And today, we know much more about that ambiguity
because we've developed topos theory.
But Grotendijk at the time just couldn't see how to do it.
So instead of actually taking column,
he's going to give a construction.
Well, what is that?
How many copies of each generator, how they're patched together?
Well, that's a pre-sheaf on the category of generators,
which was already an available idea in Paris at that time.
We're going to find pre-sheaves on the generators, which
today we will even say the category of pre-sheaves
is the free co-completion of the category of generators.
So that's natural.
If you want co-limits, well, where?
Well, how about in the free co-completion?
But as I say, that's hindsight.
That's not Grotendijk at the time.
And then, well, also, oh, tech error command there.
And also, compare the standard construction of an etel
space from a sheaf.
You make it as this kind of a union.
You say, the sheaf, how many copies of this
did the sheaf stack over here?
And how did it patch with others?
This is how you constructed an etel space from a sheaf.
Well, it's the same way he constructs these pre-sheaves.
And we have to know that if you've
got a patching that's compatible over a cover of some open set
you, you here is an open subset of the thing we're interested in.
It's not just, doesn't necessarily have to be the whole thing.
Once a compatible patching over a cover
has to imply a patching over you.
And having said that, you now have
Fezot de Vey, which in SGA1 he says,
visiblement inspiré de serre.
By three years after that afternoon,
he's invented the Fezot de Vey, visiblement inspiré de serre.
It goes on to develop.
By fall of 1961, OK, that was spring of 61 when SGA1,
in print edition, appeared.
By fall of 61, he goes to Harvard.
Artin remembers, I asked him to tell me the definition
of etel cohomology.
He laughed.
OK, this is a quote by Alan Jackson in the notices.
Actually, we argued about the definition for the whole fault.
He does not yet have a definition of etel cohomology.
He's got a motivation.
He's got a method.
He does not have a definition.
Why does he not have a definition?
Well, there are technical issues.
Should we use all schemes or separated schemes?
Should the covers be finitely presented or not
have to be finitely presented?
Should they be generated by finite covering families?
Should we not assume that?
Now, it turns out that if you drop any one of these assumptions,
all the ones down the line become uninteresting.
So we don't have eight independent possibilities.
We have, I think, six independent possibilities.
But these issues have not been decided by fall of 61.
We know this because Artin laughed at the idea.
And so we argued about the whole fault.
Artin lays out these alternatives in his Mimeograph
booklet, Grotendieg Topology 62, which Grotendieg clearly
liked because he brings Artin over here for 63, 64
to work in the SGA.
And to edit SGA 4, co-edit, by 1963,
Gervaux had given his topos axioms, those four that,
you see, if you're fond of topos theory,
you remember them.
But at the time, and Grotendieg was already saying
he couldn't remember them, as Gervaux says,
sur le résultat et la mise au point de la notion de site
qu'il l'a accompagné, ont été incorporés
dans Terre et des topos et comment les Gétales des schémas.
I said everything in italics was a quote of Grotendieg.
This isn't quoting him in context,
but he does name the book a lot in the tapes.
So it's OK that this isn't italics.
But what I want to call your attention to is I think
Grotendieg looks at it the same way Gervaux is looking at here.
It's not just an axiomatic result.
It's also a mise au point of the notion of site.
The notion of site now makes more sense to him
because it correlates to these axioms.
In Buffalo, Grotendieg repeatedly says,
you need sites to give proofs.
Having repeatedly said that he doesn't think you need to worry
about the definition, he does say, well,
if you want to give proofs, you're
going to need to know the definition.
He repeatedly says you need them to give proofs.
I will say set theoretically, because this
is an issue in my own work, sites in the Gero axioms
are not as different as you might think.
A lot of people naïve say, well, the thing is sites are small.
The Gero axioms deal with large categories.
Yeah, but they deal with them in terms of small families.
They're really set theoretically.
They're not as different as you might think.
For Grotendieg, what they are is they're both slightly technical.
He keeps saying you need them, but they're not
the way to think about the subject.
They're slightly technical.
Then he comes to morphism of topos.
The notion of morphism of a topos into another
is quite essential to the notion of a topos.
And almost more importantly, the notion
and almost more important than the technical definition, which
is slightly involved.
So what is a morphism of V into F?
Sometimes we may just say just a continuous map.
In fact, I wouldn't mind saying so,
though in the seminar we said rather morphisms.
Continuous map is really the intuition.
He wants you to think of a topos as a geometric object,
even though this doesn't quite make sense,
but there are many mathematical situations
which confirm it.
We want a definition such that if E is the topos of sheaves
on a topological space X associated
to a topological space X, and F is
a topos associated to a topological space Y,
then the continuous maps from E into F in quotes,
I mean the morphisms, the topos morphisms.
Notice that's what he's putting in quotes,
the continuous maps in quotes, the topological morphisms,
should just correspond to the continuous maps of X into Y,
at least of X and Y are sober.
There's another issue that I won't go into here,
but so they're going to turn out to be what are now
called geometric morphisms of the topoi, which I won't
give the technical definition.
But it does this exactly.
For sober topological spaces, the geometric morphisms
between the sheave categories correspond exactly
to the continuous functions between them.
And there are reasons why it can't
be for all topological spaces, but for sober ones it does.
So he says, when we speak about a topos, oh, and now,
oh, wait a minute, let me refresh my memory
on exactly where this happened in the series.
OK, yeah, this is still in the regular series.
When we speak about a topos, there are always two intuitions.
We think of the topos as something
like a generalized topological space,
embodied through the category of sheaves E.
So the intuition here is it's a category of sheaves.
He keeps stressing how big these categories of sheaves may be.
The motivation is sheaves E. So he's
going to go back to the topology of the topological space
where big these categories of sheaves may be.
The motivation is sheaves on a topological space,
but a topos is a category of sheaves.
But in fact, we think of the topos
as being something still different from the category
E, the space which is underneath, so to say.
The category sheaves on X, a topos as category
is a generalization of this category.
But we think of this category as representing
the thing underneath it, the topological space.
And we want to think of every topos
as being something still different from the category.
Think of it as the space which is underneath, so to say.
But I have not found a verbal trick
to distinguish between a topos and a space we're thinking of.
And then there's a long pause he's thinking.
One could just declare that there
are such things as topoi, where a topos
is a generalized topological space where every topos has
an associated category and distinguished between the two.
We'll just say, the same as we distinguish a topological space
from this category, well, for any topos,
for any category E that has the topos property,
we'll distinguish some geometrical object, G,
that it lies over.
We'll just say, what do we mean by geometrical objects?
They're the things that topoi lie over.
But one will never really define what, well,
and now he's even saying the topos.
This is going to be the topos.
The topos is that little geometrical object.
The category that lies over it is another thing.
But one will never really define what the topos is.
Never mind.
He says this a lot in the lecture,
so get thinking about something that's never mind.
So we could just say, we know about all these huge categories.
And we know that some of them are associated
to topological spaces.
But we're going to say that all of them
are associated to geometrical objects.
It's just that most of the time we can't get those.
He says the category of sets is pretty huge,
but as a topos, it's pretty small
because you should think of it as a topological space
reduced to one point.
The category of all sets is the category
of sheaves on a one-point topological space.
And a topological space, unlike, say, a scheme,
if it's got one point, that's all it's got.
It's just a point.
So the category of sets is pretty huge, but the topos,
the geometrical object, is pretty small.
It's just a point.
I'm sorry to insist rather heavily on kind of trivial matters,
he says.
But I think it's very essential to see on one hand
these big categories, and on the other hand,
geometric objects, which are a lot smaller,
but these geometrical objects we can't define in any other way.
They're just these huge categories.
Yeah, he wants a theory of geometrical objects
that he doesn't really have.
Well, there's nothing surprising or wanting something
they don't have yet, right?
I mean, he wants new geometrical objects.
He says one could, of course, other times
speak almost without any abuse of language.
But I think the geometry would get lost.
So after a while, when it's comfortable, almost conversely,
one reverts back to the geometric language,
the language of these small things,
and views E as the category of sheaves on the real topos.
I mean, on the real honest thing, the geometrical object X.
The real topos is the topological space, the little thing
G that we can't describe, whatever.
E, the category of sheaves, that's some big thing that
describes this honest geometrical thing.
Even if X is a topological space,
the usual topological space doesn't exist anymore.
The objects of the topos, like sheaves over a space,
are spaces in their own right.
In fact, they're the induced topoi.
That's just how it is, and it just works.
That's not a radical statement to say that it works.
Yeah, he can't spell it out yet, but it works.
It works.
And he wants to be able to spell it out.
That's why I brought up the thing about categorical logic.
He can't make categorical logic into mathematics,
and he says he's not even going to try.
He's not against somebody doing it.
Well, here, he wants to do it.
He wants to make this mathematics.
But he's told us he can't really do it.
So I will say, even points at topological spaces
are to be replaced by new objects.
The topological space doesn't exist anymore.
Only the topos, which is now not the category of sheaves
that we call the topos.
It's the geometrical object underlying it.
Missing a verbal trick, these are thoughts of my own.
This is not in the Buffalo lectures.
And I hope nothing here is italicized.
That's not italics.
That's math font.
Different thing from italics.
A zarisky topos, S czar, S is some scheme.
What is the zarisky topos of a scheme?
Well, it's a space made out of zarisky opens.
It's a topological topos.
You take the scheme as a zarisky topological space.
You look at the category of sheaves over on it.
Geometrically, it's made of the zarisky open subsets.
You don't have time to define that carefully.
It's a lattice ordered by inclusion.
The only relation subsets have to each other
is overlapping or inclusion.
That's the key point here is that,
like any topological space, we're
just looking at overlapping inclusion of the opens.
And the zarisky topos is like that.
I would compare a pane of glass.
Take a sheet of glass.
It has extent.
It's extended to a certain amount.
You could even cut it in pieces.
But there's no inner structure.
Glass has no inner structure.
You can break it, but there's no structure inside it.
Compare the etal topos on that same scheme.
It's made of etal opens.
What is the point of an etal open?
An etal open is kind of a part.
It looks kind of like a zarisky open,
but it can unfold into Galois extensions.
It unfolds into Galois extensions of any degree.
And I would invite you to compare a sheet of mica.
Beautiful sheet of mica.
I think a nice, transparent, big sheet of mica.
You can always split it into any number of thinner sheets.
The etal topos is like that.
Compare Mumford's drawings of arithmetic schemes over spec Z.
They come layered.
And we want to make that into geometry.
A continuous map from the etal topos to the zarisky topos
fuses the orbits together.
You've got this sheet of mica that you could have split,
but instead you melt it into a sheet of glass.
And now it won't split anymore.
That's what that continuous map does.
This doesn't work very well.
When I said missing a verbal trick,
I'm not supplying the verbal trick.
I'm saying this is what we're missing.
This doesn't really work very well.
I like the image, but it's not going to go very far.
If you just take these topoi without structure rings,
forget a lot.
You basically, you do not want to know
the topos of sheaves on the zarisky topology of a variety.
Not if you don't know the ring of the variety, too.
But also, topology forgets a lot in all
analysis in differential geometry.
Topology is supposed to forget a lot.
That's the value of it.
You forget a lot and you still have something left.
They say this is really not going to work very well,
because more interesting than either of these topos,
these just by themselves, is the ringed topos,
where you do remember the structure ring.
And that's what we also, we don't have a good language for.
Now there are two directions to go with this.
Two directions that are being, that are currently
being taken on this.
One is general topos theory, the way
Gioiault, Tierney, and Murdoch have done it,
extending generalized topology.
You've got these ideas of local, étendu.
You've got factorization theorems in topos theory
that compare to factorizations in topology.
Generalize them very substantially.
You've got properties that make no sense in points
at topology, but do here.
But this geometrical kind of theory
has been developed considerably.
I do think that the distinction between Grohe
and Petitopos might be crucial in understanding this.
Lavier reports that when he talked with Grotendijk about it,
Grotendijk liked his reference to that chocolate metal
exercise and agreed that it might be.
This is just a might be.
I'm not going to, I'm just saying it might be.
It exists.
The other is geometrizing specific kinds of topoi
in more special terms, the way I just did over there,
with the Zariski and Etel topos, except maybe do it better.
Do it, make it work.
Make it work more than that one does.
I think both of these directions are going to happen.
People are going to continue pursuing both of these.
Just want to mention that they are the two.
Back to Buffalo in 1973, Grotendijk tells us, SGA4,
he says SGA4 is the first one and a half volumes
of the two volume seminar devoted to the theory of topoi
and etalcology of schemes.
In fact, he says the initial aim of the seminars
was etalcology, but one had to write down prerequisites
on sites.
Oh, I will say, yeah, I should say in connection
with this other thing.
Oh, no, not that far.
This is the way people talk about etal and Zariski sites.
A lot of what I'm sort of urging to develop
as a geometrical view of topos already
exists as a geometrical view of sites.
But of course, then it's not invariant
under forming the topos.
So this kind of thing is going on partly at that level.
Yeah.
But in the, yeah, one had to write down prerequisites
on sites, and the first write up was pretty awful, he says.
The direction of arrows was never clear, which is true.
When you read the IHS mimeographs,
it's not really clear which direction
the geometric morphisms go.
And the geometric meaning was very messed up.
So we rewrote the whole series of notes.
So half of the seminar, the seminar on topoi,
was done with great care.
His recommendation is, yeah, that stuff in SGA4, volume one,
that was done with great care.
Because it was rewritten.
It was written twice.
Other parts were only written once.
Notre principe des acteurs a été de développer un langage
et des notations qui soient ceux qui servent déjà
affectivement dans les diverses applications.
This is already being used.
We're just trying to put it into this,
de sorte à ne pas perdre contact avec les contenus
géométriques ou topologiques des diverses facteurs
qu'on a terminé à considérer entre sites.
Yeah, we've got these ideas that are already working some
in some way.
SGA4 is an attempt to make them work in general topos theory.
When he says, principe des acteurs,
you can see he's saying this is not exactly an achievement.
If it was an achievement, he'd just
say, read the book, it's there.
But this is where they're trying to go with it.
Pour ceci, les notions de topos et de morphisme de topos
semblent être le fi conducteur indispensable.
Et il convient de leur donner la place centrale
à une notion de site devenant une notion technique aux
liens.
He really, OK, this is his argument for why topos should
be the key idea and that the provisional form of site
which you need for proofs.
He keeps saying you need it for proofs.
But it's auxiliaux.
Now we're at hour 13.
Yes.
OK, not where he expected it at the first time.
He originally expected it at an hour 10.
Then he thought he would at an hour 13.
He now estimates one or two more meetings of an hour and a
half on topo insights, and maybe a smaller, more
technical group on relations between algebraic
structures and topoi.
As to topoi, I think more and more by the way that in the
language of topoi, one should really distinguish between
the category and the geometrical objects, which
one has in mind.
I mean, he keeps coming back to this.
One has to make this abusive language, because otherwise
one will always be a little torn.
Never mind.
Yeah.
But I also want to stress about Groton Dieck, because I
think this is systematically important.
He's not recommending abuse of language.
He's not saying, oh, let's just abuse language
whenever it suits us.
He's saying this abuse is really important, and until
someone can make it mathematics, we should make the abuse.
He says, you have to, because otherwise I think the
geometric intuition gets lost.
For instance, the sum of topoi in the geometric sense
corresponds to the product of categories.
He likes this example.
You know what is.
You've got a topological space here and some other topological
space over there.
You know what is topological space over there.
What is their union?
It's the two of them.
I can't draw them differently, because the drawing of the
union just looks like the drawing of the two of them.
And you know what is a sheaf on them.
It's a sheaf on this one, together with a sheaf on
that one.
That is, the category of all sheaves is the product of
these two categories.
You take one from here, one from there to get a
sheaf on this union.
This union, to get the category of sheaves, take the
product of their sheaf categories.
This works in general topos theory.
In any topos, it makes sense to talk about the sum of two
topoi geometrically, because you take the product of the
sheaf categories.
Of course, for a standard topos theorist, the sheaf
category is the topos.
But now for me, the topos is a geometric object underneath.
The arrows are just in the opposite direction.
Yeah, that's important.
I won't go into that here.
Well, it is unpleasant in some situations to identify a
topological space with the category of sheaves on it.
The space can be pretty small, and the category of sheaves
is a pretty huge thing.
Every topos has the category of sheaves on it.
This is the geometric intuition that he doesn't.
He can't really spell out yet.
He's still missing the verbal trick.
And then we come to universal algebra.
And I'll take seven minutes to go into this.
We won't really be able to do it.
About 10 or 15 years ago, so again, this isn't 73.
He's looking back to 58, or shortly after 58.
I thought some about universal algebra in regard to a pretty
grim seminar of chevalets.
Back to that one that was a mess.
Chevalet does not like categories up to equivalents.
So he did everything up to isomorphism.
It became a dreadful mess.
You know that in some current versions of category theory,
people take it pretty seriously that you should do
everything up to equivalents.
You should not talk about isomorphism of categories.
And Grotendijk is saying, yes, in this context,
there's a lot to that.
Is it one reason to use topos?
He says there seems to be a one-to-one correspondence
between algebraic structures up to a certain
notion of equivalents.
And topoi up to a certain notion of equivalents.
There's a remarkable geometric intuition of topoi, and
that's the interest of them.
I will say the geometric intuition here, he means
cohomology.
But I think it's important to understand that when Grotendijk
means cohomology, he doesn't mean, as opposed to intuitive
geometry, for Grotendijk, cohomology expresses
intuitive geometry.
This is not a choice to be made.
This is just a way of doing it.
So certain notion of equivalents.
This has a name today, Morita equivalents.
And this is very much the topic of Olivia Carmelo's work.
What I have not done is listen carefully enough to this to
relate it to modern ideas.
He does give a two-categorical theory of universal
algebra.
Numerous examples, lots of examples.
Lots of insights, and lots of errors.
Over and over again, a session starts out with, well, some
of the things I proved last time I think are not right.
This is going to be some work to really dig into this and
find out what's, even just to find out what's Grotendijk's
final version within the lectures, let alone what is
the current state.
And he does start out by saying to people, I am not up to
date on this.
I am not paying attention anymore.
So you're going to have to tell me, well, of course, the
people in Buffalo aren't much more up to date on it either
in 1973.
But a lot of it has been done since.
There are numerous references to the blackboard.
You're listening to the tapes, and you're here, click,
click, click, click, click.
And then you'll hear, now here, click.
If you look at this, click.
Very frustrating.
I don't doubt that a lot of it could be reconstructed if you
listen very minutely.
But it's painful.
It's painful right now to listen to.
He talks about accessible categories,
disregarding cardinality conditions.
Nobody today works on accessible categories without
talking about the cardinality conditions.
Grotendijk does disregard them.
I expect his disregard is in favor of the
loosest of them.
I expected it.
It makes sense to a modern expert, but it's only a
special case to a modern expert, but I'm not sure.
Because it's so hard to tell what he's saying anyway.
Because he keeps saying, as we wrote here, click.
You don't know what he wrote there.
He talks about a pseudo-topos, which is a pretopos,
which is a gerotopos, except for the generating set.
That's pretty much a current definition, except I'm not
sure precisely how he intends it.
He talks about hyper-topos, a strict topos, a topos with all
the exactness properties of sets.
What he means by that is that arbitrary products preserve
epimorphisms.
There is no currently standard meaning to all
exactness properties of sets.
He has one exactness property in mind that an arbitrary
product of epimorphisms would be an epimorphism.
So I think this is basically an ill-defined concept.
But he does give preshift topoi as an example, OK, in a
category of preshifts, yes, limits and co-limits are both
point-wise, and an arbitrary product of epimorphisms will
be an epimorphism.
So he's got clear examples.
I don't think he has a clear definition.
He may just mean a topos where the constant she-functor
preserves all products.
That would be one way to clean up what he says.
You'd have to really work through what he's saying to
decide if that's an adequate way to clean it up.
Oh, I know what I need to get to, though, because you will
not want to miss this.
He tells us, towards the end, there's a little trouble with
universes, and don't think it's about universes.
There's a little trouble with universes, because one has to
add such a strong axiom to set theory.
Once one adds this universe axiom, one is in a way happy,
because one has a lot of leeway to do category theory.
For example, Delinia has just proved a beautiful theorem on
vase conjectures.
And I guess he's used large cardinals.
Groton Dekas and Buffalo.
He's been in North America for most of a year now.
I don't remember exactly when he arrived.
You have to use all these topoi, all this general nonsense.
And you have to use universes.
Jack Duskin, who'd made these tapes.
Oh, I was to mention Lavir's role in rescuing these tapes,
too.
These tapes could have been lost, I think, is fair to say.
And Bill Lavir made sure they weren't lost.
Duskin took them, but he didn't listen to them afterwards,
which is natural.
I mean, of course, he didn't listen to them right after he
made them and later on these other things.
Duskin says, but isn't there a relative consistency proof for
universes?
It's not really a new assumption, because it's
relatively consistent.
And Groton Dekas says, no, no.
10 years ago or so, when I came up with universes, I asked a
few logicians, and they seemed convinced that there's no hope
of proving relative consistency.
Now, this sets an interesting limit on Groton Dekas'
knowledge of logic.
A point that I keep making to logicians, Groton Dek cared.
Groton Dek went and asked logicians about this.
Groton Dek cared to develop the whole idea of universe.
But Groton Dek does not understand that there's an
easy proof that there can't be a relative consistency
theorem, as long as you think a good old second in
completeness theorem is easy.
I mean, it's an easy corollary of good old second in
completeness theorem that there can't be a relative
consistency proof here.
So Groton Dek goes to the experts and appreciates their
answer, but he doesn't himself know the reasoning behind
that answer, or at least he doesn't recall it here.
Often in these tapes, it's not clear what he really doesn't
know and what he's just not recalling in a moment.
So therefore, Groton Dek says, therefore the question arises
and he and Duskin both laugh.
Do phase conjectures depend on this axiom?
Everybody would be convinced, of course, they don't.
But Samuel thought about introducing galaxies smaller
than universes.
One has to be careful with injectives and such homological
algebra to see if you can construct them in this new
context.
His description of Samuel's idea is badly butchered.
The idea he describes makes no sense, because Groton Dek
is not specializing in the set theory, but he cares that
somebody should get it right.
He does say, it would be nice to have a context where one
doesn't add any real axioms to set theory, and yet one can
work with categories without too much
afterthought and trembling, take each functor category as
another category, et cetera.
Of course, we have a context where you can do a tau
cohomology without adding any real axioms to set theory by
not really using most of the topos theory.
You didn't need it, so you don't use it.
But he's saying, no, I want a context where you don't need
new added axioms, but you can do all the topos theory just
the way you would naturally think of it.
And Delinia, the second thing Delinia said to me when he met
me was, I think topos is one of Groton Dek's great ideas.
Well, he knew that I was coming from topos theory, and
Delinia's a very nice guy, and he wanted me to feel like he
wasn't, and I don't feel like he's against topos.
But Groton Dek is.
When did you say Delinia?
When?
You said, Delinia said what?
Delinia, when I first met him, he was at the IAS in
Princeton, and he comes out, and he says hello.
And basically, the first thing he says after hello is, you
know, I think Groton Dek's idea of topos is one of his great
ideas, which he substantially says in, what is it?
Quelques idées maîtresses, dans l'œuvre d'Alexandre Groton
Dek?
No, oh, but that's what he says to me.
You don't need them.
You can get rid of them in favor of small sites, but
there are a good way to think.
Yeah.
So, and that's what Groton Dek is.
Groton Dek, of course, by the time SGA4 came out, he knew
you didn't need universes for the core theorems.
But you did need universes to state the theorems the way he
states them.
And he's saying it would be really nice if we had, and,
OK, an advertisement for my work, I can now provide this
context.
I can provide a context radically weaker than even
Zermelo set theory, in which you can do all of SGA4 with
no afterthought and trembling in all the functor
categories or categories.
It's not really very hard.
In hindsight, basically what it comes to is, SGA4 does not
use the axiom scheme of replacement.
And because it doesn't use replacement, you don't really
need that much strength.
But of course, at the time they were writing it, they
didn't know what they would need because they didn't know
what theorems they'd be proving.
Now that you know what theorems they proved, you can
provide this context.
But he does, and he says, I think there's mathematics
behind all of this.
Because you have to be careful.
It's not good enough to say, I'm pretty sure you don't need
set theory.
You have to check that you don't need that set theory.
And if you want to take each functor category as another
category, that checking is not super hard, but it's not
trivial.
And it wasn't done yet at this time.
Somebody who I don't recognize says it feels like some
infinite cardinals and models in ZF don't really exist.
These infinite cardinals, they're talking in fact about
the whitehead conjecture.
No one in the room understands clearly that they're talking
about the whitehead conjecture, and so I won't
explain what it is.
But you can tell that's what they're talking about.
It feels like some of these infinite cardinals don't really
exist, and he says, no, they don't.
They exist in the same way as chess playing.
They construct the same thing.
They construct powers.
You look around in nature, you won't discover
any of these things.
And then he starts musing.
That's kind of nice that these conjectures are true.
I just got a letter from Ilyzee saying, Delinia was
explaining the proof in Cambridge at a seminar in honor
of Hodge, one of the most beautiful theorems ever proved.
I'm thinking it's quite clear he will have used a
talcohomology.
He doesn't yet know how the proof has gone.
I'm thinking it's quite clear he will have used a talcohomology,
and a talcohomology after all means we've added all the
theorems of Topoi.
Now Delinia already knows you don't really need all those
theorems of Topoi, but Groendiek is saying, well,
that's how it's done is by these theorems of Topoi.
And Delinia, I mean, when you read SGA four and a half,
Delinia thinks about the Topos.
He just knows you don't formally need it.
One has the feeling that there's some hard core you see.
A talcohomology is computed, and there are very precise
things about it.
That's the hard core.
All these categories, universes, et cetera, are just
some kind of fussing around to make the parcel you see more
appetizing.
Really not sure of that word fussing.
These are old tapes, and some of them are.
I guess you can do mathematics without
axiomatizing almost at all.
Every time you want a certain theorem, you just do your
proof of it over again.
You don't need the theorem.
Just give the proof every time you wanted the result.
And so you won't need axioms.
So one doesn't really feel that universes are essential.
Even the geometry of vase conjectures can be formulated
without reference to any specific homology theory.
Well, of course, vase formulation was without
reference to any specific homology theory.
The core, the positivity of certain traces can be
expressed in terms of intersection multiplicities.
I quote this for the interest of anybody who cares to
pursue it.
I do not know the proof well enough to know what he means
by saying the positivity of certain traces is the core.
So somebody could work on that if they wanted to.
There is a lot more about this in the tapes.
Hard to transcribe because he's hesitating.
He's restarting.
People are speaking over him because they're pretty
excited by this point.
The problem with this approach is once you know the
theorem is true, you know you could check everything this
way.
But until you know the theorem is true, you don't know
that that check will always work.
You have to be able to prove the check will always work for
it to count as a proof and can be done, but you have to do it.
I'm not sure one can completely write the conjectures
down as a mere statement about algebraic cycles except by
making it even stronger than it is.
There's a stronger version that's just about algebraic
cycles, but he says I'm not sure you can do it except by
making it stronger than it is.
Illuzzi tells me the most essential use was made of
SGA 7.
I would be kind of curious to know what the ideas are,
because I had no impression it was close at hand at all.
This is July 13, 1973.
He's just he's gotten this letter, but he's saying I had
no impression it was close and I suspecting that's because of
the standard conjectures.
A proof by the standard conjectures was not close at
hand at all, then or now.
But that's my conjecture.
This is what he says.
There's much more discussion, including talk about
motives that I did not try to transcribe.
They joke around a while, then they go to dinner.
Two days before, in the algebraic group lectures, an
audience member had asked him, what kind of subjects are
you working on now?
Grotendijk is startled.
What?
What kind of subject?
No subject.
I've been thinking a little during these last weeks about
topoi and universal algebra, because this was connected to
the things in the talks, but I'm not going to go on.
And I won't go into these other topics unless they come up.
Hey.
Oh, yeah.
This is from Rekhoutse Semi.
L'ensemble des deux seminars consécutifs, SGR-4, SGR-5,
qui pour moi sont comme un seul seminaire, développe
à partir de néant, à la fois le puissant instrument de
synthèse et des découvertes qui représentent le langage
des topos, et l'util parfaitement au point d'une
efficacité parfaite qu'est la chronologie étale.
Cette ensemble représente la contribution la plus
profonde et la plus novatrice que j'ai apporté en
mathématique au niveau d'un travail entièrement ménéatère.
This is why you should learn the language of topos.
He compares it at one point to building houses.
I build houses ready to live in.
What I say to mathematicians, a lot of mathematicians will
say it's all foundations.
I don't care about foundations.
But I think Grotendieck is onto something here.
Does anybody worry about the foundations of this building?
Not me or you, but of course people worry about the
foundations of the building.
The building wouldn't work if somebody hadn't worried about
the foundations.
And that's Grotendieck's attitude.
Here, you don't need, he wants you to not need the SGA to
use these ideas.
He wants the SGA to be so perfect that you can just use
their results without knowing them.
But he wants the SGA to have proved it from the ground up.
So, is that the time you wanted?
OK.
OK.
Thank you.
Thank you.
