Welcome back. Come with me, please, to the Aegean coast of Turkey, to one of ancient
Ionia's great architectural wonders, the Temple of Apollo at Dittema. Today, it's
a monumental ruin, but in the 4th century BC, this was the fourth largest religious sanctuary
in the Greek world, built to rival the nearby Temple of Artemis at Ephesus.
Perhaps its builders were too ambitious because they were never able to finish the job. Still,
the builder's failure is our good fortune, because these unfinished masonry walls bear
unmistakable evidence of the machines that raised each stone block into position. These stone
lugs, which would have been chiseled away had the building been finished, are the lifting points
for the ingenious wood and iron construction cranes that were used to build many of the
ancient world's greatest structures. Today, we'll look at these fascinating human-powered machines.
We'll see how they worked by significantly amplifying the force exerted by human muscles,
and in a broader sense, we'll see how they exemplify the ingenuity of the ancient engineer.
But why were such machines needed when Greek and Roman builders could use vast
numbers of slaves to do the heavy lifting on a construction site? This is an important question,
particularly in view of the common claim that classical era technological development was
inhibited by the ready availability of slave labor. According to this theory, classical
civilizations had no incentive to develop labor-saving machines because they had access
to virtually unlimited supplies of free manual labor. While there is certainly some truth in
this claim, it can easily be overstated, because there are many types of work that simply can't
be performed by unassisted human power, no matter how much of it might be available.
Just for fun, let's do some simple calculations to prove this point.
This is a marble column drum from the tomb of Mausolus, one of the seven wonders of the ancient
world, located in Halikarnassus, modern Bodrum, Turkey. That's one of my students trying unsuccessfully
to move it. Evidently, he needs some help. So, how many able-bodied slaves do you think it would
take to lift this drum and set it into position on a building foundation? Well, to answer that
question, we'll need to estimate the drum's weight, which can be calculated as density times
volume. The density of marble is roughly 160 pounds per cubic foot, and the volume of a cylindrical
body is pi times the radius square, that's the area of the circular cross-section,
multiplied by the length of the drum. This stone drum is about four feet in diameter
and five feet long, so its weight could be estimated as 160 pounds per cubic foot,
times pi times the radius two feet squared, times five feet, just over 10,000 pounds.
Well, it's hard to grip a large block of stone, so it would be unrealistic to expect each slave to
lift more than about 100 pounds. Thus, our required workforce for lifting this marble drum is 10,000
pounds, divided by 100 pounds per slave, equals 100 slaves. But how could 100 people lift this
drum? They'd have to position themselves around its circumference to get their hands underneath its
rim, and the circumference of the drum is just pi times its diameter, which works out to about 12.6
feet. But as you can see, we could only squeeze 15 men at most around that circumference, and we need
100 to do the lifting. Clearly, for lifting stone blocks, it doesn't matter how many slaves are
available, the job simply can't be done by human power without some form of mechanical augmentation.
Ah, you ask, but couldn't slaves lift the block by pushing or pulling it up a ramp on rollers?
Well, yes, of course. Indeed, as you recall from Lecture 3, this is precisely how those
massive architrave beams on the Temple of Artemis at Ephesus were raised to their final 60-foot height.
But this actually reinforces my point, because the roller and ramp are both simple machines.
The roller is a wheel and axle, and the ramp is an inclined plane. So how do the ramp and rollers
actually work as machines? How do they allow us to lift an object by applying a force that's
significantly less than that object's weight? Well, the weight of an object resting on a sloped
surface can be visualized as the sum of two equivalent component forces. One component parallel to the
surface of the ramp, and the other perpendicular to it. The parallel component, which tends to push
the object down the slope, is the one we need to overcome in order to push the object up the slope.
And, by the way, here's where the rollers come in. Because without them, we'd actually have to
apply a much larger pushing force to move the object uphill to overcome that downhill component,
because we'd also have to overcome a huge friction force in addition to the object's weight.
Now, basic trigonometry tells us that the force required to push the object uphill
is equal to the sine of the ramp's angle of inclination times the weight of the object.
If the angle of the ramp is 30 degrees, as you can see in this drawing, then the force required
to push the object is the sine of 30 degrees, which my calculator says is 0.5, meaning that
the pushing force is 50% of the object's weight. If we reduce that angle to 20 degrees,
the pushing force now works out to be 34% of the object's weight. And at 10 degrees, it's only 17%.
Clearly, the ramp does what it's supposed to do. That is, it allows us to push an object up the
slope using less force than the object's weight. But as this diagram shows, these reductions in
pushing force come at a significant cost. The shallower the ramp, the longer it must be in
order to reach the same height as a steeper ramp. Thus, at the most fundamental level,
an inclined plane works by trading force for distance. The lower the pushing force,
the longer the distance through which that force must be applied. We'll see exactly the same
trade-off in all of the machines we examine today. The immediate implication of this inherent
force distance trade-off is that a ramp becomes progressively more impractical as the required
height of lift increases. For example, if the stone columns adorning the upper level of the
coliseum had been raised to their required 160-foot height with a 10-degree ramp, that ramp would
have been nearly 1,000 feet long. That's significantly longer than the coliseum itself.
Even if such a ramp could have been built, it's unlikely that there would have been room for it
there in the heart of Rome. The construction crane provided a more practical and economical means
of lifting heavy objects. Unfortunately, no such machines have survived from antiquity,
but we have ample evidence of their existence from as early as the 6th century BC. In sculpted
reliefs, in unfinished stone blocks, as we saw at Didema in the start of this lecture,
and most importantly in Book 10 of De Architectura, where Vitruvius provides excellent descriptions
of several standard crane configurations. The first of these so-called Vitruvian machines
is this shear-leg crane, which is represented by my model here, which is built on a scale of
about 1 in 10. It's a 1-tenth size representation of the actual device. This sort of crane was
composed of two wooden posts, which are shaped into an inverted V and connected together with an
iron bracket at the top. The device is then supported with two backstays, ropes, which run
down the backside and are anchored at the rear of the machine. The lifting rope, which is located
here, is pulled by a windlass. That's this device running across the base of the machine.
And the windlass actually combines two simple machines. Its shaft is a wheel and axle,
and then these hand spikes, which are used to turn it, are levers. The windlass was operated
by two men operating in sequence. So the first man would pull down his hand spike about one
quarter turn, then the second would insert his and also pull down a quarter turn while the first
repositioned his hand spike in the opposing socket. And then the two men working together
repeated that alternating operation in order to keep the crane operating continuously
and getting a continuous pull. And by the way, this is a good opportunity to discuss the concept
of torque, which we'll be using often in our study of ancient rotating machinery. With each
pull of one of these hand spikes, the crane operators apply a torque to the shaft. Torque
is defined as the tendency of a force to cause rotation. To calculate torque, we multiply the
force by its distance from the center of rotation. Thus to increase torque and therefore to increase
the shaft's tendency to rotate, we can either increase the force or increase the distance.
Remember this concept. We'll be using it often over the next three lectures.
For now, back to the windlass, which was used in this crane because it provides something called
mechanical advantage. Mechanical advantage is defined as the amplification of applied force
by a mechanical device. Mechanical advantage is generally expressed as a ratio of output force
to input force. And for a windlass, it can be calculated as the ratio of the hand spike length
to the shaft radius. Now the shaft on my model here has a diameter of a half an inch and therefore
a one quarter inch radius. And the hand spike length is about five inches. So the mechanical
advantage can be calculated as five inches divided by 0.25 inches or 20 to one. In other words,
for every one pound I apply to the hand spike, 20 pounds of force are delivered to the lifting rope.
And by the way, if we scaled up my model to full size, this mechanical advantage wouldn't change
as long as we scaled up all of the individual components in the same proportion.
Now note that the windlass achieves mechanical advantage by trading force for distance,
just as the inclined plane does. When I move the hand spike through one full rotation like this,
I'm actually applying force through a circumferential distance of about 30 inches around the circumference
of that circle. But the lifting rope moves only about one and a half inches during that same motion.
Theoretically, my hand and the lifting rope are doing exactly the same amount of work,
which you'll recall is force times distance. But my hand applies a small force through a
large distance, and the lifting rope applies a large force through a small distance.
Now one important caveat, the work done by my hand is theoretically equal to the work done by the
rope. But in a real world machine like this one, some of my work input is actually lost to friction
in the axle bearing. And as a result, the work output is reduced somewhat. Thus, as a machine
designer, I need to minimize friction in order to maximize work output. And that's why the Romans
use those precisely fabricated iron wheel bearings on their wagons as we saw last lecture.
Now if we look out here on the other end of the lifting rope, we find another one of the six
simple machines. You tell me, what is it? Right, it's a wedge. And specifically, recall from lecture
three that this is a particular type of wedge called a Lewis bolt. Recall how the Lewis bolt works.
We use it as a very highly effective way of lifting stone blocks using the power of the wedge.
To do that, I'm going to take the two outer wedge shaped components of the Lewis bolt,
I'll insert them into the wedge shaped slot that's carved into the top of the block.
Now I'll insert that center bar, which forces the two wedge shaped pieces apart. And then finally,
I add my lifting shackle with pin to complete the assembly. At this point, I'm going to pull down
the crane, engage the hook. And at this point, we can lift our block
with considerable ease from a single lifting point. And as you recall, the Lewis bolt is
particularly advantageous because it allows the stone to be very easily maneuvered into position
because of that single point of support. In between, the windlass and the Lewis bolt is
yet another simple machine, a pulley. More precisely, this is actually a set of pulleys,
one above and one below, that we typically refer to as a block and tackle system,
where each individual pulley is then referred to as a block. Now recall that back in lecture three,
I used this crane to demonstrate how stone blocks were configured for lifting. But back then,
the crane was fitted with just a single pulley up here on top. And that's often referred to
as a single block because it has just one single rotating wheel or sheave located within the body
of the block to carry rope. Used in that configuration, the pulley serves the important
function of changing the direction of the tension force in the lifting rope, but it doesn't change
the magnitude of that force at all. Thus, a single block, as we saw in that previous crane
configuration, provides no mechanical advantage. But this block and tackle system does provide
mechanical advantage through the use of two pulleys rather than one. In this configuration,
the upper pulley is a double block. That means it has two individual sheaves mounted side by side
within the body of the pulley block. The lower pulley is a single block. That is, it has a single
sheave within its body. The lifting rope is rigged in the following way. First, it's tied to the
lower block and permanently fixed at that location. Then it runs up and over the top of one sheave
in the double block, then back down through the single sheave of the lower block, then back up
through the second sheave of the upper block, and then finally back to the windlass where it's
pulled in order to lift the block. Now, by combining multiple pulleys in this way,
this block and tackle system actually achieves a mechanical advantage of three to one.
Easiest way to see how this works is to just focus right now on the lower pulley block.
Notice that this block has the weight of the stone pulling downward, and the tension in
one, two, three legs of the same lifting rope holding it up. And remember that the tension
in this entire lifting rope is the same throughout the system. Why? Well, recall that when a rope
passes through a pulley, its direction changes, but its magnitude does not. The tension force
remains the same even as the rope bends around the sheave. So the tension is the same in all three
legs of that rope. Note that the block is not moving, so that means that all of the forces
acting on it must be in balance. Therefore, the downward load caused by the weight of the block
is being counterbalanced by the upward tension in all three legs of the lifting rope.
Mathematically, the weight W equals three times the tension T, and thus we can conclude that in
this system, a one-pound pull on the rope will lift three pounds out here at the end of the lower
block, and therefore the mechanical advantage is three to one. But note that once again,
mechanical advantage is achieved by trading force for distance. To lift the load one inch,
I need to pull three inches of rope through the pulley system.
That.
Now this crane is a wonderful example of a compound machine, a system composed of multiple
simple machines. The mechanical advantage of compound machine is equal to the product of
the individual mechanical advantages of its components. Thus for this crane,
the total mechanical advantage is 20 to one for the windlass times three to one for the
block and tackle equals 60 to one. Now again, this is a theoretical result that doesn't account for
friction in the bearings and the pulleys. Yet even with these inefficiencies taken into account,
this machine would allow a single operator pulling with 100 pounds to lift over two tons.
Another crane described by Vitruvius achieves even greater mechanical advantage by adding a second
shaft. Here the windlass on the first shaft pulls a rope that's wrapped around a drum on the second
shaft. As this drum rotates, it pulls a pair of lifting ropes through the block and tackle system.
This second shaft further increases the mechanical advantage of the system by the ratio of the
drum radius to the shaft radius. Assuming that ratio is three to one as shown here,
and if all other dimensions of the crane are unchanged, then the total mechanical advantage
of the system is 60 times three equals 180 to one. With performance like that, who needs slaves?
The cranes described by Vitruvius were originally developed by the Greeks and subsequently adopted
by Roman builders. But in the generations after Vitruvius, the monumental construction of the
imperial era demanded ever greater lifting capabilities. The Roman construction crane that
emerged during this period was essentially identical to the Greek shear leg crane, except it was much
larger and more powerful. Its mechanism for harnessing human power was the tread wheel,
a large wooden spoked wheel attached to the crane's drive shaft. It was turned by one or more men
walking inside the wheel, sort of a giant hamster wheel on steroids. The Roman tread wheel provided
far more torque than the Greek windlass because its radius was significantly larger and its
operators were able to apply their full body weight to the wheel. Remember, we increased torque by
increasing either the distance or the force. In this case, we increased both. We're quite confident
about this configuration of the machine, thanks to an extraordinary stone relief from the tomb of
the Hatterii, originally erected outside of Rome and now preserved in the Lateran Museum.
Carved around 100 AD, this panel depicts a Roman construction crane in operation,
and the level of detail on this carving is spectacular. We can discern individual fasteners
on the tread wheel, sheaves within the pulley blocks, and even the twisted strands of individual
ropes. Note that the backstays incorporate pulleys to adjust the crane's angle of inclination.
The large lifting block has three sheaves, which typically would be paired with a two-sheave block
below to produce a five-to-one mechanical advantage for the lifting apparatus alone,
and the mechanical advantage of the system would have been greatly increased by the huge
tread wheel, which was large enough to accommodate five crewmen, as you can see in the carving.
Based on all these characteristics, scholars have estimated that this crane could lift about
eight tons to a height of perhaps 40 feet. This estimate is nicely validated by a large
marble cornice block found in the ruins of Trajan's Forum in Rome. The block weighs eight
tons and has a single carved slot for a Lewis bolt at the center of its top surface. Given
that this slot must have been the sole lifting point, it's reasonable to conclude that the
block was lifted by a crane with a capacity of at least eight tons, and that the Lewis bolt itself
must also have a capacity of at least eight tons. Now this full-scale replica of a Roman crane at
a museum in Allen, Germany, shows an interesting alternative configuration with a tread wheel
physically detached from the shear legs. This modular configuration would have been particularly
advantageous for structures like the calcium, where cranes had to be placed on upper levels
of the building during various stages of construction. Positioning and maneuvering these
machines would have been greatly simplified with the cumbersome tread wheels remaining all the way
down at ground level. Well thus far we focus strictly on construction cranes, but it's important
to recognize that similar devices were built for many other purposes in the ancient world.
Petruvius briefly mentions the use of specialized rotating cranes to offload ships and ports,
and other machines to haul ships out of the water for maintenance. This raft-mounted pile
driver was used by Julius Caesar's engineers to build the Great Timber Bridge over the Rhine River,
as we saw in lecture 11. This machine operated by repeatedly raising a heavy stone block
to the top of this timber frame, and then dropping the block onto a top of a pile,
which was an iron-tipped wooden post. And the pile was then driven into the riverbed by these
repeated impacts. Well given its function of raising a stone block, the pile driver would almost
certainly have used the same basic lifting apparatus as a standard construction crane.
As capable as these machines were, there must have been also quite a few uniquely demanding
construction challenges for which standard cranes were entirely inadequate. In such cases,
unique high-capacity lifting devices would have been specially designed to meet the
unique demands of this specific project. Consider Trajan's column in Rome.
Dedicated in 113 AD, this monument is famous for its intricately carved spiral frieze,
illustrating the Emperor Trajan's victorious campaign against the Dacians from 101 to 106 AD.
But this great marble shaft should be equally famous as one of the most extraordinary
construction achievements in antiquity. Trajan's column was one element of an extensive
urban development project that also included Trajan's Forum,
the Basilica Opia, a pair of libraries, and Trajan's Market here, which you'll certainly
recognize from Lecture 8. This entire complex was probably the work of Trajan's talented
engineer, Apollodorus of Damascus. The column was situated in this extremely confined space
between the Basilica Opia to the south and the two libraries to the east and west.
This temple that you see in this photo hadn't yet been built at the time the column was erected,
and indeed this area was almost certainly used as the contractor's storage and workspace
during the construction project. Trajan's column is 126 feet tall, measured from ground level to
the base of the bronze statue of Trajan that once stood at its apex. Above its 20-foot square
pedestal, the shaft is composed of 20 solid marble drums, each incorporating
one-half turn of a grand spiral staircase carved out of its core. The heaviest of these
drums, the base, weighs 60 tons. The uppermost drum, which includes the column's capital
and observation platform, is only slightly lighter, 59 tons, and it had to be lifted over
110 feet to its final resting place. The standard Roman construction crane, robust as it was,
with its 8-ton capacity and 40-foot height, was entirely inadequate for this unique project.
Now nobody knows how Trajan's column was actually built, but Lynn Lancaster, a classic
scholar at Ohio University, has provided us with a well-researched and well-reasoned
reconstruction of this project. This computer model is my interpretation of Lynn Lancaster's
proposed construction scheme. At its heart is a massive wooden tower, which surrounds the column
pedestal and provides structural support for lifting those massive marble drums.
It certainly makes sense that Apollodorus of Damascus would have used a temporary wooden tower
to build Trajan's column. He was, after all, an accomplished military engineer who would have
been familiar with wooden siege towers of comparable size. Indeed, he even wrote a treatise on siege
craft that included technical descriptions of just such towers. Lancaster's proposed construction
tower consists of two parallel shafts, one for lifting column drums and one for lowering them
back into position on top of the column. The tower's north side must be open because this is the only
possible direction from which the column drums can be moved into the lifting shaft on this tightly
confined site. The drums are moved on rollers like this. Now given the 60-ton weight of the
heaviest drum and the 8-ton lifting capacity of loose bolt, eight sets of lifting ropes are
required to raise the drums. Eight ropes times 8 tons per rope equals 64 tons total lifting
capacity for a 60-ton load with a little bit of extra margin of safety. But were the Romans really
capable of fabricating ropes strong enough to do these sorts of lifts? Yes, indeed. Archaeological
remains of 2.5-inch diameter ropes that could have safely carried 8 tons have been found in
ancient Egyptian quarries. Second-century Romans could surely have been capable of replicating
this technology. Furthermore, if the lifting ropes incorporated block and tackle systems,
as you saw in my crane, then the rope tension would actually be significantly reduced below
8 tons. In our model, these block and tackle systems are suspended from heavy timber trusses,
spanning 22 feet across the top of the tower. Trusses are essential here because wooden beams
of this length couldn't possibly have carried such heavy loads. The lifting ropes are routed
from the upper blocks down to pulleys at the base of the tower and then out to a battery of eight
cap stands as shown here. Now a cap stand is basically a horizontally oriented windlass
anchored to the ground. But unlike a windlass or a treadwheel, a cap stand can be turned by
either men or animals, and many more pushers can be brought to bear simultaneously,
resulting in significantly greater torque. Also, the cap stand allows the application
of torque to be more precisely controlled, a vital feature for our reconstruction of
Trajan's column, because all eight lifting ropes must carry more or less equal shares
of each drum's weight. If one rope carries significantly more than its fair share,
it will probably snap or its loose bolt will fail, and then a chain reaction failure of the other
lifting ropes would almost certainly ensue. Once a column drum is hoisted to its required height,
it must be moved horizontally from the lifting shaft over to the lowering shaft,
another daunting challenge. In Lancaster's reconstruction, this movement is accomplished
by a temporary floor that's moved out of the way as the drum is lifted up above it,
then it's lowered into position to support the horizontal movement of the drum on rollers,
and then it's moved out of the way again as the drum is lowered into its final position on the column.
The drum is locked into position with iron dowels in the traditional Greek manner.
Well, now we have successfully placed one marvel drum on the pedestal. To complete this column,
we only need to repeat this sequence of events 19 more times.
So, is it really possible that such a complex and technically demanding scheme was used to
build Trajan's column? Well, we'll never know with certainty, of course. But as an engineer,
I can confidently make two observations about Lynn Lancaster's proposed reconstruction.
First, it could have been built this way. There's absolutely nothing in her reconstruction that's
technically infeasible. Second, I can think of only two or three other possible schemes that
might have worked, and each of these is even more complex and would have required even greater
technological sophistication to implement than Lancaster's proposal. For example, instead of a
double shafted tower with Lancaster's proposed movable floor system, the Romans might have used
a single shafted tower that itself could be rolled forward and back on wheels or rollers,
much like the siege towers we'll be examining in a later lecture. But in my view, designing
building and operating such a tower would have been somewhat more complex than Lynn Lancaster's
proposed system. So, you decide. What we do know with certainty is that Trajan's column was built
successfully after all it's there in the heart of Rome for us to admire today. However it was done,
that achievement required the design and construction of a mechanical system capable
of repeatedly lifting 60 ton loads, then moving them horizontally, then lowering them and positioning
them with great precision high above the ground on a tightly confined site using ropes and fixtures
of limited capacity propelled solely by human or animal power. However it was done, the building
of Trajan's column was a tour de force of technological skill. Thank you.
