Welcome back.
You know, in the modern world, we use power in a seemingly infinite variety of ways to
enrich our lives for transportation, illumination, entertainment, food preparation, industrial
processes, and education.
Immersed in this power-intensive lifestyle, we may find it difficult to comprehend that
the ancient world had only four very limited sources of power – human, animal, wind,
and water.
And the one with the greatest potential to do useful work, water power, was used almost
exclusively for just one activity – milling grain.
So, what was so special about milling grain?
Well, in the classical world, cereal grains, primarily wheat and barley, provided 70-75%
of the calories in an average person's diet.
But before grain can be consumed, it must be processed into flour by cracking open its
outer husk, or chaff, and then grinding the inner portion into a fine powder.
Through much of human history, grinding grain was an arduous, tedious, and time-consuming
aspect of everyday life.
From Neolithic times until the classical era, the standard technology for milling grain
was the saddle quern – a simple device consisting of two shaped stones as shown here.
And this Egyptian sculpture shows how it was used.
The miller placed a handful of grain onto the stationary lower stone, and then pushed
that upper stone back and forth repeatedly to crush the grain.
Finally, the ground material was passed through a sieve to separate the flour from the chaff.
By this arduous process, it took about three hours to produce enough flour to feed one
household for one day.
Flour was a human activity that was ripe for technological improvement.
During the classical era, two new devices emerged.
First, the hopper mill was really just a minor product improvement over the saddle quern.
It still used two stones, but now the upper stone was moved across the lower stone with
a lever as shown here.
And the top of the stone had a cavity, or hopper, that was used to feed grain into the
space between the two stones.
The lever provided mechanical advantage – and that made the device easier to operate.
And the hopper increased productivity because the miller could now add grain continuously
without having to lift the upper stone.
Still, the hopper mill certainly didn't eliminate the drudgery of milling.
The second classical era improvement was the rotary quern – consisting of a dome-shaped
lower stone, a concave upper stone with the hopper carved into its center, and a water
iron pivot called the spindle on which the upper stone rotated.
To operate this device, the miller rotated the upper stone with a wooden handle while
feeding grain into the hopper.
Because it was portable and easier to operate than the hopper mill, the rotary quern quickly
became the hand-operated mill of choice throughout the Mediterranean region.
But more importantly, it served as the basis for the world's first green mill to use
a power source other than human muscles.
Sometime around the 3rd century BC, animal-powered versions of the rotary quern began appearing
in Italy.
This development appears to have coincided with the emergence of commercial bakeries
in towns, in many towns, and the consequent need for large-scale production of flour.
In this fully-developed form, the machine has come to be called the Pompeian Mill, because
many were discovered in the ruins of Pompeii.
It's also called a donkey mill because of its usual power source.
The Pompeian Mill consists of two main components, both typically carved from solid basalt.
The cone-shaped lower part, called the meta, is fixed to a solid foundation.
In its apex, it holds a spindle, on which the upper part, the catillus, rotates.
The catillus is shaped like a hollow hourglass, with two external sockets that serve as attachment
points for a wooden frame.
This frame incorporates two capstan arms and a heavy crossbeam above that receives the upper
end of the spindle and serves as a pivot.
The lower half of the catillus fits very closely over the meta, and its upper half serves as
the hopper for raw grain.
The two halves are actually identical, so that after the lower milling surface has been
worn out, the hourglass can simply be flipped upside down to double its useful life.
To operate the machine, the miller fills the hopper with grain, and then yolks its donkeys
to the capstan arms.
As the animals then walk around the mill, its rotation causes grain to sift down into
the gap between the catillus and the meta, where it's ground between two stone surfaces.
The miller only needs to keep the hopper full, collect the ground grain from the base of
the meta, and sift it to obtain flour.
The Pompeian mill liberated humans from the drudgery of grinding grain by hand.
More importantly, it demonstrated that a new power source could produce dramatic improvements
in both productivity and the consistency of the milled product.
In that sense, it set the stage for the revolutionary development of water-powered mills.
The historical origin of the water mill is quite uncertain.
Through much of the 20th century, many scholars believed that this technology first appeared
around the first century BC, but was never really fully exploited by the Romans, and
didn't start contributing significantly to economic development until the early Middle
Ages.
But this view has always been somewhat problematic, since Philo of Byzantium mentions water wheels
in a technical treatise written in the 3rd century BC.
More recent archaeology suggests that this technology was indeed invented around the
3rd century BC, and by the 1st century AD had been widely adopted across the Roman world.
Today over 60 Roman mill sites have been identified, and there are probably many more out there.
These mills were driven by three different types of water wheels, the undershot wheel,
the overshot wheel, and the vertical shaft wheel, each with its own unique advantages
and disadvantages.
Let's begin with the undershot wheel, the only type for which we have a technical description
from an ancient source.
Of course that source is Vitruvius, who describes this machine, a vertical wheel, with radial
veins attached to its outer rim.
The wheel shaft is horizontal, here it is out here, but like the Pompeian Mill, the
upper millstone on the mill apparatus turns on a vertical spindle.
So the system must include right angle gearing to convert horizontal shaft power into vertical
shaft power.
Now, as you can see, the gearing is included on my model, but we're going to defer the
discussion of it until later in this lecture.
For now we just want to focus on the water wheel.
To operate the wheel, the lower portion of the wheel is immersed in a river or stream,
and we're going to simulate that river or stream with this tank of water.
And so at this time we're going to turn on the stream and put the mill into operation.
What's wrong?
Well, my simulated stream doesn't seem to be delivering enough flow to operate this
water wheel.
This calls for more drastic measures.
We're going to need to increase the flow rate of a river, and to do that, we're going to
have to use a bigger river.
Now, what happened here?
As you saw in the demonstration, moving water exerted force on the lower veins of the wheel.
That force generated torque, which turned the wheel.
The wheel turns its shaft.
The shaft turns the gearing.
The gearing turns the vertical spindle, and the vertical spindle turns the upper millstone,
which grinds the grain in essentially the same way as a Pompeian donkey mill wheel.
The principal advantages of the undershot wheel are its simplicity and its low cost.
The wheel can be installed along the shore of a fast moving river or stream.
It actually doesn't require any sort of special structures to bring water to the wheel or
carry it away.
In contrast with the other types of water wheels we'll be looking at shortly.
But this wheel also has several significant disadvantages.
As we saw, it requires a relatively large volume of fast moving water to move the wheel
at all.
My little stream simply didn't even budge the wheel.
It took a much larger rate of flow in order to get the wheel to operate.
Even when it did, it turns out that its power output is really surprisingly low.
To illustrate that point, we need to talk about power output of an undershot wheel.
As we saw in my demo, moving water exerts a force on the submerged veins of the wheel.
As that force moves a given vein forward, it generates power.
The science of fluid mechanics provides us with mathematical tools to calculate both
the force exerted by the moving water on the vein and the resulting power generation.
In these equations, the Greek letter rho is the mass density of water.
And for our purposes, we'll use approximately 1.94 slugs per cubic foot, and yes, the slug
is the standard unit of mass in the U.S. system of units.
A in these equations is the surface area of the vein, and the two Vs are the velocities
of the stream, and of the wheel vein.
Now let's use these equations to analyze a typical Roman undershot wheel, which would
have veins with a surface area of roughly 1 square foot each.
Imagine that this wheel is initially stationary, and then we lower it into a stream flowing
at a moderately high velocity, say 5 feet per second.
As the wheel is immersed into the stream, for just an instant, the wheel would stand
still, so at that instant, V equals 0, the velocity of the wheel, as you can see from
the calculation, and the associated force on that vein is about 48 pounds.
Now this force, of course, causes the wheel to rotate, but as soon as the vein starts
moving, the force of the water pushing on it will decrease.
As these calculations show, when the immersed vein reaches a velocity of 1 foot per second,
the force on the vein has dropped from 48 pounds down to 31 pounds.
At 2 foot per second wheel velocity, it drops to 17 pounds.
We did a few more of these calculations, and plotted the results on the graph.
Here's what it would look like.
Note that the force drops from 48 pounds when the wheel is stationary, all the way to 0
when the wheel is moving at the same velocity as the water.
Well, why is this happening?
Well, as the equation suggests, the force on the vein is actually caused by the difference
between the velocity of the water and the velocity of the vein.
For example, when the vein is moving forward at 1 foot per second, and the water is flowing
at 5 feet per second, the vein only feels water striking it at 4 feet per second.
It's just like walking with your back to the wind.
The faster you walk, the less wind you feel.
So this relationship between force and velocity is all well and good.
But what would the actual velocity of our hypothetical water wheel be?
Well, the answer depends on how heavily loaded the shaft is, how much torque is required
to turn the millstone, and to overcome the friction in the bearings and gears.
The greater the load, the more slowly the wheel will rotate, independent of the relationship
between the wheel and the water.
And because there must always be some load on the shaft, because there's always some
friction in the system, an actual undershot wheel always moves more slowly than the water
that's driving it.
If you watched my earlier demonstration very carefully, you could see this.
Even when the wheel reached its maximum velocity, water was still flowing around the veins,
moving faster than the wheel itself.
And this is the underlying reason why undershot wheels have such low power output, because
movement of the wheel decreases the force available to produce power.
Thus undershot wheels are inherently inefficient.
So how much power can this wheel produce?
As our power equation shows, when the wheel is stationary, it generates no power at all.
When it's moving at one foot per second, it generates about 31 foot-pounds per second,
which is .056 horsepower.
At 2 feet per second, just a bit more, .063 horsepower.
But as the wheel velocity continues to increase, that adverse effect of decreasing force eventually
reduces the power output back to zero.
Clearly, there's an optimum wheel velocity at which maximum power output occurs.
And since the wheel velocity is determined by the load on the shaft, the mill builder
could achieve this optimum velocity, or something pretty close to it, by carefully choosing
the size and weight of the millstone.
The bottom line, the maximum possible power output for this representative undershot waterwheel
we've been analyzing is a very unimpressive .065 horsepower, only about two-thirds of the
sustained power output of a single human being.
And while this isn't very impressive, we should also remember that a water-powered mill could
run continuously, with shutdowns required only for occasional maintenance and repair.
Once as long as it produced enough torque to turn the millstone, this wheel would probably
have been substantially more productive over time than its human or animal-powered alternatives.
The performance of an undershot wheel can be dramatically improved if it's installed
in a faster stream.
Doubling the stream velocity from 5 feet per second to 10 feet per second improves the
optimum power output eight-fold to about .3 horsepower.
But in much of the Mediterranean region, it would have been difficult to find a stream
that flowed consistently at such high speed, while also providing an adequate quantity
of water to move the wheel, and as we've seen is so essential in our demonstration.
The need to obtain higher power output from a smaller quantity of water was probably the
stimulus for the subsequent development of the overshot wheel.
The overshot water wheel differs from the undershot wheel in two critically important
ways.
First, as the undershot wheel used veins around its outer perimeter, the overshot uses these
bucket-like compartments around the rim.
And second, the undershot was simply placed in a stream along the side of a river, for
example, but the overshot requires special structures in order to operate.
That is, it requires water to be supplied at the top of the wheel through a man-made
channel called the head-race, and it also requires water to be carried away from the
wheel through a separate man-made channel called the tail-race.
Let's go ahead and see how the overshot wheel operates, and at the start we're going to
use this same simulated stream that actually didn't work particularly well for the undershot
wheel.
If we turn on the stream flow now, we'll see that the water flows down the head-race
into the buckets of the overshot wheel.
As it flows into the buckets, the weight of the water filling those buckets causes the
wheel to be off balance.
That weight generates torque, which turns the wheel, which once again drives the shaft,
the right-angle gearing, the spindle, and the upper millstone.
Well, I think you can see very clearly that the overshot wheel is significantly more efficient
than the undershot wheel, primarily because the major inefficiency associated with the
undershot wheel simply doesn't apply here.
In the undershot, the water always moves faster than the veins, and as a result, power output
is significantly compromised.
Here the water is captured in the buckets, and so its full weight contributes to the
wheel's rotation.
Because of this efficiency, a typical Roman overshot wheel could generate at least two
horsepower.
That's 30 times better than an undershot wheel of similar size.
And as we've seen, it could operate with a surprisingly low quantity of water.
Stream only had to supply enough water to continuously fill these buckets, and the wheel
turns without complaint.
The principal disadvantage of this configuration is the need to supply water at the top of
the wheel, and then to remove it at the bottom.
For a typical overshot wheel located along a river or stream with a relatively shallow
gradient, the head race might have to be run very far upstream, or the tail race run very
far downstream in order to reconnect with the river and achieve the necessary change
in elevation through the wheel.
Construction of these channels, along with the need for these watertight buckets, would
have made the overshot wheel far more expensive than an equivalent undershot wheel.
Thus, the undershot wheel was probably the preferred technology in most practical circumstances,
despite its low power output.
At sites where the water supply was adequate, efficiency wouldn't have been all that important,
as long as the wheel generated enough torque to turn a millstone.
The overshot wheel would have been used primarily at locations where the water supply was too
limited to drive an undershot wheel, or where water was already available above the wheel.
One such example is the pair of overshot wheels that were used to mill grain in the basement
of the baths of Caracalla, as we mentioned a couple of lectures ago.
Here the overshot configuration made perfect sense, because wastewater from the baths was
already available above the elevation of the wheel, and a large capacity sewer system was
available below.
So this ingenious installation provided a means of extracting shaft power from an otherwise
useless stream of wastewater as it flowed down into the sewer.
We could do very well to emulate this sort of energy efficiency today.
Now interesting as the Caracalla wheels might be, there is no more spectacular example of
ancient water power technology than the Roman Mill Complex at Barbagal near Arles, France.
Constructed in the early 2nd century AD, the Barbagal Complex was powered by a flight
of eight pairs of overshot wheels arranged in stair steps on a hillside.
They were supplied by a five mile aqueduct, which split into two channels as it entered
the complex.
Each channel then ran across a succession of eight overshot wheels, with each tail race
becoming the head race of the next lower wheel.
Each wheel drove a millstone housed beside the wheel pit.
The flower output of this extraordinary industrial facility would have easily supplied the entire
10,000 person population of Arles and then some.
As we've seen, both the undershot and overshot configurations require right angle gearing
because we have a horizontal shaft driving a vertical spindle.
Like so many other machines we've discussed, gear systems were probably developed in Alexandria
in the 3rd century BC.
We've already seen them in Sakia, the animal powered water lifting device that was developed
around this period.
The gears are wooden discs with pegs mounted around the circumference.
Vitruvius calls these gears dentatum, or toothed discs.
And if we compare one of them with a human jaw, we can see that the term dentatum is
actually quite descriptive.
Those teeth interlock with each other as the wheel turns, thus providing the required translation
of horizontal shaft power into vertical shaft power.
An interesting aspect of the system is its mounting arrangement.
It's a very robust structure, and so the mounting system has to be equally robust.
It has to carry very heavy loads, but it also has to be capable of making very fine adjustments.
And the reason is because the gap between the upper and lower millstone has to be very
carefully controlled, and that gap is susceptible to change over time as the upper millstone
gradually wears out.
So the system has to be capable of adjusting the height of the upper millstone over time.
That adjustment feature is provided by this horizontal beam down here, which is called
the bridge tree.
You can see that the vertical spindle, the iron spindle, is mounted directly at a point
on the bridge tree.
The bridge tree is hinged on one end, that's the end closest to me back here, and it's
free to rotate at the opposite end, so that raising or lowering the bridge tree also has
the effect of raising or lowering the upper millstone.
So typically in operation, when the mill is first placed into operation, the bridge tree
was probably raised up somewhat on a set of wedges, and the millstone placed in its original
position, and then as the millstone gradually wears down, it would need to be lowered in
order to adjust the gap between the two millstones to the appropriate level, and that would be
done simply by taking out the wedges that held the bridge tree in place, thus lowering
the millstone into its next lower position, and that process would continue until the
upper millstone was completely worn out, then it would be replaced and the process would
start all over again.
Now in general, gearing can be used for three purposes.
One to change the direction of a rotating shaft, two to increase the speed of rotation,
or three to increase torque.
All gearing systems in Roman mills were used for that first purpose, changing horizontal
shaft power into vertical shaft power as we've seen, but the other two purposes are actually
mutually exclusive.
To increase speed, a larger gear is used to drive a smaller one.
To increase torque, a smaller gear is used to drive a larger one, and so you can only
have one or the other.
And there's a considerable scholarly disagreement about which of these configurations was used
in Roman mills.
And to maximize productivity, the optimal speed for a millstone is actually quite high,
so we might expect that Roman mills were geared to increase speed.
And indeed, we know that later medieval water mills were geared this way.
And yet, Vitruvius' description of the undershot water wheel and the associated gearing is
exactly the opposite.
As depicted in my model, Vitruvius specifies a driven gear that's actually somewhat larger
than the driving gear, the arrangement that increases torque but decreases speed.
Some scholars have suggested that this passage in day architecture must have been corrupted
somehow over time.
But we must remember that Vitruvius is describing a very early undershot wheel, which we know
was inherently underpowered and could certainly have benefited from a boost in torque.
In my view, it's reasonable to believe that early Roman mills were geared as Vitruvius
describes, that the passage has not been corrupted.
And perhaps it was the only arrangement that could successfully turn a millstone during
that era.
Later overshot wheels, like the ones at the Barbagal mill complex, had more power, and
thus they were probably geared to increase speed to achieve higher productivity.
To accomplish this, the dentatum driving the millstone was replaced with something called
a lantern pinion, composed of two wooden discs connected by iron rods.
The pinion's diameter is much smaller than that of the driving gear, so this arrangement
would increase speed significantly at the expense of torque.
And we know that lantern pinions were used in late Roman mills because an intact one,
with its iron spindle still attached, was discovered in the early 1900s at the site
of a Roman fort in Germany.
From the available evidence, it's reasonable to conclude that there was no single standard
configuration of Roman mill gearing.
Rather it seems that Roman engineers understood the trade-off between torque and speed, and
they adapted the gear ratio of each mill installation to meet the unique circumstances at hand.
The third and final type of water wheel is the less common vertical shaft wheel, illustrated
by this reconstruction of a 4th century Roman mill at Chemtao in Tunisia.
Here the wheel is mounted in the bottom of a pit, oriented horizontally and as the name
suggests driving a vertical shaft.
A steeply sloped head race cut into the rock is used to direct a high velocity stream of
water tangentially onto the angled blades of the wheel, and then the water is drained
into a tail race at the bottom of the pit.
As the wheel rotates, the shaft turns a millstone at its upper end.
The vertical shaft wheel is often claimed to be the oldest form of water power generation,
in part because Hero of Alexandria attested to its existence all the way back in the 3rd
century BC, but also because it's the simplest of the three configurations.
It's the simplest because the wheel shaft drives the millstone directly, without the
complicated gearing system that the overshot and undershot wheels both require.
Yet this advantage of the vertical shaft wheel is often its greatest disadvantage.
Because the system uses no gearing, the millstone is constrained to rotate at the same speed
as the wheel, which eventually came to be regarded as too slow for efficient milling.
This may explain why vertical shaft wheels weren't as common as the other two types.
Ironically, this oldest of old power generation technologies is amazingly similar to the water
turbines used in today's state-of-the-art hydroelectric power plants.
Indeed, the Kentow Mill, the oldest surviving vertical shaft installation, is widely regarded
as the world's first true turbine engine.
This sophisticated machine is a powerful reminder that many technologies we think of
as modern actually aren't.
Through most of the classical era, water power was used primarily for milling of grain and
in the case of the Noria, for raising water.
But the later centuries of the Roman era saw a plethora of new water power applications,
an interesting indicator that political instability didn't necessarily result in technological
decline.
A late fourth century AD poem by Alsonius speaks of the river Eurubius, drawing the
screeching saws through smooth white marble, apparent evidence of a water-powered sawmill
in Roman Gaul.
Many scholars question whether this passage really referred to sawmills, until archaeologists
in Pamukkalei, Turkey unearthed a third-century relief showing a water wheel powering a pair
of stone-cutting saws, complete with an ingenious mechanism to convert the wheel's rotary motion
to the reciprocating motion of the saws.
Alsonius is vindicated.
There is also evidence of water power being used during the late empire for kneading dough,
fulling wool, and lifting hammers to crush mineral ores.
These late Roman inventions do lend some credence to a theory I mentioned previously, the often-stated
hypothesis that the availability of slave labor served as a disincentive for technological
development in the classical world.
Here in the late empire, the decline in Roman territorial conquest would have reduced the
slave population substantially, and perhaps did provide an incentive for the development
of these new labor-saving water-powered machines.
While the relationship between technology and slavery remains the subject of considerable
debate, however, the relationship between technology and warfare is undeniably clear.
Next lecture will look at a particular form of ancient warfare, siegecraft, and examine
how it stimulated the development of some truly astonishing technological systems.
Until then, thank you.
