Welcome back.
In the book of Deuteronomy, chapter 8, Moses tells the Hebrews, For the Lord your God is
bringing you into a good country, a land with springs and fountains welling up in the hills
and valleys, a land whose stones contain iron and whose hills you can mine copper.
Today, we're quick to remember that the promised land was flowing with milk and honey, but
to the ancient Hebrews, it seemed that iron and copper were at least as important.
Materials mattered in the ancient world.
Entire civilizations rose and fell on the basis of their ability to exploit materials
to enhance their military, economic and political power.
It's hardly surprising then that the ages of human history are customarily defined in
terms of their dominant materials, the Stone Age, the Bronze Age, the Iron Age.
In that sense, the story of human civilization is the story of materials.
Just as materials mattered in the ancient world, so they matter in this course.
To understand, say, the Parthenon in Athens, not just as an architectural wonder, but also
as an engineered system, we must know something about the materials used to build it.
In today's lecture, we'll be considering materials from two different perspectives.
First we'll look at their mechanical properties in a general sense, and then we'll consider
six specific materials, stone, wood, clay, copper, bronze and iron, how they came into
use, and how their properties influenced the design of technological systems.
These were the principal materials available to builders at the dawn of the classical era,
so they provide the essential foundation for understanding the ancient technologies we'll
be discussing throughout this course.
Let's begin with mechanical properties, defined as characteristics that describe how a material
responds to forces.
And as you might remember from your high school physics course, a force is simply a push or
a pull, defined in terms of both magnitude and direction.
In the U.S. system of units, the magnitude of a force is typically measured in pounds.
In the metric system, we use newtons.
So how do forces affect materials?
When we say the material like stone or iron has high strength or low strength, what does
that actually mean?
Why are certain materials used for particular structural applications, like beams or columns,
for example, but not for others?
To answer these questions, let's go to the laboratory.
Let's begin with this simple model of a column.
It's a structural element that we might find in a Greek temple or a Roman basilica.
Here in the laboratory, I'm going to take this column and I'm going to place it inside
this testing frame.
Then we're going to load the testing frame with bricks, representing the portion of the
structure above the column, the portion of the structure that's actually supported by
the column.
And if you look very closely, you'll notice that as I add bricks to the column, it is
compressing.
It's getting shorter.
It's deforming.
Its length is decreasing.
And of course, this particular model column is made of styrofoam, but it's important
to recognize that a stone column behaves in exactly the same way.
It would get shorter under the equivalent loading.
Of course, the amount of deformation would be much, much less.
Now, as this column shortens, it's experiencing something called stress, defined as the intensity
of internal force within a structural element.
This comes in two flavors, tension, which is associated with elongation of the element,
and compression, which is associated with shortening of the element.
The column in our testing frame, obviously, is in compression.
So what physically is stress?
When I applied that compressive force to the column, it shortened.
Down at the microscopic level, the individual atoms in the crystal structure were being
pushed ever so slightly closer together.
But the bonds between these atoms are quite strong, and they resist being deformed.
In effect, when I push, they push back.
The effect of these interatomic bonds resisting deformation is the phenomenon we call stress.
Mathematically, stress is expressed as force per area, for example, pounds per square inch,
just like pressure, the pressure in your automobile tires, for example.
The area in question is the cross-sectional area of the element.
In this case, it's the square area of the column viewed from its end.
To illustrate this concept, let's go back to the lab and test a column made of a material
that's a bit closer to the stone we'll see in so many ancient structures we study later
in this course.
Chalk.
Now, this piece of chalk is about 0.4 inches in diameter, and therefore, it's cross-sectional
area, which we'll need to determine in order to calculate the stress, is a circular area.
We calculate it using the formula pi r squared, in this case, that works out to be 0.126 square
inches.
I'm going to take that piece of chalk and place it into our testing machine as a structural
column.
Now, we're going to take bricks and load that chalk column.
We need to know how much the bricks weigh.
As you can see, one brick weighs about four and a half pounds, and so when I take that
same brick and place it in the loading frame, it applies a compressive force to the chalk,
which therefore experiences a stress of 4.5 pounds divided by 0.126 square inches for
a stress of 36 pounds per square inch.
If I add a second brick, the stress doubles to 72 pounds per square inch.
Now this concept of stress is extremely important because the most important mechanical property
of a material, its strength, is defined in terms of stress.
Specifically, the strength of a material is defined as the maximum stress the material
can withstand before it breaks, before it physically shatters.
So how many more bricks do you think I'll need to add to the loading device before the
chalk crushes in compression?
Let's give it a try.
There's three.
So it failed on the fourth brick, four times 4.5 pounds divided by the cross-sectional
area of the chalk, works out to be about 140 pounds per square inch.
And so we can conclude that the strength of that particular piece of chalk in compression
is about 140 pounds per square inch.
Now this chart summarizes the typical strengths of the materials we're considering in this
lecture.
Tensile strength, compressive strength.
Note that there's significant variability in these strengths ranging from over 30,000
pounds per square inch for iron and bronze to less than 100 pounds per square inch for
clay brick.
Note also that the tensile and compressive strengths of a given material are not necessarily
the same.
Stone is much stronger in compression than in tension.
My piece of chalk carried 140 pounds per square inch in compression, but in tension it fails
at a much lower stress, about 10 psi.
Strength is the most important mechanical property of a material, but as we'll see,
other properties also have influenced ancient technological development quite significantly.
These include workability, the extent to which a material can be molded, carved, or deformed
to attain a desired physical shape.
And durability, the capacity to resist deterioration by weathering, corrosion, or rot.
We could also consider fire resistance an aspect of durability.
These properties have profoundly influenced the use of materials through the ages.
Let's explore this influence by examining the discovery and early use of these materials
from a broad historical perspective.
This is a fascinating story that could easily occupy an entire course.
I'll provide just a very brief synopsis here.
When our distant ancestors first began manipulating materials for practical purposes, they naturally
used what they found lying about, stone and wood.
Indeed, the oldest known man-made artifacts are simple stone tools, really just sharp
chips of rock used for cutting and chopping.
Materials dating from 2 million years ago have been found in East Africa.
Now, by the time our own species, Homo sapiens, emerged roughly 200,000 years ago, humans were
making hand axes, more or less like this one, a stone blade bound to a wooden handle with
strips of hide or cemented with tree resin.
This is a very early example of combining two different materials, stone and wood, each
in a manner consistent with its mechanical properties.
Stone is quite suitable for the axe head, because when I propel it into the log like
this, the handle is pushing downward on the axe head while the wood of the log is pushing
upward and inward.
Stone is extremely strong in compression, and so the fact that it's being compressed
in all directions causes it to work very effectively in that mode.
The handle, on the other hand, behaves quite differently.
The handle is bending under the action of my hand and the support of the axe head on
its opposite end.
When it bends, it experiences significant tension on the bottom side, compression on
the top side.
However, wood has comparable strengths in both tension and compression, and so it works
quite well for bending.
Note that if the handle of the hammer were made of stone rather than wood, and we use
it in exactly the same mode, well, it doesn't work quite as effectively.
Why not?
Because the handle experiences that same tensile stress as the wooden one did, but because
stone has such very low limited tensile strength, it breaks quite readily and makes the tool
effectively useless.
Indeed, we still use wooden handles for hammers and axes and similar hand tools today, a pretty
good indicator that prehistoric tool makers had the right idea.
Through the ages, the use of stone and wood advanced considerably.
The extent of this advance is evident in the Parthenon of Classical Era Athens, with its
elegantly proportioned marble columns and elaborate wooden roof structure, yet hundreds
of millennia after the invention of the primitive hand axe, the Parthenon still reflects those
same inherent strengths and limitations of stone and timber.
Stone is strong in compression, so it's well suited for columns and walls, but it's weak
in tension, so it's not particularly well suited for beams, which explains why the columns
in the Parthenon are spaced so closely together.
Stone is also quite workable, the marble of the Parthenon could be carved with great precision,
and it's durable, allowing us to enjoy this architectural marble 2400 years after it was
built.
On the other hand, timber is reasonably strong in both tension and compression, so it's
much better suited for structural components subjected to bending, like these roof beams.
Wood is easily cut and joined with simple tools, so it was well suited for this sort of elaborate
construction.
Yet wood lacks durability, it's highly vulnerable to rot and fire.
So today, no Greek temple roofs have survived.
We can only speculate about their configuration based on the stone sockets in which those
wooden beams were supported.
In addition to stone and wood, a third material that was readily available to prehistoric
humans was clay.
The distinguishing property of clay is its workability, the ease with which it can be
molded into any shape.
This property reflects clay's unique atomic structure, consisting of thin layers of atoms
that are only weakly bonded to each other.
These layers can slide over each other easily, like playing cards in a deck of cards.
Making the material very easy to shape.
Because of clay's plasticity, early builders learned that they could mold it into bricks.
These so-called mud bricks were made by mixing clay with sand and straw, and then packing
the material into wooden molds and placing them in the sun to dry.
Though mud bricks are easy to produce, they make a very poor structural material.
Sun-dried clay has only low to moderate compressive strength, essentially zero tensile strength,
and very poor durability.
While ancient builders used mud bricks to construct many impressive structures, ziggurats, temples,
city walls, these structures have mostly vanished today.
At near constant maintenance, mud brick structures tend to disintegrate over a period of roughly
thirty years.
Of course, the poor durability of sun-baked clay can be overcome by firing it in a kiln.
When clay is subjected to intense heat, its original layered atomic structure changes to
a more rigid, three-dimensional crystal structure.
The result is a ceramic, a crystalline material that's strong, heat-resistant, and water-resistant.
The technology for producing fired brick is actually quite ancient.
At a site in the modern Czech Republic, archaeologists have found small, fired clay figurines from
twenty-six thousand years ago.
The technology took a long time to take hold, though.
By the seventh millennium BC, useful artifacts like pots and jars were being made from kiln-fired
clay.
By the way, despite the clear superiority of fired clay, unfired mud brick construction
is still quite common today in regions of the world that don't have enough timber to
fuel their kilns, places like Afghanistan, where I spent some time a few years ago.
Now from our modern vantage point, the discovery of fired clay might not seem terribly significant,
but it truly was a monumental event in the development of civilization.
Before that, discovery humans were only able to change the shape of a material, say by
carving stone or cutting wood.
Fired clay was the first material that humans were able to transform into a fundamentally
new substance.
Thus fired clay was, in effect, the first true man-made material.
The immediate uses of fired clay, or terracotta, were revolutionary in their own right.
Durable bricks and waterproof roof tiles facilitated fundamentally new types of construction, ultimately
reflected in the grand structures of Imperial Rome.
Fired clay vessels were used to store and transport liquids and grains, stimulating commerce
and, most importantly, fired clay tablets served as the world's first permanent writing
medium, the surface on which ancient Sumerian cuneiform script was written.
But the long-term impact of this discovery was perhaps even greater.
Once the ancients recognized that heating clay produced a fundamentally new material,
it was only a matter of time before they began experimenting with other materials.
Thus they invented lime by heating limestone, charcoal by heating wood, various metals by
smelting mineral oils.
In a sense, our modern field of material science originated with the discovery of fired clay
so many millennia ago.
The first man-made metal was copper.
We have evidence of its use as early as 9,000 B.C. in the Middle East, though these artifacts
were apparently made from lumps of relatively pure copper found in streambeds.
It was another 5,000 years before the production of copper from mineral ores began.
Copper-rich ores were found in Mesopotamia, in Anatolia, and on the island of Cyprus.
Indeed, our word copper comes from the Latin cuprum, meaning metal found on Cyprus.
But these ores couldn't be exploited until ancient metallurgists developed the process
we call smelting, the heating of copper ore with charcoal to produce pure copper.
Smelting occurs through a type of chemical reaction called an oxidation-reduction reaction,
in which one substance loses electrons and therefore is said to be oxidized, and another
substance gains electrons and is said to be reduced.
Here's a typical example.
Copperite in this chemical formula is copper oxide.
It's a copper ore.
CO is carbon monoxide produced by the combustion of charcoal.
Now, at about 2,000 degrees Fahrenheit, the carbon monoxide molecule pulls an oxygen atom
from the copper oxide to form carbon dioxide gas and pure copper, which is what we're
after in the first place.
By the way, 2,000 degrees might seem pretty hot, but it's actually considerably lower
than the temperature required to melt iron, about 2,800 degrees Fahrenheit.
And this explains why copper was the first metal to be exploited by humans, even though
iron is about 1,000 times more plentiful in the Earth's crust.
Copper came first not because of its availability, but because it could be smelted more easily.
So why was the production of metals so important to ancient civilizations?
Well, as we've seen, metals are relatively strong, and they have more or less equal strength,
intention, and compression.
Metals can also be formed by casting, by heating to the melting point, and then pouring the
molten metal into a mold.
But most importantly, metals are malleable.
They can be shaped or formed into thin sheets by hammering, in sharp contrast with stone
and clay.
Moreover, metals are actually strengthened by hammering, a characteristic that makes
them particularly well suited for tools and weapons.
But all of these desirable characteristics come at a price.
Smelting copper consumes a vast amount of charcoal for fuel.
From antiquity until relatively modern times, charcoal was produced in a highly specialized
craft process.
The Collier built a large conical pile of wood, as you can see in this photo, and then
covered it with soil and ignited its core.
The soil limited the amount of oxygen available for combustion, so the fire burned slowly,
driving off water and resins from the wood, but leaving behind porous lumps of nearly
pure carbon, a substance capable of burning at a much higher temperature than wood.
In antiquity, it took about 7 pounds of wood to make 1 pound of charcoal, and 20 pounds
of charcoal to smelt 1 pound of copper.
The grand total is 140 pounds of wood to smelt a single pound of copper.
Ancient smelters were voracious consumers of timber, and as metals became ever more popular,
the resulting insatiable demand for charcoal caused widespread deforestation.
The barren terrain of modern Greece was caused largely by the clear cutting of forests during
the classical era, and subsequent erosion of the irreplaceable topsoil.
Clearly, the environmental impact of technological development is not just a modern phenomenon.
Despite the depletion of timber, experimentation with metals continued.
Around 3200 BC, smelters began adding small amounts of tin to copper to produce a new material,
bronze.
A metal composed of two or more elements is called an alloy.
Thus, bronze is an alloy of copper and tin.
A fascinating aspect of the science of materials is that adding an impurity to a substance
often increases its strength.
Thus an alloy is typically stronger than both of its constituent elements, and indeed, bronze
is considerably stronger than pure copper or pure tin.
Yet, paradoxically, the melting temperature of bronze is actually 140 degrees lower than
that of pure copper, and so bronze is actually better suited for casting.
For these reasons, bronze quickly superseded copper as the preferred metal of ancient civilizations.
It held that distinction for over a millennium, and in the process, it gave its name to a
new era, the Bronze Age.
During this period, Homeric heroes were clad in bronze, while bronze plows, sickles and
saws improved the lives of common people.
By the 10th century BC, bronze casting technology was sufficiently advanced that an artisan
named Hiram of Tyre was able to fabricate 27-foot-tall bronze pillars for Solomon's
Temple in Jerusalem.
By that time, however, bronze was already giving way to a new material, iron, that would define
a new age.
The earliest iron known to man actually originated in meteorites and was used as a luxury metal
for several thousand years before the Iron Age began.
Indeed, we know that the ancient Sumerians actually succeeded in identifying iron's
extraterrestrial source because they called it heaven metal.
But sometime in the second millennium BC, smelters in the Near East developed techniques
for producing iron from an ore called hematite.
In this process, hematite was placed on a layer of charcoal inside a furnace, which
in its earliest form was probably just a hole in the ground, as you can see in this graphic.
But eventually, that furnace evolved into a stone structure built above ground.
Once the charcoal was ignited, air was blown into the furnace through a clay pipe called
a twir to increase the combustion temperature.
The result was an oxygen-reduction reaction similar to the one we saw in copper smelting.
Carbon monoxide rising up through the furnace reacted with the iron oxide in the hematite
ore to produce iron and a pool of waste material called slag.
But while this chemical reaction theoretically produces pure iron, the actual product of
these crude ancient furnaces was far from pure.
Iron melts at about 2,800 degrees Fahrenheit, but ancient forges couldn't do much better
than 2,200 degrees, so the smelting process produced not a pool of molten iron, but a
spongy mass called a bloom composed of iron, some unreacted ore, unburned charcoal, and
other impurities.
While the bloom was still red hot then, it had to be hammered vigorously to drive out
the impurities and create a usable metal, though still not a pure one.
This product was called wrought iron because it had been wrought or worked through this
hammering process.
By the way, the other form of iron, cast iron, was largely unknown in the ancient world because
the ancient furnaces couldn't achieve temperatures hot enough to melt iron.
Cast iron wouldn't come into common use until the medieval period.
Partly for this reason, in antiquity, iron doesn't appear to have been a significant
improvement over bronze.
The two materials are comparable in strength.
Bronze because of its lower melting temperature was actually easier to smelt and therefore
could be used for castings while iron couldn't.
Iron is significantly harder, which means that iron weapons and cutting tools hold a
better edge than the equivalent bronze instruments, but it's also much more susceptible to corrosion
or rusting and therefore to the long-term deterioration.
Given iron's lack of clear-cut advantage then, why did the bronze age yield to the iron age?
Why did iron become the metal of choice in the Near East, India, Europe, and the Far
East from around 1200 BC onward?
The answer is quite simply availability.
As I mentioned earlier, iron is about 1,000 times more plentiful in the Earth's crust
than copper.
Tin, bronze's other constituent, is even scarcer than copper.
Indeed, archaeological evidence suggests that severe shortages of tin occurred during the
late bronze age, providing a powerful stimulus for increased iron production.
Because iron is so much more difficult to smelt than bronze, it took a long time for
this technology to mature, but once iron became economically viable, the widespread availability
of iron ore virtually guaranteed that iron would surpass bronze, and so it did.
Like most new technologies, iron found its earliest applications in warfare, primarily
for weapons and armor.
But as its production cost decreased, iron was adopted in all sorts of new civil technologies,
which we'll examine in future lectures.
Like these clamps in stone masonry construction, spikes for fastening ships' holes together,
wheel rims on wagons, and all manner of axles, fittings, and connectors in machines like
this water wheel.
Clamps and connectors are small and easy to overlook, but in a very real sense, the classical
world was held together with iron.
I'd like to conclude this lecture with four important points.
First, note that all the materials we've talked about in this lecture were well established
prior to the Classical Era, thus they provided an essential foundation for Greek and Roman
technological development.
Second, note that we have not discussed all of the materials that contributed to technological
development in the ancient world.
We haven't discussed precious metals like gold and silver, which were used primarily
for coins from the 6th century BC onward.
Coinage had an enormous influence on technological development, however because precious metals
weren't actually employed in engineered systems, we won't consider them further in this course.
We also haven't discussed lead, which was used for specialized applications like water
pipes.
We'll discuss this material during our lectures on water supply systems.
And we haven't yet discussed the one major engineering material that came into widespread
use during the Classical Era, concrete.
This material, the heart of the Roman construction revolution, will occupy our attention during
lecture 6.
Third point, even when we add concrete and lead to our list, the materials available to
Greek and Roman builders were still very limited, both in number and in their suitability for
engineering applications.
In sharp contrast with the modern world's immense and ever expanding array of custom
manufactured metals, plastics, and ceramics, to a large extent we'll see the genius of
ancient engineering in the use of these extremely limited materials in ways that capitalize
on their unique strengths and compensated for their inherent weaknesses.
Final point, while we tend to think of materials as enablers of technological development,
we've also seen how ancient systems for acquiring and processing materials are important examples
of technological development in their own right.
We'll explore this idea in much greater depth next lecture, when we examine how that most
ubiquitous of all ancient construction materials, stone, was quarried, transported, shaped, and
assembled into masonry, the very fabric of the ancient world's most beautiful and enduring
structures.
Until then, thank you.
Thank you.
Bye.
