Welcome back.
You know when we look at an architectural gem, like the Temple of Athena Nike in Athens,
we tend to focus on the building's beautiful proportions, its elegant fluted columns, its
finely crafted ionic capitals, and the delicate carvings of its entablature.
Faced with such architectural refinement, it's easy to take the Temple's plain masonry
walls for granted.
After all, just a bunch of stone blocks piled on top of each other, right?
Oh, maybe.
But how were those blocks extracted from solid bedrock at a time when the most sophisticated
quarrying tool was a simple iron-tipped pick?
How were they squared, shaped, and fitted so perfectly together with only hand tools,
without mortar?
How were they lifted into place and positioned with such precision?
Well, in this lecture, we'll attempt to answer these questions by following a block of stone
from its point of origin in a quarry to its final resting place in the Wall of a Greek
Temple.
In doing so, we'll gain a deeper appreciation of stone as the ancient world's most important
construction material.
But more importantly, while we tend to think of materials as enablers of technological development,
this story will also illustrate how ancient systems for acquiring and processing materials
are also important examples of technological development in their own right.
And along the way, I hope you'll come to realize that there's a lot more to stone
masonry than meets the eye.
Our story begins during the 2nd millennium BC, during the ascendancy of that great bronze-age
civilization of Mycenae in the northern Peloponnese.
The Mycenaeans developed a form of monumental stone masonry, created by piecing together
large polygonal blocks of stone in irregular patterns, with minimal cutting and fitting,
as we can see today in the ruins of the citadel at Mycenae.
Later Greeks called this type of construction cyclopean, because they believed that only
the mythical cyclops could possibly have been strong enough to move such enormous stones.
Now, during the Mycenaean era, cyclopean construction reached a very high level of refinement, as
evidenced by the famous lion gate shown here.
But with the collapse of bronze-age civilization around 1200 BC, this technological know-how
was lost and not rediscovered until centuries later.
Now, around the late 8th century BC, in Archaic Era Greece, about that same time that the
polis emerged as a political entity, Greeks once again began constructing their public
buildings of stone.
This development was probably stimulated by a desire for buildings with greater dignity
and permanence, but as we've seen, it was also significantly influenced by deforestation,
the shortage of timber resulting from increased demands in metal production and shipbuilding.
The earliest of these Archaic Era stone structures used polygonal stone construction, probably
copied from the ruins of those bronze-age Mycenaean citadels.
But over time, Greek masonry construction gradually evolved toward a more refined configuration
of rectangular stones set in horizontal courses or layers.
This configuration, called Ashlar, was firmly established by the 5th century BC.
Once again, the Greeks' adoption of a new construction technology was probably not an
original idea.
The Greeks were heavily engaged in seaborne commerce, and they're known to have traded
in Egypt, where Ashlar construction was already very well established.
It's quite likely that Greek traders returned home with stories of monumental pyramids and
temples in the Nile Valley, and these stories inspired Greek architects to begin experimenting
with Ashlar masonry.
Certainly, we can see Egyptian influence in Greek architecture.
Note the strong similarity in the overall form of the Egyptian temple of Amonet Karnak
on the left, and this typical early Greek temple on the right.
But while Greek techniques for quarrying and building in stone were probably borrowed from
the Egyptians, the Greeks made substantial improvements to these methods over time.
The great philosopher Plato acknowledged this point when, in the 4th century BC, he wrote
that the Greeks had invented nothing, rather they had borrowed all of their technologies
from other peoples, but then had improved on everything.
Well let's delve more deeply into the fully evolved Greek system of stone masonry construction
by following a block of marble from quarry to temple wall.
Greece has always had an abundant supply of limestone and marble for building.
Limestone is a sedimentary rock, usually formed from the accumulated skeletal fragments of
marine organisms like coral.
It's found in many forms, from soft porous tufa to travertine, which is nearly as hard
as marble.
Marble is a metamorphic rock, created when limestone is subjected to intense heat and
pressure deep below the earth's surface.
Marble is strong, hard, and found in an amazing variety of beautiful colors.
It was first incorporated into Greek architecture in the early 6th century BC, and soon became
the preferred material for important public structures.
In Athens, the great building program instituted by Pericles in the 5th century BC, a program
that included extraordinary structures like the Parthenon and the Propylaea, was supplied
largely from two quarries, one at Mount Haimetos, 7 miles southeast of Athens, and one at Mount
Pentelikon, 9 miles to the northeast.
The close proximity of these quarries to Athens was no accident.
Because Classical Era Greece was primarily a seafaring civilization, most of its roads
were little more than dirt tracks.
Long distance transport of heavy stone blocks over these poor roads was out of the question,
and so quarries either had to be close to the construction projects they were supplying
or close to navigable waterways.
Ancient quarries like Mount Pentelikon were often located on hillsides, so that blocks
of stone could be extracted in a stair step pattern, and then lowered down the hillside
for subsequent loading and transport.
A hillside location also facilitated the removal of the large quantities of debris that resulted
from extracting and shaping the stone.
This drawing shows how this sort of hillside quarry might have looked.
To extract a block from one of these stair stepped beds of stone, the quarry man first
had to use a simple pick with a double pointed iron head to cut a vertical trench around
all sides of the block.
The trench was about 15 to 30 inches wide, and its length and depth defined the block's
overall dimensions, which were based on the architect's specifications for a specific
block in a specific building project.
Once all four sides were exposed, the block's bottom surface still had to be freed up from
the bed of stone below.
This was usually done by chiseling a groove around the base of the block, cutting a series
of holes along the groove, and then driving iron wedges with a sledge hammer to split
the block along the horizontal plane.
Sometimes to achieve better control over this splitting process, wooden wedges were used
instead of iron ones.
These were driven into the holes and then doused with water and covered with wet rags,
so the slow swelling of the wood would apply a very gradual, uniform pressure all along
that desired plane of the split.
Where possible, the quarry man also tried to exploit naturally occurring cracks or planes
of weakness in the stone mass by driving wedges into these discontinuities and then using
levers to free up large blocks, as you can see here in the drawing.
Regardless of technique, this process was done with the utmost care.
If the rock split somewhere other than on the desired horizontal plane, a great deal
of effort and stone would be wasted.
Now, after the block was completely freed from bedrock, it was immediately trimmed almost
to its final shape and size.
Given the challenges of transporting large stone blocks overland, it made good sense
to ensure that no block was any larger than absolutely necessary when it left the quarry.
Nonetheless, some excess material was always left on all of the block's six sides so that
any surface damage occurring during transportation wouldn't ruin the piece.
Our stone block is now roughly dressed and ready for movement to the project site.
At well-established quarries like Mount Pentelicon, there would typically be a track or paved
roadway cut into the hillside and used as a ramp to lower stone blocks down the slope.
Our block would be placed on a wooden sled, as you see here, and then guided down this
track controlled by ropes attached to heavy posts called bollards mounted at intervals
along the descent.
At the bottom of the mountain, the block would be loaded onto a barge or ox cart for overland
transport.
The largest stone elements required immense wagons sporting 12-foot diameter wheels and
pulled by as many as 37 teams of oxen.
It's worth noting that the ancient road from Mount Pentelicon to Athens followed the contours
of the land, allowing these huge vehicles to move along a very gradual, continual downhill
slope.
A few ancient entrepreneurs recognized the inherent limitations of this transport system
and attempted to develop alternatives with strikingly different degrees of success.
The Roman engineer Vitruvius, whom we met in lecture one, describes three such transportation
innovations in his treatise De Architectura.
The first was by the Greek architect Kersaphron, who built the monumental Temple of Artemis
at Ephesus, one of the Seven Wonders of the ancient world.
The columns of Greek temples were usually built up of cylindrical segments called drums,
and for the Temple of Artemis, hauling these huge column drums over the nine-mile road
from quarry to building site posed a particularly daunting challenge.
Kersaphron responded with a solution that was as simple as it was ingenious.
He turned each column drum into a gigantic wheel.
As shown here, the drum was turned on its side, and a simple wooden frame was fitted
around it, attached to the drum with a pair of short axles, and then, looking very much
like a gigantic lawn roller, pulled along by several yoke of oxide.
With the columns in place, the next major elements required for this temple would have
been the architraves.
These are rectangular stone beams that stand across the tops of the columns.
The Temple of Artemis' architraves were 25 feet long, and they weighed over 20 tons,
an even greater transportation challenge than the column drums were.
Now, at this point, Kersaphron's son, Metagenes, got into the act, building the device you
see here.
Metagenes built two 12-foot diameter wooden wheels, and fixed them to the ends of the
architrave, which functioned as an enormous axle.
He then attached the same sort of wooden frame that his dad had used for column drums, hitched
up his oxen, and moved the architraves quite successfully.
But not all such contrivances were so successful.
In Vitruvius' own day, a Roman contractor named Pachonius was hired to move a large
stone pedestal.
In Vitruvius' words, with confident pride, Pachonius chose not to use Metagenes' invention,
but devised his own instead.
Now, here's a model of Pachonius' machine, a cylindrical wooden spindle, 15 feet in diameter,
and enclosing the stone pedestal here in the center.
Pachonius' innovation was to hitch his oxen to a rope that was wound around the spindle,
like this.
In one sense, this is a very clever arrangement, because pulling from the top of the spindle
rather than from the level of the axle actually requires less force to move the device.
In fact, it's half of the amount of force that would have been required otherwise.
Thus, it provides what we call mechanical advantage, a concept that we'll be discussing
in more detail in lecture 17.
But Pachonius' spindle also had a fatal flaw.
It was directionally unstable.
Let's see how.
Like my model, Pachonius' spindle probably worked fine when it rolled on smooth level
surfaces like this one, and you can see that it rolls along quite nicely.
The problem is, when the spindle had to negotiate rough terrain and hilly terrain, it started
encountering problems.
Just as my model does, when it encountered a large pothole in the road, there was a
tendency of the wheel to turn sideways, like this.
As a result, as the ox continued pulling, the wheel skirted off to the side of the road
and ultimately ran into the ditch.
It had to be reoriented, re-centered, hitched up to the oxen again, and then pulled along
once more.
As a result of this difficulty in maintaining directional control, Pachonius was unable to
finish the job.
He couldn't fulfill his contract, and he went bankrupt.
Pach is the inherent risk in technological innovation, as it remains today.
Whether by conventional ox cart or some more sophisticated conveyance, our block of marble
has finally arrived at the construction site.
Here at the construction site, it's offloaded and delivered to the mason.
At this point, the mason will precisely dress the stone's top, bottom, and ends so it'll
fit perfectly into its designated position in the temple wall.
He'll do this work with hand tools that are essentially identical to the ones a modern
stone carver would use.
The point chisel for rough shaping.
The claw chisel with its multiple teeth for refining the overall shape of the block.
And both the flat chisel and the rasp for final shaping and smoothing.
By the way, stone carving is a wonderful way to get into the spirit of Greek construction
technology.
I highly recommend it.
Now this model illustrates the configuration of our block just before it's placed into
the wall.
Note that its end faces are hollowed out so that adjacent blocks will make contact with
it only around their edges.
This treatment is called anathrosis and it allows for an extremely precise fit.
This photo shows anathrosis on an actual stone block.
You can find countless examples of these blocks scattered around ancient building sites.
On my model, note also that the front face of the block has been left rough so it can
be dressed to a perfect flat finish after it's been placed in the wall.
These notches on the upper ends of the block are for connectors, which we'll be discussing
shortly.
Now on early Greek construction sites, stone blocks were lifted into position by building
a temporary earthen ramp and dragging the blocks up the ramp on wooden rollers, just
as the Egyptians had done for centuries.
According to an account by Pliny the Elder, those immense architrave beams at the Temple
of Artemis at Ephesus were raised to their final 60-foot height by this same technique,
but with a characteristically Greek improvement.
Chersophron, that resourceful builder that we met earlier, piled a layer of sandbags
on the top of his earthen ramp and then after each architrave was dragged up onto the sandbags,
sand was very slowly released from the bags to ease the beam gently down to its final
position on top of the columns.
Building those ramps would have required a huge workforce that few Greek construction
contractors could possibly mobilize.
Eventually Greek builders developed simple construction cranes like this one that made
the task of lifting and positioning stone blocks significantly more efficient.
We'll be looking at this crane in detail when we study ancient machines in a later lecture.
For now, let's just use my model to illustrate another fascinating aspect of the stone masonry
fabrication process, configuring the block itself to facilitate lifting and placement
with the crane.
But why configure the block at all?
Why not just loop a rope sling underneath the block like this and then hook the crane
onto the rope sling and simply mobilize the crane to do the lift, something like this.
Turning the windlass, winding in the lifting rope to the point where the stone has reached
an adequate height to place it on the wall.
Now put the lock in place to hold the windlass in position and we will lower the block back
down onto the wall by adjusting the length of the stay rope that holds the crane in position.
And as I do this, notice what happens to the block.
The block is set in position on the wall, but note what happened.
The block may be in position, but it's also resting directly on top of the sling.
Remember that this block in reality weighs many tons and so it's impossible for us to
remove the sling because the block is holding it in position.
This is the reason why we have to configure stone blocks especially in order to conduct
appropriate lifting with our mechanical crane.
Fortunately, Greek builders devised a number of very innovative techniques to solve this
problem, three of them to be precise.
In the first case, the first of these innovations, they began carving stone blocks and leaving
four lugs two on each side projecting from the front and back faces of the stone.
These are temporary lugs which are there for the purpose of wrapping the sling around in
order to lift the block into position.
So I'm going to take my sling, I'm going to loop it over those four lugs.
Once the sling has fully engaged all four of them, lift the block quite easily, move
it precisely into its final position in the wall, set it in place, and then of course
it's now quite easy to remove the sling without any damage to the sling or without having
to move the rock any further.
A second innovation, very similar in concept but slightly different in execution, was to
carve these U-shaped channels into the end of the block, one on either end, and to then
use those channels to hold the sling in position in order to do the lift.
So let me demonstrate that here by placing my sling into the channels and then once again
from a single point, lift with my crane, move the block into position, set it in place immediately
adjacent to the previous block, and still without any difficulty remove the sling.
Now those are two fairly interesting innovations but by far the most elegant solution to this
problem is something called the Lewis Bolt.
And the Lewis Bolt worked so well in antiquity that it's actually still used today.
Here you see an image of an actual ancient Lewis Bolt and here is my small scale model
of a Lewis Bolt for comparison purposes.
You'll notice that the device consists of three iron bars which form a wedge shape when
they're in position held together with a single horizontal pin that attaches the device together.
In order to use the block, excuse me, in order to use this device we begin by having the
masons prepare the block by carving a wedge shaped hole into the top of the block.
You can't see the wedge shape but in fact the hole spreads outward slightly on either
side such that its shape is exactly consistent with the shape of the Lewis Bolt.
Now in order to use the device I first have to disassemble it so I'll remove the lifting
clevis on top.
Now I take apart the three bars, set aside the center one, and put the two inside bars,
excuse me, the two outside bars into the slotted hole.
Once they're in place I'll use the center bar to push the two outside ones apart and
once they are in their correct position I'll take my pin and clevis mechanism, reassemble
the Lewis Bolt.
Now when I hook the crane to the clevis and pull upward wedge action will cause the sides
of the Lewis Bolt to press against the insides of that wedge shaped hole and I can lift the
block from a single point, move it into position, and set it down.
Now the two great advantages of the Lewis Bolt system are first that it's the only method
that uses one single lifting point to lift the block upward and that allows the workman
to maneuver it into position much more easily.
The second advantage is that it only requires one hole on top and after I've removed the
Lewis Bolt, that hole being located in the top of the block will be obscured by additional
layers of stone on top and nothing will be visible in the completed structure.
Now notice that in positioning these blocks we haven't said anything about the use of
mortar and indeed mortar was never used in Greek stone masonry construction.
Instead each stone was cut to the exact precise required size and then iron clamps like these
were used to connect adjacent blocks together.
The masons cut wedge shaped slots into the ends of each block like these here and then
the clamp was inserted into the wedge shaped hole.
Once it was in position molten lead was poured into the slot the gap between the clamp and
the stone in order to seal the clamps firmly in place.
Blocks were also sometimes held in place with iron dowels like these that you can see on
the bottom surface of this block.
Dowels were set into the bottom surface of a given block just like this one and then
when the blocks were assembled into the wall they were inserted into holes carved into
the upper surface of the course of stone immediately below in order to create a good solid rigid
joint.
When you visit ancient Greek ruins you'll invariably find evidence of these kinds of
fasteners that we just saw in my demonstration.
These two stones at the temple of Apollo at Didema are beautiful examples of wedge shaped
slots for iron clamps, slots for a Lewis bolt and holes for iron dowels and this groove
cut into the top surface of the stone was used as a channel for molten lead to seal
the dowel after the upper surface was set in place.
This well conceived system of iron connectors resulted in exceptional structural integrity
particularly appropriate for the many earthquake prone regions of the Greek world.
Sadly the greatest strength of this system was also its undoing.
In subsequent centuries many wonderful ancient structures were destroyed or defaced by scavengers
seeking the iron clamps that held the masonry together so effectively.
These pock marked walls on the great theater at Miletus marked the spots where iron clamps
were chiseled out of the structure.
So we've now positioned and connected our stone blocks but we're not done yet.
Recall that extra material has been left on the front faces for protection only after
the entire wall is built to the masons mount their scaffolding to dress finish and polish
these surfaces ensuring that the wall as a whole has a perfectly flat smooth surface
just like this wall of the Temple of Athena Nike where today's lecture began.
Now throughout this discussion we've been using a simple rectangular block to illustrate
stone masonry construction but the fabrication process was essentially the same for the many
other more elaborate types of building elements used in Greek temples.
The column is a particularly interesting example.
As we've already seen Greek columns were almost always built up from cylindrical drums stacked
one on top of the other.
These drums were carved roughly to shape in the quarry and then brought progressively
closer to their final form in a series of well-planned stages.
We actually have documentation of this process in surviving expense accounts from the Erechtheon
another of the fine temples on the Athenian Acropolis.
This model illustrates how fluted columns were shaped by stripping away layers of stone
in four distinct stages.
First the roughly carved outer surface was smoothed to create a perfect cylindrical shape.
Next a thinner layer was stripped off to leave these polygonal facets where the fluting
would eventually be and finally the curved fluting itself was hollowed out in two stages
the latter after the column was fully assembled to ensure that each flute formed a smooth
continuous vertical line from the top of the column to the bottom.
Like rectangular blocks column drums also used an atherosis but for columns this deliberate
hollowing of the mating surfaces was applied to the top and bottom faces rather than the
sides.
Note that there's a square socket carved into the top and bottom of the drum.
A hardwood plug was inserted into this socket and an iron dowel was then inserted into a
hole drilled into the block.
The dowel was used to align adjacent column drums to ensure accurate centering like this.
And so we've seen how Greek builders constructed simple ashlar masonry walls and simple stone
columns yet let's pause for a moment to reflect on the succession of complex processes by
which each individual block of stone came to be part of these simple structural elements.
A quarry was established at a location that provided high quality stone but was also suitable
for transportation.
Within that quarry the stone was laboriously extracted by quarrymen working with picks,
wedges and levers.
The block was then lowered down the hillside on a sled and hauled by ox cart or barge to
the project site.
The block was then meticulously shaped to a perfect fit with specially carved fittings
for lifting, fittings like those lugs on the side that you shaped slot in the end and
the specially configured slots for the use of the Lewis bolt.
It was then put into position with ramps and rollers or with a construction crane.
Adjacent blocks were then interconnected using rod iron clamps sealed with lead and dowels.
And then finally this entire wall or column was fully assembled and only then the outer
surface was carefully dressed and polished to create a perfect smooth planar surface.
Clearly, a masonry wall is not just a bunch of blocks piled on top of each other.
It's the product of a beautifully integrated technological system, one that we can't begin
to appreciate from the completed structure alone.
This system required the development of architect's specifications for each individual stone in
order to determine its proper placement in the completed structure.
It required synchronization of quarrying, transportation and construction operations.
It required careful management of both skilled and unskilled workers, the quarrymen, cart
drivers, masons and general laborers, not to mention the blacksmiths who fabricated those
iron connectors and carpenters who built the scaffolding.
And this system had to work efficiently and effectively because the economic viability
of a building project often depended on it.
The Parthenon, for example, required 50,000 cubic feet of quarried marble and transporting
that stone was the project's single largest expense.
Next lecture, we'll see how this system produced the extraordinary buildings that have come
to symbolize the Hellenic world, the Greek temple.
But for now, we should appreciate stone masonry on its own merits as a wonderful manifestation
of Greek technological know-how.
Thank you.
