Welcome to our exploration of the Pantheon, the ancient world's most ambitious engineering
achievement and the quintessential example of the imperial Roman architectural style
that we first encountered last lecture.
Completed in 126 AD during the reign of the Emperor Hadrian, the Pantheon is a temple
dedicated to all the gods.
It's also the best preserved of all ancient Roman buildings, so it provides us with a rare
opportunity to experience imperial architecture much as a Roman citizen of that era might
have experienced it.
Let's take advantage of that opportunity.
We'll begin today's lecture by visiting the Pantheon and attempting to experience
it from the perspective of a 2nd century Roman.
We'll begin our journey in this grand courtyard that extends northward from the Pantheon's
main entrance.
Over 300 feet long and closed by colonnades and with a triumphal arch at its center, this
was an impressive architectural space in its own right.
Sadly, none of it has survived today, so we can only imagine how this monumental approach
might have enhanced our impressions of the great temple that lies ahead.
From the courtyard, our first view of the Pantheon is its front porch or portico, which
bears a striking resemblance to a Greek colonnaded temple.
Yet, several characteristically Roman features tell us this isn't just a copy of a traditional
Greek building.
Recall from lecture four that the typical Greek temple sat on a stepped base or a stereobate
accessible from all four sides.
In contrast, the typical Roman temple, like the Temple of Portunus shown here, was built
on a taller platform accessible only from the front.
As my model shows, the Pantheon follows this Roman convention, but we wouldn't know it
if we visited the Pantheon today.
Over the centuries, debris from crumbling buildings and silt from the frequent flooding
of the Tiber have accumulated on top of the original courtyard.
The pavement of the modern Piazza Dello Rotunda, shown here, was built on top of all that material.
Today the original platform and steps of the Pantheon are still there, but they're buried
beneath the piazza.
In addition to the portico's frontal orientation, its columns are also decidedly ungreek in
character.
The capitals are the typically Roman Corinthian style, and the column shafts are not fluted
as Greek columns would be.
Most importantly, rather than being built up from a series of individual cylindrical
drums, each of the Pantheon's column shafts is a single piece of stone, a granite monolith
40 feet tall.
As proud Roman citizens, we'd probably recognize that this characteristic gray granite was quarried
in distant Egypt, and then transported at great expense across the Mediterranean to Rome.
And so in these columns, we'd experience the vast power and wealth of the empire.
We'd also see imperial power reflected in the triangular pediment above.
Recall that in Greek temples, the pediment was usually decorated with sculpture depicting
scenes from mythology.
Today, the Pantheon's pediment sculpture has been lost, but based on the pattern of
holes for the iron clamps that once held it in place, scholars tell us that the sculpture
was probably an imperial eagle with a laurel wreath, a characteristically Roman motif that
in this context proclaimed unity between the imperial government and the gods.
Immediately blow the pediment is a stone architrave bearing a prominent inscription.
Marcus Agrippa, son of Lucius, three times consul, built this.
We would never see this sort of attribution on a classical Greek temple, which was seen
primarily as a reflection of the polis, not a product of a powerful patron.
Recall the story of the citizens of Ephesus refusing Alexander's offer to build their
temple of Artemis because they didn't want Alexander's name inscribed on it.
Yet we frequently see attribution inscriptions on Roman public buildings, many of which were
built for the purpose of demonstrating the patron's generosity.
During our visit, we now ascend to the porch, pass through the massive bronze clad wooden
doors of the main entrance, negotiate a vaulted corridor, and then emerge into one of the most
awe-inspiring interior spaces the world has ever known.
We're now in a vast circular room, 142 feet in diameter.
Its richly decorated walls offer much to delight us, and yet our eyes are drawn uncontrollably
upward.
Overhead, we see the ancient world's most extraordinary structural achievement, a hemispherical
dome with a grid of four-sided indentations called coffers, enlivening its inner surface.
A 30-foot diameter oculus at its apex, 142 feet above the floor.
As a result of this geometry, a 142-foot diameter sphere would fit perfectly within this space,
its bottom just touching the center of the floor.
Evidently, the Romans have adopted their Greek forebears' love of geometric perfection.
A shaft of light streaming through the oculus draws our eyes back downward to the cylindrical
wall of this great rotunda.
We notice the articulation of that wall, two prominent cornices, vaulted apps directly
opposite the main entrance, six deep niches, each screened by a pair of marble columns,
and these forward-projecting shrines called ediculi for displaying statues of the gods.
We revel in the elaborate pattern of colored marble veneer covering the wall and the simple
square grid decorating the floor.
Everywhere we look, outside and in, this extraordinary building proclaims the glory of Rome.
In the colonnaded forecourt, we're reminded of military triumphs.
The classical portico reflects Rome's respect for Greek culture, which is nonetheless subject
to the authority of the imperial eagle hovering overhead.
The plan of the sanctuary is a circle, the most perfect geometric shape, with no beginning
and no end, like the eternal city itself.
To 2nd century Romans, those encircling cornices might symbolize the 9,000-mile boundary of
the empire.
Within that boundary, Roman dominion is evident in exotic marbles imported from conquered
lands, and even in that simple square floor grid, which suggests centuriation, the Roman
practice of subdividing conquered territory into regular, perfectly square parcels.
A practice we'll learn about next lecture.
Overhead the Great Dome evokes the heavens, covering the empire from horizon to horizon
in unity with the gods.
Yet even as the pantheon so closely reflected the empire from which it emerged, it clearly
had a far more universal appeal.
Amianus Marcellinus, a 4th century Roman historian, called it the Temple of the Whole World.
And over a millennium later, in 1632, Pope Urban VIII had the following inscription carved
into one of its walls.
Pantheon, edificium toto terrarum orbe caliberimum, the most celebrated edifice in the whole
world.
Yet this celebrated edifice, this expression of architectural genius, wouldn't have been
possible without an equivalent application of engineering genius.
So let's spend the remainder of this lecture looking at the pantheon as a structural engineering
achievement and as a product of Roman technological innovation.
In examining the engineering design of the pantheon, it would be most helpful to know
something about its designer.
Sadly, we don't.
According to the Architrave inscription we saw earlier, the builder was Marcus Agrippa,
a talented general, statesman and engineer who served the emperor Augustus during the
latter half of the 1st century BC.
Now Agrippa did build a temple to all the gods on this same site, but that structure
was destroyed by fire in 80 AD, setting the stage for the pantheon we know today.
We're quite certain that Agrippa didn't build this one because the earliest brick stamps
found in the structure date from 117 AD, 129 years after Agrippa's death.
Regardless of who designed the pantheon, there's no doubt that Hadrian was its patron.
Born in Spain and later adopted as the son and successor to Trajan, Hadrian was an intelligent
cultured and broadly talented man, a capable soldier and administrator.
He was also an accomplished artist, poet and architect.
Throughout his 21 year reign, Hadrian fostered extensive large scale construction in Rome
and around the empire.
One 4th century biographer wrote that Hadrian built public buildings without number and
placed his own name on only one, the temple dedicated to his father Trajan.
If this observation is true, Hadrian really did demonstrate modesty so entirely uncharacteristic
of a Roman emperor that it might explain why he chose to rededicate the new pantheon to
Agrippa even though Agrippa's pantheon was long gone by that time.
There's considerable scholarly speculation that the designer of the pantheon was actually
Apollodorus of Damascus, Trajan's gifted engineer whom we met last lecture.
This was certainly alive when the pantheon was built and many aspects of this design
reflect structural ideas that are evident in other buildings attributed to Apollodorus.
The reason why he might not have designed the pantheon is that he had evidently fallen
out of favor with Hadrian by that time when Hadrian assumed power in 117.
The historian Cassius Dio tells us that Apollodorus had criticized one of the young Hadrian's
architectural designs.
Hadrian never forgot the insult and after becoming emperor he had Apollodorus banished
and later executed on trumped up charges.
Now many historians doubt Dio's account but even if it's true it doesn't rule out the
possibility that Apollodorus had a hand in designing the pantheon and given the prominence
of his prior engineering achievements it's certainly possible that his work strongly
influenced the pantheon's design even if he wasn't personally involved.
For what it's worth Apollodorus gets my vote.
Regardless of who was responsible I must emphasize that the pantheon didn't just spring spontaneously
from the mind of its designer.
Circular buildings were actually common in antiquity.
The Treasury of Atreus, a Mycenaean tomb from 1300 BC had both a circular plan and a primitive
stone dome.
Greek burial mounds and shrines often incorporated circular stone walls and colonnades as did
the Roman temple of Vesta.
An Augustan era temple at Baye had a 70 foot diameter concrete dome that probably served
as a prototype for the pantheon and there are strong structural similarities between
the octagonal atrium of Nero's Domus aria, a model of which we have here on set today,
and the dome of the pantheon.
So in one sense the pantheon represents just one link in a long chain of development.
In that sense it employed no revolutionary new technologies.
Yet in another sense the pantheon must be regarded as innovative simply because it successfully
met the structural challenge inherent in its extraordinary scale.
Viewed holistically the engineering of the pantheon was unique in the ancient world.
Indeed it wasn't until the 19th century that a longer spanning dome was built successfully.
In analyzing the pantheon as an engineered system we'll separately consider its three
main components, the dome, the cylindrical drum on which the dome rests, and the portico.
The dome is solid cast concrete and with the exception of the stone columns and decorative
elements the remainder of the structure is entirely opus testacium.
The pantheon is indeed the ultimate manifestation of the Roman construction revolution.
Now last lecture in our discussion of the domus aria I introduced some basic ideas about
the dome as a structural element.
To understand the pantheon's dome we need to review these concepts and add a few more.
Let's take a look at a model of a typical hemispherical dome.
As we said last lecture a dome can be visualized as a series of arches arranged around a central
axis and like an arch those individual elements of the dome carry load primarily in compression.
When the principal loading of the dome which is typically its own weight acts downward
compressive force is transmitted out and through the dome radially through these radio segments.
As a result of that compressive loading passing out through the dome the dome experiences
significant lateral thrust and therefore that thrust must be restrained.
But as the dome is loaded those individual segments expand laterally but as this happens
small gaps open up in the spaces between those segments and those gaps open up tell us that
something else is going on in this dome.
What's happening is that tension is occurring in the circumferential direction the opening
of those gaps tells us that the circumference of the dome is actually increasing under the
action of load and to demonstrate that point let me take a simple flexible string and wrap
it around the dome and then once again I'll load the dome and I'll simply ask you to watch
as the dome is loaded and the segments expand that circumferential string is going to increase
in length it's stretching outward as the dome expands and therefore the fact that the string
is stretching tells us that there is tension in the dome operating perpendicular to the
main load carrying path the compressive path that perpendicular direction is circumferential
and that that tension is really quite significant.
Now if the dome were made of a material with significant tensile strength something like
steel in a modern dome this behavior would actually be quite advantageous the tensile
stress in the material operating in this circumferential direction would actually hold the radial
slices together and therefore significantly reduce the need for lateral support at the
base of the dome and result in significantly greater structural integrity and structural
stability but the pantheon dome is made of concrete and concrete has very low tensile
strength so a concrete dome like the one in the pantheon tends to crack along these radial
lines just as you see here and those cracks occur as a direct result of that circumferential
tension and indeed the actual pantheon dome exhibits just this sort of cracking.
In the 1930s the plaster coating on the interface of the dome had become unserviceable and needed
to be replaced.
When the old plaster was removed a regular pattern of those radial cracks was revealed.
These cracks which are hidden from view but are still there today actually don't compromise
the structural integrity of the dome as long as the associated structural system provides
an effective means of restraining the dome's lateral thrust.
The designer the pantheon responded to the challenge of lateral thrust with a variety
of ingenious design features several of these reduce the thrust others restrain it.
The lateral thrust of a dome is directly proportional to its weight so the obvious way to reduce
thrust is by reducing the weight of the dome.
Both the oculus and the coffers achieve this goal by simply removing material from the
dome itself.
The weight of the dome has also been reduced by significantly modifying the components of
the concrete itself.
Now recall that Roman concrete was made by combining pazzolana, lime and water to create
mortar and then mixing the mortar with stone or rubble which we call aggregate.
The strength and weight of the cured concrete are largely determined by the aggregate.
The pantheon's dome uses progressively lighter types of aggregate at progressively higher
levels.
At the base of the dome the aggregate consists of broken bricks.
Higher up the bricks are intermingled with lightweight tufa and at the very highest level
the tufa is mixed with extremely lightweight volcanic pumice.
There's even some evidence that sealed terracotta containers or amphorae were placed into the
wet concrete to create air voids that further lightened the dome.
Of course air voids and lightweight aggregate also weaken the concrete but the internal forces
up at the top of the dome are considerably lower than at the bottom so the reduced strength
in the upper region isn't really a problem.
As a technological innovation the use of lightweight aggregate was both ingenious and quite effective.
A modern engineering analysis has shown that had this technique not been used stresses at
the base of the dome would have been about 80% higher.
But lightweight concrete wouldn't have been strong enough to withstand the very high concentration
of internal forces right around the oculus and that's why the oculus itself is reinforced
with this five foot thick ring of bricks.
Just as we saw in the domus aurea this ring functions as a three dimensional keystone
subjected to compressive forces pressing inward from all sides.
This configuration is perfectly suited to this loading.
With these radial oriented bricks acting as vooswars the oculus ring carries load exactly
like an arch.
An ingenious arrangement that makes this distinctive architectural feature possible.
Now these various measures to lighten the dome notwithstanding it still weighs over
5,000 tons thus it still generates immense lateral thrust.
To understand how this thrust is resisted we now turn downward to the cylindrical drum
which supports the dome from below.
The most important mechanism for resisting the dome's thrust is the 20 foot thickness
of the drum walls.
A thick wall is far more resistant to overturning than a thin one because of both its broader
base and its greater weight.
The pantheon's designer enhanced this beneficial effect by extending the drum upward above
the base of the dome and adding this series of step rings to its upper surface.
These features add even more weight above the drum effectively deflecting the dome's
lateral thrust downward and further increasing its structural stability.
Here you can see these features on the actual structure.
This exterior cornice is actually at the same elevation as the base of the dome so all of
this material above it and the step rings are contributing to its structural stability.
From this exterior perspective the drum of the pantheon looks like a simple solid cylinder
of opus testacium but as this floor plan shows the drum is actually honeycombed with voids
that effectively reduce its weight by half without compromising its stability.
Some of these voids, the entrance corridor, the apps, the niches are architectural features.
The others are intended only to save concrete and provide access to the inner structure.
The apps and the niches present a particular structural challenge which we'll examine
with the help of this computer model.
At each of these locations the drum walls are reduced to one third of their normal thickness
and thus are significantly weakened yet overhead the immense weight of the dome is applied uniformly
around the entire perimeter of the drum.
So how is all that weight transmitted down through the drum without crushing those weakened
sections at the niches?
The answer is a brilliantly conceived system of brick, vaults and arches embedded entirely
within the drum wall.
To understand this system we first need to remove the dome, the interior marble facing,
then the opus testacium forming the bulk of the upper drum, leaving behind this incredible
internal skeleton of brick arches and vaults called relieving arches which channel those
immense compressive forces around the niches into the adjacent wall sections and these
stone columns within the niches and finally down to the foundation, a solid ring of concrete
15 feet thick which distributes the building's immense weight safely to the underlying soil.
Here you can see the outer edges of these vaults on the exterior surface of the drum
but recognize that these represent only a small portion of a sophisticated structural
system that's mostly hidden from view, embedded in concrete and hidden behind the marble veneer
covering the interior wall.
Ah, the marble veneer.
Let's pause for a moment to discuss this new way of using stone in Imperial Roman buildings.
In previous lectures we've seen that early Roman construction relied heavily on local
tufa and travertine for traditional cut stone masonry.
As the new Imperial architecture emerged, brick and concrete became the norm for load
carrying structure while imported specialty materials like marble and granite came into
vogue almost exclusively for decoration.
This trend began in the second century BC when Roman generals began commemorating their
military victories by erecting monuments made of marble imported from conquered lands in
the east.
Soon, colored marble became a status symbol in the homes of the rich and famous.
This trend was facilitated by new technological developments, most notably the invention of
an iron saw for cutting hard stone into thin sheets.
Augustus accelerated this trend by systematically gathering exotic stone from throughout the
empire for his high profile building projects.
Near the end of his reign, he famously proclaimed that he had found Rome a city of brick and
left it a city of marble.
Over time, the acquisition and exploitation of decorative stone became a formal Imperial
institution with an extensive centrally controlled quarrying and transportation infrastructure
providing a guaranteed source of supply for the emperor's grand projects.
As this system matured, Imperial quarries began prefabricating and stockpiling standard
sized columns and capitals so that architects wouldn't have to place special orders for
each component.
It was during this period that Romans acquired their taste for monolithic columns.
Each a single piece of stone turned on a huge lathe, another impressive technological development.
This new fashion may have been influenced by a desire to show off all of those exotic
multi-hued stones flooding in from the provinces, but it's also quite likely that monolithic
columns became popular simply because they were so difficult to quarry, fabricate and
transport.
In effect, they were billboards displaying Roman technological prowess.
Which brings us to the final major component of the pantheon, the front portico, with its
pediment and gabled roof supported on 16 monolithic columns of Egyptian granite.
As impressive as these 40 foot, 60 ton shafts are, there's strong evidence that the portico
was originally designed for even larger 50 foot columns.
The evidence is right here.
This odd gabled cornice on the front wall of the portico, 10 feet above the roof.
Some scholars believe that this cornice corresponds to the originally planned level of the portico
roof, which would have required 50 foot columns.
Now, if this speculation is true, then why the change?
Why was the roof lowered?
Well, we don't know, of course, but it's worth noting that a 50 foot column would weigh nearly
twice as much as a 40 footer, because that 25% increase in both its length and diameter
would nearly double the volume of stone used for the shaft and weight is proportional to
volume.
The substantial weight of the planned 50 foot columns might easily have caused insurmountable
problems in quarrying, transporting, or especially in erecting these shafts in the very tight
quarters around the portico of the pantheon, thereby forcing a change to the smaller column
size 40 footers after construction of the rotunda was already well along.
If this odd cornice really is a vestige of a more ambitious design that failed, well,
then the pantheon, this grand symbol of imperial power, also displays a subtler symbol of the
imperial overstretch that ultimately would contribute to Rome's downfall.
This architectural anomaly, notwithstanding, few buildings in the history of human endeavor
have been as influential as the pantheon.
When the Pope called this building the world's most celebrated edifice, he was probably referring
not just to its fame, but also to the host of more recent buildings that have mimicked
its architectural form.
We'll see some of these in lecture 24 when we discuss the modern legacy of ancient technology.
But for now, please allow me simply to assert, as a work of architecture and engineering,
the pantheon has often been imitated, but never equaled.
And on that triumphal note, we conclude our eight lecture survey of great Greek and Roman
structures.
Next lecture, we'll begin our consideration of the broader technological system in which
these buildings reside, system we call infrastructure.
Until then, thank you.
