Welcome back.
Last lecture I used this model to demonstrate the basic elements of a typical Roman aqueduct.
In the spring, as a water source, continuous downhill flow of water through a man-made channel,
use of an arched bridge to carry the channel across a valley, delivery of the water into
a receiving tank within the city, distribution of that water to fountains and baths throughout
the city via a pipe network, and then finally discharge of the wastewater into a local stream.
While this model illustrates the basic functions of a Roman aqueduct, it really doesn't adequately
capture the vast scope and technological complexity of this amazing infrastructure system.
In my courses at West Point, I find that my students don't truly understand a complex
engineered system until they've had an opportunity to design one themselves.
So let's give it a try.
Today, to deepen our understanding of Roman aqueducts, and to better appreciate the challenges
faced by the engineers who created them, we're going to design one ourselves.
Consider this piece of terrain and this hypothetical Roman town, Magnus Kursum, which needs an
aqueduct to supply water for its new public bath complex.
You and I are Roman engineers charged with developing the design.
We'll begin the design process by identifying the location where the aqueduct will deliver
water to the city.
Within the city, water distribution must be driven by gravity, so the delivery point
should be at or near the city's highest point.
We'll use this hilltop.
Next, we'll decide on the gradient or slope of the channel.
As we learned last lecture, an open channel aqueduct system must maintain a downhill
gradient or slope all along its length.
If any portion of the channel is sloped the wrong way, that is uphill, the water will
back up and it will overflow at that location.
The gradient of a channel is normally expressed as a percentage, elevation change per horizontal
distance.
For example, the average gradient of the aqueducts supplying the city of Rome was about 0.4%,
meaning that the elevation of the channel decreases by 0.4 feet or about 5 inches for
every 100 feet of length.
This is an amazingly shallow slope.
On my graphic, I've had to exaggerate the slope considerably for clarity, but we need
to take a look at an actual 0.4% slope to see what it really looks like.
This trough here on the demo table has a slope of about 0.4%.
If you look closely, you'll see that the gradient is hardly discernible at all.
The high end of the channel over here is only about one-eighth of an inch higher than the
low end out here on the opposite side.
And yet, that very, very slight, hardly discernible slope is more than adequate to keep water
flowing through the channel.
But imagine the precision in surveying and construction required to maintain this barely
discernible slope over a 50-mile channel that winds its way around hills and across
valleys, as many Roman aqueducts did.
Because of this need to accommodate varying terrain, most aqueducts didn't use a single
uniform gradient, rather they were designed in several segments, each with a gradient
chosen to accommodate the terrain through which that particular segment passed.
For example, a relatively steep gradient might be used to bring an aqueduct down from its
source in the mountains, while a significantly shallower slope would be used to carry the
same channel across a flat plain.
Therefore, our design should be based on a range of acceptable gradients rather than
a single value.
In Rome's water supply system, ten of the eleven aqueducts had gradients within a range
from 0.06% on the low end to 0.6% on the high end.
So we'll use these values as our minimum and maximum acceptable gradients.
But why have limits at all?
Well, if the slope of a channel is significantly greater than 0.6%, the velocity of the flow
will be too high and the conduit will wear out prematurely through erosion.
If the slope is significantly less than 0.06%, the water will flow too slowly and it will
be susceptible to clogging and overflowing.
So now we'll locate an appropriate water source.
A few Roman aqueducts drew surface water from rivers, but most tapped groundwater from upland
springs.
Obviously, the source needs to be at a higher elevation than the delivery point.
Remember, water engineers rule number one, water flows downhill.
Thus, for the Magnus Cursum Aqueduct, we'll be looking for springs somewhere up in these
mountains north of the city.
If we're lucky, we might find a steady flow of water already gushing from a hillside.
But more likely, we'll need to do some exploration to find a suitable aquifer.
In Book 8 of De Architectura, Vitruvius provides several practical suggestions for locating
water sources.
For example, he tells us that certain plants like bulrush and ivy grow only in damp soil,
so if we encounter them somewhere other than in marshy ground, there's probably an aquifer
below.
Vitruvius also suggests that water sources can be identified by watching the vapor rising
from the ground at sunrise.
This makes sense because at sunrise, groundwater will normally have been drawn to the surface
by capillary action, but not yet evaporated by the sun.
Using these sorts of techniques, we've found a possible water source on this north-facing
hillside about four miles from Magnus Cursum.
We'll first verify the presence of an aquifer by digging a shaft downward until we hit the
water table.
Then we'll drive a horizontal gallery inward from a lower point on the hillside, allowing
water to flow freely from the aquifer to the surface.
At the point where this gallery emerges, we'll build a settling tank.
This is a masonry basin that's designed to remove sediment from the water before it
enters the aqueduct.
We'll talk more about settling tanks in some detail next lecture.
Once we've verified that the quantity and quality of water from this source are adequate,
we're ready to begin the challenging task of determining the best route for our aqueduct.
This process begins with a careful survey of the terrain along all possible routes.
As Roman engineers, we'll perform this survey with a device called the corabatis, a long
wooden table used to measure the change in elevation over a distance.
Before we can use the device, though, we need to level it.
We'll insert wooden wedges under its downhill legs here, and then check these plumb lines
and this water-filled trough to ensure that the top surface is indeed perfectly level.
Now we'll look through this pair of sights toward a target rod that's held by an assistant
some distance away, and we'll measure the height of our sight line on the rod.
On this diagram, I've labeled the measured height of the sight line, it's labeled as
S, and the height of the corabatis, labeled as H. As you can see, the change in elevation
E is simply equal to S minus H.
By repeating this measurement hundreds of times along the proposed route, in conjunction
with measurements of horizontal distance, using those various techniques we discussed
back in lecture 10, we can develop a terrain profile.
This is a graph showing the variation of elevation all along the route.
To illustrate the concept of a terrain profile, let's start by investigating the simplest
possible route for our aqueduct, a perfectly straight line that runs from the source to
the delivery point inside of Magnus Corsum.
If we slice through our 3D model along this line, the resulting shape that you see here
is the terrain profile.
The horizontal axis represents distance in miles, the vertical axis is elevation in feet,
and note that I've exaggerated the vertical scale considerably so the variations in elevation
are more clearly visible.
Now let's connect the source and the delivery point with a straight line, a proposed aqueduct
channel of uniform gradient.
This channel loses about 75 feet of elevation over a distance of 4 miles, and that works
out to 75 feet over 4 miles times 5,280 feet is a gradient of 0.35%.
That's about midway between our allowable upper and lower limits, 0.6% and 0.06%.
So we can conclude that the location of our chosen source is a viable one.
We can use the terrain profile to evaluate the suitability of this proposed channel alignment.
Note that here on the profile, in this region, the gradient line is above the existing terrain.
That means that the aqueduct channel will need to be raised up on an embankment or bridge.
And in this region on the graph, the gradient line passes below the surface, indicating
that we'll need a tunnel.
But before we can consider the feasibility of these engineered structures, we need to
look more closely at the aqueduct channel itself.
Here's a very typical example.
This is an actual cross section excavated from the Eiffel Aqueduct in Germany.
The channel is a rectangular concrete trough.
It's roughly 3 feet wide and 5 feet high.
It's covered with a stone vault.
The walls on the floor are coated with a special mortar made of lime and crushed brick, polished
to a glass-like finish.
This reduces friction between the surfaces of the channel and the water, and it also
facilitates the removal of those calcium carbonate deposits that we learned about last lecture.
Given that this coating only covers the walls and floor, we can conclude, and it's absolutely
the case, that aqueduct channels were not designed to flow full.
The depth of water running through the channel is typically one-third to one-half of the
conduit's height.
The extra height above the water level is provided solely to facilitate maintenance,
so that a worker can physically enter the conduit to repair leaks or remove mineral deposits.
The vaulted roof overhead is there only to reduce evaporation and to prevent foreign
material from falling into the channel.
Because the channel does not flow full, it's still categorized as an open channel, for
the purposes of analyzing the flow.
Now wherever possible, the channel is built slightly below ground, using a technique called
cut and cover.
Using this method, the channel is constructed inside a trench, with inspections shafts added
at regular intervals.
And then the trench is backfilled, like this, with soil, so that it's completely out of
sight.
But even though this below ground configuration is the norm, it was often necessary to raise
the channel above ground to maintain an appropriate gradient.
This can be accomplished in three ways.
First, where the channel needs to be raised six feet or less, we'll use something called
a substructio, a solid stone or brick-faced embankment, with the water channel perched
up on top.
Here's the ruin of a substructio in southern France.
Where the required channel innovation is greater than six feet, we'll use either a bridge
or an inverted siphon.
Aqueduct bridges can be used for two distinctly different purposes.
The first is to carry the water channel across a valley, as I demonstrated at the start of
this lecture.
The second is to elevate the channel over relatively level ground, often for very long
distances, simply for the purpose of maintaining the planned gradient.
This structure in Pamplona, Spain, is an excellent example of this application of the Aqueduct
Bridge.
Now, single-tier arcades like this one are generally used whenever the required channel
elevation is less than 70 feet.
For greater heights, two-tier arcades, like the spectacular Segovia Aqueduct, and three-tier
structures like this one at Merida, Spain, are used for improved stability.
Why are multi-tier arcades more stable anyway?
Well, let's do some experiments and see.
Structural elements that experience compression, like the piers that support arcade bridges,
are subject to a unique failure mode called buckling.
Here's how buckling works.
If I take that structural element and I subject it to a pure compressive force, and notice
that I'm just pushing directly downward, and even though that downward force is entirely
vertical, notice that as I apply load, at some point, the element suddenly displaces
laterally and quite catastrophically.
This is a buckling failure, and it's quite a serious failure mode.
It's always catastrophic.
The structure will collapse in its entirety if buckling is allowed to occur.
Now, what's important for our purposes here is that buckling strength is substantially
influenced by the length of the structural element.
The longer the element, the more susceptible it is to buckling, and indeed, the equation
that we use to calculate the strength of a compression element in buckling has the length
squared in the denominator.
So as the length doubles, for example, the buckling strength will decrease to one quarter
of its former value.
We can see that difference because recall how easy it was for me to buckle.
This element, I can push down just slightly, and it buckles quite easily.
This shorter element is exactly the same size in terms of its cross-section dimensions.
Its width and thickness are precisely the same as the longer one that I've been working
with previously.
But now, when I apply compressive loading to it, it's physically impossible for me
to buckle this element simply because it's so much shorter.
Had the Romans used single-tier arcades for aqueducts over 70 feet tall, the piers would
have been quite slender, as you can see in this graphic, and therefore dangerously susceptible
to buckling.
By adding arches at multiple levels, as you can see here, each of these long piers has
now been subdivided into three shorter ones, and therefore the shorter members are much
less susceptible to buckling, and so their load-carrying capacity is greatly improved,
and therefore the load-carrying capacity of the structure as a whole is substantially
improved.
Based on archaeological evidence, it appears that no Roman aqueduct bridge ever exceeded
160 feet tall, which just happens to be the height of the famous Pont du Gard aqueduct
bridge in southern France.
And since there are several aqueducts for which taller bridges would have been highly
advantageous, we can conclude that that 160-foot height was almost certainly a well-established
practical upper limit for the height of aqueduct bridges.
Now, we're not sure why this limit existed.
It's possible that Roman engineers were concerned about the structural stability of taller bridges.
It's also possible that the greater weight of a higher bridge would have caused foundation
problems.
It's entirely possible that Roman engineers built a taller aqueduct bridge and it collapsed,
and they vowed never to do it again.
Regardless, in our design, we'll respect this convention and we'll avoid using bridges
over 160 feet tall.
On the other hand, Roman engineers routinely built inverted siphons across valleys far
deeper than 160 feet.
Indeed, all eight of the known Roman siphons built in Gaul had heights substantially greater
than 160 feet.
A good indicator that siphons were used almost exclusively in situations where bridges would
have been infeasible.
It was a purposeful use of the siphon in places where the bridge simply couldn't be built
tall enough.
The most spectacular Roman inverted siphon in the world is found on the gear aqueduct
which supplied water to the city of Le Dunham, modern Lyon, France.
At 1.6 miles long and 400 feet deep, this siphon was over twice as high and ten times
as long as the Pont du Gard.
While somewhat smaller than the Hellenistic era siphon at Pergamon, the gear aqueduct's
capacity was six times greater, an astonishing 6.6 million gallons per day.
Here's how it worked.
At the top of the valley, water from a conventional open channel aqueducts poured into this vaulted
header tank and then into nine parallel lead pipes, each 10 inches in diameter.
These pipes ran down a massive concrete ramp and then descended into the valley underground.
And this header and ramp have survived to the present day.
Even in ruins, as you can see in this photo, they are impressive structures indeed.
Now, near the bottom of the valley, the pipelines emerged from underground and they crossed the
valley on a low arcaded structure called a venter bridge.
And then they climbed up the opposite side to a receiving tank where another conventional
open channel aqueduct continued on to Le Dunham.
The purpose of this venter bridge, which has also survived, was to reduce the pressure
in the siphon pipes by raising them somewhat above the valley floor.
Use of the venter bridge reflects a keen understanding of the mechanics of an inverted siphon and demonstrates
unequivocally that the Roman's preference for aqueduct bridges wasn't motivated by an
inability to understand or build siphons.
And what about tunnels?
Well, the Romans certainly built them, though, again, only when all other feasible alternatives
were ruled out.
Into Vitruvius, the standard Roman tuttling technique was to excavate a horizontal gallery
in conjunction with a series of vertical shafts like this.
Yes, this is the same process used by the Persians to build the canot as we discussed
last lecture.
Indeed, the advantages of this shaft and gallery tunneling method are identical to those of
the canot.
Vertical shafts simplify surveying by allowing the alignment of the tunnel to be controlled
precisely from the surface, in contrast with the method used by Eupolinos the Greek for
his tunnel on the island of Samos, which was dug inward from both ends simultaneously.
The vertical shafts on the shaft and gallery method also reduce construction time by allowing
for multiple work faces within the tunnel and then by providing multiple pathways for
the removal of excavated material.
So speaking of tunnels, recall that our proposed straight-line route for the Magnus Cursum
aqueduct requires a one-mile-long tunnel through this mountain.
The longest Roman aqueduct tunnel known was about 1.4 miles long, so this one in our design
would be at least feasible.
But there's a far more practical alternative.
Because the river flows directly through the mountain just a short distance away from
our source, we can simplify the route considerably by routing the channel around the ridge and
then back to its original alignment, like this.
Granted, we've now significantly increased the length of the aqueduct, so our original
.35% gradient has now dropped to about .1% along this loop.
Nonetheless, this shallower slope is well within our acceptable limits, so we can continue.
From this point forward, the channel needs to be elevated by as much as 155 feet above
the ground for the entire three-mile distance to the city.
Though it's theoretically feasible, this would be the grandest Roman aqueduct bridge
ever built.
It would be 30 times longer than the Pont de Gard and almost as tall.
As pragmatic Roman engineers, we'll pursue a more efficient alternative, following the
contours of the terrain to obviate the need for such an extravagant bridge.
We will need a bridge, of course, to convey the channel across the river.
But to minimize cost and construction time, we'd like this bridge to be as short and
as low as possible.
To minimize its length, we'll place it at the narrowest point in the valley, here.
And then, to minimize its height, we'll increase the channel's gradient between the spring
and the bridgehead to the maximum permissible value of 0.6 percent.
This adjustment lowers the channel to within 140 feet of the river, resulting in a bridge
of very reasonable dimensions.
From this point forward, we could use a ground-level channel almost all the way to the city, following
the contours of the terrain like this.
Unfortunately, this route won't work, because the resulting gradient is too shallow.
The difference in elevation between the bridge and the delivery point is now only 20 feet.
And the distance covered by this convoluted route is nearly 10 miles, which by the way
is over three times longer than the straight-line distance between these same two points.
The resulting gradient is about 0.04 percent, which is undesirably low.
I should note that a few Roman aqueducts did use gradients significantly lower than this.
One segment of the Nîme Aqueduct, that's the one that has the Pont du Gard as part
of the overall system in France, has an astonishingly low gradient of 0.007 percent.
But such cases reflect extreme conditions with no feasible alternatives.
In our case, we can address this issue quite effectively by simply short-circuiting the
channel's westernmost loop with the bridge across this low-lying area.
This mile-long structure will be only 70 feet tall at its highest point, so we can use a
single-tier arcade, tapering down to a substructio at each of its outer ends.
This shortcut reduces the overall length of the channel by about 4 miles, increasing the
gradient of this final segment to just over our minimum acceptable value of 0.06 percent.
We'll also need an arcade for this final approach to Magnus Corsum here at this location, because
the water must be delivered over the city wall to this hilltop inside of the city.
Here the channel will empty into a masonry tank that constitutes both the end of the
aqueduct and the start of the urban water distribution network, which we'll be discussing
next lecture.
Congratulations!
Our design is now complete.
Let's summarize it by drawing an updated terrain profile, which depicts the elevation
of the water channel as we've designed it along our chosen route from the source to
the city.
This blue line represents the channel itself, set at a relatively steep 0.6 percent slope
for its first mile from the source to the bridge, and then assuming a shallower 0.06
percent slope for the remainder of its length from the bridge to the city.
Next to this route is a ground-level channel, as it should be, follows the terrain and is
most efficient to construct.
But our design does include three bridges, one to cross the river, one to shorten the
channel on that shortcut route across the low-lying area, and then one to carry the
water into Magnus Corsum at an appropriate elevation.
The route crosses no valleys deeper than 160 feet, so there was no need for any inverted
siphons.
This design is hypothetical, of course.
But it's entirely typical of an aqueduct serving a smallish provincial town.
The detailed planning, precision surveying, and high-quality construction required to
implement even a modest system like this one are vivid testimonials to Roman engineering
know-how.
Still, we can't fully appreciate the scope and sophistication of Roman water supply
infrastructure without also examining a large-scale system serving a major urban area.
There were many such systems throughout the Empire, but the quintessential example is,
of course, the system serving Rome itself.
Rome's first major aqueduct was the Aquapia, commissioned in 312 BC by none other than
Apius Claudius, the magistrate who also built the Via Apia, Rome's first major intercity
road.
The Aquapia provided a much-needed supplement to the city's wells, cisterns, and springs,
which were becoming increasingly inadequate for a rapidly growing population.
Its channel ran entirely underground, from a spring about 10 miles east of Rome to a
fountain in the Forum Boreum, one of the city's lowest public spaces.
About 40 years later, the Anio Vitus was added to the system.
This aqueduct drew water from the Anio River in the mountains 40 miles east of Rome.
It too ran underground, but by following higher terrain on the route into the city, it
was able to deliver water to the Viminal Hill on the northeastern side of the metropolis.
In 145 BC, the longest and most celebrated of all Roman aqueducts, the Aquamarcia was
completed.
The Marcia ran underground for 50 miles from its source, a spring in the Anio Valley, but
as it left the mountains, the channel was elevated on an arcade for the six-mile stretch
across the plains of Campania into Rome.
The first ever use of an aqueduct bridge provided the elevation needed to deliver the Marcia's
water to the Capitoline Hill.
As demand continued to increase in Rome, the Aquatepula was added in 127 BC.
The Aquajulia, named for its patron Julius Caesar, followed in 33 BC.
These two aqueducts originated at separate sources in the Albin Hills south of Rome, but
when they reached the Campanian Plain, they were both piggybacked on top of the Aquamarcia,
creating a triple-decker bridge as shown on this cross-section drawing.
The Aquaclaudia and the Anionovus, both built in 52 AD, used this same expedient.
Here's the remains of the Anionovus, built of brick-faced concrete, somewhat deteriorated,
but still visible, riding on the top of the Aquaclaudia and its stone channel.
Now note that, even though these channels ran adjacent to each other for many miles,
the Romans generally didn't combine the water from multiple channels into one.
Merging channels might have made good sense from an engineering perspective, but the Romans
kept them separate, primarily as a matter of taste.
Each aqueduct had its own source, and therefore the water from each source had its own special
character.
The Aquamarcia, for example, was renowned for supplying Rome's best-tasting water.
The Anionovus supplied sediment-filled, foul-tasting river water that was considered to be suitable
only for irrigation.
Mixing water from these distinctly different sources would not have pleased the Roman people.
By the 3rd century AD, Rome was served by an integrated system of 11 aqueducts sprawling
over 300 miles and delivering about 300 million gallons per day.
By comparison, the New York City water supply system wouldn't achieve this capacity until
well into the 20th century.
When we consider both the effectiveness and the majesty of these aqueducts, it's hard
not to agree with a historian, Edward Gibbon, who called them the noblest monuments of Roman
genius and power.
But what happened to those 300 million gallons of water after they reached Rome?
We'll answer this question next lecture as we go with the flow and examine urban water
distribution.
Until then, thank you.
