Welcome to the final lecture in this course, and thanks for accompanying me on this whirlwind
journey through the world of Greek and Roman technology.
But just because we've reached the end of this course doesn't mean our opportunities
to appreciate ancient engineering are also ending.
The purpose of today's lecture is to explore the modern legacy of classical era technology.
Through this exploration, I hope to demonstrate that long after our course has ended, we can
continue to experience the marvels of ancient technology by learning to see their modern
manifestations in our everyday lives.
Let's consider an example from my everyday life, but for some background.
In 431 BC, Pericles, the great Athenian soldier statesman, delivered his famous funeral oration
as part of Athens' traditional annual public funeral ceremony honoring her war dead.
Pericles delivered his speech at a pivotal moment in Greek history, the end of the first
year of the Peloponnesian War, and he used this occasion to do something quite unique.
He honored the Athenian citizen soldiers killed in the war by extolling the virtues of the
democratic polis for which they fought.
In 1902, another great soldier statesman, President Theodore Roosevelt, had much the
same purpose in mind when he delivered the keynote address at the centennial celebration
of the school where I teach, the U.S. Military Academy at West Point.
At this pivotal moment in American history, the young democracy had just become an imperial
power, much like Athens in the Age of Pericles.
In Roosevelt's centennial address, he praised West Point graduates' contributions to the
nation's success, and he extolled the virtues of the academy that had produced these citizen
soldiers.
West Point, he said, is the most absolutely democratic of all American institutions.
How fitting that Roosevelt's speech was delivered in this imposing stone building, constructed
just four years earlier as a memorial to West Point graduates killed in the nation's wars.
Named for the distinguished graduate who funded its construction, Cullum Hall was designed
by the renowned American architectural firm of McKim, Mead, and White, and what better
way for these architects to evoke the greatness of a young democracy that had recently become
an imperial power?
What better way to celebrate the triumphs of West Point's first century?
What better way to honor the noble sacrifice of its graduates who died in defensive freedom?
What better way than to clothe this great building in the trappings of classical Greece?
So whenever I visit Cullum Hall, I can't help but be reminded of Periclean Athens.
The building's exterior is dominated by these monumental fluted ionic columns, perfectly
proportioned according to Vitruvian design rules.
Above the cornice are authentic anti-fixes, those decorative bosses that were originally
used on Greek temples to cover the exposed edges of terracotta roof tiles, and the cornice
is punctuated by these lion's head water spouts, a wonderful classical detail that
can be seen on countless ancient cornice blocks like this one.
Cullum Hall's front entrance, with its pediment and bronze door, is straight from Book 4 of
Dei Architektura.
Inside we see engaged Corinthian columns and a coffered ceiling that's nearly identical
to the ones used in Athenian temples like the Erechtheon.
I love Cullum Hall, not just because it's a majestic, historically important building,
but also because it's a powerful manifestation of classical Greece, and one that's totally
accessible to anyone who knows what to look for.
And that manifestation isn't just a collection of architectural details, it's also the underlying
spirit that these details were meant to evoke.
The spirit of glorious achievement, of freedom, of sacrifice for a worthy cause, in short,
the spirit of Pericles.
That's what today's lecture is all about, learning to find and experience the spirit
of classical Greek and Roman technology in our modern world.
Now, it's often supposed that the technological developments of the classical world were largely
lost with the demise of Roman civilization in the 5th century AD, and had to be reinvented
in later eras.
And there's certainly ample evidence to support this contention.
No doubt, the fall of the Western Roman Empire initiated a dark age for technological development,
as barbarian incursions, political turmoil, and the collapse of central authority ended
imperial sponsorship of public works and military research and development, while also disrupting
the well-established system by which engineering expertise was developed, taught, and propagated.
Nowhere was this phenomenon more apparent than at the Museum of Alexandria, the government-sponsored
think tank that spawned so many of the technological innovations we've discussed in this course.
During its heyday in the 3rd century BC, the museum employed over a thousand of the Hellenistic
world's best minds, performing scientific research, inventing, lecturing, and publishing
their work.
But by the 3rd century AD, the museum was being actively suppressed by paranoid emperors,
and was ultimately destroyed by fire in 272, possibly on the orders of the emperor Aurelian.
With the museum's demise, many promising lines of technological development died.
Consider, just as one example, the work of hero of Alexandria, perhaps the museum's
most prolific and creative experimenter.
This amazing character wrote technical treatises on pneumatics, mechanics, surveying, catapult
design, optics, and geometry.
He's credited with inventing the syringe, the vending machine, this amazing wind-powered
organ, the ancient world's only known use of mechanical wind power, and this incredible
device, the eolapile, considered to be the world's first steam engine.
Now, in preparing this course, I was so intrigued by this idea of the eolapile that I decided
to build one myself, and here it is.
As you can see, I've actually simplified hero's configuration somewhat.
My model rotates on a vertical axis, rather than the horizontal axis used by hero's original.
It also doesn't have a separate combustion chamber as hero's eolapile does, and by making
this somewhat modified configuration, I've actually eliminated the major technical challenge
in hero's configuration, and that is fabricating those horizontal pivots, which actually serve
as inlets for steam into the main rotating chamber, and fabricating them tightly enough
to prevent the steam from leaking through them, but also loosely enough to allow for
free rotation.
My model, the water simply goes right into the spinning chamber and is sealed in there,
and then I can heat it directly with my handy propane torch and produce the steam that's
necessary to create rotation.
But the underlying design principle of my model is exactly the same as hero's.
When I heat the water on the inside of the chamber, it boils.
That pressurized steam is only able to escape out through the two angled outlets, and the
escaping steam then provides the thrust, which caused the chamber to rotate.
Now, at this time, I would love to fire up my torch and demonstrate how my eolapile works,
but because there is a non-zero chance of this thing exploding, my good friends at the
Great Courses have asked that I take my experiment out of doors, and so rather than do the demonstration
here in the studio, let's have a look at this video, where you can see my eolapile working
reasonably well.
Now, I should also note that some other modern reconstructions built by craftsmen with far
better metalworking skills than mine have actually been able to attain speeds of over
2,000 revolutions per minute with similar reconstructions.
Nonetheless, regardless of the speed attained, I should also note, and have verified with
my own experiments that no eolapile, neither here as original nor the various modern reconstructions,
could produce enough torque to do useful work.
Still, we can only imagine where this line of research might have led had the Museum
of Alexandria remained in operation.
Sadly, it didn't, and the world would have to wait another 1,700 years for usable steam
power.
Beyond the work of the Museum, many other technologies were also lost with the fall
of Rome.
For example, concrete construction, a hallmark of the Roman construction revolution, virtually
ceased to exist, and urban planning methods were largely forgotten.
Even the quintessential elements of classical architecture, the Doric, Ionic, and Corinthian
orders fell by the wayside as medieval architecture evolved toward the pointed arches, ribbed vaults,
and flying buttresses of the Gothic era.
And yet, these losses notwithstanding, there was also much technological continuity through
the period of late antiquity and on into the Middle Ages.
Water power, metallurgy, glass making, and other forms of technological know-how did
survive in isolated pockets throughout the Western world, often preserved and further
developed by the medieval monastic orders.
Based to this continuity, we can legitimately claim that modern hydroelectric power plants,
steel mills, and fiber optics are indeed legacies of ancient engineering.
Some forms of construction technology also survived the fall of Rome, largely because
of the Roman basilica.
Recall from Letcher 5 that this secular building became the predominant model for early Christian
churches, primarily because the logical alternative, the Greek-style temple, was ill-suited for
congregational worship.
The basilica form persisted through the Middle Ages, in wonderful buildings like San Mignato
Almonte in Florence, Italy.
Today innumerable small-town churches throughout the Western world continue to use this distinctly
Roman form.
As the basilica persisted, so did its principal structural engineering technologies, the arch
and the tie-beam truss.
Structures were used to support the roof of old St. Peter's Basilica in Rome, built
in the 4th century AD.
And a millennium later, they were still being used in essentially the same form in medieval
structures like the Orvieto Cathedral.
Since then, the truss has undergone continuous development and is now used in ambitious long-span
structures like the retractable roof of Phoenix Stadium and in tall towers like the Tokyo Skytree.
These spectacular structures are direct descendants of the simple wooden trusses that stand the
Roman basilicas of old.
Many Roman technological creations were also so well built that they actually survived the
fall of Rome more or less intact and millennia later became models for modern builders.
For example, in the 17th century, French engineers systematically cataloged and analyzed Europe's
many surviving Roman roads and then incorporated their key design features into standards for
modern roads.
Similarly, surviving Roman aqueducts inspired the design of many modern water supply systems,
as is quite evident in the Harlem River crossing of the Croton Aqueduct, a major component
of the New York City water system constructed around 1840.
Perhaps the most important source of technological continuity following the fall of the Western
Roman Empire was the Eastern Roman Empire, which evolved into the civilization we now
call Byzantine and continued to thrive for another thousand years.
Byzantine structural engineering was a direct outgrowth of the Roman imperial building system
we examined in lecture A. The quintessential Byzantine structure is the great church of
Hagia Sophia, located in Constantinople, modern Istanbul, consecrated in 537 A.D.
This extraordinary building has been characterized as one of the most ambitious and original
in all of human history and yet, in its grand dome, we can see the clear influence of the
Roman pantheon and in its beautifully integrated piers, arches and vaults, the legacy of Roman
imperial-era structures like the Basilica of Maxentius.
Interestingly, however, Hagia Sophia is constructed entirely of brick and stone with no massed
concrete at all, so it does appear that the demise of concrete construction methods did
extend to the east as well.
In the centuries after Hagia Sophia's construction, Byzantine architecture spread throughout
the eastern Mediterranean and then back to the west, in such important buildings as Charlemagne's
Imperial Chapel at Achim in Germany and St. Mark's Basilica in Venice.
In the modern era, these great structures have inspired the design of fine neo-Bizantine
buildings like the Cathedral Basilica of St. Louis, completed in 1914, and the Los Angeles
Public Library of 1926.
You encounter these structures, remember that you're experiencing a modern interpretation
of the grandeur first espoused by first-century Roman emperors, but perhaps our most important
source of technological continuity with the classical world is the Italian Renaissance
of the 14th century.
This great revival of classical literary and artistic values stimulated an intense interest
in Greek and Roman architecture and engineering.
This interest was greatly intensified in 1414 when a Florentine scholar named Poggio Bracciolini
discovered a long-forgotten copy of Vitruvius' De Architectora in a medieval abbey in Switzerland.
When Bracciolini shared this manuscript with a broader community of Renaissance scholars,
artists, and builders, De Architectora quickly became the architectural and engineering Bible
of the Western world.
In 1499, inspired by Vitruvius, a Dominican friar named Giovanni Giocondo, reverse-engineered
Pozzolana-based concrete for the peers of his Notre-Dame Bridge in Paris, the first known
use of concrete since the fall of Rome, Vitruvius also appears to have stimulated new interest
in urban planning and substantially influenced the development of modern machinery as well.
This drawing from an early 19th century French text shows a construction crane that incorporates
only a few minor product improvements over one of Vitruvius' designs and uses the same
human-powered treadwheel as the larger Roman variant on Vitruvius' crane.
This drawing from the same era shows a water pump that's identical to Vitruvius' description
of Archimedes' screw pump.
Amazingly, Archimedes' screw remains in widespread use today.
This one is used for dewatering polder or reclaimed land in Holland.
This same configuration is commonly used in wineries for moving grapes, in combine harvesters
for moving grain, and even in modern snowblowers.
But my favorite modern application of Archimedes' screw is this one, an electrical power-generating
facility in England.
This state-of-the-art system turns Archimedes on his head.
Rather than pumping water from bottom to top by applying power to the screw, this power-generation
facility receives a stream of water at the upper end of the screw and channels it downward.
And as that water flows downward through the screw, it actually turns the shaft, which
turns a generator, which generates power.
You may recall that at the end of lecture 18, I demonstrated how the tympanum, a rotary
waterlifting device, may have inspired the earliest water-powered mills.
This modernized version of Archimedes' screw takes advantage of the same underlying principle,
but with the added advantage of environmental friendliness.
It turns out that, in contrast with traditional water wheels and water turbines, fish can
swim through this helix from one end to the other quite safely, though perhaps just a
bit dizzy after the trip.
Who would have imagined that a third-century BC technology could be the basis for a state-of-the-art
ecologically friendly energy source?
We owe it all to Archimedes, and of course to Vitruvius for communicating Archimedes'
ingenuity to future generations.
Which brings us back to the Renaissance, and Vitruvius' profound influence on the revival
of ancient engineering and architecture.
In the century and a half after Poggio Bracciolini's rediscovery of de-architectura, a succession
of Renaissance scholar architects, most notably Leon Battista Alberti, Sebastiano Cirlio,
and Andrea Palladio, wrote influential handbooks that effectively established Vitruvius' definitions
of the Doric, Ionic, and Corinthian orders as canonical formulae for architectural design.
This influence can be seen in the 15th century work of the great Florentine architect, Filippo
Brunelleschi, whose works include the Basilica of San Lorenzo, with his beautiful Ionic columns
supporting its cloister, and the Pazzi Chapel, which incorporates the Corinthian order in an
elegant assemblage of arches, vaults, and domes.
Vitruvian ideals are also reflected in this wonderful building, Donato Pormante's Tempietto
in Rome, completed in 1502.
Considered one of the great masterpieces of the high Renaissance, the Tempietto isn't
a copy of an ancient building, but rather it integrates Vitruvian Doric elements into
an original composition lauded for its perfect proportions.
In the late 16th century, Renaissance architecture evolved toward a new form of expression called
the Baroque style, which employed the classical orders in a looser, more theatrical way, exemplified
by the Onesanti Church in Florence.
But as they say, anything worth doing is worth overdoing, and so by the mid-18th century,
the Baroque style had evolved into something so excessively ornate that it inevitably provoked
a reaction.
This reaction came in the form of a new movement called Neoclassical, which sought to restore
the pure architectural forms of ancient Greece and Rome.
Neoclassical architecture was also motivated by the mid-18th century discoveries of Pompeii
and Herculaneum, which sparked tremendous popular interest in ancient Roman civilization.
During this period, Greece was occupied by the Ottoman Turks, and so its great buildings
were effectively denied to Westerners.
As a result, early Neoclassical architecture was based almost entirely on Roman models.
Thus, when Thomas Jefferson designed his own home, Monticello, in 1772, he used the
Roman Doric of Vitruvius rather than the original Greek Doric of the Parthenon.
Jefferson's stunning Virginia State capital of 1792 might appear to be Greek in character,
but it was actually modeled on the Maison Carré, a well-preserved Roman temple in southern
France.
And Jefferson's Rotunda, the library at the University of Virginia, was clearly inspired
by the Roman pantheon.
These buildings reflect the emergence of a uniquely American form of Neoclassical architecture
called the Federal Style, which combined classical columns, pediments, and arches with a simple
red brick type of wall to invoke the spirit of the Roman Republic.
We tend to associate the Federal Style with major buildings like Independence Hall in Philadelphia
and Faneuil Hall in Boston.
But it was ubiquitous in 18th century America, and it remains so today, in town halls, post
offices, and churches across the land.
The Federal Style is so common and so distinctly American that we can easily overlook its direct
connection with ancient Rome.
In the late 18th century, the Ottomans gradually opened Greece to the West and stimulated a
new phase of the Neoclassical era called Greek Revival.
In this period, architects began employing distinctly Greek motifs to express nationalism,
cultural superiority, and civic virtue in structures like the Brandenburg Gate in Berlin
and the British Museum in London.
But like the Federal Style, Greek Revival architecture wasn't just limited to grand
public buildings.
Even today, it can be found in myriad private homes and small town banks, libraries, and
churches all over the land.
I could cite thousands of examples, but one should suffice.
This is the Old Cadet Chapel at West Point, built in 1836.
It's not an important work of American architecture.
Indeed, we're not even sure who designed it.
It's really just a small town church that happens to be located on an army post.
Yet this modest building's faithful allusions to classical Greece, the fluted Doric columns,
the pediment, the entablature with its correct arrangement of triglyphs and metopes.
These elements tell us that classical Greece meant something very special to people living
over two millennia after Pericles.
Neoclassical architecture remained popular through much of the 20th century, particularly
for buildings of particular cultural or political importance.
Consider Column Hall at West Point, which we've already visited, and the original Penn
Station in New York City, completed in 1910, and faithfully modeled on the baths of Caracalla,
complete with Corinthian columns and coffered vaulting.
Consider the great monumental buildings of Washington, D.C., the Lincoln Memorial of
1922, the National Gallery of 1937, the Jefferson Memorial of 1943.
Who could deny the power of these classical forms in connecting the American Democratic
Republic with its distant roots in Athens and Rome?
And while the neoclassical style did wane somewhat near the end of the 20th century,
it appears to be staging a comeback in the 21st.
The Schemerhorn Symphony Center in Nashville, Tennessee is one fine example of a 21st century
structure that has continued the neoclassical tradition in bold new ways.
Sackler Library at the University of Oxford is another.
Furthermore, the classical character of these buildings is more than just an aesthetic veneer.
According to the Sackler Library's architect, Robert Adam, the building meets today's stringent
demands for sustainability and energy efficiency, primarily through the use of locally available
materials and traditional design features like thermally stable solid masonry walls and
relatively small windows positioned for optimum light and ventilation.
By now, you shouldn't be surprised to learn that the concepts of using wall thickness,
window size and orientation to achieve energy efficiency come to us from Vitruvius, Day
Architectura, Chapter 6.
Recall from Lecture 15, Vitruvius' dictum that the heated rooms of a bath complex be
placed along the building's southwestern side so that these rooms would receive direct
sunlight from midday until evening when the baths were most heavily used.
Vitruvius also tells us that the north-facing walls of buildings should be thicker than
the south-facing walls because they receive no direct sunlight and thus require more insulation.
By incorporating this approach to energy efficiency, the modern Sackler Library proves once again
that many ancient ideas still have a place in our most modern technological systems,
the fact that it can only increase our admiration for the ancient engineers who conceived these
innovations so many centuries ago.
Now, of all the modern legacies of ancient engineering, there are none so moving as the
actual remains of the classical era technologies that have survived from antiquity, and I strongly
encourage you to find opportunities to experience these sites and artifacts first hand.
And here I must include a word of caution.
At a typical archaeological site, the most fascinating evidence of Greek and Roman engineering
is rarely obvious and it's often quite subtle.
Recall how in Lecture 5, we had to reconstruct the roof of a Greek temple by examining the
slots in the stone cornice blocks.
Interacting with ancient technology and truly appreciating it requires careful preparation,
a discerning eye and thoughtful analysis, and it's precisely this demand for intellectual
effort that makes the exploration of ancient technology so rewarding.
To illustrate this point, I'd like to conclude today's lecture with a personal story.
Last summer, I took a group of students on a two-week trip to Turkey to study the great
engineering works of ancient Anatolia.
None of us had ever been to Turkey before, and so to prepare ourselves for this experience,
we did our homework.
We studied the literature on construction methods and structural forms used in temples,
aqueducts, baths, and fortifications.
The same stuff you've been learning about in this course.
Based on this preparation, we then formulated hypotheses about what we might find on the
ancient sites we planned to visit.
And then at each of these ruined cities, Miletus, Sidae, Perga, Ephesus, we conducted a sort
of ancient engineering scavenger hunt, with the entire group fanning out across the site
in search of interesting insights.
Now our scavenger hunt yielded many fascinating discoveries, but one stands out above all
the rest.
We were in Priene, wandering through a nondescript area of stone ruins and route to the ancient
city's fabulous temple of Athena, but we weren't just passing through.
By this point in the trip, everybody had come to recognize that our most interesting discoveries
tended to happen in the least expected places, and so we were all scrutinizing the ruins
as we walked.
And sure enough, one of my sharp-eyed students cried out, and we all gathered round to see
what he'd discovered.
It was the foundation of an ancient colonnade, just a simple row of cut stones only barely
protruding from the ground, the sort of thing that most people would have passed by without
a second look.
Carved into these stones was something we'd never encountered before.
In between the familiar wedge-shaped slots that once held iron connectors was a Greek
letter, and on the adjacent stone, the same Greek letter, here's Aida, and then in the
next stone, Lambda, and Theta, and Alpha.
These were Mason's marks cut into each stone to designate its correct position in the structure.
As we kicked ideas around and processed this seemingly simple discovery, we realized that
it had a number of significant implications.
Here first of all was unmistakable evidence that in Greek Masonry construction, stones
were individually fitted for specific locations in the building.
Here also was Greek lettering, surprisingly suggesting a literate Mason delivering stones
to a literate construction foreman.
And here was an intimate connection to a stone Mason who worked too millennia before our
time.
With just a little imagination, we could visualize this man with his point chisel in hand, forming
each of those letters with a series of sharp mallet blows.
It's hard for me to articulate what a magic moment this was for all of us.
Every day, hundreds of tourists walk past that spot and never noticed anything special,
but my students had prepared themselves to see more, and they did.
As a result, they gained some extraordinarily rich insights, and they took ownership of
that experience in ways that wouldn't have been possible otherwise.
It is my fervent hope that this course has provided you with the same sorts of tools,
and that you can reap similar rewards when you experience the legacies of ancient technology
in our modern world.
Thank you.
And most of that stored elastic energy will be imparted to the arrow in the form of kinetic
energy.
I only missed by four feet.
What is it?
What is it stuck in?
It's stuck in the handle.
Like I said, as an archer, I'm a pretty good engineer.
The boat plus ballast weighs about half a pound.
Now when I place…
James!
That was one.
Point C really is very much aided by having water.
