Welcome back, water.
It's essential for human life, but we don't just drink it.
We use it to irrigate our crops, to generate power.
We use it for transportation, sanitation, food processing, recreation, firefighting,
cooling, and a wide variety of industrial purposes.
And though we might think of these as modern uses of water, they were all prevalent in
antiquity as well.
So it's hardly surprising that water supply systems played such an important role in ancient
technological development and will occupy our attention for the next three lectures.
Today we'll look at the historical development of water supply technologies.
Next lecture, we'll see how this developmental process reached its zenith in the Roman aqueduct,
an integrated infrastructure system designed to transport water in bulk from a distant
source to a city.
And then finally in lecture 14, we'll look inside the city walls to learn how the water
delivered by an aqueduct was subsequently distributed to individual users and then how
it was disposed of after use.
Water supply is a human endeavor, but it occurs within the context of a natural process called
the hydrologic cycle.
This cycle begins with fresh water falling to the earth as precipitation.
After reaching the ground, the rainwater takes three different forms, each corresponding
to a different branch of the hydrologic cycle.
The first is surface water, which flows over the earth's surface, is channeled into progressively
larger streams and rivers, and may be temporarily stored in lakes and oceans.
Along the way, surface water is constantly being returned to the atmosphere by evaporation,
thus completing the hydrologic cycle along that path.
Second, soil water infiltrates into the earth but is retained near the surface in the voids
between soil particles.
Some of this water eventually evaporates.
Some of it is absorbed by the roots of plants and returned to the atmosphere by a process
called transpiration.
And finally, ground water infiltrates more deeply into the soil and is ultimately collected
in a geologic formation called an aquifer.
An aquifer is a porous stratum of soil or rock that's fully saturated with water.
An aquifer is generally formed immediately above an impermeable stratum called an aquaclude,
which precludes the water from percolating any farther downward.
The upper surface of an aquifer is called the water table.
Now, if the geologic stratum containing an aquifer isn't level, then the ground water
within it will very slowly percolate downhill.
If the stratum then intercepts the surface like this, it forms a spring.
And as we'll see shortly, springs were the principal sources for most major water supply
systems in the ancient world.
In general terms, the purpose of a water supply system is to intercept the natural hydrologic
cycle to divert the water for human use.
The distinctions between various types of systems are driven to a large extent by the
point at which this diversion occurs.
Now, ancient cities were usually located on or near rivers, so you might expect that these
rivers would serve as the city's principal water sources.
But in practice, this was rarely the case for two reasons.
First, rivers flowing through ancient cities were invariably used for the disposal of human,
animal, and industrial waste, so they were generally too polluted to be used safely for
drinking water.
Second, a river typically flows through a city at or near the city's lowest elevation.
Thus, using the river as a water source would require large quantities of water to be lifted
a considerable distance before it could be distributed to users, a very significant technological
challenge.
By far, the most common water supply technology in the ancient world was the well.
Now, a well is just a vertical shaft dug down into an aquifer and then stabilized with
an inner wall of wood or masonry.
Since the aquifer is saturated, water collects at the bottom of the well shaft up to the
level of the water table, and can then be drawn out with a rope tied to a bucket.
Primitive wells from the 9th and 8th millennia BC have been found on the island of Cyprus,
so the technology is quite old, and wells have been in continuous use since then.
Even at the height of the Roman imperial era, with sprawling aqueduct systems delivering
millions of gallons per day to myriad cities, private wells still provided the most common
water source for much of the population, particularly in rural areas.
Although the well is a very simple technology, it did undergo some noteworthy developments
over time.
For example, by the Roman era, the inner walls of well shafts were often built up from prefabricated
terracotta segments like these, and note the very clever built-in footholds which served
as a ladder for access to the bottom of the shaft.
Of course, the well also had significant limitations as a water source.
It could only be used if a suitable aquifer were present, and even then, the water had
to be lifted, usually one bucket at a time from the bottom of the shaft.
Over the centuries, the need to lift water more efficiently stimulated a number of important
technological developments.
The Shadoof, a counterweighted beam pivoting on a vertical post, has been used for lifting
water since at least 2000 BC, and Assyrian stone carving from the 8th century BC shows
the earliest known use of a pulley to draw water from a well.
The Greeks developed sophisticated mechanical waterlifting devices like the screw pump and
the bucket wheel, both of which we'll discuss in lecture 18.
Yet none of these developments solved the well's most fundamental limitation, its inability
to deliver a large volume of continuous flow.
Where there was no accessible aquifer, the cistern was the preferred alternative to a
well.
The cistern is a masonry tank, usually located just below ground level and used to collect
rainwater that flows off of a roof or paved surface.
This is probably an invention of the Neolithic Age.
Certainly by the classical era, it was in widespread use.
Even though some large, public, aqueduct-fed cisterns would eventually be built by the
Romans, most ancient cisterns were located in private households and had only very limited
capacity.
Thus, like wells, they weren't particularly useful for large-scale water supply systems.
Some of the world's first large-scale public water supply systems were built by the Assyrians,
whom we've already recognized for their efforts in road construction.
From 700 BC, King Sennacherib built a dam to divert the Atrush River into a man-made
channel that then carried the water to the city of Nineveh over 30 miles away.
This stone channel, a portion of which survives today, is often regarded as the world's first
true aqueduct.
It's worth noting that Nineveh was located on the Tigris River, yet the Tigris wasn't
used as a city's water supply.
Sennacherib's engineers had to tap a distant source to get the water quality and the elevation
they needed.
Around the same time, the 8th century BC, Persians living on the Arid-Iranian Plateau
developed the Canat, one of the most important advances in the history of water engineering.
A Canat is a tunnel driven into a hillside to tap an underground aquifer.
One of these things began with a vertical shaft called the Motherwell, which was used
to verify the presence of the aquifer.
Once water was found, a horizontal tunnel was then dug from the base of the hill toward
the Motherwell on a slight uphill gradient.
Along the way, a series of vertical shafts were added at regular intervals.
These shafts helped guide the alignment of the tunnel and also provided a means of removing
excavated material as the tunnel advanced.
The longest Canats were over 20 miles long and had as many as 700 of these vertical shafts.
Once the main tunnel intercepted the Motherwell, a steady stream of water could flow from the
aquifer down to the tunnel outlet where it was used for both irrigation and consumption.
In effect, the Canat was a man-made spring.
Eventually, this technology spread throughout the Middle East, North Africa and Spain, making
it possible for humans to live and grow crops in some of the world's most inhospitable
places.
Elsewhere in the Mediterranean region, the cities of Archaic and Classical-era Greece
generally didn't build large-scale public water systems.
The typical Greek polis grew up around a small spring, which was eventually enclosed within
an architecturally elaborate fountain house.
As the population of the polis grew, the discharge from the spring often proved to be inadequate
and had to be supplemented with water piped in from sources outside the city walls.
Greek pipelines were usually made of terracotta segments, 8 to 10 inches in diameter, fitted
together end to end as you can see here, and then sealed with plaster and set into a trench.
But these small-scale water lines typically served only to supplement the wells and cisterns
located in private homes.
Now a few Greek city-states did experiment with an innovative alternative to tapping
water sources outside the walls.
They built storage reservoirs like this one, the fountain house of Theogenes in Megara.
This 6th century BC facility consisted of a stone enclosure measuring 60 by 44 feet,
with a flat roof supported on 35 octagonal columns.
Water from a spring entered here, and at the opposite end it flowed through a trough where
people could then fill their amphorae, which are terracotta jars like these.
The large storage capacity built into this fountain house suggests that Megara's spring
was inadequate to meet the city's daily demand for water.
The reservoir was probably allowed to fill up at night when water demand was low, and
then this additional supply would be available at the start of each day to augment the discharge
from the spring.
A modern analysis has shown that the time required for Megara's spring to fill this
enclosure would have been about 7 hours, which strongly supports the hypothesis that the
reservoir was designed to be filled at night.
Although Hellenic Era water systems generally didn't exhibit technological sophistication
beyond this sort of simple storage reservoir, there was one major exception to this rule.
In the 6th century BC on the island of Samos, a Greek engineer named Youpa Linos built an
aqueduct that included an extraordinary 3,400-foot tunnel through the solid rock of Mount Pastra.
This tunnel is described by the historian Herodotus, who regarded it as one of the ancient
world's greatest engineering achievements.
In his account, Herodotus refers to the tunnel as double-mouthed, implying that it was dug
by two crews working inward from both ends and meeting in the middle.
To achieve this link-up in a 3,400-foot tunnel, the surveyed bearing of each tunnel segment
would have to be accurate to within two-tenths of a degree.
Any greater error in the two crews would have missed each other entirely.
We probably regard Herodotus' account as fantasy if it weren't for the amazing fact
that the tunnel of Youpa Linos still exists today, and visitors can actually inspect the
point where the two crews met in the center of Mount Pastra.
The physical configuration of this meeting point shows that Youpa Linos employed a really
clever scheme to prevent the two crews from missing each other at the center of the mountain.
As the crews approached each other, one made a shallow right turn, while the other turned
first right and then left.
As a result, the two tunnels intersected at an angle like this, and it would have been
effectively impossible for them to miss each other, as long as they were at or near the
same elevation.
Ironically, this convoluted maneuver was probably unnecessary.
Based on very careful measurements, modern scholars have concluded that had Youpa Linos
simply continued the two tunnel segments along their established trajectories, they would
actually have met within only a few inches of error in the center of the mountain.
This was astonishing engineering, particularly for the 6th century BC.
Indeed, one expert on ancient water systems asserts that modern archaeologists would have
incorrectly classified this tunnel as Hellenistic that is dated at least two centuries after
it was actually built, were it not for Herodotus' account.
Without this indisputable literary evidence, no one would have believed that 6th century
Greeks could survey and build with such precision.
Of course, this perspective greatly underestimates the capacity of an individual genius like
Youpa Linos to transcend the norms of his own time.
We've seen such genius before in this course, in Apollodorus of Damascus, for example, and
we'll see it again.
The development of water supply systems did advance considerably during the Hellenistic
era, primarily through the patronage of the successor kings.
These technological developments were also aided by Hellenistic science, as the flourishing
museum at Alexandria was providing important new insights about hydraulics and mechanics
during this period.
Hellenistic aqueducts were substantially larger and more sophisticated than their Hellenic
forebears.
Indeed, they were quite comparable to the later Roman systems, in all respects but one.
Because Hellenistic engineers failed to exploit the arch as a structural element, they weren't
able to raise the water channel significantly above ground level.
Thus, when crossing a deep valley, their only practical option was to use an inverted siphon.
Well, what is an inverted siphon?
Let's use this model to explore what it is and how it works.
Here is an ancient city and here is the city's desired water source, a spring located up
in the mountains that's fed by this aquifer.
There's a deep valley between the source and the city, as you can see, and a river is flowing
through that valley.
The inverted siphon consists of a pipeline extending between two tanks, a header tank
located on the source side of the river and a receiving tank located on the city side.
Both of these, in reality, would be built of stone and lined with a coating of waterproof
mortar.
As we'll see shortly, the pipeline in an inverted siphon experiences significant internal
pressure, so terracotta pipes like the ones we saw earlier generally weren't strong enough
for this application.
Thus, Hellenistic era siphon pipes were generally made of more robust stone blocks, like these,
each with a hole carved through its center.
The blocks were connected together end to end, then sealed with mortar and laid directly
on the ground for the greatest support and stability.
Now, in my model, the pipeline is actually just clear plastic, so you'll be able to see
the water moving once we get this system in operation.
When the spring gushes forth, water will flow from the source into a settling tank, and
we'll talk more about settling tanks in a couple of lectures, and then flow into a conventional
open channel aqueduct, which is indicated here.
We'll talk more about open channels next lecture as well, but for now, all I need to do is
to remember water engineers rule number one, water flows downhill.
An open channel must maintain a gradual downhill gradient all along its length.
If there's any point where the gradient is disturbed, where it goes the wrong way, it
tilts uphill, the water's going to overflow from the channel, and so in hilly terrain,
the only way to accomplish this uniform gradient without bridges or tunnels is to follow the
contours of the terrain, which is precisely what my model does.
Once the water reaches the header tank here, it enters the inverted siphon, and let's go
ahead and activate the system now and see how the inverted siphon works.
We're going to open up the spring.
As the water flows through the open channel, it begins to fill the header tank.
It then acquires a little bit of additional force as the water climbs up through the tank.
I need to give it a little bit of a boost to get it going.
Now the water has nearly filled the header tank, but it's flowing freely into the receiving
tank at the opposite end. As it accumulates in the receiving tank, it's flowing out of
that tank into the city's water distribution system, where it's feeding the city's baths
and fountain houses, and in the typical ancient water system pattern of continuous flow, it
flows through these facilities out into the wastewater stream, where it's then carried
in an open channel to a local river or stream.
Now notice as we look at the inverted siphon itself, that the water is very happily flowing
uphill, but isn't this a violation of rule number one?
Well, not really. The two tanks and pipeline constitute a closed system, and within that
system the water is flowing downhill, from the header to the receiving tank.
Because the pipeline starts and ends in a submerged reservoir, it's flowing full and
under pressure.
The pressure is caused by the difference in the water levels of the two tanks, and water
is going to continue to flow through that pipeline under pressure, as long as the water
level in the header is higher than the water level in the receiving tank.
Now if the receiving tank backed up, and the two water levels eventually became equal,
flow would stop. But that won't happen as long as water is draining from this tank.
It drains from the tank, again into the city's water distribution system, and then ultimately
is discharged into the stream, in that system of continuous flow that's so important for
us to understand how these ancient water supply networks work.
Throughout the system, inflow equals outflow, and therefore all of the water levels remain
constant.
Archeologists have discovered at least 20 of these inverted siphon aqueducts in Hellenistic
East. The most spectacular by far is the one at Pergamon, on the Aegean coast of Turkey.
A city of great prosperity, Pergamon built eight major aqueducts, five in the Hellenistic
era alone. The greatest of these, constructed during the reign of King Eumenes II in the
2nd century BC, supplied over a million gallons of water per day from a spring in the Madredag
Mountains, 25 miles north of the city.
Most of this Madredag aqueduct was a conventional open channel system, but its final stretch
was an extraordinary inverted siphon crossing a valley two miles long and 650 feet deep.
The size of this system was absolutely unprecedented in antiquity, as was its configuration.
The siphon was a single pipe, 12 inches in diameter, running through a series of upright
stone posts, four to six feet apart, like this. The pipe itself has long since disappeared,
but many of these posts remain, so we're quite certain that the pipe was suspended above
ground in this unique way.
But what was this pipe made of? Anyway, this is an important question, because the pipeline
at Pergamon represents a successful solution to an unprecedented engineering challenge.
The internal pressure in an inverted siphon increases in direct proportion to the depth
of the valley it crosses. More precisely, pipe pressure increases in proportion to the
vertical distance between the pipe and the hydraulic gradient, which is an imaginary
line connecting the water surfaces of the two reservoirs, like this.
Based on the topography of the valley at Pergamon, we know that the maximum pressure
in the madridag siphon was about 250 pounds per square inch, roughly eight times higher
than the pressure in the tires of your car, and substantially higher than any other ancient
pipeline. Internal pressure in a pipe has essentially the same effect as internal pressure in a
balloon.
The internal pressure causes tension in the material that makes up the pipe, and if that
material isn't strong enough, well, it bursts.
As we've seen, many Hellenistic siphons used segmental stone pipes, but this wouldn't
have worked for the unique elevated configuration of the Pergamon siphon, because the individual
segments would have simply fallen apart without the continuous support that would normally
be provided with the pipe resting directly on the ground.
Based on the spacing and shape of those stone posts, it's clear that the pipe was made of
metal, and for much of the 20th century, scholars claimed that the metal must have been bronze,
because they believed that the only alternative, lead, wasn't strong enough to have been fabricated
into a high pressure pipe.
But then in 1976, a chemical analysis of the soil along the path of the Magridag siphon
indicated that the soil had a lead concentration 56 times higher than normal, proving that
the pipe was, in fact, made of lead.
So these ancient engineers have surprised us again. Just as Eupolinos achieved seemingly
impossible surveying accuracy to build his tunnel, so the Pergamon engineers were able
to fabricate a lead pipe with seemingly impossible strength. Perhaps it's time we stopped underestimating
these guys.
Recall, however, that the sophistication of the inverted siphon system was, to some degree,
the result of a significant constraint. The Hellenistic engineers failed to exploit the
arch as a means of elevating a water channel.
Roman engineers knew no such constraint. They would have carried the aqueduct channel across
in a very different way, using a bridge like this one. Now, you know how an arcade bridge
like this one works as structure, but have you thought about it as one piece of a much
larger infrastructure system? Well, here it is as part of that system. And, note that
in this context, the top level of the bridge is really just a continuation of the open
channel, and it's built with the same gradual downhill gradient all along its length. So
now, when water gushes forth from the spring, in this case, it flows through the open channel,
out onto the aqueduct bridge, across the bridge, into the receiving tank, where once
again it's fed into the city's distribution network, and finally expelled into an open
channel for disposal in a local river or stream.
Now that you've seen both of these systems in operation, you may be wondering why the
Romans preferred bridges to inverted siphons. After all, the siphon is clearly more technologically
sophisticated, it's more adaptable to different types of terrain, and much less expensive
than a massive stone bridge. Some scholars have suggested that the Romans didn't understand
how an inverted siphon works, or that they weren't able to manufacture pipes strong enough
to handle the pressure of a siphon. But we know these claims are incorrect, because the
Romans actually built several impressive inverted siphon aqueducts, including this extraordinary
structure at Aspendos in Turkey. The Aspendos aqueduct is actually a series of three siphons
strung together to cross a mile wide valley and route to the city. The structure you're
looking at here supported an elevated tank, which served as both the receiving tank for
the second of the three siphons, and the header tank for the third. These intermediate tanks
were apparently used at points where the siphon pipe needed to make a sharp change in direction.
All in all, it's a highly sophisticated system. And next lecture, we'll examine another
grand Roman inverted siphon, the guillac-roduct in southern France, providing equally impressive
evidence that the Romans were fully capable of building these types of systems. Well,
it's clear then that the Romans preferred bridges over siphons not for lack of knowledge,
but for a quintessentially Roman reason, practicality. For all of its theoretical superiority and
technological sophistication, the ancient inverted siphon must have been a maintenance
nightmare. The siphon at Pergamon had several thousand joints between pipe segments. When
that system was pressurized, every one of those joints was a potential leak. And because
the inverted siphon is a closed system, it would have been particularly difficult to
inspect and maintain. This problem was greatly exacerbated by the high mineral content of
many ancient water sources. Now limestone strata occur quite frequently in the geology
of the Mediterranean region. When rain water percolates down through limestone to become
groundwater, calcium ions leach from the limestone into the water. And as this water moves through
an aqueduct, the minerals precipitate out as calcium carbonate, a white solid that accumulates
on the inside surfaces of the conduit. You can see the calcium carbonate deposits quite
clearly in this ancient terracotta pipe, which is about 50% blocked by those deposits. Roman
open channel systems weren't immune to this problem, but they were purposefully configured
such that a maintenance worker could physically descend into the channel to remove mineral
deposits with a hammer and chisel. This wasn't possible with the closed pipes used in inverted
siphon, and so these systems were likely to clog up after a few decades of use and then
require total replacement. We can conclude then that the Romans were fully justified
in their preference for open channel aqueduct systems, and that the apparently extravagant
arcaded aqueduct bridge was actually the more pragmatic way to carry the water across the
valley. But don't forget, the aqueduct bridge is just one small part of a more extensive
and beautifully integrated infrastructure system. Next lecture will attempt to gain a
fuller appreciation for this system by examining some of Rome's great aqueducts and more importantly
by experiencing the process of aqueduct design first hand from the perspective of a Roman
engineer. Until then, thank you.
