Welcome back.
Today our exploration of ancient technology will take us on a new tack.
Please join me as we go down to the sea and ships.
The ancient Greek world was inextricably linked to the sea.
Many poles were port cities engaged in seaborne commerce throughout the Mediterranean, often
exercising military power by sea as well.
Plato once observed that the Greek people were like frogs sitting around a pond, cities
hugging the coastline, their attention focused on the water.
During the next two lectures, we'll look at the nautical technologies, the sailing
vessels and oared warships that made this seafaring culture possible.
Now, at this point you're probably asking, what about the Romans?
Well, unlike most other topics in this course, the story of classical aeronautical engineering
is predominantly a Greek story.
The Romans were not a seafaring people.
The city of Rome is located 16 miles inland, with the Tiber River providing its only access
to the sea.
Romans built capable ships when they had to, but they never did it with the same ingenuity,
the same grand ambition that characterized their contributions in, say, water supply or
building construction.
Consider the First Punic War.
As this epic struggle for control of the Western Mediterranean began in 264 BC, the Roman Republic
confronted Carthage, probably the world's premier naval power, with essentially no navy.
Characteristically, the Romans were able to build a powerful fleet by copying Carthaginian
ships, to rebuild that fleet twice following disastrous storms and battles, and ultimately
to vanquish the Carthaginian navy.
Yet, by the mid-2nd century BC, the Romans had largely disbanded their fleet, choosing
to rely instead on their new Greek allies to provide ships and crews when needed.
At the start of the Imperial Era, Augustus established Rome's first permanent fleet.
Yet, in the succeeding centuries, the Empire faced no major maritime enemies, so there
was really little incentive for further technological development of warships.
Rome also built a huge merchant fleet, primarily to supply the city with grain from Egypt.
But for the most part, these cargo vessels were just particularly robust applications
of well-established, Hellenic-era nautical technologies.
So we'll focus these next two lectures primarily on Greek nautical engineering, and just have
an occasional nod to the Romans.
Sometime in the 3rd millennium BC, Bronze Age Greeks and Minoans developed early prototypes
of two basic ship configurations, the round ship and the long ship, which would remain
in use throughout the Classical Era and beyond.
The round ship was invariably a merchant vessel, powered primarily by sail, though it was sometimes
fitted with supplemental ores.
As the name suggests, it had a broad, rounded hull, typically with a length-to-width ratio
of about 4 to 1, to maximize its cargo capacity.
We know a lot about ancient round ships because quite a few shipwrecks have been discovered
by underwater archaeologists.
A fine example is this one, the Kyrenia ship, a 4th century BC vessel that was discovered
about a mile off the northern coast of Cyprus in 1967.
The wreck was recovered, preserved and displayed in the Ancient Shipwreck Museum in the town
of Kyrenia Cyprus, where you can see it today.
The original vessel was 47 feet long, 14.5 feet wide, and propelled by a single square
sail with supplemental ores, as this model shows.
At the time it sank, the Kyrenia ship was carrying a cargo of wine stored in over 400
of these terracotta amphorae, as well as 29 millstones, which also served as ballast
to stabilize the ship.
The second type of ship, the long ship, was generally either a warship or a pirate vessel.
Its primary source of power was a large crew of oresmen, though most long ships also carried
at least one supplemental mast and sail.
Its hull was built for speed, with a length-to-width ratio as high as 10 to 1.
There were many types and sizes of long ships, but nearly all had this characteristic profile,
long and low, with a ram extending forward at the bow, at the waterline, and a dramatic
upward sweeping stern post.
This model is a Greek triremorship, which we'll be examining next lecture.
Now to understand these ships as technological systems, we need to look at them both as structures
and as machines.
A ship's hull is a structure because it must withstand tremendous bending and twisting
loads as it moves across and is supported by the uneven and ever-changing surface of
the sea.
A ship is a machine because its purpose is to do work, that is to move under the action
of a force.
In this case, a force applied either by rowers or by the wind.
So let's begin with ships as structures.
All classical-era hulls, round and long, were constructed using a method called shell-first.
Because this technique is quite unfamiliar to us today, let's first examine its much
more familiar alternative, called the plank-on-frame method, which was used to build such famous
wooden ships as the USS Constitution, Old Ironsides, shown here.
The plank-on-frame method probably originated in late antiquity in northern Europe, and
indeed it's still used there today.
I stumbled across this scene when I was visiting Normandy a few years ago, and I was quite
surprised to see traditional timber plank-on-frame construction still being used, not for some
sort of historic reconstruction, but actually for a work-a-day fishing boat.
Now, the plank-on-frame construction process begins with construction of a heavy timber
framework, something like this one.
That framework consists of a keel, the structural backbone of the ship, if you will, across
the bottom, a stem post, the more or less vertical post at the bow, the stern post here
at the stern of the ship, and most importantly, this series of very closely spaced wooden frames.
The rigid framework that is constituted by those four main elements then establishes
the shape of the hull, and it serves as its structural skeleton.
Only after this internal skeleton has been completed is this outer planking added, with
individual planks attached to the frames, but not to each other.
In contrast, ancient shipwrights used the shell-first method, in which the entire outer
shell of planking was built first, and then interior frames were added subsequently.
To create the shell, the individual planks were attached to each other along their edges.
In the earliest shell-first ships, built in Egypt in the 3rd millennium BC, the planks
were actually sewn together with linen cord, as this model illustrates, but later, as the
structural demands on hulls increased, this lacing was replaced by wooden mortise and
tenon joints.
What are they?
Well, let's see how they were built.
Going to actually go through the process of creating some mortise and tenon joints in
much the same way that an ancient shipwright would do for a shell-first ship hull.
The way this process began was that the shipwright would cut several planks to the appropriate
size and shape, like these, and then would use a chisel to chop rectangular slots, indicated
here, here, here, and here, into the edges of those planks.
Notice that the rectangular slots are carved into the top edge of a lower plank, and also
into the bottom edge of the plank that's going to be placed directly above it.
Once in those slots, we will insert hardwood rectangular blocks, which are called tenons.
Tenons are inserted into the mortises like this, and then those mortise and tenon connections
are used as the basis for attaching two successive planks together like this.
Of course, the two planks aren't really attached together yet because I could quite easily pull
them apart, so in order to lock the joint together, we're now going to drill a hole
through each of the mortise and tenon joints, and then insert plugs or dowels to hold those
joints fast.
Now, I would love to demonstrate the incredibly clever hand drill that was used by ancient
shipwrights to do this sort of drilling, but for the sake of time, I'm going to have
to resort to something a bit more modern, my power drill.
The basic principle is the same, though, regardless of the type of drill that's going to be used.
So I'm going to drill eight holes, two through each of the mortise and tenon joints, like
this.
And then, once again, to lock the joints in place, we need to insert these hardwood plugs
into the holes we've just drilled, and I'll tap them into place with a hammer, and now
the two planks are very tightly and rigidly attached together, it's impossible to pull
them apart or to slide them with respect to each other.
It's really an incredibly effective, structurally efficient joint, but of course, recall that
that process would need to be repeated many thousands of times to create all the joints
necessary to build an entire hull.
The joint was incredibly effective.
Many shipwrecks of shell-first hulls actually show no evidence whatsoever of any caulking
between the individual planks, a good indicator that the method produced extremely tight-fitting
structural joints, given that caulking was not required to seal them.
Here we see a museum reconstruction of the Kyrenia ship's shell-first hull.
Note that the small wooden frames have been added to the inside of the shell to strengthen
and stiffen it, but unlike the robust frames used in the plank-on-frame system, these are
lightweight secondary elements that only extend across four or five planks each.
The principal source of strength in a shell-first hull is the shell itself.
One of the ways we know that these frames weren't added until after the ship was built
is this stone relief, which shows a Roman shipwright fabricating a frame for a shell
that has already been fully constructed.
The shell-first method produced a hull that was amazingly strong and light, but also quite
labor-intensive.
Even a small ship would have many thousands of those mortise and tenon joints that we
saw earlier, and everyone had to be fitted quite precisely to ensure the structural integrity
of the hull.
So how do these joints contribute to the hull's structural integrity?
Well, to answer that question, we need to look more rigorously at what it means for a
ship's hull to carry load as a structural element.
And we need to start with the concept of buoyancy.
So what is buoyancy?
Well, the basic idea is that a floating object displaces water, and the weight of displaced
water is exactly equal to the weight of the floating object itself.
To illustrate that concept, let's look at a small model boat.
I've placed some ballast inside, and so the boat plus the ballast weighs about half a
pound.
When that boat is floating in water, it displaces water with its hull.
That is, when the portion of the hull that falls below the water line takes up space,
it takes up the amount of space formally occupied by one half pound of water.
Now I'm going to add a half pound of cargo to the boat, and you'll notice that as I do
this, the boat is going to settle down and sink a little bit lower in the water.
It's going to ride a little bit lower.
As it rides lower, it will displace more water.
In fact, the amount of water it displaces is a half pound of water, and so the total
weight of the boat plus cargo, the total of one pound, now displaces a total of one pound
of water.
This displacement of water causes an upward force, which is called the buoyant force,
which exactly counterbalances the boat's weight and causes it to float.
Eureka, we have just discovered Archimedes' principle of buoyancy.
It's formulated by that great Greek mathematician in 212 BC, reportedly while he was taking
a bath.
Now, when a ship floats in still water, like my model, this buoyant force is more or less
uniformly distributed along its entire length, as you can see in this graphic.
So it bounces the ship's weight, and the hull experiences relatively little tendency to
bend.
But in rough seas, the buoyant force can be distributed quite unevenly along the length
of the hull, and when this happens, the hull bends like a beam.
There are two worst case conditions.
First, when the crest of a wave is a midships, the buoyant force is concentrated there,
and the entire hull tends to bend concave downward in a behavior that's typically called
hogging.
And second, when the trough of a wave is a midships, the buoyant force is now concentrated
at the bow and stern, and the hull tends to bend concave upward.
This is called sagging.
Well, now let's examine how the hull resists this tendency to bend.
Here you see a model of a ship's hull.
I made it by gluing 15 sheets of wood together to create the hull, and then carving it to
shape.
What I'd like to do is assume that each one of these individual sheets of wood represents
one plank in the hull of an actual ship.
Let's also assume that this vessel is moving through rough water, and at one particular
instant in time, its hull is momentarily supported on the crests of two waves as you see here.
Now we're in that configuration where the weight of the ship is going to cause it to
sag to bend concave upward.
I'm going to use these heavy weights placed right in the center of the ship to represent
its weight, in this case applied at its center of gravity, and you'll notice that when I
put those weights in place, well, take my word for it, the hull does sag, but not much.
In fact, the amount of bending is so slight that you probably couldn't even discern it.
Now, here's another model of a ship's hull.
This one is identical to the one that I showed you earlier.
It's also made of 15 thin sheets of wood, however, in this case, the thin sheets of
wood are not glued together.
You'll notice that they're actually simply stacked on top of each other, not physically
connected.
But the amount of wood is precisely the same.
The shape, length, and size of this ship hull is precisely the same as the model that I
just tested previously.
I'm going to put it in the same position on the same pair of waves, and I'm going to
load it with the same weight representing the weight of the ship itself as it crosses
over those waves.
As I put that load in place, you can clearly see a substantial amount of sagging occurring
under the action of that weight.
Can you see why?
If you look very closely, you can see that when the hull bends, the planks are actually
sliding horizontally with respect to each other, and this, of course, happens because
they're not glued together.
This behavior is called shearing, and it tends to be most visible at the ends of the hull.
So in order to make it a little bit clearer what's going on here, I'm going to take the
hull and bend it again, and I simply ask you to focus in on the bow of the ship up here.
Right now, this is in the unloaded condition.
Now as I load it, you can see very clearly those planks sliding with respect to each
other, unloaded, loaded, unloaded, loaded.
In the loaded condition, what is formally a straight stem post looks like a little stair
step because the planks have slid with respect to each other.
So there's a fundamental difference in the behavior of those two hulls.
Why is that?
Why is it that the two hulls that are made of exactly the same amount of wood, the same
type of wood, the same configuration, the same shape, behave so very differently?
Well that first hull was stronger and stiffer because the shearing of those planks is resisted
by the horizontal glue joints between the planks.
That resistance is not provided in the second model, so it's considerably weaker and more
flexible.
In a classical-era ship, within the hull of that ship, there's critical structural function
that is preventing the shearing along the seams between the hull planks was actually
accomplished by those thousands of mortise and tenon joints that we talked about earlier
in this lecture.
And as you'll recall from our demonstration of the creation of the mortise and tenon
joints, they are in fact quite effective at preventing just that sort of shearing action,
the tendency of the planks to slide horizontally with respect to each other, and so they perform
that critical structural function.
Now, to resist bending, a hull also depends very heavily on its keel.
The keel is the ship's structural backbone.
So if you think of this beam as if it were a ship's hull, the keel would be located centrally
and oriented longitudinally along the length of the beam.
And if you can visualize that, then you can see that when the hull is hogging, the keel
is in compression.
And when the hull is sagging, the keel is in tension.
Under a number of other possible conditions in rough seas, the hull might be subjected
to lateral bending, in which case the keel is also bending, and it might undergo twisting
type behavior, in which case the keel twists as well.
Now for longships in particular, it was generally necessary to assemble the keel from two or
more lengths of timber, and therefore those two lengths of timber would have to be joined
together with splices.
This was a significant structural challenge, because these joints had to be capable of
carrying the same extreme loads as the keel itself.
Today we could rely on metal fasteners to provide the necessary strength, but back then
the wooden splice had to do the job on its own.
To meet this challenge, ancient shipwrights devised an amazing type of joinery.
The locking scarf joint has been found in many ancient shipwrecks, and appears to have
been the standard method of splicing keels in classical-era ships.
The configuration is quite complex, but let's take a moment to look at it.
The splice joint consists obviously of two different pieces of wood.
Now I've got short segments of wood here, but I want you to imagine that this is one
segment of the keel of a warship, which means the splice joint is here, but the keel might
extend for another 30 or 40 feet in this direction, and then for this piece, the section of keel
might extend for another 30 or 40 feet in the opposite direction as well.
The joint itself, quite complex, but I assure you that every single notch and every single
projection has a very specific load carrying purpose.
To appreciate it, we really have to put it together.
So I'm going to take the joint, I'm going to insert the lower half into the upper, and
we'll press it together like that.
That leaves a hole in the center, but we'll fill that hole by inserting it with two wedges
that are inserted from opposite sides.
Two wedges joined in the center, when I lock them tightly in position, it locks the entire
joint together.
If I set up a couple of bricks just for structural testing purposes, you can see that this joint
now carries tremendous bending loads in the vertical orientation, I can flip it sideways,
and it carries tremendous bending loads in the lateral orientation, it carries tension,
it carries compression, and it can withstand twisting as well.
Of all the technologies we've examined in this course, I can think of no better example
of virtuosity and craft than this beautiful joint.
Well, now that we've considered the hull as a structure, we're ready to examine how
the ship as a whole functioned as a mechanical system.
Today we'll focus on the use of sails to harness wind power.
Next time we'll look at human power in ore-driven warships.
Over the past five lectures, we've seen many applications of human, animal, and water power,
but the sailing ship was the ancient world's only practical application of wind power.
A typical merchant vessel like the Kyrenius ship was propelled by a single square sail
mounted on a mast, but don't be fooled by the apparent simplicity of this configuration.
Assuming this sail effectively as the ship's principal form of propulsion required a sophisticated
system of support and control, let's use our computer model to examine this system in greater detail.
First the mast is mounted in a socket, which is called a step, down in the ship's keel.
And then it's held in place with ropes called stays, which extend for and aft, and another
set of ropes called shrouds, which extend to port and starboard.
All these ropes are called standing rigging because once they're in place, they won't
be moved, they simply hold the mast in position.
The ropes associated with controlling the sail are called running rigging because they're
constantly being adjusted.
The sail is mounted on a horizontal yard arm, which can be raised and lowered by this double
line called a halyard.
These ropes are called lifts, and they're used to tilt the yard arm from side to side.
This pair is called braces to rotate it horizontally.
The sail itself is controlled by these lines, which are called sheets, and they run from
the sail's two lower corners back to the helmsman's position at the stern.
And normally the sheet on the windward side of the ship was made fast, and the one on
the leeward or downwind side is held by the helmsman who uses it to control the speed
of the vessel.
When the sheet is pulled taut, the sail can catch the full force of the wind, and the
speed of the vessel is increased.
The size of the sail can be adjusted using these ropes called brails.
They're very light lines that are attached to the lower edge of the sail, and then they
extend upward through a series of iron rings that are sewed onto the sail's front face,
and then over the yard arm and back to the stern where they're tied to a post or are
held by a crewman.
All of the brails can be pulled up simultaneously to haul up the entire sail, or they can be
pulled in differing amounts to change the shape of the sail, something like this.
This photo shows some of the sail rings and other pieces of the running rigging that were
recovered from the wreck of the Kyrenia.
The various components of running rigging, combined with these two steering ores located
on the quarter, provided a very flexible system for controlling the ship's direction and
speed.
Indeed, this system was so effective that it allowed Greek ships to sail into the wind,
probably for the first time in nautical history.
Now most scholars believe that a square rigged Greek vessel could reliably sail one point
into the wind.
That's nautical terminology.
A mariners compass has 32 points.
So one point is 360 degrees divided by 32 equals 11 and a quarter degrees, as shown here.
For the sake of comparison, modern sailboats, well equipped, can generally sail two points
into the wind, or about 22 degrees.
So you're the captain of this ship, and you're trying to reach this harbor.
Will the ability to sail 11 degrees into the wind really do you any good?
Well, yes, because you can make forward progress by tacking, that is by zigzagging back and
forth across the wind repeatedly at that 11 degree angle.
This tortuous path will require you to sail about five times farther than the straight
line distance from your current position to the port.
But you will get to your destination eventually.
So how does a ship sail into the wind?
Well, as you might expect, it's all about the mechanics of forces.
In the simple case of a following wind, the wind strikes the sail perpendicularly and it
exerts a force that propels the ship in the downwind or leeward direction.
But the wind's effect on the ship's motion gets a bit more complicated when the wind
is blowing in a direction other than the one that the ship is heading, and when the sail
is braced at an angle other than square to the wind.
So let's analyze a sailing ship one point into the wind, which, as I said, is probably
the best that classical era vessels are able to achieve.
The optimum sail orientation for this wind direction turns out to be at about 50 degrees
from square or perpendicular.
So let's use this configuration for our analysis.
Now how does this wind force propel the ship forward?
Back in lecture 16, in our discussion of the inclined plane, we saw that a force can always
be represented as a mathematically equivalent pair of perpendicular force components.
Using this same concept, we can visualize the wind force as two components.
One that's parallel to the sail and one that is perpendicular to it.
Now wind moving parallel to the sail has no effect on it, it just slides by, so we can
simply ignore this component as irrelevant to our discussion.
Only the perpendicular component contributes to the propulsion of the ship.
Now applying some simple trigonometry, we can determine this effective wind force to
be about 63% of the actual wind force.
But even though this force is perpendicular to the sail, it's not pushing in the same
direction as the ship's heading.
So we now have to represent this force as two components, one that's parallel to the ship's
direction of travel and one that's perpendicular to it.
Only the parallel component contributes to the forward motion of the ship, and applying
trigonometry once again, we can determine that this component is about 40% of the original
wind force.
This is, of course, an ideal theoretical result.
Actually achieving it would have required extremely precise control of the sail's position
and size.
And even then, some of the ship's forward progress could be lost to this perpendicular
component, which tends to push the hull sideways in the leeward direction through the water.
Greek shipbuilders addressed this problem in the 5th century BC with an innovative new
hull design.
It's called the wine glass shaped hull, which greatly reduced susceptibility to leeward
drift caused by that perpendicular component of wind force.
This downward extension of the keel works sort of like the blade on an ice skate, allowing
forward motion while resisting any tendency to skid sideways.
The Kyrenia ship had a wine glass shaped hull, as you can see here.
Now this analysis of wind and sail mechanics demonstrates that sailing into the wind with
a square rigged vessel is both challenging and inherently inefficient.
Not only must the ship travel up to five times farther than the desired straight line route,
but it can only harvest about 40% of the wind energy that would be available if it were
sailing with a following wind.
And the vessel's forward progress is further hindered by leeward drift.
Recovering these challenges required an advanced hull design combined with flexible and precise
systems for steering the ship and controlling the position, size and shape of the sail.
The development of these systems was a substantial technological achievement and remains a vivid
illustration of Greek nautical engineering genius.
Wind and sail mechanics can also shed some light on another important classical era development
in nautical technology.
When a ship sails across the wind like this, it tends to heel over to the leeward side.
This sideways lean shifts the line of the wind force off the hull's centerline, causing
a torque that turns the ship into the wind, a tendency that mariners call weather helm.
For a ship with one sail, weather helm could only be countered by the helmsman turning
the steering oars in the opposite direction.
A corrective action that works but slows the ship down.
Greek shipbuilders eventually figured out that they could address this problem much more
efficiently by adding a small mast and second sail near the ship's bow.
This foresail could be trimmed to counterbalance the weather helm while also providing some
additional propulsion.
Over time, this insight that a second sail added flexibility in controlling the ship
led to the development of large three-masted Greek and Roman freighters, which prefigured
the grand ocean-going ships of the Age of Discovery over a millennium later.
Because of their technological refinement, classical-era roundships achieved unprecedented
levels of performance under sail.
These ships carried large cargoes over great distances, despite the challenges of Mediterranean
weather.
An ordinary merchant ship of this era would have been about 60 feet long and 15 to 20
feet wide, with a carrying capacity of 120 to 150 tons.
But ships of 400 to 500 tons were common, and several of over 1,000 tons were described
in the literature.
Typical cargoes included grain, wine, building stone, metal ingots, oil, and during the Roman
era looted art treasures.
The importance of these ships to ancient economies is best illustrated by the huge fleet of merchant
ships built to supply the people of Rome with grain from their distant province of Egypt.
A typical voyage of this fleet would start from Rome's port of Ostia, and could generally
reach Alexandria in about 20 days, thanks to prevailing Mediterranean winds that blow
from northwest to southeast.
But the return trip, largely against the wind, might take 45 to 60 days, and could easily
include additional time loitering in intermediate ports, waiting for better wind conditions.
Winter storms limited the safe sailing season to the period from early April until September,
so each ship could only make at best two round trips per year from Ostia to Alexandria.
In characteristic fashion, the Romans compensated for this inherent limitation by building an
integrated system of sea transport, a fleet of several hundred ships, with total carrying
capacity of perhaps a hundred thousand tons, augmented by sophisticated ports, grain storage
facilities, and distribution networks.
Under full sail, this great fleet, a Roman product of Greek nautical engineering genius,
must have been impressive indeed.
We can get some sense of the sight of this fleet from Book Five of the Aeneid, where
Virgil writes,
Now, a sweet joy steals across Aeneas' mind.
Step the mast, he orders, spread the canvas aloft.
All set their sheets alike, and braced the yards, swinging and slanting, now to port,
now to starboard, brailing up the sail to Leeward with each change of tack, scurrying
along in the fair breeze.
What a wonderful, appealing picture of technology at one with nature in service to mankind.
What a very different picture we shall see next lecture.
As we examine the ancient longship, a human-powered torpedo designed and optimized for the sole
purpose of destruction.
Until then, thank you.
