Welcome back.
Last lecture, we examined one of the crowning architectural and technological achievements
of the Hellenic Greek civilization, the colonnaded temple.
Throughout that discussion, I focused primarily on the stone components of the building — crepidoma,
columns, capitals, architrave, frees, pediment, cornice.
I made a passing reference to the temple's wooden roof structure, called a prop and lintel
system, but I didn't discuss it in any detail.
Well, during today's lecture, we'll return to the temple roof and give it the attention
it deserves.
So, what's so important about a roof anyway?
Obviously, from a functional perspective, a building's roof provides shelter from the
elements and may also support a ceiling or an attic.
But there's certainly nothing exciting about a roof.
Furthermore, once a Greek temple was built, its roof structure was entirely hidden — by
stone or terracotta tiles above and by a wooden ceiling below.
Out of sight, out of mind.
It's also worth noting that not a single wooden component of a Greek temple roof has
survived from antiquity.
So everything we do know about these structures is subject to considerable speculation.
Nonetheless, there are three reasons why we must address the timber prop and lintel roof
system in this course on ancient technology.
First, as we'll see shortly, the inherent limitations of this system decisively influenced
the form and function of the colonnaded temple, and of several other important types of Greek
buildings as well.
Second, the subsequent replacement of the prop and lintel roof with a fundamentally new structural
system — the Tybeam Truss — opened the door to new realms of structural possibility
and eventually stimulated the development of an important new architectural form called
the Basilica.
And third, the lack of clear-cut evidence about ancient timber roofs creates a bit of
a mystery — and everyone loves a mystery.
Fortunately, archaeological remains of Greek temples have provided us with just enough
clues to unravel this mystery — to reconstruct the configuration of timber roof structures
with reasonable confidence.
And this archaeological detective story is really quite fascinating in its own right.
So, let's return to the Temple of Concordia at Agrigento, and see if we can use some
of these archaeological clues to reconstruct its roof system.
Here is the stone structure of the building, more or less as it appears today.
And here's our primary source of information for understanding the roof system — a series
of rectangular sockets carved into the edges of the cornices, pediments, and crosswalls.
These sockets provide invaluable clues about the sizes and positions and orientations of
the various roof timbers.
We'll begin our reconstruction by positioning the ceiling support timbers, a series of closely
spaced beams, each spanning the full width of the temple in three segments — from colonnade
to cellar wall, and then across the cellar, and then from cellar wall back out to the
opposite colonnade.
These beams rest on ledges rather than in sockets, so we can't know their precise size and spacing.
But we do know that they would have been substantial timbers, because in addition to their role
as load-carrying elements in the roof system, they also supported an attic floor up above.
And we know that the attic of this temple was a functional space — indeed, probably
a ceremonial space — because of these two very substantial stone stairways which provide
access to the attic from the ground level.
Now, based on these large sockets in the pediments and crosswalls, we add three heavy longitudinal
beams.
The outer two are called purlins, and one in the center is the ridge beam.
On the ends of the building, these beams span only about 15 feet between the pediments and
crosswalls, so they're more than adequately supported.
But over the cellar, this 60-foot span is much too long.
Without additional support, these wooden beams would bend and break under the weight of all
those heavy roof tiles up above.
And so we need to install a series of vertical props to provide intermediate support for
those beams.
The props that support the purlins rest on the cellar walls, and the ones that support
the ridge beam are positioned at mid-span of the ceiling beams, as you can see here.
Now, at the ends of the building, these sockets in the pediment and crosswalls tell us that
there should be eight additional purlins supporting the roof over the east and west porches.
Finally, these closely spaced sockets in the cornices tell us that a series of angled beams,
which are called rafters, must extend from each cornice across the purlin up to the ridge
beam.
This integrated system of wooden structural elements constitutes what we've been calling
the prop and lentil system.
And by the way, the word lentil is an architectural term referring to any horizontal beam that
spans the opening between two vertical supports.
Thus, in the prop and lentil system, the lentils are the ceiling beams, purlins, ridge beams,
and rafters.
This structure supported an ingenious system of interlocking roof tiles made of either stone
or terracotta.
To install the system, we first positioned lightweight wooden beams called battens on
the top of the rafters, and then placed these large pan tiles across the battens.
The pan tiles are installed from bottom to top, with the lowest row resting on the cornice,
and then each higher row overlapping the one below it just a bit.
Then these cover tiles are positioned over the upturned edges of the adjacent pan tiles,
with each cover tile also overlapping the one below.
The bottom row of cover tiles incorporates these decorative bosses called antifixes,
which hide the exposed ends of the tiles and give the eaves a finished look.
Two characteristics of this tile system are particularly noteworthy.
First, there are no nails, clamps, or adhesive anywhere in this system.
Every tile is held in place only by gravity, friction, and mechanical interlocking with
adjacent tiles.
This is why the slope of Greek temple roofs is relatively shallow.
If it were steeper, the tiles could easily just slide off.
Second, the system is quite waterproof, even though it typically didn't include any sort
of sealant.
Because of this ingenious arrangement of overlaps and upturned edges, the only way for water
to penetrate the tile layer is for it to flow uphill.
Well, now that we've seen how all the major components of the Temple of Concordia are
put together, let's use this highly simplified model to examine how the structure actually
carries load.
The typical method of analyzing a structural system is to follow the load from top to bottom,
from the point of application of load all the way down through the various and assorted
structural elements to the foundation of the building.
So we'll begin at the top, and the principal loading carried by this structural system,
at least at the start of the load path, is the weight of these heavy terracotta roof tiles.
The roof tiles are directly supported by those sloped beams called rafters that run from
the colonnades up to the ridge beam.
In order to be able to see that portion of the system more clearly, let me remove the
roof tiles, and now we can focus on the rafters.
The rafters then take all this load, the assembled weight of all the roof tiles placed above them,
and they transmit it down to five parallel elements, the roof beam and center, the purlins,
midway out to the ends of the building, and the outer colonnades.
Now I'll remove these rafters, get them out of the way so we can examine the portion of
the structure that falls below them.
Take care of these.
With the rafters out of the way, we can examine the next layer of the load path, if you will.
Remember that the rafters were supported on the ridge beam, the purlins, and the outer
colonnades.
We can now see that the purlins transmit the load that they carry down through these very
short props into the cellar walls, and now we can get these out of the way.
Once again, the purlin with its very short props, transmitting load directly downward
into the cellar walls below.
The ridge beam is similar.
It's supported on a series of props which are somewhat taller because the ridge beam
is positioned higher in the roof system.
It's transmitting its load down through those three props, which are carrying load and compression,
therefore are functioning essentially as mini columns.
But they're supported not on the cellar, but rather on these transverse roof beams.
So if we get the props out of the way, we can now examine those heavy roof beams which
run from colonnade to cellar wall to cellar wall to colonnade.
And indeed, you can see now that all of that load that's transmitted down to the roof beams
is itself carried out to both the cellar walls and the colonnades.
So we can get rid of these.
And what we're left with is the entire weight of all of the structure that is positioned
above this level is ultimately transmitted in part to the cellar walls, in part to the
colonnades, and all of that load is transmitted straight down vertically through these systems
into the foundations of the building.
Note that in this system, these props carried load in compression.
So as structural elements, they can be categorized as columns.
But every other element in the entire system is a beam carrying load and bending.
And as such, the prop and lentil system is really just another example of trabeated construction
as we discussed during lecture four.
And just as the trabeated stone construction of the temple colonnade was subject to some
significant structural limitations, structural limitations that we examined in the laboratory
using this device.
So the trabeated timber construction of the temple roof is similarly constrained.
Let's see how this constraint became apparent and how it ultimately influenced Greek architecture.
As we learn last lecture, the limiting factor in trabeated stone construction is the span
length of the architrave beams.
If the columns in a colonnade are placed too far apart, the tensile stress in the bottom
of the architrave exceeds the relatively low tensile strength of stone and the beam fails.
Of course, this constraint wouldn't necessarily limit the overall size of a Greek temple because
the architect could always increase the width of the colonnade by simply adding more columns
rather than increasing their spacing.
Indeed, this is just what the designer of the temple of Hera at Pestum did.
The column spacing used in this colonnade is almost identical to that of the temple of
Concordia, but the front colonnade now uses nine columns instead of six, and thus is about
50% wider.
But there's a problem with this approach.
As the front colonnade of the temple gets wider, the cellar must get wider as well in
about the same proportion.
Because the cellar is spanned by the wooden ceiling beams of the prop and lentil roof
system, increasing the cell width soon becomes problematic.
As a general rule, Greek builders avoided spanning distances greater than about 30 feet
with wooden beams, and the rare exceptions to this rule used truly massive beams.
So as the column spacing in a Greek temple was constrained by an inherent limitation
on the span length of stone architraves, so the cell width was constrained by an inherent
limitation on the span of wooden ceiling beams.
Now, at first glance, you might be wondering why this ladder limitation should be so.
After all, the span limitation on stone beams resulted from the low tensile strength of
stone.
But wood is about as strong in tension as it is in compression.
And for its weight, wood is actually an amazingly strong material.
Well, the problem is that the dimensions of wooden beams are limited by the diameter of
the tree from which the beam is cut.
Thus the greater tensile strength of wood is offset, to some extent, by an inherent
limitation in cross-section size.
Wood is also much more flexible than stone.
It bends much more under a given load.
And so long span wooden beams tend to sag excessively.
So what are the implications of this 30-foot limitation on wooden beam spans?
Well, in the temple of Concordia, the cellar walls are about 25 feet apart.
It's less than 30, so the limitation really had no impact at all.
But in the larger temple of Hera, the cellar walls are now about 38 feet apart.
Because of this longer span, the architect had to provide additional support for the
ceiling beams.
He did this by adding an interior colonnade, running longitudinally down the center of
the cellar.
Now, this solved the structural problem by cutting the span of the roof beams in half.
But it must also have seriously compromised the temple's function by forcing the cult
statue of the goddess to be placed off-center.
We can be reasonably sure that Greek architects recognized this problem because nearly all
subsequent large temples, including the Parthenon, had not one but two interior colonnades.
The cellar walls of the Parthenon are just over 60 feet apart, so it would have been
structurally feasible to use a single interior colonnade, thus dividing it into two 30-foot
spans, like the temple of Hera.
But instead, the architect chose to use two, allowing the statue of Athena to be appropriately
centered in the cellar.
Although the double colonnade did address the structural and functional challenges posed
by the post-enlental roof system, it was hardly an efficient solution.
These internal colonnades are substantial, expensive stone components, which existed
solely for the purpose of propping up the roof.
Furthermore, temples weren't the only Greek buildings affected by this inherent limitation.
Consider one of the most interesting, if unappreciated, buildings of classical antiquity, the arsenal
at the Piraeus, built by Phylon of Eleusis, around 330 BC.
The Piraeus was the port city of Athens, the home of the great Athenian naval fleet.
Phylon's arsenal was a huge storage building used to secure sails, ropes, and other equipment
during the winter months when the fleet was hunkered down in port.
Unfortunately, this impressive structure hasn't survived, but we know a lot about it from the
likes of Demosthenes, Plutarch, Strabo, Pliny, and Vitruvius, who all wrote about it.
More importantly, Phylon's actual construction specifications have survived, largely intact,
as an inscription on a large marble panel.
These specifications are so detailed that we can reconstruct the configuration of the building
quite confidently as I've done with this computer model.
The general architectural arrangement consisted of a central aisle, providing access to 34
storage bays on either side of the aisle, delineated by two interior colonnades, and
roofed with a fully developed prop and lintel system.
The timbers of this system were immense.
The ceiling beams measured 30 inches wide by 27 inches high, and even though they only
had to span 20 feet across the central aisle, they had these massive proportions.
The ridge beam above and the rafters were similarly robust, a clear indicator that 100
years after the Parthenon was constructed, Greek builders had made little or no progress
in addressing the structural inefficiency of the prop and lintel system.
Perhaps the most important architectural manifestation of the post and lintel system can be seen in
the building's overall dimensions, 400 feet long by only 55 feet wide.
Now, there are several plausible reasons why such a long and narrow plan might have been
used in this instance, but one must certainly have been the inherent challenge in covering
such a vast floor area with a post and lintel roof.
By using the long and narrow plan, Phylon could span the shorter dimension with the
same basic roof configuration that had been used in temples for the past two centuries,
and then just extend that system in the longitudinal direction for as long as necessary to enclose
the desired floor area.
We can see the same underlying design concept in the stoa, a Greek public building second
to only an importance to the temple.
The stoa was a covered pavilion that housed shops and offices, and was usually located
in the Agorah, or central marketplace of a Greek city.
Here's a typical example, the stoa of Attalos in Athens, constructed in the 2nd century BC,
and then beautifully restored in the 1950s.
It's 377 feet long by only 65 feet wide, and once again that long and narrow plan must
be attributed, at least in part, to the span limitation of the prop and lintel roof system,
which is indeed oriented in that short direction.
Perhaps the most interesting architectural manifestation of the timber roof system can
be seen in the assembly halls of the late Hellenic era, rare examples of large Greek
public buildings that were not long and narrow.
In 5th century Athens, most public business to include the meetings of the Athenian assembly
had taken place outdoors, but in the following century, Greek urban planners introduced the
concept of the assembly hall, a large public building capable of accommodating indoor
meetings attended by thousands of citizens.
A particularly intriguing example is the Thercilion at Megalopolis in the Peloponnese.
Constructed around 370 BC, this immense building, roughly 200 feet square, was called the Hall
of Ten Thousand, a reference to the size of the popular assembly it was intended to house.
As an assembly hall, the Thercilion's function would have been best served by unimpeded interior
space.
In practice, however, wooden beams couldn't possibly have spanned the building's full
200 foot width, and so the Thercilion's interior was studded with 69 interior columns, each
spaced not more than 30 feet apart.
The architect made the best of this constraint by arranging the colonnades in five more or
less concentric rectangles, as you can see here, with individual columns perfectly aligned
on radial lines converging at the speaker's rostrum.
With this ingenious configuration, he implicitly acknowledged that closely spaced interior columns
were inevitable, and so he focused on minimizing their adverse impact rather than eliminating
them entirely.
By confining them to these distinct sightlines, he provided unimpeded views of the rostrum
from every other location in the hall.
Now the ingenuity of this Thercilion notwithstanding, we can only marvel at the extent to which
architectural function in Greek buildings continued to be compromised by the inherent
limitations of wooden beam spans.
But everything changed with the invention of one of the ancient world's most important
structural technologies, the truss.
Let's see what it is and how it works.
Before we actually talk about the truss, I want to start by taking a simple wooden beam
and spanning it across these two colonnades.
When I apply the load to this beam, and if you watch very carefully, you'll see that
it will bend substantially under that load.
Here goes.
Notice the bending.
And if you didn't see the bending apparent as I applied the load, I'll place my ruler
over the top of it, and you can see the gap between the ruler and the beam as evidenced
that under the action of this load, the beam bends about a quarter of an inch.
Let's get this out of the way and see if we can't find a better technology to span
that gap.
That new technology is going to start with what looks like essentially the same beam,
a single horizontal element.
This one happens to have a couple of slots cut into the top surface, and I'm going to
use those slots to attach some additional structural elements.
I'll begin by adding a vertical strut inserted right into the center of this beam, and then
we'll add a couple of diagonals as well.
To attach the diagonals, I will first plug in the upper portion, then I'll insert the
lower.
I'll do the same with another diagonal on the opposite side, first inserting the upper,
then the lower.
We'll now place this new, innovative structural system into position.
Having assembled those members together, we have in fact created something fundamentally
new, a truss.
It might look like the prop and lentil system.
Certainly certain aspects of it are superficially the same, but this is not a prop and lentil
system.
It is a fundamentally different kind of structure.
The key difference between this and the prop and lentil system is that we now have structural
connections at each of the corners of this triangular geometric arrangement, and those
structural connections make all the difference in the world.
By the way, those connections that I just assembled here are actually accurate representations
of ancient timber connections.
Pretty good example of virtuosity in timber design that was sort of fundamental to ancient
building construction.
This structure carries load in a fundamentally different way than the prop and lentil system,
and I'm going to demonstrate that by taking exactly the same loading that I applied to
my beam previously, we're going to attach it to the truss.
Notice that when I do that, there is no discernible movement of that structure.
There's no discernible deformation or deflection from its initial position.
There actually is a tiny amount of deformation, but it's not even enough to see with a naked
eye.
How does this thing work?
How does it carry load?
Well, unlike a beam which carries load in bending, and therefore experiences some tension
in the bottom, some compression in the top, this structural system carries load entirely
in either pure tension or pure compression, depending on which element of the system we're
talking about.
The diagonals carry load in compression.
As this applied force is pushing downward, the two diagonals are being compressed, and
in doing so, they're transmitting load out to the supports of the structure.
Now, if we simply have these two rafters, that compressive loading would cause these
two elements to tend to want to flatten out, the colonnades would tip outward and the whole
system would collapse, but that potential failure is prevented by the horizontal element,
which is tied to the diagonals, and which carries load in pure tension, and because
it ties the two diagonals together, it's called the tie beam, and the entire system
is referred to as a tie beam truss.
This structural system is significantly more efficient than a beam.
It can span significantly longer distances, and it can carry heavier loads safely.
So, where did the truss come from?
Well, there's much scholarly debate on this issue, but no definitive answer.
Several Greek temples on Sicily have cello walls that seem to be too far apart to have
been spanned by beams.
There's some speculation that Sicilian Greek builders learned about the truss through their
frequent contacts with the Carthaginians, a seafaring people who had been adept with
timber construction.
There's stronger evidence that Hellenistic builders occasionally used trusses, but as
with so many other ancient technologies, it was the Romans who fully exploited the architectural
possibilities of this new structural configuration.
And so, as the Greek world gradually succumbed to Roman dominion, the long and narrow stoa
and the Thercilion style assembly hall with its forest of interior columns were superseded
by a new, functionally superior type of public meeting hall called the basilica, an architectural
form that only became possible with the advent of the truss.
Now, the basilica was a quintessentially Roman building located in the Forum, or Central
Business District of a Roman city.
It provided a covered space for conducting business and legal transactions.
The earliest basilicas were constructed in the late 2nd century B.C. and soon afterward
the form spread widely across the Mediterranean world.
A variety of distinctly different basilica forms were developed throughout the Roman era,
but all had one common distinguishing characteristic, a vast covered central hall, unimpeded by
interior columns.
Eventually, this same feature led to the basilica's adoption as the architectural model for early
Christian churches, after the Emperor Constantine converted to Christianity in the 4th century
AD.
To understand the basilica and the role of the Tyveim truss in making it possible, let's
look at one of history's most famous examples, the Roman basilica fanno, built around 39
B.C.
This structure is not famous because of its great size or sophistication.
It was actually quite a modest building, located in a small town on the Adriatic coast
of Italy.
And it's not famous because any part of it has survived from antiquity.
Today there are no physical remains of the building, indeed, even its physical location
is disputed.
Rather, the fanno basilica is famous because it's the only structure known to have been
designed and built by the ancient world's most famous engineer, Marcus Vitruvius Polio.
Vitruvius describes the fanno basilica in Book 5 of De Archa Tectura.
Unfortunately, his description is maddeningly incomplete, probably because the original
treatise included drawings that haven't survived.
Still, he provides enough detail for us to reconstruct the building's overall dimensions
and configuration, including its use of trusses in the roof structure.
This computer model is my attempt to reconstruct the fanno basilica based on Vitruvius' description.
And while many details are conjectural, we do know with certainty that the overall plan
of the building was T-shaped, with the main entrance centered on the long side of one wall,
and with the stem of the T serving as the tribunal, an area with a raised floor where
the local magistrates heard cases and dispensed justice.
We know that the heart of the building was a vast central hall, a 120-foot by 60-foot
space outlined by 50-foot tall monolithic stone columns surrounded by a two-story aisle.
We know that the aisle had a lower roof line than the hall to allow for illumination by
a row of windows on the upper level.
And we know that the roof of that monumental central hall was supported by a series of
60-foot wooden tie-beam trusses.
These trusses made the basilica possible.
Without them, the only way to support the roof would have been with a forest of columns
filling that central hall.
But this would have fundamentally altered the architectural design, robbing the basilica
of its most characteristic feature, unimpeded open space.
With its 60-foot trusses, Vitruvius' phono basilica was by no means an exceptional structure.
The Emperor Constantine's basilica in Trier, Germany, had timber roof trusses spanning
85 feet.
And while the evidence is not definitive, it's quite likely that the Flavian palace
on the Palatine Hill in Rome had roof trusses over 100 feet long.
The only ancient structures capable of spanning longer distances were the great concrete domes
of the Pantheon and the Bads of Caracalla.
We'll visit these remarkable structures in a later lecture, but for now we would do well
to reflect on the unremarkable nature of Vitruvius' basilica at Phono, a modest building constructed
in a small Italian city, probably little different from hundreds of basilicas in hundreds of
other cities around the empire.
Unremarkable, yet in comparison with Phylon's arsenal and the Thercilion, Vitruvius' basilica
represents a monumental leap forward in both structural engineering and construction technology.
The fact that the Romans are now erecting 50-foot monolithic columns and 60-foot timber
trusses in a routine small-town construction project suggests that the Romans are bringing
a whole new spirit to the engineering enterprise, a spirit of innovation informed by a strong
appreciation for structural principles and greatly enhanced by a cultural predisposition
toward pragmatism and organization.
Here we see the roots of a construction revolution, one that will reach its climax in the grand
public works of imperial Rome.
In this lecture, we will explore the building blocks of that revolution, the two most important
construction technologies of the ancient world, concrete and the arch.
Until then, thank you.
