Welcome back. As we've seen, the Aqueducts of Rome brought hundreds of millions of gallons
of fresh water every day in a never-ending stream, from distant springs and rivers through
mountains across valleys and over-broad plains to the heart of a thirsty city. This system
was certainly one of the great technological achievements of human history.
And yet, getting water to the city was only half the job. Once these man-made rivers reached
their destination, the water still had to be cleaned and then distributed in appropriate
quantities to baths, fountains, industrial consumers, and private users all over the
sprawling city. The water supply infrastructure had to be maintained, repaired, and constantly
expanded to meet increasing demand. The supply network needed mechanisms for measuring usage
so that private consumers could be appropriately charged for their water. And ultimately, to keep
the city from drowning in its own effluent, a parallel system for collecting and disposing
of wastewater also was essential. As extensive and ubiquitous as Roman water distribution
systems were, it's actually surprising that we have so few high-quality sources of information
about them. The archaeological evidence is spotty at best. Many individual components
of these systems have survived, particularly those made of stone, concrete, or terracotta.
We can find basins, public toilets, drainage channels, and clay pipes at many sites around
the Mediterranean world. But these individual components often don't tell us much about the
systems to which they once belonged. Moreover, these systems, all-important metal components,
lead pipes, bronze faucets, iron fastenings, and such have mostly disappeared, thanks to the ease
with which metals of all kinds can be recycled for other uses. The one notable exception is the
city of Pompeii, where a well-developed water system was preserved more or less intact in the
volcanic ash deposited by the eruption of Mount Vesuvius in 79 AD. Without question, the most
important physical evidence of ancient water supply technology comes from this single site.
Our literary evidence is similarly limited. Apart from a few isolated passages in juvenile
and Pliny, we really have just two substantive written sources on water supply. You might expect
the first one is Vitruvius, who devoted all of Book VIII of day architecture to this subject.
Unfortunately, in this case, we need to view this material with some skepticism.
Several of Vitruvius' descriptions of various water supply technologies actually don't make sense.
If we built them as he described them, they simply wouldn't have worked properly. And so,
we're forced to conclude that Vitruvius' expertise in this area was probably limited,
and the material presented in Book VIII may be unreliable. Well, this leaves us with a less
famous but equally intriguing character named Sextus Julius Frontinus. Born around 35 AD,
Frontinus was a well-respected member of the senatorial class who held the Roman consul
ship three times before the emperor Nerva appointed him as water commissioner of Rome in 97 AD.
Frontinus was a devoted public servant and a capable administrator, though not an engineer.
Thus, upon assuming his duties as commissioner, he devoted himself to learning everything he could
about Rome's water system. Unlike so many before him, he worked hard to eradicate the
waste and corruption he encountered. Then, he did something even more extraordinary. He wrote it
all down in an official report called De Aqueduct II, which has survived to the present day.
De Aqueduct II is not great literature. Indeed, it's about as exciting as watching concrete cure.
But the treatise is accurate and thorough, and it's of particular value to us because it describes
Rome's water supply system not as a collection of components but as an integrated whole. Without
De Aqueduct II, we'd know next to nothing about Rome's amazingly sophisticated water infrastructure.
We are fortunate indeed to have this resource. As Frontinus makes clear, the most important
characteristic of Roman water supply and its most important difference from modern systems
is continuous flow. Except for occasional maintenance and repair, and Aqueduct was simply
never shut off. Water moved through the urban distribution system without interruption,
usually with no long-term storage along the way. Given this characteristic, the natural way to
study Roman water systems is simply to go with the flow, following the water from its delivery
point at the terminus of the aqueduct all the way to the sewer that eventually carried it out of the
city. So, let's go with the flow. At one year, its delivery point, an aqueduct typically emptied
into a settling tank which was designed to remove sand, silt, and other suspended solids from the
water before it entered the urban distribution network. As we saw last lecture, a settling tank
was often built at the aqueduct source as well. Well, let's see how a settling tank works. Here's
a model of one, and over here on this side you see a simulated aquifer. Right now the water looks
fairly clear, but this particular aquifer happens to be filled with very, very dirty water.
So, there's the dirt. Let's stir it around a bit just to make sure that we have the highest possible
concentration of suspended solids in the water. Now, water flowing from this aqueduct, from this aquifer,
through an open channel aqueduct, passes into a settling tank as you see here. The principle
underlying this system is that moving water can carry more suspended solids than still water can.
Water in the channel carries settlement quite easily, but in the tank it slows almost to a halt,
first at the bottom of the first chamber, and then it flows laterally from the first chamber
over into the second, and then it must climb the second chamber all the way up to the outlet,
which is located all the way over here on the left-hand side. Along the way, the water is largely
stationary, and so it drops much of its burden of sediment along the way. That sediment settles to
the bottom of the tank where it can be periodically cleaned out by maintenance workers.
And as you can see, it's not perfect, but by the standards of ancient Rome, it's pretty good, and
it doesn't taste bad either. So, let's continue going with the flow. After passing through the
settling tank, the water was directed into the Castellum divisorium, a structure designed to
divide the incoming flow into multiple channels. A fine example has survived at Pompeii.
It's housed inside this brick building at the terminus of the city's small aqueduct,
just inside the Vesuvius Gate. Inside the building, water from the aqueduct entered here,
and then it flowed into a shallow circular basin about 18 feet in diameter. The flow first
passed through two metal gratings, one coarse, one fine, to remove leaves, twigs, and other debris
from the flow. And then, in the center of the basin, it was divided into three channels,
leading to three separate outlets, large lead pipes that served as Pompeii's water mains.
At the center of the basin, these slots indicate that the attendant could use movable wooden gates
to control the flow into each channel. Scholars have suggested that the three gates were of
different heights, like this, creating a built-in priority system for water distribution.
According to this theory, the lowest gate controlled the water supply to the public fountains.
The next higher gate provided a lesser supply to the public baths, and the highest gate of all
allocated the smallest quantity of water to private homes. With the gates configured in this way,
in times of shortage, the public fountains would continue to operate even after the baths and
private users had been cut off entirely. This theory is actually based on Vitruvius'
De architecturea, which describes a Castellum divisorium, configured to distribute water to
three categories of consumers on a priority basis, much like this. But despite a superficial
resemblance to this description, the Castellum at Pompeii probably did not use the Vitruvian system
for two reasons. First, Pompeii's aqueduct was quite small, and given the limited quantity of
water it delivered to the city, the heights of those three gates would have had to differ by
just a tiny fraction of an inch for the system to work as the theory predicts. Such high-precision
adjustments wouldn't have been feasible with these simple wooden gates. Second, according to this
theory, public fountains and private users were served by two different water mains, which would
therefore require two independent parallel distribution networks extending throughout the
city. Unfortunately, the large lead water mains extending from Pompeii's Castellum have all
disappeared, so we can't know definitively where they led. But wherever intact portions of Pompeii's
distribution system have been uncovered, there's no physical evidence of any such parallel network.
Conversely, there is strong evidence that a single water source served the public fountains
and private users within a given region of the city, as we'll see shortly. Certainly plausible
that one of the three pipes emerging from Pompeii's Castellum divisorium directly supplied the city's
baths. Public baths were invariably the largest consumers of water in a Roman city,
and Pompeii's baths could certainly have used a devoted water main. But all indications are that
the other mains supplied not two distinctly different categories of customers, but rather two different
regions of the city. If so, then the gates of the Castellum divisorium would most likely have been used
not to regulate flow into the three channels, but to close them off entirely, each in turn,
to perform maintenance or perhaps to ration water in times of shortage.
Okay, let's continue going with the flow. At Pompeii, the pipes from the Castellum divisorium
conducted the water to a series of secondary castella, each consisting of a 20-foot tall brick
pier, like this one, topped by a 250-gallon tank made of lead. The open-top tank was continuously
filled by this large pipe running up the side of the tower, and then continuously emptied by these
smaller pipes running back down to public fountains and private homes in the immediate vicinity.
At Pompeii, 12 of these secondary castella towers have been identified. According to Frontinus,
Rome had 247 of them. Now, the principal purpose of the secondary Castellum
was to control pressure in the distribution system. Let's see how this worked.
Pompeii's aqueduct delivered water to the Castellum divisorium at the Vesuvius gate,
the highest point in the city. The opposite end of town had an elevation 60 feet lower.
If water supply lines had run directly from the Castellum to the fountains and homes in this low
line area, the pipes would have experienced internal pressure of about 26 pounds per square inch.
This clearly is significantly lower than the pressure experienced by those great siphons
at Pergamon and Lyon, but it's pretty high for an urban distribution network, which would have had
many poor quality pipe joints that were particularly susceptible to pressure-induced leaks and blowouts.
Pompeii's engineers minimized these sorts of problems by inserting secondary Castella at regular
intervals throughout the distribution network. Consequently, the system effectively became
a series of inverted siphons, each secondary Castellum serving simultaneously as both the
receiving tank for the siphon pipe above and the header tank for the one below.
When I introduced the secondary Castellum earlier, you were probably wondering how the water got
up to the top of the tower in the first place. Well, here we see the answer. Each tank is lower
than the one that feeds it, so the entire system is propelled by gravity. But then why don't the
lower level of Castella overflow? Well, actually they would, if water weren't continuously being
drained from each tank to supply the fountains and homes in the vicinity. In designing modern
water systems, we tend to think in terms of supply keeping up with demand, but in these Roman
continuous flow systems, it was really more a case of demand staying ahead of supply.
So how do the secondary Castella regulate pressure? Recall that I said that was their
principal purpose. Well, remember from Lecture 12 that the pressure in a siphon pipe is proportional
to the vertical distance between the pipe and the hydraulic gradient, an imaginary line that connects
the water surfaces at each end of the pipe. As we've seen, the 60-foot change in elevation at
Pompeii corresponds to a pressure of about 26 pounds per square inch. But the secondary Castella
effectively break this system into segments, each with an elevation change of no more than 20 feet,
the height of the brick towers. So the maximum pipe pressure in each segment is now reduced to
about one-third of what it would be without the secondary Castella, less than 10 psi. And the
towers are just tall enough to propel water to second-story residences in their vicinity. It's
really a very clever system. At the heart of the system are the pipes themselves. In the Roman world,
water supply pipes could be terracotta, stone, or even wood in some cases, but most often they
were made of lead. In many ways, lead was an ideal material for this application. It's highly
malleable. That means it can be very easily formed into different shapes by hammering. It has very
low melting temperature. And particularly in the Roman West, it was inexpensive and readily available.
In Latin, lead was called plumbum, the origin of the modern chemical symbol PB for lead. And a lead
worker was a plumbarius, the ancestor of today's plumber. Roman pipes were fabricated in standard
diameters ranging from about an inch to nearly two feet. To make a pipe, the plumbarius poured
molten lead into a flat mold of stone, clay, or sand. The mold was 10 feet long, which is the
standard length of a Roman pipe, and slightly wider than the required circumference of the pipe.
The pipe thickness was standardized by specifying the weight of lead that would be poured into
the mold for a given pipe size. While this lead sheet was still hot and flexible, the plumbarius
bent it around a cylindrical form of water bronze and then withdrew the form and closed the seam
by folding the edges together like this or by soldering. So what's solder? Well, solder is a
mixture of lead and tin that melts at a lower temperature than pure lead, so it's particularly
useful for making joints. A common technique for soldering a pipe was to place temporary ridges of
clay along either side of the seam to hold the molten solder in place as it cooled and solidified,
like this. The result was this characteristic ridge on the top of the finished pipe.
Now, one of the most fascinating aspects of Roman lead pipes is their inscriptions,
which typically identify the manufacturer or the reigning emperor. On most pipes, these inscriptions
are actually raised letters, indicating that they were molded along with the pipe itself,
not cut or stamped into the surface after the fat. On some surviving Roman pipes, irregularities in
the alignment of the letters suggest that the inscriptions were actually made by setting individual
letter molds into that horizontal surface on which the molten lead was poured. If this interpretation
is correct, then it's quite possible that these pipes represent the world's first use of movable
type, and the Romans came tantalizingly close to inventing the printing press, more than a millennium
before Johannes Gutenberg actually pulled it off. Well, we can't leave the subject of lead pipes
without briefly considering the issue of lead poisoning. Much has been written about this
subject to include a rather astonishing theory that the decline of the Roman Empire was caused
not by barbarian incursions, not by imperial overstretch, not by civil wars, but rather by
lead contamination of Roman water systems. This is wonderful stuff for Neoludites who believe
that technology is ruining our world, but the claim can't really stand up to scientific scrutiny
for two reasons. First, as we've seen, water and Roman distribution system was constantly in motion.
The elapsed time between the water's first entry into a lead pipe and its ultimate arrival at a
public fountain couldn't have been more than a few minutes, not enough exposure for an appreciable
amount of lead to enter the water. Furthermore, since most Roman water sources had high mineral
content, a coating of calcium carbonate would have quickly accumulated on the insides of most
pipes. This coating would have prevented direct contact between the water and the inside lead
pipe surface, so there would have been very little opportunity for lead contamination of the water
as it passed through. Now, not all metal components of Roman water supply systems were made of lead,
zooming in on our secondary castellum, we can see that each supply pipe was connected to the
water tank with a bronze fitting. This connector is called a calyx, and it was used to regulate
water use. When a city dweller wanted to obtain his own personal private water supply, he arranged
for the Roman water authorities to install an officially approved calyx in the local secondary
castellum. The customer then hired a plumberious to run a pipe from the calyx to his home,
and then he paid his water bill based on the size of the calyx. We know from Frontinus that
corruption was absolutely rampant in the water supply establishment, so it's not surprising
that the calyx was made of bronze rather than lead. That harder metal would have been much more
difficult to tamper with. Okay, as we continue going with the flow, we see the water now passing
through the calyx into a supply pipe, down the tower and into the public fountain at its base,
and this is the typical position of the public fountains which were often located right there
at the base of the secondary castellum. Public fountains served as the main source of drinking
water for most city dwellers. Pompeii had about 50 of them spaced approximately 300 feet apart at
regular intervals, so that no one had to walk more than about 150 feet to get water. The typical
public fountain was a rectangular stone basin held together with iron clamps and with a decorated
spout on one end, and an overflow trough cut into the upper edge of one of the sides. In a Roman
continuous flow system, water was constantly overflowing from these fountains and cascading
across the streets and route to the sewers, a primitive form of street cleaning. The other
pipes exiting from the secondary castellum delivered water to private residences. At Pompeii,
about 10 percent of households had a private water supply, evidently a major status symbol,
as domestic supply pipes were often surface mounted on interior walls,
just for show, and occasionally were even made of silver. The supply pipe typically emptied
into a basin at a central location within the house, not in a kitchen or bathroom as we might
expect today, and the overflow was then channeled into the sewers, but often by way of a private
garden where it was used for irrigation. Although continuous flow was the norm in Roman water
systems, quite a few of the supply lines found at Pompeii actually did incorporate faucets or taps.
The Roman tap was made of bronze, and it looks surprisingly modern. It was operated by turning
the square loop on top with an iron wrench. When the hole in this cylinder aligned with the pipe,
water was able to flow freely. When the cylinder was rotated 90 degrees, the flow stocked.
At Pompeii, some of these devices were apparently used just as modern faucets are,
to turn the water on or off at a basin or fountain, but more often they were used as
shut-off valves at pipe junctions to isolate one branch of the system for maintenance or repair.
Another common destination for water in Roman city was the public toilet.
Toilets were often co-located with public bath complexes, so that they could be served by wastewater
flowing from the baths, but standalone facilities were also quite common.
Like this very well-preserved example at Ostia, the toilet facility was typically a large open room
with marble benches on three sides. The facility was served by two different continuously running
water channels, one beneath the seats to carry away the waste, and one just in front of the seats,
which you can see here, and is used for hand washing. Both of those emptied into the sewage system.
And yes, these are my students experiencing the technology firsthand.
Going with the flow, we now see that nearly all of the water originally supplied by the aqueducts
has drained from fountains, baths, and toilets to become wastewater.
Today, we actually classify structures that remove human waste as sanitary sewers,
and structures that remove excess rainfall as storm sewers. But in the ancient world,
both of these functions were usually performed by a single system, so we'll just call it a sewer.
Not all Roman cities had well-developed sewer networks, even at the height of the empire.
But in cities that did, these systems were often quite sophisticated. At Pompeii, for example,
masonry drainage channels with gabled covers ran underneath the sidewalks.
Storm runoff and overflow from the fountains entered these channels through openings in the
pavement, like this one. Other wastewater entered these channels underground from drain pipes that
originated in baths, public toilets, and private homes. But before painting too tidy a picture of
Roman sewage disposal, I must emphasize that an awful lot of wastewater to include human waste
was still dumped directly into the streets from buildings, even in cities with public toilets
and well-developed sewer systems. This nasty stuff combined with the overflow from all of those
public fountains to produce a continuous stream of filth running across the streets and into the
drain inlets. Not a pretty picture at all. The pedestrian crosswalks at Pompeii reflect a
typically pragmatic Roman response to this unpleasant reality. The tall stepping stones
allowed pedestrians to keep their feet dry, while the gaps between the stones allowed
wheeled vehicles to pass through the crosswalks, unimpeded. In well-developed Roman sewer systems,
the wastewater channels emptied into larger collector channels, and these into a single
great sewer running beneath the center of the urban area. The great sewer collected all of the
city's wastewater and storm runoff and channeled it into the nearest river where we joined the
natural pathway of hydrologic cycle, while also contributing to the systematic pollution of ancient
waterways. Rome's cloaca maxima is the quintessential example of these important but often overlooked
components of ancient infrastructure. The first segment of the cloaca was built in the sixth
century BC to drain the swampy lowlands between Rome's seven hills. Later it acquired its function
as a sewer, and then as Rome grew the channel was vaulted over, it was lengthened considerably,
and it was improved in various ways over time. This map shows its final route right through
the heart of the Roman Forum. We can plot this route accurately because the cloaca maxima is
still there today, serving as an active sewer over two millennia after its original construction.
For these past three lectures, we've examined the development of ancient water supply,
which reached its zenith in the great aqueducts and urban water distribution systems of the
Roman Empire. Next lecture, we'll visit Rome's most voracious user of water, the imperial bath,
an infrastructure system that incorporated nearly every one of the Roman technologies
we've seen thus far in our course. Urban planning, surveying, monumental stone masonry,
concrete vaulting, domes, roads, water distribution, and drainage, and a few others we haven't even
encountered yet. It's going to be great. I'm looking forward to it, and I hope you are too.
Until then, thank you.
