Welcome back.
At the very beginning of this course, we saw a vastly outnumbered fleet of Greek longships
called triremes confront a mighty Persian armada in the narrow strait of Salamis and
when a decisive victory that profoundly changed the course of history.
Today we'll revisit this fascinating machine within the broader context of ancient ord
warship development.
This story is absolutely unique in our course for three reasons.
First, from the perspective of engineering sophistication, longship development reached
its high watermark unusually early with the trireme in the 5th century BC and then it
actually declined thereafter.
In contrast, every other technology we've examined in this course achieved its highest
level of sophistication during the Roman imperial era.
Second, while we have some archaeological remains from most forms of ancient technology,
not one single remnant of a trireme has survived from antiquity.
Thus, everything we know about this great ship has been synthesized from a smattering
of literary sources, pottery, coins, and similar artifacts.
Third, this is the only form of ancient technology for which engineering optimization was an
absolute non-negotiable design criterion.
Designing a temple or a basilica, an architect could attain greater height simply by using
heavier, more robust walls with very few adverse consequences.
Getting a more capable catapult only required larger torsion springs and a correspondingly
heavier timber frame.
But the trireme couldn't be made better by becoming bigger.
Its effectiveness depended on a perfectly optimized balance of speed, maneuverability,
and strength, performance characteristics that tend to conflict with each other.
Greater speed can only be achieved at the cost of maneuverability, greater strength
at the cost of speed.
Achieving this perfect balance was literally a matter of life and death.
In a seaball, the slightest advantage in speed or maneuverability might mean the difference
between victory and defeat.
So the builders of these ships had a powerful incentive to refine their designs to a razor's
edge of efficiency.
For these reasons, in my view, the Trireme is the ancient world's single most interesting
technological system, and therefore a suitable subject for this penultimate lecture in our
course.
So let's start with some historical background.
Based on a few Bronze Age archaeological artifacts, pterocotomodels, graffiti, and Minoan stone
seals, it appears that primitive multi-oared longships first emerged in the Eastern Mediterranean
during the 3rd millennium BC.
By the 2nd millennium, the era of the Trojan War, the Greek longship had evolved into a
true sea-going vessel, a low, undecked galley repelled by a single bank of oars which were
rode over the top of the gunnel, the heavy wooden rail at the top edge of the hull.
Homer's Iliad describes the Achaean heroes rowing to Troy in a 100-foot-long, 50-oared
vessel called the Penteconter.
This Phoenician coin shows a typical Penteconter.
And the fact that the rowers' round shields are arrayed along the top of the gunnel is
a good indicator that this vessel was employed primarily as a troop transport.
In sharp contrast with later longship crewmen who rode but didn't fight, these oarsmen
were warriors headed for battle.
Four centuries later, in Homer's own day, the Penteconter remained the standard Greek
troop transport.
Yet, vase paintings from this same period suggest that a totally new technology had also appeared
on the scene, the Byrheem, a warship with oars on two levels.
So what caused this new development?
Well, surprisingly, the reason wasn't to make warships more powerful or to carry more
men per ship.
If it had been, we'd expect the literature of this period to have introduced a new term
for a hundred-oared warship, but no such word appears.
However, the term Penteconter is now applied to 50-oared Byrheems.
Compare these two Penteconters, the upper one with one bank of oars and the lower with
two.
And I think you can already see what this new development was all about.
Adding that second bank of oars was intended not to double the number of rowers, but rather
to reduce the Penteconter's length by half.
Shortening a hull makes it both stronger and significantly more maneuverable, so this development
probably marks a major change in the long ship's primary role, from troop transport
to offensive weapon.
With its 50 rowers now arranged on two levels, this shorter, stronger Penteconter would be
better able to outmaneuver and ram enemy ships, without compromising the human power available
to propel it.
The major change in naval tactics implied by this development is confirmed by contemporary
graphical representations of long ships, which now, for the first time, clearly show bronze
rams affixed to their bows.
The Byrheem represented a significant nautical engineering challenge.
Two levels of oars would inevitably require a taller hull, and a taller hull would have
been more unstable, that is more susceptible to capsizing.
The stability could be enhanced by adding ballast within the ship's hold, but this
extra weight would have reduced speed and maneuverability.
To minimize height without adding weight, Byrheem builders eventually developed an optimized
configuration with the upper level of oarsmen rowing over the gunnel as before, but now
the lower level of oarsmen positioned deep within the hull, rowing through ore ports
placed just above the waterline.
Well the Byrheem must have been quite successful, because within just a few decades of its introduction,
ships with a third level of oars began to appear, and thus was born the Tryreem, the
ultimate manifestation of this 8th century BC naval arms race.
Now we're not entirely sure who actually invented this ship.
The best evidence points toward either the Phoenicians or the Corinthian Greeks, both
of whom were building Tryreems by 700 BC.
It's actually possible that these first generation Phoenician and Corinthian Tryreems were actually
developed contemporaneously but independently, because their configurations were actually
quite different.
But regardless of origin, by the 5th century BC the Tryreem had become the principal means
of asserting political power in the Eastern Mediterranean.
It was instrumental in the Persian suppression of the Iolian revolt, in the subsequent Greek
victory over Persia in the Persian Wars, and the establishment of the Athenian naval empire.
It figured prominently in the Peloponnesian War, in Athens' defeat, and in its astonishing
post-war revival.
Archaeologist John Hale, my personal favorite great courses professor and author of a wonderfully
readable history of the Athenian Navy, makes a compelling case that the great cultural achievements
of Athens' golden age would never have happened without the Athenian naval superiority that
derived from the Tryreem.
The so-called age of the Tryreem lasted until the age of Alexander, when naval tactics changed
yet again, from an emphasis on ramming to an emphasis on boarding and capturing enemy
ships.
From this point forward, warships became progressively larger, heavier, and carried
significantly larger complements of soldiers, and even artillery.
First came the Quadra Reem, which, despite its name, actually didn't have four banks
of oars, but rather two banks, with two rowers per oar.
The Quinquareem, or Fiver, followed.
It probably had three banks of oars, with two rowers per oar on the upper two levels
and one per oar on the lowest level.
By the mid-fourth century B.C., sixers were commonplace, and through the Hellenistic age,
this arms race continued to the point of absurdity, ultimately culminating with a thirtier built
by Ptolemy II of Egypt.
Like the monumental Hellenistic siege machines we saw back in Lecture 20, these monster ships
were meant to impress, not to fight.
Characteristically, the practical-minded Romans settled on simple Tryreems and Quadra Reems
as their standard warships, and built few larger vessels.
Indeed, Roman technological development was focused not on the ships themselves, but
rather on specialized equipment that would make them more effective as fighting platforms
for marine infantry.
Characteristic of these developments was the Corvus, a hinged boarding ramp that could
be lowered across the gap between the Roman ship and its adversary, and then lodged into
the deck of the enemy vessel with this iron spike at its end, and then used by assault
troops as a seaborne version of the agar, the earthen assault ramp, that we encountered
in our discussion of siegecraft.
But because all of these Hellenistic and Roman ships were designed primarily as mobile platforms
for marine infantry, none of them could compare with the Hellenic era Tryreem in terms of
speed, maneuverability, and engineering efficiency.
During the three-century age of the Tryreem, thousands of these ships were built, in Greece,
Asia Minor, the Levant, and Egypt.
Yet we have surprisingly little substantive evidence for the Tryreem's technical characteristics.
No archaeological remains have been found, and the literary and iconographic evidence
is both ambiguous and maddeningly incomplete.
Recently, however, our understanding of this technological system has been greatly enriched
by an extraordinary exercise in experimental archaeology.
In 1982, a team of classical scholars, naval architects, and rowing enthusiasts initiated
a project to design and build a full-scale reconstruction of a fifth-century Athenian
Tryreem.
The completed vessel was launched in 1987 and christened Olympias.
This project proved to be an intriguing detective story, requiring the synthesis of classical
scholarship, archaeology, expertise in ancient ship construction, and modern naval engineering.
It also provides us with some fascinating points of comparison between the engineering
of the fifth century BC and the engineering of today.
The Olympias project drew upon a wide range of sources, including the historical narratives
of Herodotus and Thucydides, which describe numerous sea battles involving Tryreems.
A number of oblique but intriguing references to Tryreems in Greek poetry and philosophical
treatises.
Archaeological remains of ancient merchant vessels like the Kyrenia ship that we looked
at last lecture.
This large, Hellenistic-era bronze ram recovered from the sea floor off the coast of Israel
in 1980.
Vase paintings, reliefs, coins, fourth-century BC Athenian inventories of naval equipment,
which have survived on stone tablets, and archaeological remains of these ship sheds,
which were used to shelter Athens' fleet of Tryreems at the Piraeus Naval Shipyard,
as we learned in our lecture on city planning.
But perhaps the most vital sources for this project were the laws of physics, which informed
the design process at every stage and in numerous instances were decisive in determining
the physical characteristics of the ship, with confidence born of the certainty that
these laws haven't changed from antiquity to the present.
Now ancient literary sources provide no comprehensive information about the Tryreem, but they do
offer many useful tidbits.
For example, Herodotus tells us that Tryreems had crews of 200 men each.
But the Athenian naval inventories report that each Tryreem carried only 170 oars, excluding
spares, which suggests that each crew included only 170 oarsmen.
So that leaves 30 non-rowing crewmen, who in various sources are identified as the captain,
the helmsmen, 10 hoplite infantrymen, four archers, the rowing officer who commanded
the oarsmen, a purser to pay the crew, a shipwright to keep it in good repair, a piper to help
synchronize the rowers, and probably 10 deckhands to work the sails.
Our sources are also clear that, contrary to the Hollywood stereotype, Greek oarsmen
were usually citizens, and occasionally foreign mercenaries, but almost never slaves.
Indeed, the oarsmen were often treated as highly trained specialists who weren't even
allowed to fight as soldiers because they were so valuable.
Even Vitruvius proved to be an invaluable source for the Olympias project, even though
he doesn't address ship design at all.
In discussing the subject of symmetry in architecture, believe it or not, he makes an offhand but
critically important remark that the spacing between rowers in a long ship was standardized
at two qubits, which is about three feet.
So much of the Olympias hull design ultimately would derive from this very fortuitous observation.
We also know from Herodotus' enthucitides that the Athenians used the trireme primarily
for ramming enemy ships, thus it had to be light, strong, and maneuverable.
It also had to be capable of rowing backwards to extract itself from an enemy hull after
a successful ramming attack.
The ship carried two sails, a mainsail of midships and then a smaller one forward, but
the sails were used only for long voyages.
When a trireme was cleared for battle, the masts and sails were removed and left ashore.
These historical accounts of battles also make it clear that triremes disabled by enemy
ramming attacks didn't sink.
They were typically towed away by the victors after an engagement.
Thus, we know that triremes exhibit a characteristic called positive buoyancy.
It's the result of extremely lightweight construction and a lack of ballast in the hull.
To illustrate the concept of positive buoyancy, I'm going to use my small wooden ship model.
And the concept here is that the model ship is in fact positively buoyant in exactly the
same way as a trireme was, in this case because it's made entirely of a lightweight wood,
which is less dense than water.
And I haven't added any additional cargo or people or ballast that would have a higher
density than water.
So as a result, I can take this ship, I can push it completely under the water, I can
completely immerse it, and it still floats.
It's impossible for me to sink it.
So the model boat, as it exists here in my tank, is behaving precisely the same way
a trireme would behave after it was hauled in a ramming attack.
It would be swamped and incapacitated, but not sunk.
And this idea of positive buoyancy explains why underwater archaeologists have never found
a trireme wreck, few if any of these ships ever made it to the bottom.
Now as I mentioned in lecture one, historical accounts also indicate that triremes were hauled
out of the water stern first every night, even during combat operations.
Otherwise their wooden hulls would become waterlogged and performance would suffer.
The need to pull a lightweight longship onto the shore without physically breaking it in
half would also have had a significant influence on the Olympias hull design.
The triremes cruising speed, under or, was about 7 to 8 knots, that's 8 to 9 miles per
hour.
Now no ancient sources report this performance characteristic explicitly, but it can be inferred
from several historical accounts, including Thucydides' famous description of the dash
to save the middleenians.
After Athens crushed a revolt by the city-state of Medellin, a former Delian League ally,
the Athenian Assembly voted to exact punishment by executing Medellin's entire male population
and selling its women and children into slavery.
The Athenian Assembly immediately dispatched a trireme to carry the execution order to
the Athenian commander at Medellin 186 sea miles away.
But the next day the Assembly had second thoughts.
They met, they voted again, and they revoked the earlier decision and then had to send
a second trireme to counterman the order.
According to Thucydides, the first ship was in no hurry and the second rode with all possible
speed.
Its crew motivated by the promise of a monetary reward if they succeeded in getting the message
to the Athenian commander before the executions were carried out.
While this story has two happy endings, first, the second ship did arrive just in time to
save the middleenians and second, modern scholars were rewarded with a very reliable estimate
of the trireme's cruising speed under both routine and emergency conditions.
Armed with a variety of these rich but fragmentary historical tidbits, the Olympias team could
begin designing the trireme's hull.
The critical first step was to determine the proper configuration of the rowers, a task
that required the team to challenge some conventional wisdom.
From the Renaissance through much of the 20th century, many scholars maintained that the
Greek trireme didn't really have three levels of rowers.
This contention was based on three observations.
First, it seemed that a three-level ore system would result in the top-level rowers pulling
impossibly long ores, as you can see in this diagram.
Second, it was known that the Hellenistic era's successors to the trireme were called
quadraremes, quinquaremes, and so forth, and given that it was clearly infeasible for
a ship to have four, five, twenty, or thirty levels of ores, the scholars concluded that
this naming system must have some different meaning.
And third, there was indeed a well-known alternative meaning for these ships' names.
War galleys of the Renaissance era had used two different ore systems, called a la sensile
and ascalotio, and both of these systems included ships called triremes, which had all rowers
positioned on one level.
And a la sensile trireme had three rowers sitting on an angled bench with each man pulling
his own ore, and as you can see in this graphic, the ores of the three rowers were of very
different lengths.
And ascalotio trireme had three rowers pulling each ore.
In this system, all ores were the same length, but they were also quite long, upwards of
fifty feet.
The Olympias team was able to demonstrate conclusively that these many generations of
scholars were wrong, that the Greek trireme couldn't possibly have used the a la sensile
or ascalotio systems, and that it did indeed have ores on three levels.
Here's the key evidence they cited.
First, the Athenian naval inventories indicate that most of a trireme's ores were the same
size, nine and a half cubits long or about fourteen feet.
This was much too short for the ascalotio system, and it lacked the three distinctly
different sizes of the a la sensile.
Second, an a la sensile trireme with one hundred and seventy ores would have been too long
to fit in the Piraeus shipsheds, and an ascalotio trireme would have been too wide.
And finally, this beautiful Athenian sculptural fragment called the Lenormant Relief unambiguously
depicts a trireme with three banks of ores.
The team then validated this conclusion by demonstrating the feasibility of a three-level
ores system using ores of all equal lengths, and you can see it here.
Their proposed arrangement requires that the top bank of rowers operate from an outrigger
projecting beyond the gunnel, here, that the lower-level ore ports are placed very close
to the waterline, and that the three levels of rowers are staggered longitudinally so
the ores won't interfere with each other during the stroke.
All of these features are validated by the Lenormant Relief, which shows those three
levels of ores, by accounts of trireme battles, which include references to the outrigger,
and by the naval inventories, which refer to the use of leather covers to prevent water
from entering the lower-level ore ports in rough seas.
So now, having established the rowers' positions, the Olympias team worked out the overall size
and shape of the hull, such that all of these conditions were simultaneously met.
First, the hull could accommodate all 170 rowers in their correct positions and at the correct
two-qubit longitudinal spacing.
Second, the hull's shape was consistent with all known iconographic representations of the
trireme, such as this carving of a ship's stern, and that the stern in particular was
appropriately configured for the operation of hauling the ship out onto shore stern first
without incurring structural damage, as reported by the historical accounts.
Third, the hull cross-section and construction methods were consistent with those of known
contemporary vessels like the Kyrenia ship.
Fourth, the overall dimensions didn't exceed the space provided within the Piraeus shipsheds,
121 feet long and 19 feet wide.
Fifth, the hull was positively buoyant, as we've seen, and stable without the addition of ballast,
and its hydrodynamic properties were consistent with the triremes' known top speed and cruising speed.
The team satisfied these requirements by subjecting various trial hull designs to state-of-the-art
laboratory tests and engineering analyses aimed at predicting the ship's speed, weight,
and center of gravity location.
Amazingly, after all feasible options were considered, it turned out to be essentially
only one hull configuration that met all of these historically-based characteristics,
performance requirements, and constraints.
Given the goal of accurately recreating an ancient trirem, this was a very hopeful sign.
Next, this hull configuration was analyzed as a structural element, accounting for the
various structural demands as we discussed last lecture, and a new problem emerged.
It turned out that that long, slim hull of the Olympias trirem was found to be initially
structurally adequate with respect to the sagging mode of response to movement through
the waves, but it was seen severely inadequate with respect to hogging.
That is, that form of bending concave downward resulting from the ship being supported by
a single wave more or less at midships.
So how is this problem resolved?
First of all, let me simulate the hogging condition by placing a heavy weight for an
aft, again noting the tendency of the ship to bend concave downward in response to that
loading when it's supported only at center.
Once again, the ancient sources came to our aid in solving the problem.
Those naval inventories in Athens referred to a rather mysterious piece of trirem rigging
called the hyposoma.
Based on all available literary evidence, which includes a rather intriguing passage
from no less than Plato's Republic, the Olympias team determined that this thing called the
hyposoma was a loop of heavy rope which was anchored near the ship's bow and stern and
then used to strengthen the hull with respect to the hogging bending mode.
So I'm going to go ahead and add my simulated hyposoma to this model ship's hull in order
to see how it functioned.
First thing I'm going to remove the weights to make room for the hyposoma.
Now again, the hyposoma is a heavy loop of rope, actually with several loops of heavy
rope anchored at large beings located in the bow and stern of the ship.
And then while we don't know its specific details, the system integrated some sort of
a windless device that could be used to twist the ropes.
I'm simulating that windless device with this little peg placed in the center of the loop
and I am simulating the twisting of that device in applying some initial tension to the hyposoma.
Now again, to demonstrate how the system actually worked, I'm going to replace my heavy weights
so you can see the hogging behavior of the hull and I'm going to continue that tightening
operation by continuing to twist the hyposoma and as I do, it applies a substantial tension
force here on the top surface of the hull.
And as that tension force is applied, it has the tendency to pull the top of the hull inward
and that has the effect of very gradually reducing the effect of that hogging that we
saw earlier.
So the tighter I cinch down the hyposoma, the more we see the hogging behavior eliminated
and the more we see the structural integrity of the hull restored.
And we could continue to do that twisting operation until the hogging is entirely removed.
I've removed most of it with this amount of twist.
And as you might guess, to work properly, that hyposoma must be positioned relatively
high in the hull because that's the only way it'll impart that upward curvature of
the ends of the hull as you see here and indeed that's precisely where the designers of the
Olympias ultimately located it, just below the upper deck, as high in the hull as was
possible without interfering with the operation of the crew.
Now this drawing shows a reconstruction of the hyposoma tensioning device used in a trireme
and as you can see it was a very substantial piece of machinery indicative of the critical
structural function it performed.
And just as my simulated hyposoma significantly reduced the hogging in my model, so this device
fully addressed the structural inadequacy of the Olympias hull as well.
Now with the hull design complete, the Olympias team designed the bronze ram, the decks, the
masts, sails, oars, rowing hardware and other details adhering as closely as possible to
the historical evidence.
The Greek government then funded the actual construction of the Olympias at a cost of
over a million dollars.
The ship was launched in June 1987, commissioned in the Hellenic Navy and then for the following
five years loaned back to the research team for a rigorous series of sea trials using volunteer
rowers from Europe and the US.
Early tests of this ship were so disappointing that the researchers actually thought they
might have to proclaim the whole experiment of colossal failure, but they soon realized
that these poor results were entirely attributable to crew training.
As crews became more proficient at the oar, the ship's performance came progressively
closer and closer to historically attributed levels.
Unfortunately, each annual sea trial lasted only three weeks and each used an entirely
new crew of volunteers.
Thus, no single Olympias crew was ever trained to the same level of proficiency that a classical
era crew would certainly have attained.
Nonetheless, Olympias was able to achieve a very respectable top speed of 8.9 knots in
these tests.
The ship proved to be highly maneuverable and performed quite well under sail.
However, its best long-distance cruising speed was only about six knots, far short of the
seven to eight-knot cruising speed attested in the historical sources.
Now, after much analysis of this situation, the researchers arrived at a plausible explanation
for this performance shortfall.
Recall from Lecture 16 that an average human should be able to exert about one-tenth horsepower
indefinitely, which would be the case for the rowers in a tri-ream in the cruising mode.
In the Olympias, the rowers weren't achieving this level of power output because the oar
positions were just slightly a bit too close together.
Within the confined space of the hull, the rowers couldn't pull efficiently because
they couldn't take a full-length stroke.
Yet, Vitruvius had clearly put the distance between rowers as two cubits, so there didn't
appear to be a way of addressing this problem without violating that all-important historically-based
constraint.
But yet again, archaeology came to the rescue.
In the ancient world, measures like the dactyl and the cubit were by no means standardized.
And in 1990, just three years after the sea trials of Olympias began, archaeologists unearthed
a relief bearing a previously unknown and slightly longer definition of the cubit.
Biddingly, this discovery was made on the island of Salamis, the very place where the
tri-ream earned its everlasting place in world history.
The design team's subsequent analysis showed that a slightly modified version of the Olympias,
based on this longer cubit, would have given the rowers more space and therefore allowed
them to provide the necessary propulsive power to overcome the performance shortfall noted
in the sea trials.
The Olympias project could now be proclaimed an unequivocal success.
This amazing endeavor demonstrated that a three-level oared worship could indeed achieve
historically attested performance levels.
It also demonstrated that the tri-ream was an extraordinarily sophisticated technological
system, one that reflected the Greeks' deep understanding of nautical engineering and
their superb shipbuilding skills.
Now, at this point we must ask, how did the Greeks do it?
With reconstructing the Olympias presented such a daunting challenge for the modern
world's best scholars, naval architects and shipwrights, using state-of-the-art scientific
and engineering tools, how did the ancients build thousands of them to such a high standard?
Well, the answer, I think, is that classical-era Greeks have three things that we don't have.
First, they had expertise accumulated through two millennia of building wooden longships.
Second, they had a well-established tradition of empirical design, the process of making
a succession of well-reasoned incremental changes based on observed performance.
And third, they had time.
Greek shipwrights were able to apply that empirical design process over hundreds of
years to refine and optimize the tri-ream's configuration.
The Olympias team could only build one ship, but they were able to use modern scientific
tools as an alternative to all those empirical design iterations, confidently predicting how
the ship would perform even before starting construction.
And therein lies the most fundamental difference between the engineering of antiquity and the
engineering of today.
This lecture we've seen how a long-standing historical mystery was solved conclusively
through the synthesis of ancient literary and archaeological evidence with modern science
and engineering.
Our understanding of the tri-ream's pivotal role in the history of Western civilization
would be far shallower were it not for the Olympias project and the scientific and engineering
tools that made it possible.
Thank you.
