Welcome to the second major segment of this course on Greek and Roman technology.
During these next six lectures, we'll be studying infrastructure development in the
classical world.
The term infrastructure refers to large-scale technological systems that enhance societal
functions, facilitate economic development, and enhance quality of life, particularly
for urban populations.
In classical antiquity, infrastructure systems included transportation networks, water supply
systems, sewage systems, and facilities for public hygiene, most notably the great bath
complexes of Imperial Rome.
In today's lecture, we'll focus on urban planning, the science of designing the overall
layout, functional organization, and architectural character of a city or town.
Urban planning is an often overlooked aspect of technological development, but it's both
important and particularly appropriate as an introduction to our study of infrastructure
systems because urban planning serves as the framework within which infrastructure development
occurs.
We'll begin our story in Bronze Age Greece, when small, independent urban communities
typically centered on their kings.
In cities like Mycenae and Troy, the king's palace and the associated buildings were
typically clustered on a hilltop and surrounded by a wall for protection.
Within this citadel, the streets were narrow, unpaved, and arranged in an irregular pattern
dictated largely by the terrain.
Outside of the wall, the crude residences of common citizens were scattered about with
little or no organization or architectural character.
Thus, the Bronze Age Greek city was characterized not so much by a particular approach to urban
planning as by the lack of it.
Around the 7th century BC, the polis became the center of political, cultural, and economic
activity in the Greek world.
Early polis, like Athens and Thebes, were laid out more or less like the earlier Mycenaean
citadels, except that now temples, public buildings, and markets took the place of the
king's palace on the Acropolis.
As in the earlier citadels, the Acropolis was typically served by a maze of narrow,
winding streets arranged to conform with a terrain.
And again, in the residential areas beyond the Acropolis, there was little evidence of
a broader organizing scheme.
The one major advance in urban planning during this period was the Greeks' deliberate efforts
to enhance the architectural character of their public spaces.
In a clear expression of civic pride, they placed elegantly designed temples, stoas,
and council chambers in purposeful arrangements that often demonstrated a keen sense of architectural
balance, massing, and proportion.
There is, of course, no better example of this new aesthetic sensibility than Athens,
with its picturesque cluster of buildings adorning the fortified Acropolis.
During Athens' golden age, following the Greeks' great victory in the Persian War,
urban planning took a monumental leap forward at the hands of one of the most interesting
people in all of classical antiquity, a guy named Hippodamus of Miletus.
Hippodamus was a philosopher, a utopian theorist who attempted to define the perfect human
community.
He was also a rather colorful and eccentric character who dressed in odd clothing, wore
his hair long and unkempt.
He may have been the world's first hippie.
In attempting to define the perfect human community, Hippodamus proposed various paradigms
for social and spatial organization of cities, all of which seemed to involve threefold divisions.
He suggested that the ideal city should be organized into three zones, public, private,
and sacred, that its population should be divided into three groups, craftsmen, farmers,
and warriors, that its laws should address three classes of offenses, insult, injury,
and homicide, and that juries, believe it or not, should choose from not two but three
possible verdicts, guilty, not guilty, and partly guilty.
Now, Hippodamus gained considerable notoriety when he planned the reconstruction of his
home city, Miletus, after it was sacked by the Persians in the aftermath of the Ionian
revolt.
With this success as his credential, Hippodamus traveled throughout the Mediterranean region,
preaching the gospel of urban planning, and promulgating his own well-conceived system.
This system was based on a gridiron plan of rectangular city blocks formed by a hierarchy
of major and minor streets organized into well-defined public, private, and sacred zones.
These ideas were so influential that even today, Hippodamus is known as the father of
urban planning.
Now, in that period following the Greek victory over the Persians at the naval battle of Salamis,
Athens rose to prominence, first as the leader of the Delian League, a group of Greek city
states allied for mutual defense against the Persians, and then as hegemon of a de facto
Athenian empire.
Athens' meteoric rise as a naval and commercial power demanded the creation of a new port
city, and so in 465 BC, the Athenian assembly hired none other than Hippodamus of Miletus
to plan the development of a port at the Piraeus, a peninsula located about five miles southwest
of Athens.
In developing his design for the Piraeus, Hippodamus faced several significant challenges,
as you can see from this aerial photo of the modern city.
He had to facilitate the efficient operation of three harbors, the Zia and Munaquia naval
harbors on the east side of the peninsula, and the Cantharos commercial harbor on the
west side.
He had to impose order on a piece of rugged terrain that had been occupied for thousands
of years, and he had to overcome the resistance of skeptics, who claimed that a traditional
maze of narrow winding streets was actually superior to a regular grid plan because it
would hinder the movements of an invading army that managed to break through the city
walls.
The Hippodamian plan for the Piraeus was built upon this central axis, extending along the
ridge line from the Munaquia hill to the limestone quarries at the southern end of the peninsula.
Perpendicular streets connected the harbors on opposite sides of the ridge.
The grid of streets followed a strict hierarchy, 45-foot wide main boulevards, 25-foot wide
secondary streets, and 15-foot wide alleys.
Sacred, public, private, and military zones were designated marked with boundary stones.
Within the public zone, just north of Zia Harbor, Hippodamus placed the Agorah, Council
House, and public offices. Sacred zone, he even made accommodations for shrines and temples
dedicated to the gods of the foreign merchants who lived in the port.
Development of the two naval harbors included hundreds of these ship sheds, which protected
the Athenian Navy's famous trireme warships, technological marvels that we will address
in Lecture 23. Phylos Arsenal, the great naval storehouse we examined in Lecture 5, was later
integrated into this naval installation as well.
In the private zone, uniformly-sized residential blocks were each subdivided into 8 40-by-70-foot
building lots, each accommodating a modest two-story dwelling with an enclosed courtyard.
Hippodamus arranged these lots in a stair-step fashion along the ridge line, such that every
home had a view of the sea. He also provided for two open-air theaters at locations that
would be convenient for residents. Clearly, Hippodamus' approach to city planning was
as humane as it was efficient.
For defense, the entire urban area was enclosed within a great circuit, a thick stone defensive
wall, which was also integrated with the famous Long Walls, a pair of ramparts forming a protected
corridor that connected the Piraeus with Athens.
Hippodamus' design for the Piraeus was truly a masterpiece of order and functionality, a
vivid reflection of an urban planning revolution prompted by that utopian eccentric from Miletus.
And the full scope of this revolution was plainly evident right there at opposite ends
of the Long Walls, in the stark contrast between the scenic disorder of the Athenian Acropolis
and the rationally zoned grid of the Piraeus. The Greek world took note. From this point
forward, new cities across the Mediterranean were nearly always designed according to Hippodamian
principles. Further progress in urban planning occurred during the 4th century BC, as formerly
autonomous, Hellenic city-states were subordinated to vast, Hellenistic kingdoms. Within these
kingdoms, individual cities were now only parts of a larger whole, with less need of
grand public buildings that expressed public pride in the polis, but greater need of sophisticated
commercial facilities to accommodate expanded trade and defensive works to counter ever-improving
siege weaponry. During this era, urban planning also shifted toward greater attention to the
welfare of the common man, through better integration of residential zones and greatly
enhanced urban infrastructure. These developments are exemplified by the great port city of
Alexandria, probably the greatest example of idealized urban planning in the ancient
Mediterranean world. Developed at the end of the 4th century BC, under the direction
of a Greek architect named Dinocrates, Alexandria's city plan was greatly facilitated by its
level site near the mouth of the Nile. The plan included a fully developed gridiron layout
with main boulevards 100 feet wide. It also incorporated a Jewish quarter, at the time,
home to the ancient world's largest Jewish community, and a mile-long, man-made causeway
connecting the city with an offshore island, thus creating two fine, sheltered harbors.
On that island stood the pharaohs, the famed White House of Alexandria. At 400 feet tall,
it was one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. So, the iconic symbol of this new planned
Hellenistic city was not an elegant temple dedicated to a patron god, but a utilitarian
lighthouse that enhanced the city's commercial power, and thus the power of the ruling Ptolemaic
dynasty. These Hellenistic developments notwithstanding,
the most coherent and comprehensive approach to urban planning was yet to come in the Roman
era. This should come as no surprise. Throughout this course, we've seen examples of the Romans'
inherent love of order, organization, and standardization, characteristics that are
intrinsic to effective urban planning. It's only natural that the Romans would excel in this endeavor.
It's likely that the Romans first encountered urban planning during their conquest of the
Etruscans. Probably because of Greek influence, many Etruscan cities were built on a
hippodamian gridiron plan. As the Romans conquered these cities, they adopted the gridiron system
as their own. Then, consistent with their propensity to improve on others' ideas, the Romans took
urban planning to new heights, achieving a level of sophistication that wouldn't be seen
again until the Renaissance. A typical example of a Roman planned city is Easta
in northwestern Italy. Easta was founded in 25 B.C. when the legions
of Marcus Terentius Varro crushed the Salasi tribe in that region and then established
this town, originally known as Augusta Praetoria Salasorum, as home to 3,000 of Varro's retired
veterans. In locating Easta, Varro's planners found well-established Roman practice. Unlike
the Greeks, the Romans generally didn't establish new cities up on defensible hilltops. Rather,
they tended to choose sites on flat, open ground astride strategically important roads
or rivers. They compensated for the less defensible terrain with better-designed defensive works.
This photo of modern Easta clearly shows that the town was positioned not on a defensible
hilltop but out in a valley, astride the main road from Rome to northwestern Italy at the
confluence of two rivers and at the outlet of two key alpine passes. As such, this town
was of considerable strategic military importance and was fortified accordingly.
Like most Roman planned towns, Easta was surrounded by a stout rectangular circuit wall, augmented
by towers at regular intervals. The urban area within was divided into four zones by
two main streets, the Cardo Maximus, oriented north-south, and the Decumanus Maximus, oriented
east-west. These roads passed through the city's four main gates, each of which was fortified
with two towers. This is the Praetorian Gate on the east side of town, an excellent example
of a typical Roman city gate, built of solid stone and clad in marble, with a large arched
opening for vehicles and a smaller one for pedestrians.
The four zones of Easta were then subdivided by a grid of streets into major residential
blocks called Insuli, Latin for Islands, and each insula was then further subdivided
into residential plots measuring roughly 200 by 300 feet. As the city developed, these
plots would eventually be filled with buildings of various shapes and sizes and crisscrossed
by narrow roads and alleys. Just off the intersection of the Cardo and Decumanus was
the Forum, the public marketplace. Other major public facilities, a theater, amphitheater
and baths were all placed in one quarter of the town, evidence of purposeful zoning.
Well-developed system of water supply and drainage was also integrated within and beneath
the grid of city streets. The city plan of Easta was coherent, comprehensive,
and highly functional, yet perhaps its most important characteristic is that it was entirely
typical. Scores of Roman cities throughout the Empire, in Italy, Spain, Gaul, North Africa
and the Middle East followed the same basic model, with only minor variations to account
for differing terrain, climate and population. It's also worth noting that much of Roman
Easta remains intact today, and as in so many other European cities, the original Roman
plan is still clearly visible in the grid of modern streets crisscrossing the urban
center. This city planning model was also applied
in a totally different context, the Roman military camp, or castrum. The legions built
these camps as operating bases while campaigning out on the frontiers of the Empire, and you
won't be surprised to learn that castra were highly standardized, perhaps even more so
than Roman cities. The typical castrum was essentially identical
to the Roman planned town, except that a large headquarters building called the Principia
was placed at the center where the form would have been in a city, and the insuli were replaced
by barracks for the troops and stalls for the horses. When first constructed, the exterior
wall of a castrum would typically have been an embankment of turf topped with a wooden
palisade. Within, troops were housed in tents. But as many of these frontier forts evolved
into permanent bases, the walls over time were rebuilt in stone, and the tents were
replaced by buildings of timber, brick or stone. Many castra had hospitals, granaries, and
even bath complexes, making their resemblance to Roman planned towns even more striking.
There's some very interesting scholarly disagreement about which came first, the standardized Roman
city plan, or the standardized Roman castrum. But for our purposes, it really doesn't matter.
What matters is that the Romans applied their urban planning system in a wide variety of
contexts with amazing consistency, and through this system, each town, city, and camp came
to reflect the dominion of the Roman Empire. With its common arrangement of streets, public
spaces, and residential zones, the planned town was now visibly a part of a far greater
whole. Its residents were citizens, not of the municipality, but of Rome.
Of course, we must also recognize that the Roman urban planning system was developed and
refined over many centuries, and so the earliest Roman towns and indeed the city of Rome itself
exhibit that same sort of chaotic disorganization that we saw in older Greek city-states like
Athens and Thebes. A particularly interesting example is Pompeii, a city that was actually
founded around the 7th or 6th century BC by the Oskans, a pre-Roman people of central
Italy. Pompeii was subsequently conquered first by the Etruscans, and then by the Samnites,
who didn't fully succumb to Roman dominion until 89 BC. After it became a Roman colony,
Pompeii underwent extensive growth and infrastructure development, particularly during the Augustan
era, with the construction of an amphitheater, public baths, an aqueduct, and an extensive
water distribution system. The city plan of Pompeii clearly reflects this
history, with its irregular pre-Roman core, here, surrounded by progressively more regular
zones organized on the gridiron system. Yet even in the fully Roman outer precincts, the
gridiron isn't entirely regular. Many city blocks are actually parallelograms or trapezoids
rather than rectangles, a compromise that reflects the irregular terrain on which the
city was built. This intentional irregularity clearly demonstrates that Roman planners were
actually quite flexible in their application of the standard city planning model, in short
contrast with their uncompromising insistence on the relentlessly straight alignment of their
intercity roads, as we'll learn next lecture. And so, Pompeii provides us with a wonderful
illustration of the historical evolution of Roman urban planning, all within one single
circuit of city walls. The picture is all the more vivid because this evolution was
effectively frozen in time when Mount Vesuvius erupted in 79 AD.
Now, effective as it was, Roman urban planning would have been of very little use if it weren't
also accompanied by an equally effective system of land surveying. Surveying is an often overlooked
but important aspect of technological development because it provides the critical link between
a plan and the corresponding constructed works. In general terms, surveying involves three
operations. First, establishing a bearing that is laying out a line oriented in a particular
direction and passing through a designated reference point. Second, measuring distance
along that line. And third, measuring the elevation of a point on the ground with respect to
a reference point. This third function was only really necessary for aqueducts, so we'll
defer our discussion of measuring elevation until our later lectures on water supply systems.
For now, let's just focus on bearings and distances.
Well, to establish a bearing, Roman surveyors used this ingenious device called a groma.
We know about it from several ancient technical treatises, from pictorial representations
carved into several stone sarcophagi, presumably the tombs of Roman surveyors, and from an
actual groma that was found more or less intact in the ruins of Pompeii. The device consists
of a pivoting crossed staff, that's this portion here, which is mounted on an L shaped
bracket below, which is in self mounted on a vertical post with a metal shoe at the bottom
for the purpose of driving the device down into the ground. At the ends and center of
the cross staff are these weighted strings called plumb lines. Now, let's say I'm a
Roman surveyor, an agrimensore or landmeasurer employed in laying out a town according to
a specified plan. I'll begin at the very center of the proposed town, at a reference
point marked with a stone benchmark, like this. I'm using this center plumb line to
ensure that the post of the groma is perfectly vertical and the cross staff above is positioned
directly above the benchmark, and note that the benchmark has a cross carved in its top
surface to ensure that the position is precisely correct. Now I'll swing the cross staff around
so that one bar is oriented perfectly east west, using the rising sun to establish this
direction. Then I sight from plumb line to plumb line to establish the alignment of the
decumanus, the main east west road through the city. Now my partner is a few hundred
yards away and he's holding a vertical pole that I'm using as my target, and I'll signal
him to move one way or the other until his pole is perfectly lined up with the two plumb
lines I'm siding on. When we've got it just right, he'll hammer a stake into the ground
to fix the alignment of the decumanus. Now without moving the groma, I'll move around
and sight along the perpendicular arm to establish the main north south road, the Cardo. To complete
my city layout, I would now reposition the groma at specified intervals along those
two center lines, and at each of these intervals, use the instrument to establish a new perpendicular,
thus delineating the basic gridiron plan for the city. Now in conjunction with this process,
the Agrimensora used a variety of tools for measuring distances. For relatively short
distances, he would have used a decimpeda, a hardwood measuring rod capped with special
bronze fittings that allowed multiple rods to be connected end to end. Based on the
name decimpeda, you can probably figure out how long the rod was. Dec means ten, ped means
feet, and so the rod was ten roman feet long. As an alternative, for longer distances, the
surveyors used ropes coated with wax or pitch to minimize shrinkage, and these ropes would
have been fabricated in standard lengths, most commonly the actus equal to 120 roman feet.
And then finally, for extremely long distances, like those associated with intercity roads and
aqueducts, the Agrimensora used an ingenious device called a hodometer. This machine was
described by both Vitruvius and a Greek scholar named Hero of Alexandria. It was a wheeled cart
with its axle driving a set of cog wheels, calibrated such that a small pebble would drop
into a bucket after the cart had rolled exactly one roman mile, a distance of 5000 roman feet.
This device provides just a hint of the surprisingly sophisticated machines we'll be
encountering later in this course. Beyond the layout of cities and military castra,
the other fascinating manifestation of roman serving prowess is centuriation,
the quintessentially roman practice of subdividing conquered territories
into square parcels of farmland for allocation to settlers. The centuriation process began
with the establishment of a new intercity road, which was often built by army engineers as the
legions gained control of new territory. With this road as a baseline, the surrounding countryside
was divided into large square parcels called centuriae, or centuries, each measuring 20x20
actus, and recall that one actus equaled 120 roman feet. The centuria was so named because it was
subdivided into 100 smaller square plots called heredia, each measuring two actus on a side.
Each of these was further divided in half along the north-south axis to create a rectangular
plot, the ugarum, defined as the area of land that could be plowed by one pair of oxen in one day.
Now this amazing system was so effective that it remains in use today as the basis for defining
property lines in many regions of rural Italy. Modern aerial photos of rural Italy show this very
clearly. And when you see these modern vestiges of centuriation, remember that every one of these
thousands of road intersections was defined by a roman surveyor with his groma some two millennia ago.
Neither city planning nor surveying were roman inventions, yet as we've seen in so many previous
instances, the Romans improved on earlier technologies by attaining far greater levels
of organization and standardization. Even today, the vestiges of roman city planning and
centuriation live on in modern cities, towns and farmland, vivid manifestations of the ancient
roman's love of order and their seemingly innate tendency to express the power of the empire
by exercising control not only over other people but even over nature itself.
We'll see this tendency again at work next lecture as we examine one of the greatest manifestations
of imperial power and technological prowess the roman road system. Until then, thank you.
