Welcome back.
Last lecture, we examined a variety of machines designed to lift stone blocks on a construction
site.
Today we'll look at some fundamentally different kinds of machines designed to lift water.
Now, in the ancient world, such devices were particularly important for irrigating crops,
pumping groundwater out of mines, removing bilge water from ships, and firefighting.
Last lecture, we also encountered five of the six canonical simple machines, first identified
by Greek philosophers.
We saw the inclined plane used as a construction ramp, and we encountered four different machines
integrated into the Vitruvian construction crane that we examined in some detail.
The lever, the wheel and axle, the pulley, and the wedge.
Well, since then, you've probably been lying awake at night wondering when we're going
to see the sixth simple machine, the screw.
Well, I am delighted to report that your wait is over.
Indeed, the first water lifting device we'll examine today isn't just a wonderful example
of the sixth simple machine.
It's actually the first known use of the screw in all of human history.
Traditionally attributed to Archimedes in the third century BC, the screw pump was called
the cochleus in Greek because it resembled the spiral seashell of the same name.
One of Vitruvius' richest descriptions in all-of-day architecture is devoted solely
to this device.
Not only does he describe the Archimedean screw pump, he actually provides step-by-step
instructions on how to build it.
So let's let Vitruvius guide us through the construction of this fascinating machine.
Begin with a rounded wooden rod, he says, with a length 16 times its diameter.
Now draw radial lines dividing the rod's circular end into eight equal segments, like this,
and then extend the ends of these radii along the full length of the rod.
Note that these parallel lines are spaced one-eighth of the circumference apart.
Finally, draw a series of circles along the length of the rod at this same spacing to
create a grid of perfect squares over the entire surface of the rod.
Next, Vitruvius says, take a narrow strip of flexible wood, coat it with pitch for waterproofing,
and then wrap it around the shaft diagonally across the corners of that square grid, like
this, and nail in into place.
The resulting spiral shape is called a helix, and because it runs diagonally across the
square grid, it's said to have a helix angle of 45 degrees.
Next, add another strip of wood on top of the first, then another, and another, until
the outer diameter of this helical vein is twice the diameter of the wooden shaft.
Finally, repeat this process seven more times, creating an additional vein for each of the
remaining grid points on our layout grid, and then enclose all eight veins in a case
made of wooden slats reinforced with iron bands, very much like a barrel.
Iron pivots are now mounted on the ends of the shaft, and our screw pump is ready for
action.
But how does this thing work?
Well, here's a scale model of Archimedes screw pump that I built almost exactly according
to Vitruvius's recipe.
As you can see, it is built around a wooden shaft with spiral veins built up with narrow
strips of wood.
And if you look closely, you can see that structure quite well here on the exposed end
of the device.
Here's the wooden shaft in the center.
Here's the two veins that I built up out of individual strips of wood laid on top of
each other, and wrapped around the shaft in a spiral manner, just exactly as Vitruvius
described in the architectura.
Now I said I followed Vitruvius's recipe almost exactly because I built only two veins rather
than the eight that Vitruvius specifies.
I did this partly to illustrate the inner workings of the device more clearly.
You'll actually be able to see the water moving through the screw more clearly with
fewer veins than if I had put all eight in place.
But really, quite frankly, I only used two veins because I got very tired of gluing up
all those wooden strips.
Evidently, Vitruvius had a lot more patience than I do.
Now the other deviation I've made obviously from Vitruvius's description is that rather
than encasing the device in wooden slats contained within iron bands like a barrel, I used a
plastic case so that you can see what's happening on the inside.
Now by the way, archaeological remains of several ancient screw pumps have actually been identified.
They tend to be found in ancient mines where they were used for dewatering.
And they're generally true to Vitruvius's description, except that like my model, they
tend to use fewer than eight veins.
So apparently those ancient pump makers were about as lazy as I am.
Okay, finally note that the pump itself is mounted on two pivots out on the ends and
slide the case into its proper position.
I'm going to take those two pivoting mounts and place them into the correct position.
Down here on the lower end is a sump.
That's our water source, which might very well be a river or stream.
And here at the upper end, the outlet end, I have another bucket, but in practice this
would typically be an irrigation trough, which would then carry the water out to its ultimate
destination.
To operate the device, I merely need to rotate this crank and turn the screw.
And you'll see that as the screw turns, with each turn, one of those veins picks up a scoop
of water and then carries the scoop up to the top of the barrel.
And here you can also see the single most important advantage of this amazing device.
Continuous flow.
As long as I continue to rotate the device, it will continue to move water at a steady
rate.
Now, by the way, my model uses a crank, but scholars tell us that surprisingly, the crank
was unknown in classical antiquity.
No ancient authors ever mentioned the crank, including Vitruvius, and the fact that it
definitely wasn't used in a number of classical era devices for which it would have been ideally
suited suggests that indeed, the crank was probably not invented until some later date.
The Truvius tells us that the full-size screw pump, which would have been about eight feet
long, was powered by a man-treading.
Now we're not sure exactly what this means, but it's fairly likely that the operator of
the pump simply walked on the outer case, like this, and probably was aided by some additional
wooden trends that were nailed to its outer case in order to prevent his slipping on that
inclined cylindrical surface.
Now before the screw pump came along, the most common waterlifting device was the Shadoof.
That ancient counterweighted beam we encountered back in Lecture 12.
But a Shadoof could only lift water one bucket at a time.
In contrast, as we've already seen, the screw pump lifts a continuous stream of water as
long as the shaft is rotated.
A scholar named John Landles, who wrote a definitive and widely-referenced text on ancient
engineering, estimates that a typical eight-foot-long Archimedean screw would be capable of pumping
about 2,000 gallons per hour when powered by one man.
By the way, this number, 2,000 gallons per hour, is called the flow rate, and it's a
very useful measure of a pump's output.
We'll see it again.
Now impressive as this output might be, the screw pump also has one serious limitation.
We saw it in its initial configuration with a shaft oriented on a relatively shallow angle.
If I repeat the operation of the pump now, but increase the angle of inclination considerably
steeper, what we'll see is that at the steeper angle, the veins are able to capture less water,
and so the flow rate through the pump is substantially decreased, especially decreased when you turn
it the wrong way.
Now you can see a substantially lower flow rate with progressively higher angle of inclination,
and in practice, there's a certain characteristic angle of inclination, which happens to be,
in the case of this screw pump, 45 degrees, that is, the helix angle, where water simply
runs back out of the device and can't be retained on the veins at all, and therefore
the flow rate stops entirely.
So clearly there's an inherent limitation on the height that a screw pump can actually
lift water.
The maximum practical lift for a typical 8-foot long screw pump would only be about 4 feet.
Classical era engineers overcame this limitation over time by developing several different
types of wheel and axle type waterlifting devices.
All of these are described by Vitruvius, although they first appeared much earlier, around the
3rd century BC, and may have been products of that great center of discovery and invention,
the Museum of Alexandria.
Certainly, irrigation was absolutely vital to the economic vitality of Egypt's Nile
Valley, and as this illustration shows, this need would have provided a powerful stimulus
for the development of ever more efficient waterlifting devices.
The first of these waterlifting wheels is called the tympanum, because of its resemblance to
a musical drum of the same name.
Consist of a hollow wooden cylinder, which rotates on a horizontal axle.
As you can see, because I have left the front side covered with plexiglass, the interior
of the drum is subdivided into eight wedge-shaped compartments.
The outer rim has a series of slots, one per compartment, and if you'll notice, recognizing
that the direction of rotation of the wheel will be this way, that slot is always located
at the corner of the compartment that will enter the water first.
There are outlet holes cut into the front side of the drum, down here near the axle,
at the apex of each compartment.
These outlet holes will exhaust the water out into a launder or trough located here
on the front of the device, and then the launder will carry the water to its ultimate destination,
which again is probably an irrigation system in most cases.
At this time, let's go ahead and give this device a try.
I'm going to take it and place it over our sump containing water, we'll immerse it in
that water, and then like Archimedes screw, this device was typically powered by a man
treading.
In this case, it would have been a slave walking on the outer rim, and as the slave walked
on the outer rim, the drum rotated as a result of the torque imparted by the man applying
his weight to the device.
The drum rotates, and as each inlet slot dips into the sump, water fills the compartment
as the compartment rotates upward, the water pours from the outlet into the launder, and
once again we get a reasonably good flow rate, continuously developed as a result of this
device's continuous rotation.
Now according to John Lendl's estimate, a 10 foot diameter 8 inch wide tympanum would
be capable of lifting over 5,000 gallons per hour with one man treading the rim.
Unlike the screw pump, the tympanum also had the disadvantage of relatively low lift.
As you can see from my model, the maximum height that the rotating drum can raise water
must be somewhat less than its radius.
The solution to this inherent limitation was the bucket wheel.
This device works on the same principle as the tympanum, except that the water is now
carried in smaller compartments which are placed around the circumference of a significantly
larger wheel.
Its principal advantage is that the outlets are closer to the rim of the wheel and so
the launder can be placed much higher, significantly increasing the device's lift.
This computer model shows a Roman bucket wheel that was discovered in the Rio Tinto mines
in Spain during the 1920s.
Was made entirely of wood and held together with wooden pegs, presumably because iron
fasteners would rust.
It was over 15 feet in diameter and had 24 rectangular compartments built into its rim.
A modern reconstruction of this wheel has a flow rate of about 1200 gallons per hour.
Considerably less than both the screw pump and the tympanum, but it's able to lift
water about 12 feet, that's a three-fold improvement over both previous devices.
The power required to operate this particular wheel is slightly over 0.1 horsepower, indicating
that the machine was almost certainly perfectly proportioned to be operated by one man treading
its outer rim continuously.
And indeed these cleats that are built into the outer rim were clearly intended for just
this purpose.
But what if 1200 gallons per hour and a 12-foot lift weren't enough?
Well, just as Roman engineers combined multiple sets of block and tackle to lift the 60-ton
drums of Trajan's column, so they frequently combined multiple bucket wheels to lift large
quantities of water to amazing heights.
This computer model of the Rio Tinto pump system shows that bucket wheels were used in
pairs to increase capacity, in this case from 1200 to 2400 gallons per hour as a result of
using two wheels instead of one.
Note that the two wheels operated from the same sump, but they turn in opposite directions.
Why?
Well, we can see the answer in the configuration of the simple launder, which wrapped around
both wheels, and because of this configuration, the forward motion of both wheels propelled
the water in the same direction within the launder, onward toward its destination.
What was its destination?
Well at the Rio Tinto mines, the destination was the sump for another pair of bucket wheels,
and then another, and another, and another.
Yes, this mine was drained by an incredible installation of eight pairs of wheels, arranged
in ascending steps carved into solid rock as shown here.
The system had a total lift of nearly 100 feet, and as I said, could move about 2400
gallons per hour, with 16 men providing the power.
Well, the Rio Tinto mines must have been very profitable indeed to justify this sort of
investment in dewatering.
An alternative technology for achieving these sorts of high lifts is the bucket chain.
According to Vitruvius, this device consisted of a series of small bronze buckets attached
to two loops of iron chain.
The chains are driven by a tread wheel, driving a rotating axle on top, and the buckets dip
into a sump at the bottom.
As the axle rotates, the buckets are continuously filled, lifted, and then dumped into a launder
as they pass over the axle.
Now, unfortunately, Vitruvius' rather sketchy description of the bucket chain leaves two
big questions unanswered.
First, what prevents the chains from slipping when the axle rotates?
One scholar has suggested that the chains were actually looped one and one-half times
around the axle, and while this scheme certainly would have prevented slipping, it actually
couldn't possibly have operated correctly because that extra loop of chain would have
interfered with the movement of the buckets around the axle.
Second, how did the buckets empty their contents into the launder?
Most references show simple sketches with open top buckets dumping forward into the
launder like this, but this system couldn't have worked either.
With this scheme, the launder would have to be positioned some distance away from the
chain and the axle in order to provide enough clearance for the buckets to pass by as they
rotate over the axle and head on back down again.
But then most of the water dumped from the buckets would have fallen through this gap
and never actually reached the launder.
Now it is possible that the outlets were placed on the sides of the buckets rather than the
top so that they could empty into a launder placed alongside the axle, but the required
side openings would then have reduced the capacity of those buckets fairly significantly.
Fortunately, a recent archaeological discovery has yielded more convincing answers to these
questions.
In 2001, the remains of a Roman bucket chain dating from around 100 AD were discovered
in the heart of London.
The artifacts that were discovered included wooden buckets with openings only on the top
and a few iron chain links, some with this odd bend in the center.
From these artifacts, a team of scholars, engineers and craftsmen organized by the Museum
of London were able to reconstruct a full-scale working replica of this machine.
And here it is.
Let's use a computer model to examine this really incredible reconstruction more closely.
As my model shows, the chain of buckets is driven by an eight-sided wooden wheel with
projecting radial partitions engaging those bent iron links between buckets, and as you
can see, very effectively preventing the chain from slipping.
Each of these partitions also forms one side of a lateral trough that's built right into
the wheel.
There's actually eight of them built right into the wheel, and these troughs capture
water dumped from the buckets and they channel it out sideways to a launder.
This ingenious system maximizes the capacity of the buckets and it minimizes spillage by
using the wheel rather than the buckets to divert the water laterally into the launder.
The Museum of London's engineers calculated the flow rate of this amazing machine at a
very impressive 1,900 gallons per hour.
But that number is uncharacteristically large because these wooden buckets are twice the
size of the bronze ones described by Vitruvius.
Because the London machine lifts water only about 10 feet, and because this modern reconstruction
is powered by four-man turning a cap scan rather than one man driving a tread wheel,
as most bucket chains probably would have operated.
The flow rate of a bucket chain is very heavily influenced by its power input and the height
of lift.
By my calculations, a one-man powered machine with a 50-foot lift could achieve a flow rate
of perhaps 250 gallons per hour.
This might seem quite low, but remember that none of the other devices we've seen today
could even approach a 50-foot lift.
Indeed, the only practical upper limit to the lift that these devices might achieve
is dictated by the strength of the iron chains.
Now, at this point, you've probably noticed a pattern in the performance characteristics
of these various water lifting machines.
Devices that can move large quantities of water generally can't lift them very high.
Devices that can lift to greater heights typically have much lower flow rates.
At the heart of this trade-off is a very simple principle of physics, and it's one that we
already know quite well.
Recall from Lecture 16 that power equals force times distance divided by time.
So, for water lifting, the distance is the height of lift.
The force is the weight of the water being lifted during a given interval of time.
Using some basic algebra to rearrange this expression,
we can see that the height of lift equals power times time divided by the weight of water.
Now, if we assume that the machine will be propelled by just one man, then the power input
is fixed at about 0.1 horsepower.
And so, if we want to increase the height of lift without increasing power input, we
must either reduce the amount of water lifted or increase the time required to lift it.
In either case, the flow rate in gallons per hour must decrease.
Thus, physics tells us that the inherent price of increased lift is decreased output.
Well, the obvious way around this physical constraint is to increase the power input.
However, on many of these devices, it would have been difficult to add a second man in
order to double the power because there simply wasn't enough space to do so.
For example, the bucket wheels in the Rio Tinto mines were only barely wide enough to accommodate
one man each.
But Greek and Roman engineers did occasionally achieve the same end by using other power sources.
One option was to add veins to the outer rim of a bucket wheel so that water power could
be used to drive the wheel.
The resulting device, called the Noria, was used as early as the 2nd century BC and later
adopted by both the Byzantines and their Arab conquerors.
Even today, 17 immense wooden Norias have been preserved in Hama, Syria, along the Orantees
River.
And while these particular machines are medieval, they were probably copied from earlier classical
era wheels.
The Noria requires a fast-moving stream.
Water pressure on the veins rotates the wheel, even as some of the water is scooped into
buckets mounted on its rim.
As these buckets rotate around and near the top of the wheel, they empty their contents
into an aqueduct, which is then used to supply the local irrigation system.
The 60-foot lift of this wheel is an indicator of the immense potential inherent in water
power, which we'll be discussing next lecture.
Ancient engineers also used animal power for waterlifting wheels.
Here the challenge was to translate the animal's horizontal pull into rotary motion around a
horizontal axle.
The answer was to have the animal turn a cap stand, which was connected to the waterwheel's
horizontal axle, through a right-angle gearing system.
This resulting machine is called a Sakia, and amazingly, this Hellenistic era invention
is still used widely in the developing world today.
This particular Sakia in Egypt is a modernized version of the tympanum, made of metal instead
of wood, and incorporating these large scoops to capture more water per revolution, but
operating exactly as an ancient tympanum did thousands of years earlier.
It's powered by a crude cap stand, in this case a pair of cattle hitched to a pole, which
turns a vertical driveshaft.
This shaft drives a right-angle gearbox, which rotates the tympanum to lift water for an
irrigation system.
Now that right-angle gearbox is also an important technology for water power, so we'll be examining
it in much more detail next lecture as well.
Without question, the ancient world's most sophisticated waterlifting device was the
Force Pump, attributed to Tasebius, one of the most prominent scientists and inventors
associated with the Museum of Alexandria in the 3rd century BC.
The Force Pump is described by both Vitruvius and Hero of Alexandria, another one of the
great scholars of the Museum, and archaeologists have found numerous examples, most frequently
in shipwrecks and at the bottom of wells.
One of the best preserved examples of the Force Pump was found in the Sotil Coronado
mine in Spain, and is now in the National Archaeological Museum in Madrid.
Its configuration is astonishingly consistent with Vitruvius' description.
Let's have a look at a computer model.
The pump is made entirely of bronze.
Its body consists of two cylinders, connected by these right-angle pipes to a central chamber,
which has a single vertical outlet pipe projecting from its upper end.
Each cylinder holds a closely fitted piston, linked to a rocker arm by a hinged connecting
rod.
The rocker arm is a hand-operated lever, one of those simple machines, which moves one
piston up and the other down with each stroke.
The outlet pipe is connected to a pivoting nozzle here on top, indicating that this device
was certainly intended for spraying.
Although its purpose is not entirely clear, particularly because it was found in a mine,
some archaeologists have theorized that the pump was actually used as part of a very clever
system to improve the efficiency of mining operations.
According to this theory, the Romans would use an open flame to heat the surface of the
rock face they were currently working.
And then they used this pump to douse the hot rock with cold water, thus causing the
rock to fracture, facilitating its subsequent excavation and removal.
Regardless of its purpose, this is an exceptionally well-crafted machine.
Let's have a look inside.
As you can see in this cutaway view, the pump has four beautifully crafted bronze valves.
There's an inlet valve at the base of each cylinder and an outlet valve at the junction
between the two right angle pipes and the central chamber.
Each valve consists of a disc with a stem extending upward from its center.
The valve stem passes through a circular housing that allows the valve to move freely up and
down.
The disc is precisely fitted to its base to ensure that no water can pass through the opening
when the valve is closed.
To operate the pump, it's placed with its inlets below water level.
For the time being, let's just focus on one of the two pistons.
When the rocker arm is rotated counterclockwise, this piston is pulled to the top of its cylinder.
The resulting suction pulls the inlet valve open and draws water into the cylinder.
This suction also pulls the outlet valve shut so any water in the central chamber won't
be sucked back into the cylinder.
Now the rocker arm changes direction from counterclockwise to clockwise.
This movement now drives the piston back downward.
The pressure forces the inlet valve shut and the outlet valve open, and so it drives the
water out of the cylinder and up into the central chamber and then upward through the
outlet pipe.
Meanwhile, the other cylinder is operating in exactly the same way but on the opposite
cycle because it's driven by the other pushrod at the opposite end of the operating lever.
As one cylinder draws water in, the other forces it out.
So there's a near continuous flow of water up through the outlet pipe.
For a forced pump of this type, operated by one man with a lift of 16 feet, Landau's
calculates a flow rate of roughly 180 gallons per hour, a very respectable output for such
a small device.
Of course this performance could only be achieved if the machine were fabricated with great precision
and indeed many of them were.
A one cylinder pump recovered from the wreck of a first century Roman merchant ship was
subjected to a careful series of measurements and the clearance between the inside of its
cylinder and the outside of its piston was found to be about four thousandths of an inch,
roughly equal to the diameter of a human hair.
To have achieved this level of metalworking precision without the benefit of modern machining
equipment is simply astounding.
But perhaps the most fascinating examples of ancient force pumps are actually the ones
at the opposite end of the technological spectrum.
In the first century AD, as this technology became more well known, the force pump was
re-engineered in wood.
Because of their substantially lower cost, these wooden pumps were produced in large
numbers and used extensively at rural villas and farms all over the empire.
At least 20 have been found, typically at the bottoms of wells.
Even though the wooden pump was carved from a tree stump, it still had all the characteristic
features, cylinders, pistons, central chamber, outlet pipe, and valves that Vitruvius specified
in De Arquitectura.
Who does it might be?
This is Roman ingenuity and pragmatism at its very best.
Now because of its critical role in irrigation, mining, water supply, maritime commerce and
firefighting, the water lifting machine was an important contributor to economic development
in the ancient world.
But it might also have served as the stimulus for a technological development of even greater
long-term consequence.
Consider this purely hypothetical situation.
We're in an ancient mine, and a slave has been working a shift, treading the tympanum.
It's about to be relieved by another man, and so at the conclusion of a shift, he stops
treading the wheel and steps off.
And because the buckets are full on one side of the wheel, but not on the other, it's unbalanced.
And as you saw, the wheel rotates on its own in the opposite direction.
Observing this gravity-driven rotation, an ancient engineer standing nearby has an idea.
Instead of applying human power to raise water with a rotating wheel, he could just as easily
run the process in reverse and use falling water to generate power with a rotating wheel.
Like just such a chance observance, water power may have been invented.
Next lecture will turn our attention to this fascinating subject.
Until then, thank you.
