Welcome back.
Today we'll complete our discussion of infrastructure in the ancient world.
In the previous five lectures, we've examined city planning, surveying, roads, water supply,
and wastewater disposal. Today we'll revisit all of these topics within the context of the
ancient world's best example of an integrated infrastructure system, the great imperial baths of
Rome. But first, some historical background on bathing and antiquity. Some of the oldest surviving
bath facilities in the Mediterranean world are found in Bronze Age palaces on Minoan Crete.
These baths apparently served ritual functions. It wasn't until the classical era that Greeks
began constructing public bath facilities for common citizens. These typically consisted of a
single room with a row of individual stone tubs along one wall. Cold water was drawn from a local
spring or well, and then poured over the individual bather by an attendant. No less than Plato proclaimed
that warm baths were appropriate only for the old and the sick. I don't know about you,
but I'm betting that he was old and sick at the time, though the historical record is silent on this point.
By the Hellenistic era, individual baths began appearing in private homes,
and public facilities became somewhat more sophisticated. A particularly noteworthy example
is the 4th century BC bathing complex at the sanctuary of Asclepius near the Greek city of
Gortes. This multi-room facility still included a traditional Greek-style bathing room with
individual tubs, the remains of which can be seen in this photo around the perimeter of this circular
wall. But the complex also included something quite new, a sauna that was heated by warm air
circulated through a conduit beneath the floor. Water for the tubs was supplied by an aqueduct
and was also heated before use. Evidently, bathers of this era had overcome Plato's distrust of warm
water. The heating and water supply systems used at Gortes strongly suggest that many features
of later Roman baths may have had Greek origins. Nonetheless, the two most fundamental characteristics
of the fully developed Roman bath evidently did not originate in the Greek world. These were,
first, a sequence of three adjacent temperature-controlled rooms, one cold, one warm, one hot,
and second, communal hot water bathing pools. The origin of these features is uncertain,
but they appear to have emerged gradually in the 3rd and 2nd centuries BC in southern Italy,
perhaps an imitation of the natural hot mineral water springs found in the resort town of Baye
on the Bay of Naples. Regardless of their origin, once these characteristic features took hold,
the Roman ritual of sauna, hot bath, cold plunge, and massage rapidly gained popularity and eventually
became an essential part of Roman culture throughout the empire. By 33 BC, there were 170 baths in the
city of Rome alone. As the imperial era dawned, the emperors quickly recognized the value of public
bath construction as a means of demonstrating their power and winning public favor. Marcus Agrippa,
Augustus' right-hand man, built a major bath complex in the heart of Rome in 19 BC,
and then Nero, Trajan, Caracalla, and Diocletian all responded in turn with
successively larger and more magnificent facilities. In this lecture, we'll examine
the best preserved and best documented of these grand public works, the Baths of Caracalla.
Located south of the Aventine Hill and west of the Via Appia, the Baths of Caracalla were probably
commissioned by the emperor Septimius Severus shortly before he died in 211 AD.
The project was then carried forward by his son and successor, Caracalla,
who inaugurated the not quite complete facility in 216 AD and thus was able to give it his name
before being assassinated the following year. Apparently, if you're an emperor in the third
century Roman Empire, building public bath facilities is great for your popularity,
but it still can't prevent you from getting murdered. Now at that time, the central bath
building was complete, as was this elaborately landscaped terrace, bounded by a two-level
arcade along the front and sides. The outer precincts of the complex, including these two
libraries and a stadium, weren't actually completed until 235 AD, however. Now the bath building
itself was immense, larger than four football fields placed side by side. Its layout was symmetrical,
with four main bathing spaces aligned on its central axis. The Natazio, a large open-air
swimming pool. The Frigidarium, or cold water bath. A vast, groin vaulted hall with four cold water
plunge pools set into its corners. The Calderium, or hot water bath. A circular dome structure,
very similar to the Pantheon, with seven hot water pools placed in arched openings around its
perimeter. And the smaller Tepidarium, with two warm water pools, providing a transition between
the Frigidarium and the Calderium. On opposite sides of the central axis, we find two Apoditeria,
or changing rooms, just inside the main entrances. Two colonnaded open-air exercise areas called
Palestre, and matching pairs of saunas and other heated rooms arrayed along the southwestern wall.
The upper level of the building featured sun decks and promenades. This vast facility was
capable of handling 6,000 bathers per day. Now to better understand the Baths of Carcala as an
integrated infrastructure system, let's attempt to reconstruct it from the ground up. The basis for
this reconstruction is a wonderful study performed by Janet Delaney, a classic scholar at the University
of Oxford. Delaney's analysis uses essentially the same approach that a modern construction
manager would use to plan a major building project. She divides construction of the baths into a
series of specific tasks, determines their most likely sequence, and then estimates the people,
materials, equipment, and time required to perform each task, such that the known five-year
project duration from 211 to 216 AD could actually be achieved. Her approach is necessarily somewhat
speculative, but it's quite rigorous and yields many important insights, some of which I'll share
with you later in the lecture. So with Janet Delaney as our construction manager, let's build the
Baths of Carcala. Based on Terracotta Bricks, bearing Carcala's name, we know that construction
couldn't have begun prior to 212 AD. Thus, 211, the year when Carcala became emperor, must have been
taken up with selecting the site, developing the design, ordering the materials, and organizing
the workforce. In the spring of 212, site preparation would have begun with an army of
manual laborers cutting these three terraces into the slope of the Aventine Hill. A common practice
in Roman construction, terracing was intended to facilitate a highly accurate site layout
by starting from an absolutely level surface, which would have been achieved by
surveyors using their corabatis, as we discussed in lecture 10. Concurrent with site preparation,
construction began on a new aqueduct, the Aqua Nova Antoniniana, a four-mile branch connecting
the aquamarcia to a three million gallon cistern on the southwestern side of the Bath complex.
The aqueduct and cistern were high priority construction tasks because mixing concrete
for the remainder of the project would require huge quantities of water. As evidence of the
thoughtful design integration we'll encounter many times in this lecture, the concrete cistern
doubled as a retaining wall to buttress the excavated face of the Aventine Hill, and it would
eventually support the seating area of the stadium as well. This cistern was a rare exception to the
normal mode of continuous flow in Roman water systems. Because the Baths of Carcala would be
such a voracious consumer of water, substantial storage capacity was required to avoid disrupting
the water supply to the remainder of the city. The cistern could be filled at night when diverting
water from the aquamarcia wouldn't cause shortages elsewhere, and then during the day the Aqua Nova
could be shut off or throttled back and the cistern used to supply the Baths. Concurrently,
a new road was built to connect the site with the nearby Circus Maximus and the Via Appia,
and though ancient sources describe it as a particularly grand boulevard, this new road was
clearly intended primarily for transportation of construction materials to the site. Its great width
dictated far more by the need to move 50 foot long columns than by a need for grandness.
Once the terraces were leveled, the structural foundations could be constructed. Now wherever
a wall would be located in the completed building, a trench was dug 22 feet deep for the frigidarium
and calderium, 15 feet deep for the remainder of the complex. Within each of these trenches,
the foundations were built as you can see in this model that I used back in lecture 6 to
illustrate the brick-faced concrete wall system called Opus Tostachium. This was a standard
foundation system used in most imperial era buildings. The foundation was built in this way.
First, timber formwork was built around the perimeter that would ultimately be the foundation
itself. That formwork consists of vertical posts, as you can see here, here, here, and on down the
line, and then connecting those posts together horizontal boards that extended the full length
of the foundations. These forms were then completely filled with concrete, pazzolana-based mortar,
mixed in the case of the Bazz of Caracalla with a very heavy basalt aggregate for extra strength.
Once the concrete set, the trenches were then backfilled with soil, leaving the wooden formwork
in place. So the backfilling would have piled soil up against the wooden forms, and then once
that was complete, the Opus Tostachium walls could be built up from the cured concrete foundation
elements. Now, of course, the wooden formwork ultimately would have rotted away over time.
However, when we look at these foundations today, we can still see evidence of their existence and
really wonderful evidence of the entire construction method by seeing the imprint that they left behind
in the concrete foundations of these imperial era buildings. Here you can see very clearly
the characteristic slots in these foundations corresponding to the positions of the posts
that used to form the formwork that brought these concrete foundation elements into existence in
the first place. Now, returning to our computer model, we can at this time install the main sewer,
a vaulted brick gallery positioned just below the surface of the terrace, running across the
complex on a slight downhill gradient, and eventually connected with a sewer of the Circus
Maximus to the north. Once the foundation and sewer excavations were backfilled, you might
guess that construction of the bath building itself would proceed. But no, this structure will
actually be built on a platform 26 feet above the terrace to make room for an amazing network
of subterranean infrastructure, water supply passages, drainage structures, and maintenance
galleries. This platform is composed of four main elements. First are the substructures.
These are thick walls of opus testachium, just like my model, extending upward 26 feet from
the foundations of the bath building. Second, this two-level arcade and a pair of curved retaining
walls enclose the front and sides of the platform. Third, an extensive multi-level network of
passageways is interwoven within the substructures. This network includes brick vaulted maintenance
passages, some of which also hold lead pipes for carrying water from the cistern to various pools
and fountains throughout the bath building, regularly spaced vertical drain pipes designed
to capture rainwater falling on the roof, gently sloping drainage conduits that received both
rainwater and wastewater, and then channel it down to the main sewer. And an array of huge
service galleries providing access to the 50 furnaces that will heat the calderium saunas
and other hot rooms arrayed along the southwestern side of the building as we saw earlier. These
vaulted galleries are 20 feet wide to support two-way traffic of horse-drawn wagons carrying
wood to supply the furnaces deep underground. They incorporate skylights for illumination,
feeding troughs for the horses, and storage rooms capable of holding 2,000 tons of firewood.
The fourth element of the platform is a huge mass of fill, a mixture of compacted soil,
pazzolana, and brick fragments, which surrounds and supports the underground infrastructure
and creates a level working surface for the bath's main floor. Although I've described the four
elements of the platform as separate entities, they actually had to be constructed more or less
simultaneously from the bottom up. And here's how that construction sequence would have to
have worked. First, substructures and arcades would have been built from the foundations
up to the maximum height that could be worked by a mason standing on the terrace, about four and a
half feet. The open space between these walls was then backfilled, creating a working surface
for the next four and a half feet of substructures. This alternating sequence of wall construction
and backfill continued upward. And at the appropriate elevations, first the brick drainage
channels, and then the maintenance passages were added and then covered over. This phased construction
sequence eliminated the need for scaffolding and thus saved considerable time and expense.
Nonetheless, building the platform was a huge and enormously complex undertaking that probably took
most of the year 213 AD to complete. Here again, we see impressive forethought and integration in
the engineering design. Note, for example, that the configuration of that underground drainage
network was already entirely dependent upon the locations of pools, fountains, and roof drain
pipes that had yet to be built. The success of this design could only have been the product of
meticulous, thoughtful planning. With the platform complete, construction of the bath building could
finally begin. First, the floors of the frigidarium, natazio, and palestre were reinforced with two-foot
thick concrete slabs, which could then be used as temporary storage areas for large building
components like columns and capitals. Subfloor elements like stone column bases and the five-foot
deep frigidarium pools were also installed at this time. Now the walls were erected. Again, in
about four and a half foot stages, to a height of nearly 80 feet for most of the building,
this work required about 4,000 masons and laborers and took most of the year 214 to complete.
Like the substructures, these walls are opus testachium, though here the concrete aggregate is
lightweight tufa rather than basalt. Unlike the substructures, these towering walls couldn't
have been built without an extensive system of temporary wood scaffolding, which provided access
to the upper parts of the wall. And we're quite certain about the scaffolding because the attachment
points, these square openings in the wall called putlog holes, are still visible in many of the
walls today. They were never filled in because these walls were eventually covered with a marble
veneer in the finished structure. Here we also see extensive use of relieving arches,
which are embedded in the walls to divert the weight of the structure around doorways,
windows, and niches, just as we saw in the pantheon. The walls also include built-in roof drain pipes,
channels for water supply pipes, and heating flues, internal staircases, and mounting sockets for
those huge decorative stone elements that are going to be added later on during the construction
phase. All these provide further evidence of carefully integrated design.
Meanwhile, carpenters were prefabricating the wooden centering for an incredible
variety of concrete barrel vaults, groin vaults, and semitones. As soon as the walls reached their
full height, the centering would have been installed over all rooms except the calderium
and the central hall of the frigidarium. The concrete would have been placed before the end
of 214 AD so that it could fully cure before work resumed in the spring.
Most of these vaults were built using a technique that had become quite common in the imperial era.
The centering was covered not with wooden planking, but with a layer of heavy terra cotta bipedales,
those two-foot square bricks we first encountered back in Lecture 6. When concrete was poured on
top of this assembly, it then adhered to the bricks but not to the wood, greatly facilitating
removal of the centering after the concrete had cured, and the result was a beautiful brick-lined
vault like this. By the way, the concrete in these vaults used lightweight volcanic
pumice as the aggregate, another technical innovation that we first saw in the pantheon.
With the vault in place, interior construction could proceed under cover protected from the
elements. 252 granite columns were installed throughout the building to delineate the
polyester porticoes, to frame doorways, and to screen passages between adjacent rooms.
As you can see here, note that these columns were used solely for architectural effect.
They support a stone and tablature above, but nothing above that. The real structural load
carrying in this construction is actually being done by the brick and concrete arch above the
columns. Even these spectacular 50-foot granite columns adoring the frigidarium are non-structural.
They appear to be supporting the frigidarium vaulting above, but that function is actually
being performed by these stone impost blocks, which were embedded deeply into the massive brick
and concrete piers behind the columns. The immense vertical and horizontal forces generated
by the vaults were transmitted through the impost blocks and into the piers. The columns,
impressive as they are, carried little more than their own self-weight.
And so, eight centuries after the traditional Greek architectural orders first appeared,
they live on in Roman imperial baths, but only as architectural embellishments to the brick and
concrete construction that had now become the structural fabric of Roman infrastructure.
Without a question, the bath building's most impressive structural elements were the great
concrete roofs of the frigidarium and calderium, probably constructed in 215 AD. The frigidarium
roof consisted of three groin vaulted bays spanning nearly 80 feet across that central hall.
Now, here's the centering that I used to cast our model of a groin ball back in lecture six.
This is a small model, but imagine this centering spanning 80 feet and positioned over 100 feet
above the frigidarium floor. And I think you can see that this temporary formwork was actually a
monumental structural achievement in its own right. The structure of the frigidarium was
beautifully integrated with its function, coffered vaulting beautifully enclosed this
majestic space, while providing large upper-level windows for natural illumination. The vault's
great weight was transmitted down through those imposed blocks into the massive piers, and the
vault's substantial lateral thrust was resisted by this integrated system of external buttresses
above and transverse buttress vaults below. Architecturally, the buttress vaults also
served as enclosures for the frigidarium's four cold water pools. If this structural system looks
familiar, well, it's because you've seen it before. In the aula of Trajan's market, apollodorus of
Damascus used a very similar arrangement of buttress vaults to support a concrete groin vaulted hall.
Frigidarium merely applies apollodorus's concept on a far grander scale.
Now, just as the frigidarium was an adaptation of apollodorus's aula, so the caldarium is an
adaptation of the pantheon. The caldarium dome was somewhat smaller in diameter, 115 feet versus
the pantheon's 142 feet. But it was equal in height and more structurally daring because the
drum was pierced by large windows on two levels. These would have lightened and weakened the walls,
significantly increasing the challenge of resisting the dome's outward thrust.
Like the pantheon, the caldarium met this structural challenge with very substantial
radial buttress vaults embedded within its walls. Among the last functional elements added to the
bath building were the hypercosts. A hypercost was a heating system composed of three principal
components, a wood-burning furnace or praepherium, a raised floor created by placing several
layers of large bricks on stacks of smaller bricks like this, and a series of rectangular
terracotta pipes called tubuli embedded within the walls of the room. In operation, the praepherium
heated the air beneath the raised floor and because hot air rises, it was drawn up through
the tubuli and vented out of the building. As the hot air circulated, it heated both the floor
and the walls quite effectively. Hypercosts were used throughout the empire, as demonstrated by
this beautifully preserved example in Israel. In the baths of Karakala, the caldarium,
tepidarium, and 12 other rooms are believed to have used hypercost heating. Now with the
hypercost installed, the structure of the bath building was essentially complete. All that
remained was to add its lavish decoration, marble and mosaic floors, marble wall panels,
a stucco coating over the vaults, elaborate fountains, and larger-than-life figural sculptures
like the Farnese Hercules and the Farnese Bull, the two most outstanding survivors of this collection.
We can scarcely imagine the visual impact this extraordinary building must have had on its visitors
when Karakala opened it to the public in 216 AD. Building the baths of Karakala was probably the
largest construction project in the city of Rome up to that time other than the city walls. Janet
Delaney estimates that the project required a total workforce of about 16,000 people over the
course of five years. As this chart illustrates, about 85% of that workforce was composed of low-skill
workers, ox cart drivers, general laborers, bricklayers, and materials suppliers like quarrymen
and brickmakers. This estimate vividly illustrates a point I first made back in lecture six,
that the imperial construction system with its strong reliance on brick, concrete,
and standardized models was able to produce sophisticated large-scale public works with
a largely unskilled workforce. Well now that we've seen how the various component parts of the baths
of Karakala came together, we can look more holistically at how the completed facility
actually worked as an engineered system. Let's begin with the overall plan. Since the bath complex
was, in many respects, a small, self-contained city, we can better appreciate its layout as a
manifestation of Roman expertise in city planning. For example, the frigidarium served as a central
meeting place, like the Forum in a Roman town. Bathers could circulate easily from the frigidarium
to any other room in the building along well-defined corridors, not unlike the Cardo and Decumanus,
the main ruins of a planned city. The building's layout also reflects a surprisingly sophisticated
appreciation for energy efficiency. Precisely as Vitruvius prescribed in De Architectura two
centuries earlier, the cauldarium and other heated rooms were situated in a single row facing southwest,
because these rooms would receive direct sunlight from midday until evening when the baths were used
most frequently. Furthermore, the design of the baths of Karakala were able to take solar heating
one step beyond Vitruvius by taking advantage of significant imperial-area improvements in
glass-making technology. The windows of these rooms were glazed to reduce heat loss while also
augmenting hypercost heating through the greenhouse effect. Of many noteworthy aspects of the bath's
design, none is more impressive than its water supply system. As we've already seen, that three
million-gallon cistern was filled during off-peak hours by the Aquanova Antoniniana. And then during
operating hours, water flowed continuously from this reservoir through a network of lead pipes to
various pools, fountains, and cauldrons throughout the building. Many of these pools communicated
with each other through waterfalls. Bronze cauldrons were used to heat water for the cauldarium pools,
and after it had cooled a bit, this same water was then channeled into the tepidarium pools before
being disposed of. Some of the wastewater was used to continuously flush the public toilets,
and some was even used to drive a waterwheel-powered grain mill located in an underground chamber.
All of the wastewater eventually found its way into that extensive system of underground drainage
structures and then into the Tiber. This is integrated infrastructure design at its very best.
As Janet Delaney has so aptly observed, Caracalla's Great Bath Complex is both
paragon and paradigm. It's paragon because of its grandness, its physical size,
in architectural character, in sheer ambition, and in the resources and talent its construction
commanded. It may be the quintessential example of the emperor's use of public works to proclaim
imperial power and to win the favor of the unwashed masses. But it's also paradigm,
in the sense that the Baths of Caracalla employed absolutely no new technologies or innovations.
As we've seen throughout this lecture, every material, every component, every construction
method used in this project was already well-established in Roman engineering practice.
And yet, this great structure is so much more than just the sum of its tried and true parts.
My view, what truly makes the Baths of Caracalla a paragon is the integration of its many components
and subsystems in a thoughtful, coherent, and complementary way. This virtuosity in design
integration required a detailed, comprehensive plan for every aspect of the facility
before construction could ever begin. And it demanded intensive management of people,
materials, and equipment to ensure that everything came together at the right time
and the right place. In this sense, the Imperial Bath Complex is certainly one of the ancient
world's finest examples of an engineered system. Thank you.
