I think we're probably ready to get started.
So well, thanks for joining us.
And so the main reason that I wanted
to have this conversation is because we've
been doing this physics project.
The physics project is a big surprise
at how far it's managed to get in physics.
And not satisfied with having managed to make great progress
in physics, we're trying to understand
how the formalism that we've developed for physics
might apply to other things.
And one of the other things that we think it might apply to
is economics.
And we're not sure if we know what we're talking about.
And I figure you're a good person
to tell us if we know what we're talking about.
And we haven't, we're not finished with trying
to figure this out.
But I guess one thing, I mean, I know
you and I have talked before about economics
is not really a scientific kind of thing.
And somehow, I'm trying to understand,
I view there as being some kind of Taliban economics.
Because by the time, you know, by the time there's a big book
that is full of wonderful formulas and things,
this is a whole giant technical tower
that seems to be based on, yes, go ahead.
This is not the book.
The book is the next volume.
This is like to get fat tails out of the way,
which is not really the central point.
OK.
So my, if I were to define, I mean, OK,
my work was maybe not my work.
It's, you know, my application, my own versions
of work done elsewhere, maybe, in the real world
is the following.
Is you're missing a layer of dimensionality in economics?
For example, you take the any equation,
an equation that has sigma, right, volatility, OK?
And you tell yourself, what if that parameter is right
on average, but not, but is variable?
So you have chances in the qualities of the effect.
So the function of an average is not
an average of a function.
So it all comes from that by saying,
I'm adding a layer of stochasticity to things.
So it all started when I started doing,
and I remember I was programming in Mathematica,
the option formula, and I figured out the following trick.
It's a very simple trick.
OK.
You take a black Schultz, you price the option
at 10% higher volatility, which was
about the variation of volatility that we had over time.
And then you explain for people that volatility
is the variance of this time series.
Exactly, the square root of the variance
of the expected time series annualized, OK?
And it's a parameter for an option
because an option has some convexity that depends on that.
So it's very simple.
You price the option at a set of pricing the option at, say, sigma.
You price the option at 110% of sigma.
And you price it at 90% of sigma and see the effect.
Very simple heuristic.
And now that heuristic, I haven't discovered anything else
in my life.
So wait a minute, when you say price it at that,
there is a black Schultz formula which tells you
what the option should be priced at,
given a particular volatility.
And you say, what happens if you don't?
Let me give you a demonstration using Mathematica, all right?
And I'm going to do using Mathematica.
And I'm going to do using the Gaussian distribution
and how we can obtain fat tails from Gaussian distribution, OK?
So do you mind?
I'm a little slower than you for Mathematica.
Will you guys be patient with me?
All right?
Yeah, yeah.
Will, will, will, will, where?
So let me, unless I can find an existing program,
let me do the following.
Share screen.
Share screen.
And then I have Mathematica untitled 2, OK?
And I do the, what, window magnification 150%?
It'll probably be OK.
Yeah, 150%.
Yeah, 150%.
Let's try that, OK?
So let me do it in Mathematica.
And let's do the following, all right?
Let's say here I have PDF, OK, normal distribution,
normal distribution, OK?
It's mu and sigma.
Let's say mu is 0.
And sigma, let's say, is 1.1, OK, 10% higher.
x plus PDF, normal distribution, 0.9x, OK?
You do that.
1 half, OK?
And actually, I can, let me, let me do this.
Let me do this.
And since this is a plot, PDF, normal distribution, x minus 4,
4, OK?
OK.
OK, you have a sort of like a fatter-tail Gaussian, OK?
So here, let me do it.
I can't tell that's fat-tailed.
I mean, for me, that just gives up.
Let me show you how we can tell it's fat-tailed, 1 plus A, OK?
And here, 1 minus A.
And now I do manipulate, OK, A, 0, probably, to something.
Yeah, but it's easier to do with discrete, OK?
0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, OK?
And we do a control with it, OK?
Plot, I do two things.
And I do a control with it of a normal distribution, OK?
PDF, normal distribution with x at just 1, OK?
All right.
Now we do manipulate because they coincide.
OK, they don't coincide no more.
Right.
OK, you got fat-tails, higher shoulders, OK?
So this is one way to say that there are two ways to do the thing.
And to write, let me write using Mathematica here, OK?
I have f, OK, of sigma, f of sigma, OK?
I do f of sigma, average, f of sigma, versus f average sigma, OK?
And the difference between them gives you a bias, OK?
So everything I've done is variation around these.
OK, but nothing particularly more intelligent
than this, OK?
Except that you go in higher dimension,
you start playing with correlation,
you start playing with other things.
But there's not much more intelligent than this,
as we, as you can see.
OK, look here, you can get extremely fat-tails here,
say 0.9, 0.9.
Yeah, this is, what happened here?
No, it's OK.
Just put the pull down, we should have a 0.9 in it.
OK.
I decided that.
There you go.
Look how great it is.
And let me do a plot range all here, plot range all.
Now, this is a rough way to do this game.
You see, a very rough way to do this game.
You can make a stochastic.
You'd otherwise have a second layer of stochasticity.
But the problem is when I take for,
and let me apply this to anything in economics, all right?
Hold on, let me just explain what
you mean by a second layer of stochasticity.
What you're saying is the first layer of stochasticity
is there's a random walkish thing that's
bouncing around with a second layer.
Exactly.
And the second level of stochasticity
is there's variance of the variance, so to speak.
Exactly, exactly.
The variance has a variance.
Here, I used the Bernoulli for the variance, OK,
two-state thing.
But then you can make it more complicated and more complex.
So the way I traded options is I discovered that,
because an option, instead of taking an option off
the average variance, you take an average option
across the two-state variance.
Now, it makes the out-of-the-money options,
the options that are remote, it increases the price
considerably.
So why isn't this thing that you're constructing
from these two options?
Oh, it's because of the non-commuting of averaging
and taking the function f.
Function f is your option function.
Exactly.
So as an option trader, I function like that all the time.
Whenever I see a parameter, and I told myself,
you don't need to fix economics, all you need
is introduce a second layer of stochasticity into the game.
You know, for the sake of some of the people who are here,
maybe we should explain what an option is.
OK.
No, no, maybe it's complicated to go into options
because I discovered it was a complicated thing,
but I can apply it to simpler things.
I love the way that you refer to functions in terms of puts
and calls, where some people, if you do machine learning,
it'll be re-lose.
If you do re-lose, it'll be polynomials for other people.
But maybe an easier way to do things
is an example I gave an antifragile.
OK.
Let's forget this.
You have a grandmother.
I mean, a lot of the high school people still
have grandmothers around.
OK.
And if you don't have grandmothers,
think of grand-uncle, all right, to make it
well-distributed gender and geographic and everything.
OK.
So you have grandmother or grand-uncle,
you pick, it's your choice.
OK.
Now, your grandmother or grand-uncle
is going to spend, what's the best temperature?
Say 70 degrees, no?
In Florida, 70 degrees Fahrenheit.
OK, in Florida, no?
It's a great time.
So what is better, OK, to have the person spend day one
and day two at 70 degrees, or to have your grand-uncle
or grandmother spend the first day at zero degrees
and the second day at 140 degrees,
for an average of 70 degrees?
What do you prefer, the first case or the second case?
OK.
Wait a minute.
Go through the cases again.
Zero degrees and 140 are very bad for humans.
70, 70, OK.
OK.
Or zero, 140.
OK, fine.
OK.
So we'll put the first case.
Is this big enough?
Or you can make it?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, this is for you.
OK.
So you can make it this way.
So it's the same game I'm playing, OK,
and I discovered something called Ricardo.
Have you heard of Ricardo's comparative advantage?
I've heard of it.
Other people probably haven't.
Well, let me explain it very, very simply.
That I realized there's something wrong in economics
because they believe that 70 and 70 or zero, 140
are equivalent.
They only look at the average of the parameter.
So I started spotting in the central papers
in economics or central books something.
And the error, you can see it in Ricardo.
And Ricardo came up with the following idea.
He said that countries should specialize
where they have something called a comparative advantage,
not absolute advantage.
So let's say that you're the best brain surgeon in town
but also happen to be the best person in town
at driving an Uber, OK?
You're not going to do both, OK?
You're going to do what makes you the most money
and let someone drive the Uber, although you're better at both.
And in the example, Ricardo and all the economists
use a story of Portugal versus the UK and wine versus cloth
by saying, OK, Portugal does wine.
We do the cloth because of this concept.
And they consider the average price,
like here, the grandmother, 70 degrees, OK,
which is the average.
Now, I came up with what if there is a fatwa on wine in Portugal?
Right?
Now, what if something?
So if the average is, let's say, they came up with 70 and 70
equivalent, OK, the price.
And they give you the calculus of that.
The calculus falls apart under introducing
a very simple layer of stochasticity, in other words,
making these numbers random, OK?
That's very simple.
So I started doing this, and it's
explained in the back of Antifragile,
and no economist has, to date, been
able to grasp what I was talking about.
OK?
We might have some sample economists here.
We'll see what they do.
I mean, I'm saying your model is right, OK?
But you've got to consider what would happen.
Maybe it's right, maybe it's not right,
but you've got to consider some layers of stochasticity.
So we can apply this to economic review.
Without going into options, something very complicated.
I'm applying it first to your grand-uncle, OK?
And next to a wine versus claws and Ricardo's example,
which is taught in every book in economics 101, OK?
And I applied that to the Gaussian distribution,
which is a very simple 101, OK, of what
you learn when you learn about probability.
You learn about Gaussian distribution,
and then we can apply it to other things.
Something very, very, very, very simple, other things.
So what happens if I make that price, all right,
that is deemed to be fixed, I make it stochastic, variable?
Now, someone may tell me, how do you know it's
this distribution, not that distribution?
They start arguing, and I tell them, it's fine.
Now we're talking about details.
Well, I mean, so one question is, the central people
in many fields, including I suspect economics,
believe the central limit theorem tells them everything.
It says that all distributions end up being Gaussian.
And I think as soon as you're talking about fat tails,
you're away from that story.
That's why we have Mathematica here, all right?
So let me explain the central limit to everyone here
using Mathematica, OK?
So let me make a, have you heard of, OK, R equals, all right,
random variate, variate, uniform distribution, OK?
Well, let me see my screen, because it's not showing my screen.
OK, uniform distribution, OK?
So I do R, and it gives me a number between 0 and 1, OK?
I can make a discrete uniform, it doesn't matter, OK?
All right, I can make a 0, 1.
So let's do here table R, 10, 3, OK?
Or let's say 10, 5, histogram.
I know I could put upstairs, but we're
going to see why I need R to be 7, OK?
Look at what you get.
You get numbers between 0 and 1 like that, OK?
Now let's do the following.
If I add up two numbers, obviously, I'm
going to get the maximum, the most likely probability, at 1,
OK, because you get 1, 1 1⁄2, 0.1, 1.1.
But to get here on the left 0 or to get 2, OK,
you need a lot of work for help from God,
because only 2 can give you, 2 and 0 can give you 2.
No combination can give you that, all right?
So as you see now already, you see that the distribution is
already not flat anymore.
You sum two numbers, and you already have this distribution.
Now let's do it this way, plus R. You almost
have a Gaussian by summing up three numbers, OK?
Look, all right?
So this is called the central limit theorem.
And there are conditions under which,
as you sum up numbers, or average numbers, same thing,
however you want to do it, OK?
We could average them, OK?
You got the same?
So no, no, sorry.
OK, average now, you know.
So however you want to do it, OK?
As you sum up numbers, you end up with a Gaussian.
Now I picked this one, because this
is one that goes there the fastest,
but you can pick the random walk, random ones and zeros, OK?
You sum them, you know, you do it some many times,
then you have a binomial, and so on, you get a Gaussian.
If you want, I can give you this as an example,
but we can speed up.
So that's the story in every textbook.
Yep.
My problem is that this reaches the central limit
very, very quickly.
So let me stop here and tell you there are two theorems that
work together in economics, and in statistics, and everywhere.
One is called the central limit that we just saw.
It means you can use a Gaussian if you
have a sum that's large enough, without going into details,
OK?
And the second one is the law of large numbers,
which tells you that as you sum up that stuff,
you get the average, OK?
So for example, let's do a distribution
of the average of this, OK?
You do the distribution of the average.
I do a random variant.
Any distribution, let's say I take a uniform distribution,
you can see it.
All right.
And then I do 100.
So here, if I do table of that, discrete plot.
So if I do many, many times, or if I can do this table of this,
forget having 100.
I just do 30.
Let me do 30, OK?
OK, mean.
And I do it, say, 10,000 times histogram.
And the reason I mean, the reason I'm invited here
is because as an amateur, you want to play with things.
And to play with things, you've got to do Monte Carlo.
And other programs are a little, I mean,
Mathematica, I think in terms of Mathematica.
So, you know, I.
And I love seeing you actually use 10 to the 4
with a superscript.
That's that's that's.
I hate the other four.
I hate the aesthetics of it are not OK.
So look what you're getting here.
The distribution of the mean is very concentrated, OK?
If I go to 100, and if I take 300, you see, look at this.
If I take 300, it's going to be even more concentrated.
OK, look at this.
Most observations are between 46 and an observation
between 48 and 52, OK?
That's called the large numbers that you're
going to have the distribution of your mean
compressing as your sample becomes larger, OK?
And the variance of your mean is going to be small.
Now, I realize that when you work in an environment that
is called extremistan, all that only holds at infinity,
if it holds.
Let's do a very simple thought experiment with a different.
Have you heard of Pareto 80-20?
Pareto distributions.
Yeah, Pareto 80-20 or any distribution.
Let's say let me take a student T distribution, OK?
Fat tails.
Student T has Pareto tails, OK?
Let me see pedagogically, since we have high school people
and we have physicists.
I don't want to bore the physicists,
and I don't want to upset the high school students.
So let me find the most well-known distribution
is the Pareto 80-20.
OK.
Maps to Pareto distribution, 1, OK, it's about 1, and 1.14,
OK?
All right.
And let's see if I do this one.
Yeah, show the PDF.
Sorry?
Show the PDF, maybe.
OK, so let me do the PDF.
PDF, this, x, minimum value is 1.
1, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12.
So now plot, sorry.
PDF, x1, 12, I'm supposed to do PDF Pareto distribution, x.
Sorry.
OK.
So this is how it looks like, OK?
This is how the distribution looks like.
It has most of its values here, and it has one excursion
in the tail.
And the reason it's called 80-20 is because 80% of it
lives in 20% of the range.
Exactly.
So if I do the CDF of the cumulative,
without going into detail, 80% of the people
will own 20% of the land, and 20% of the people
own 80% of the land.
And if you recurse, it means that 1% of the people
will own 50% of the land.
Uh-huh.
So you continue with it.
So when I, so that's Pareto distribution.
Now let's do a random variate without distribution.
OK, we do a random variate.
OK.
And let's do 30, all right?
The problem with this, you're going to see.
I just left the PDF in there.
Sorry, no, a random variate.
Sorry, yeah, PDF.
So the, so you get a lot of numbers, and I do a table,
and I do take the average of 30, so I got the mean, OK?
As you can see, the mean fluctuates.
OK, as you can see, the mean fluctuates every time
I get different numbers.
And here I do table, the mean, and I do 10 to the 4.
OK?
He wants another bracket.
Table 10 to the 4.
Oh, you use the bracket here?
Yeah, I need the bracket here.
And then I do histogram.
So no, I was looking for Diego there at the same time.
This is why, so maybe here I can make it cleaner.
No.
I think you just want a larger number there, right?
Yeah, I want a larger number.
No, no, I'm so, no, what you're, sorry, that, you've got,
that's a histogram thing.
You want to get rid of the thing for the histogram,
you want to change your 10 to the 4, right?
Yeah, no, the range, the problem is, let me show you,
this is not, this is the feature, not a bug, as they say,
because some averages are at 1,000,
and the histogram is showing all the range.
Oh, I see, I see, I see.
You see what I mean?
So some of them, you cannot control from up there,
from here, you cannot control because you don't know
where you got to get.
Right, and there's a black swan wandering around
on the tail there.
You get this, and even better, if you do this, okay,
you do this, and then you do the max,
you're even going to be more surprised
with the max you're going to be getting.
This max is 19, and you can get 28, 12,
but sometimes you get 2,000, like here we have 1,000, okay?
So max for an average at 1,000,
which means that the max was maybe 30,000,
and then you got a 30,000.
So if you have the patience, you play with these.
So this one will never follow the,
this one will never obey the central limit theorem, okay?
And we can show you.
But the conditions of the central limit theorem are
that the distribution has bounded variance.
This doesn't have bounded variance.
Right.
But there's something even worse.
It has, it obey, the condition to obey,
to get to the, what's the name,
the large numbers is have bounded mean, no?
Which, this one exists.
The mean here exists.
If you look at the mean, it's going to be alpha or one,
one over one minus alpha.
It's going to be around eight, okay?
Okay, so it has a bounded mean,
but the problem is that,
given that the variance is infinite, okay?
That mean is going to jump around a lot.
So the idea is to get the same stability
you get with a Gaussian upstairs with 30 observations.
How many do you need?
Let's get, let's let someone guess.
All right.
People, how many?
How many, who can venture a number?
Come on, we got lots of people here.
Somebody.
10 to the six.
How much?
10 to the six.
Who said 10 to the six?
Why do you exaggerate so much?
I just picked the extremes and I have to make a choice.
You're not exaggerating.
You're, as a matter of fact, underestimating.
10 to the 13, 10 to the 13.
To compress the variance enough,
in other words, to get the mean
and the same reliability for the mean.
For a sample of 30, you need 10 to the 13.
Okay.
So economically, I mean, if you're a trader,
everybody's dead by that time.
Exactly.
So you got to work with other techniques
to figure out the mean.
Some other characteristics of distribution.
The whole idea is that,
maybe you don't need to know the mean,
you need to know other properties, okay?
But the central in this environment is that,
economics has been using distribution
that are more like this one.
On one hand, they say, well,
we the genie is high, we're concentrated.
On the other hand, using tools designed for the variance,
thinking that with, and a 30, they're happy.
So let's, okay.
So I want to, if we could try taking this
in a something that goes further
towards the fundamental physics story, okay?
Because this phenomenon of Gaussians or that kind of thing,
it's a thing one in physics,
those kinds of things show up in statistical mechanics.
And one of the questions,
when you have a bunch of gas molecules
bouncing around in a box,
the averages end up being these Gaussian kinds of things.
There are occasionally long tail phenomena,
but mostly in statistical mechanics,
one's concerned with things that end up being
sort of roughly Gaussian and so on.
So the question, in what we've now been able to understand
in physics is that just like there are discreet gas molecules
bouncing around in boxes to make fluids and things,
so also there are kind of discreet atoms of space
that make space time and so on.
So that may seem irrelevant,
but the question now is,
let's try and think about economics
and let's ask what are the atoms of economics?
In other words,
we try and break down an economic system
into the kind of smallest elements of what's going on.
What are those smallest elements?
And do they aggregate up to something
which is like statistical mechanics
or like what we see in our physics project?
Okay, I have, let me make a side comment
before I answer yours.
If I maximize, if I say I'm trying to maximize the entropy,
of a distribution where you don't maximize entropy
is the expectation of P log of P, okay?
Or in this case, continuous case,
P of X log of P of X, okay?
So if I maximize entropy under no constraint,
I don't know if you can get a distribution under no constraint,
I think under no constraint you get a pushy
or over, so if you maximize entropy
under constraint of variance and mean and variance,
I think I have the mathematical file here somewhere,
you get a Gaussian.
So you have to realize that you're bounding,
the equivalent in physics would be,
you know, you're putting a boundary on energy
because the variance is energy
or whatever you want to define it, okay?
So the problem with economics
is that we don't have anything binding a number.
Like, I remember when Feynman was giving his lecture
one years ago, 30 years ago, I remember he was saying,
oh, we talk about astronomical number,
we should be talking about economic numbers.
What do you mean?
He said, you know, there was expression,
very large number, astronomical numbers.
Yes.
He said, now that the deficit is reaching billions
and billions and billions,
we're talking about economic numbers, okay?
And in the black swan, I explained it,
I said the price can go from one to a billion
or like, say, Bitcoin.
Tomorrow people decide to price it for $100 billion,
each Bitcoin, you know, be my guest,
that number is meaningless, all right?
Because there's no boundaries on this.
Well, okay, so this is a very interesting point, okay?
So one thing I wanted to come to
is sort of the definition of value in economics.
Yes.
And, you know, in a sense, you're saying,
you know, what I'm trying to understand is,
you've got, it seems in an economic system,
some network of transactions that are happening.
I mean, I don't know how you view sort of
at a granular level, what is an economic system?
It's presumably a bunch of people
making transactions with each other.
Is that the correct picture or not?
No, the way I view economics
is completely different representation.
Let me tell you the way I view the world.
And as you see it from finance and economics.
In finance, I view the world as arbitrage.
And economics, I view the world as law of one price.
What does that mean?
Okay, so the things converge
that you cannot have one good, okay,
priced at $1 and have an identical good priced at $72.
That's a law of one price.
And I've used it, for example, to explain why
there are laws defining the relationship between currencies.
Called, you know, the purchasing power parity
and stuff like that.
I'm gonna give you a very simple example.
If the Swiss franc in Switzerland is multiplied by 10,
and if you have free exchange
between Switzerland and France,
then no person,
except for those under substances or stuff like that,
would buy goods in Switzerland.
They would go buy them in France.
Right, so in other words,
and then what happened is that the vendors in Switzerland
were not be able to sell
and the currency would depreciate.
And the French currency, assuming its own currency,
would appreciate and then sure enough,
then you'd have the same parity between currencies, okay?
So in other words, and I traded securities as a trader,
looking for similarity between item priced differently.
So for example, if you have an option on this item
and correlates heavily on that other item,
I can use one as substitute for the other at cheaper cost.
And this is called the replication business.
So I wrote my entire business into something
I called dynamic replication.
And that was actually my doctoral thesis.
How to dynamically replicate an item into another.
Dynamically, you could probably replicate an option
into a stock, or stock into an option, or it's a payback.
By replicate, you mean that the distribution,
that all these various distributions
that you compute for one of these instruments
agree with the distributions you got
for the other instrument.
Exactly, or dynamically, for example,
if you own a stock or you, okay, sorry,
if you own an option or you own a stock
that you buy and sell continuously, you replicate it.
Right.
So I've kept that when you're under fat tail,
these don't work dynamically.
That was my sub-specialties breakdown
of these theories locally, and where they don't break down.
So to go back, I mean, put it under some form of clarity.
My first answer is that in economics,
we don't have energy when prices are concerned.
So for example, a currency like the mark,
the mark of the Reich's mark,
I think I forgot the name of Germany during Weimar,
went from one to a dollar to three trillion to a dollar.
Right.
But you cannot have random variable, okay,
that can reach that level in the physical world that easily.
Okay, so I don't think, I mean,
I think that the analogy between with value
is probably not energy.
It's probably something more to do
with the way that an observer samples the system.
That's something that can be much more arbitrary.
Okay, I think in modern economics,
or the way I view, I'm not an economist,
I'm a financial economist,
and for us, we don't know what value means.
We have arbitrage replication equivalent.
Well, okay, so for you, I mean, so by arbitrage,
I mean, one way to think about arbitrage
in a sort of physics point of view
is it's like curvature in a space.
You go around a closed path,
and you're taking 90 degree angles
going around a rectangle,
you don't get back to where you started from again.
I mean, that's kind of a physicist analog of arbitrage.
In the sense that you go around a loop,
you know, you go around this financial loop,
you're converting this to that,
you're converting this to that.
Yes.
And it doesn't close.
You know, you make money by doing,
by going around that loop.
Or you make a little residual money,
because effectively the world is not as,
finance is not as inefficient.
They're called inefficient where you can find that stuff.
Right.
And let me give you an example in finance
where my idea breaks down
and why in fact, in the long run, it tends to hold.
I don't know if you remember at some point,
I think Volkswagen owns Porsche
or one company owned the other.
And the company that was owned,
market value was higher than a company that owned it.
That was like, that happened with Palm, right?
That was the, that happened with Porsche.
It happens periodically, or you have these absurdities.
And, but you cannot arbitrage it
because you have some idiot holding on to shares
and doesn't want to sell it to you.
Okay.
So for example, so you have things that make markets,
not as, you know, frictionless and efficient,
but in general, in general, in general,
market tend to be not that stupid.
So in other words,
you can have stupid pockets of inefficiencies
but they don't last for a long time.
They may last a year or two years,
they don't last decades
and the last decade, they don't last for a century, you see.
I thought they only lasted minutes in many cases.
No, in many cases where you have a focus
or you can replicate easily something against the other,
it's less seconds.
Like for example, when, you know,
but there's things that last longer.
I was doing currency option arbitrage
between currency option using what are called
triangle arbitrages where you buy a New Zealand dollar,
volatility, an option against Australian dollar,
do Australian dollar against Hong Kong dollar,
Hong Kong dollar against something else
and end up with enough money to go pay for your rent.
You get the idea.
So you could do the things for, you know,
and have, you know, sip a drink while doing it, you see.
But there's more narrow arbitrages,
they take a nanosecond.
So, and you have statistical arbitrages
where you're making a bet on statistical relationship
and you think in the long run, you're gonna do, okay,
thanks to the law of large numbers.
So, but trying to come back
and trying to say they are foundation of economics,
I think I read enough books on economics that say that,
but to tell you how unimportant it is
that I forgot about it.
I forgot what they are,
if you say foundation of economics is...
Oh, I'm not sure there are well-received foundations.
I mean, it's not like an axiomatic theory.
I mean, one might think there was a version of economics
where you start from sort of axioms
of human psychological behavior or something.
We have in finance axiomatic stuff that's quite robust,
but, and effectively linked to what I'm talking about,
absence of arbitrage from the freelance theorems,
absence of arbitrage, complete markets,
having a pricing kernel or things like that.
They are, but the problem is,
they're made under strong assumption.
In other words, they assume that some linearity is somewhere.
So they make assumption that don't hold in a real world.
But by linearity, you mean,
I mean, are they things that depend on things like,
fixed point theorems or are they things
that depend on Gaussian distributions?
Okay, by linearity is, you know factor,
PCA or factor analysis?
Yes.
Where you can have a price as a function of these factors.
Right.
Okay, so you have a linear...
You're essentially making a model
where you say this variable can be determined
as maybe some linear combination of these other factors.
So they try to do that in finance called the factors.
Okay, so you have factors
and then each variable is function of the factors
and therefore you can price everything
with these basic factors
and or whatever factor you have,
an awakening or an importance like in a PCA.
And I showed in the book on the fat tails,
they may exist, but you don't know what the factors are.
Well, those are essentially,
those would be sort of the primes of the financial system.
They would be the, you know,
what the index funds should be attaching themselves to those.
That's what they do.
They do some models, models around that.
But my problem is to go back to what the private is, you see?
Again, I mean, is it the average factor
or is it, you see?
Or you have...
Might want to stop sharing
because then we'd be bigger on the screen.
Okay, so what it's worth.
I'm sharing, sorry.
No, no, it's okay.
So, I mean, okay, I have,
and you're asking me a question I never thought about before
because I don't think in terms of these economic,
I mean, I came to economics
without knowing anything about anything, you see?
And then later on picked up stuff.
So I went backwards.
So I don't ask myself question coming from stuff
and then started linking.
Say, oh, what's the main difference?
Someone asked me with statistical mechanics.
I say, you don't have energy in economics.
Right, I think that's too narrow of you
of statistical mechanics.
I mean, I think that the big question,
the big sort of idea of statistical mechanics
as the things that we're finding about,
space time and so on is,
there are simple underlying processes going on
and it doesn't matter much
what those individual processes are,
but in the aggregate, they have certain behavior.
Yeah, so we have a mean field problem in economics,
which is that, and I can explain it again here
in terms of the Gaussian, okay?
What is the law of large numbers?
It's an aggregation.
Yes.
What is central limit?
It's an aggregation.
Okay, now some things aggregate very well.
Okay, so you don't need to know the details
because overall it's gonna work out very well.
So it becomes sampling.
When you sample portfolio, say you built the portfolio
for the Gaussian world,
then there's something called portfolio theory
that would work beautifully.
Okay.
The problem is we don't live in that world.
So to understand the behavior of an ensemble of securities,
okay, you cannot obtain that as easily as you don't have,
so you see at the limit things become deterministic,
but your portfolio is not large enough for that to happen.
Well, the basic claim is that the tail
will always eventually wag the dog.
That's exactly the thing.
In economics and in a lot of these,
a lot of variables related to finance
and the drivers that we have.
So to give you a very simple example,
and I have a Mathematica page for that,
is I take something called the principle component analysis.
Right.
And I say even if a true factor analysis worked,
it doesn't, but let's say it worked.
And the factors were constant,
didn't change over time, didn't mutate or anything.
You would, all you would see is spirits factors
for the same reason the law of large number is slow.
Yeah.
You would not see the real factors from your sample.
Right.
So that's the, okay, so that's the first problem.
The second problem we have in economics is dimensionality.
That, you know, when you,
correlation itself is a random variable
that also obeys a law of large numbers.
Except that when you have a high dimensionality,
you end up having a lot of securities
and not enough data per security.
So to give you a very simple example,
let's say I have a thousand securities.
Okay.
How many correlation do I have?
I have say a thousand, one half of thousand.
It's about one half thousand square and minus one.
All right.
So one half thousand square,
you remove the diagonal and then you count.
Okay.
So now I add one security.
Now that additional security,
you got to look at correlation with the other thousand.
Now I add one.
So every time I add a security, okay,
I add the spuriousness because people look
at the extreme correlation or the high correlations.
You see?
I mean, to give you a very simple example,
if I have a lot of securities on this planet,
I would find exactly a one security
that correlates a hundred percent
with your cholesterol level and fluctuation.
Uh-huh.
So what happens is when you have a lot of securities,
to stabilize, you must have a lot more data per security.
So the problem is that our spurious information
grows with squares, with a number variable,
but the contraction to the law of large numbers
goes way too slowly.
Okay.
Let me take, so one argument you're making is,
eventually the tail eats you.
Eventually tails, you know, become donors.
That is one of the problems.
But then I'm going to make another point,
which is that, you know,
there's a lot of kind of the normal operation of economics
in which you're not being eaten by tails,
in which people are just buying and selling lettuces
or whatever else it is.
Is there, you know, what, presumably there is some level
of kind of, you know, there's something to describe
that isn't the unpredictable, undescribable tails.
Yeah, I mean, that then you're dealing with,
if you're operating in grocery store,
then it becomes a grocery store management.
And you don't need an economist for that.
You need a good grocery store expert.
And it becomes a local expertise
of how to handle grocery store,
because the income for a grocery store
may not be determined by the tails,
because of gyros and stuff like that.
Maybe thin tail, but not two thin tails actually,
not Gaussian, then maybe we can talk about it.
But then the minute you're talking about economic variable
that may interest anyone, you're starting a corporation,
Wolfram Research or Maz Bahrami and company
or whatever company you're doing, all right?
The minute you're selling to more than one person
on this planet, okay,
and you're not confining yourself to a neighborhood,
that becomes out of control.
Okay, let's...
Very simple, is that, sorry, go ahead.
No, no, I was just gonna make sure
that we covered a few other things,
because I think people, so I mean, one thing,
one thing I've been curious about is,
okay, in the current economic system,
maybe the sort of atomic pieces of the economic system
are people doing transactions with each other.
Maybe in the future, it's not people doing that.
It's bots doing it.
And the question is, what does it look like
in the current sort of...
So one question that seems to me,
maybe this is not a, you know,
one non-trivial fact about economics
is that money exists and is meaningful.
That is that there is a...
It's not self-evident that you can, whoops.
It does not seem self-evident
that there is a kind of scalar quantity
that represents the value of things.
In other words, it could be the case
that whenever you want to trade two things,
the things would have all kinds of attributes.
And in order for a trade to happen,
those things have to, you know,
they have to match in their fame.
They have to match in their, you know, financial,
whatever they have to match.
Okay, that's, okay, you say,
there's something we call the numerator.
And it is essential in finance
and financial economics.
There's a numerator, numerator, unit of account.
Uh-huh.
That you're going to have to have a home currency,
what we call a home currency.
And the home currency doesn't,
can be expressed in beanie, in baseball cards.
You can have your home currency and anything, okay?
But why is it obvious
that there has to be a scalar measure of value?
Why is it obvious that transactions can be...
Then you no longer have,
you cannot enforce a law of one price
if you don't have one unit
by which you're valuing everything else.
This is where, and also you cannot have arbitrage
if you don't have one unit.
But let me tell you the complication.
Uh-huh.
Is that two people can be transacting,
each one having a different currency.
Yup.
And the strange thing is the distribution of these two
would not be symmetric.
So to give you an example from dynamic hedging, my book,
let's say your home currency is US dollar
and my home currency is the bridge pound, okay?
To reverse things, okay?
Now, the bridge pound goes to infinity.
What happens to the parity?
For one, one goes to zero,
for one, the other one goes to zero.
Because my units don't account for bridge pound,
yours is US dollars.
So by Jensen's inequality, you see?
By Jensen's inequality,
the other one is contacts with respect to yours.
So to give you a very simple idea,
is that let's say the bridge pound now is what?
Let's say 140, okay?
If the bridge pound goes to zero
with respect to the US dollar,
the dollar with respect to the bridge pound goes to infinity.
Yeah.
Okay, so you have two different dynamics.
One is skewed, the left one is skewed, right.
And when we price options between two different people,
okay, the same equation doesn't reverse.
You don't get the same price.
Okay, I don't think in terms of options,
so it's harder for me to-
Okay, okay, let's say in terms of probability,
or probability of that,
because you have two like normal distribution,
each one skewed in different direction.
We can be using the same distribution
and the probability of the British pound
going over $5, for me, okay,
is maybe 10% and for you, maybe 90%.
Yeah, okay.
All of the two country paradoxes.
So I don't want people to drown in that notion
except that for two statements,
the first one, you must have a numerator
to be coherent and have the law of one price.
And two, your dynamics for your numerator,
okay, I would never be symmetric
to the dynamics of another numerator.
You see, I think that this point about,
you know, numerator as you're calling it,
I suspect that that, I mean, in, you know,
we have some analogies to this in the physics project
about kind of what it means to construct space-time
and so on, this is a long story not to be told here.
And, you know, I think it is not as obvious
that, I mean, in other words,
you say economics as we know it with things like arbitrage
wouldn't work unless there was this numerator idea.
But the question is, let's say that there was an economy
where everything was just done by bots
and you simply told your bot, I have these preferences.
I, you know, I want to achieve this.
Yes, yes.
And all the bot is going to do
is do barter trading with other bots.
Yes.
So in the end, you know, you're going to,
you want to buy a book and, you know,
you're going to buy it from somebody who in the end
wants to, I don't know, provide food for their cat
or something and there's a chain of bots
that eventually go from the, you know,
getting the book to providing food for the cat.
And, but not in nowhere in this whole picture
was there any numerator?
There would be an implied numerator.
Okay.
If for the system to be coherent.
Okay, I think this is exactly what I suspect is the case.
And I suspect...
It's very similar to physics
where you have the observer traveling
at different speeds and stuff like that.
But the system stays coherent.
Yeah.
It's coherent for every observer.
Okay.
And it's also coherent in transaction intro observers.
Right.
Well, I mean, so, so this is,
this is why I think there's an analogy
between what we're doing in physics.
Yeah.
That's a numerator one is a,
is a, the, the, the, the, the numerator is an analogy
because I'm different.
Yes.
Go ahead.
So, so I mean, one of my exercises then
is a feature of physics is time dilation and relativity.
Okay.
So our explanation of time dilation in modern times
is sort of everything that's going on
in the universe is computational.
You can either use your computation
to compute what happens next in time,
or you can use their computation to move in space,
to, to replace yourself in space.
If you're using some of your computation to move in space,
that's going at a, at some speed,
then you will have less computation to use
to evolve in time.
So time will effectively run slower for you.
I mean, that, that's a, that's the intuition.
I don't think, okay, you, you, you probably can find
an analog in economics, but I'm not an expert on that.
I have a book here that I couldn't go, you know,
I went, I think I've read laboriously,
it took me about 10 years to read the 22 pages
on entropy and economics by Nicholas,
something Rudgen or something.
So it took me 10 years to read 21 pages.
I don't think, but I think entropy is a confusing concept.
So, okay.
Yeah, but I mean, I'm, I'm curious,
even in the spatialization of economics,
is there, is there a notion of kind of specialized economics,
presumably in times when, you know, when the economics,
you know, the economy was largely agricultural and so on,
there was a notion to, you know, you,
you dig up the carrots in this place,
and you're going to move them to some other place and so on.
There's some spatial component to economics.
I mean, in modern times with,
okay, this, I haven't thought about it in these terms,
just simply because it takes me a while to, you know.
It doesn't matter for markets, for markets,
you've got fiber optics going all over the world.
Yeah, yeah, I know, but the structure of projection
hasn't changed since the beginning of times, okay.
But the difference that we have today
is that the tails are more important.
And let me explain how, how, how that happened, okay.
And this has to do with connectivity,
which is the most important thing for economics
is connectivity.
So to explain the dynamics
and why things are getting more fat tailed.
Let's say that you're an opera singer in,
and that's the example I've used, okay,
in Naples in the 1800s, okay.
You have a good life because nobody could transport goods
from New York, namely singing.
So, you know, so people can sing in Milan
and they don't know threat to you.
So therefore you're gonna have the income,
local income determined locally, okay.
Now, let's say that someone invented something
called the VCR or stuff like that,
where suddenly now you're being displaced by audiovisual.
And they didn't have planes
and now people can fly and go to Milan, New York,
other places, see other opera singers, okay.
Now that creates a winner-take-all effect,
where it's smaller and probably,
let's say perceived to be the best, okay,
will take all the money.
And this applies to practically everything,
like Google today taking all the money
for browser worldwide or in the past,
no farmer could take all the money
for farming worldwide, all right.
You're very local.
So things are being delocalized in many respects.
They've been delocalized in literature,
where you have a clustering to a smaller number
of books worldwide and you have stuff like that.
So these dynamics come from connectivity.
So the way I look at it is that we have had
a statistical transfer, a probabilistic distribution,
okay, changing in nature,
but the transaction has been the same.
You go, you sing, you get your money, all right,
but here in one case it is fat-tailed,
in one case it's much less fat-tailed, you see,
or you do transaction.
But I never went into whether they are constants
and these things other than arbitrages.
And the very simple arbitrage is I'm not gonna pay $10 for this
if I can pay $7.91 for it here, you see.
And then you can say you can make the train not pair-wise,
but generalize it to people doing this,
and then suddenly it becomes arbitrage.
So the way I view the world is just arbitrage, you see.
So, and if you have differences in price,
because in between things, but they're not arbitrageable.
Or sometimes there's too much risk in doing the arbitrage.
I think we should, but before we run out of time,
we've got to talk about cryptocurrencies.
Okay, great, thanks.
And actually I think, did Fred want to make a comment?
I noticed Fred,
Oh yeah, it was mostly that transaction costs.
It was something that Nassim was saying,
transaction costs are a measure of distance between.
Yeah, transaction difficulty or transaction costs.
Fair enough.
Okay, anyway, back to cryptocurrencies.
So Nassim just sent me this piece
that basically says Bitcoin is worthless.
It was zero, exactly.
That's called worthless.
If it's worth zero, it's worthless, right?
And as I understand the argument,
part of what it starts from is this idea.
I mean, people always used to say the value of a stock
should be the discounted future value
of all its dividends and so on.
Yes.
Do people still believe that?
Yes, because when you buy a stock,
but the company stopped compensating you in dividend.
But lots of tech companies have never paid dividends.
Yeah, because they put the money in,
instead of paying you a dividend,
I don't want the dividend.
I want the value to stay in a stock.
Yeah.
Okay, so the whole idea,
the idea, the way I see it is the stock
would discount the value of cash flow I'm going to get.
Whether I'm going to get dividend,
I don't need the dividend.
Okay, I got a lump sum at the end, you see?
So the way you look at it is at period zero,
I'm going to get, okay, I price the stock
as if the dividend I'm going to get period one,
plus valuation period one,
and how do you value it at period one?
It's a dividend you get at period two,
plus valuation period two, okay?
If you chain those valuation using something
called iterated expectations, okay,
and end up the stock today is going to be
the cash flow I'm going to get it on it,
plus the price at infinity.
How long do you think you should wait?
I mean, like other examples
where people waited a hundred years?
No, because these things happen.
I mean, when you look at pet.com,
I mean, the reason stocks, you know,
ended up having value is because you always find
either some idiot to buy the company and pay up a lot,
okay, or the company eventually makes a lot of money.
Yeah, you see?
So the people doubt the discount,
the dividend discount model,
not on grounds of, you know,
no, hey, nobody cares about cash flow from the stock,
because the difference between Ponzi and that,
the Ponzi is something that had absolutely no value,
and we know it has no value, okay?
It's a pyramid scheme,
and hopefully we won't stuck with it.
We're going to sell it to someone
even more foolish than we are, greater fool.
Okay, so stocks are priced off of
some kind of expected cash flow in the future.
So go ahead.
No, no, so I mean,
your argument with respect to Bitcoin is
at the end of the day, there's nothing there.
That's the basic, as opposed to a company.
No, there's one thing I said, the difference is that
gold, for example, I explained gold,
I have gold here, gold doesn't give you cash flow.
But during that period, okay, it is a consumer item, all right?
So I'm paying to wear the jewelry, okay?
So that, because what happened is that
if you're discounting P very far down, it's worth zero.
Right, but so the question for cryptocurrencies,
one of the questions is,
is are they actually useful for something?
I mean, as opposed to just being thought of
as a pure repository value or place to speculate and so on,
are they actually useful for anything?
And I mean, they could be useful merely for
being able to transfer money between obscure places
that you can't usually transfer money.
They could also, yeah.
Okay, so my point about Bitcoin is the first thing
that people weren't getting, tell me it's successful.
Why is it successful?
Is anybody using it?
No, the price is going up.
So that part, you see, and not because
it's useful for transactions.
Because if it's useful for transactions, say the web,
the web doesn't have a market value.
Can you buy the web?
If you're bullish on the web, no,
you buy a company using the web.
Yeah, I mean, you know, look,
Bitcoin is being used for some transactions.
I mean, Iranian oil traders and things are using it.
Okay, yeah, no, no.
It is Bitcoin, so the point is,
it's too volatile to be a currency.
And you should not price a currency.
The success of a currency is in its uses.
And then the other problem, I had two more problems.
Gold, if I leave it alone on the ground, doesn't degrade.
Doesn't require maintenance.
What happens with Bitcoin?
You must apply a hazard model to it.
Like I apply it to a life of a person.
If a person dies, there's a small probability
of people dying, okay?
But if they die, they're done.
So it's an absorbing barrier.
So if I apply an absorbing barrier to Bitcoin,
I cannot apply that absorbing barrier to other things.
Well, you're saying gold will be forever, so to speak,
like diamonds.
And that there's nothing-
No, not that financially, physically,
physically cannot degrade.
Doesn't have an absorbing barrier,
or at least not in the next 100,000 years.
Yes.
But Bitcoin, if people lose interest in the technology,
okay, all your assets on it are vaporware.
Yeah, I mean, it's just like if a bank,
if people just decide,
oh, they're lost interest in running the bank.
It's the same type of thing, isn't it?
I mean, if people-
No, the bank wire the money to you and et cetera,
but with Bitcoin, okay, it's all this value on the ledger.
No, if there's a bank in the Wild West
and it had a vault in it and everybody just leaves the bank
and they just say, forget it,
it's gonna turn into a ghost town,
you lose the money as well.
No, because you can take the money,
you can say, okay, we're gonna open the bank
and this is your $500, this is yours,
thanks, bye, you close.
But it was Bitcoin, if they do that,
Bitcoin would be worth zero
because nobody's gonna maintain that ledger.
Well, okay, but okay, so first question is-
All probability of that happening,
if the tiny probability of that happening, all right,
maybe in mid-tick, 10 years, 20 years,
if I know in the future it will happen,
then the value gotta be,
this is very simple.
I know of no other model
than discounted cash flow to price and I think, you see,
and if there's an absorbing barrier,
then it must have a use in between,
which is a problem.
Let's talk about the use, let's talk about the use, right?
So Bitcoin itself is a not particularly
well-engineered cryptocurrency.
It's the most common, it was the first.
Okay, it's not particularly well-engineered.
Can you give me one second?
One second, one second, no problem.
Okay.
I see Leanne making lots of comments here
and Leanne is as perhaps we can,
I'm not sure how long the same can stay,
but...
I'll put my camera on.
Okay.
All right.
Sorry.
You know, not really.
So Bitcoin is close to a current
coin is, you know, not particularly when engineered,
it happened to be the first,
it's the largest cryptocurrency.
I mean, the, you know, one thing I mean,
I know you and I talked about this several years ago,
the concept of computational contracts
and the idea of kind of autonomous things
that can happen in a purely computational domain.
That's an example of something
for which cryptocurrencies are presumably useful.
That is, it's, you know, as something where you,
I mean, both the ledger capability of blockchain
and the kind of autonomous execution idea of blockchain
and even the transaction concept of blockchain
is something that is useful.
If the number of contracts in the world increases
by a factor of a thousand,
and most of them are purely computational contracts
between machines, between AIs and effect,
then there is something,
then there's a utility in having
this sort of purely computational notion of a currency,
I think.
Yes, okay, so, but how does that utility enter the valuation?
Well, because then there is a thing for which people find,
I mean, if, you know, if Bitcoin was the Swift network
or something, if Bitcoin was a bank network,
people would say, oh, we want it.
We want to use this bank network.
Okay, I mean, we should disentangle the idea
that Bitcoin trading at 34,000, okay,
and what use we can have of the network built that way.
That can, and the fact that it cannot be imitated
by other networks or broken,
for example, the notion of blockchain requires
the thing to be public, distributed,
and irreversible, you agree?
Yes.
So, and people say, oh, we do a blockchain,
and you tell them, is it irreversible?
Say no, we can change it.
So it's not a blockchain anymore.
Is it public?
Is it, is it so?
Well, there are non-public versions.
I mean, the permission blockchains
are a little bit different,
but in a first approximation, it's public.
Okay, so what I meant, there's nice technologies,
but I don't understand technology,
I understand markets, I send the uses,
and I'd rather wait, given the history of technology,
I'd rather wait for something to be used
before the hype rather than hype before the use.
Yeah, and I don't think, I think the thing is overhyped.
But let me start focusing now on the one essential thing
that I thought that Bitcoin would be a currency.
So we're talking Bitcoin now, okay?
And, but then I realized two things.
I realized that gold couldn't be a currency
because to have something priced fixed in a currency,
floating in fiat dollars, or what they call fiat,
is that then you must have, let's say I wanna buy,
I wanna rent an apartment in Bitcoin.
For my rent to be in Bitcoin, my income gotta be in Bitcoin.
Sure.
So if my income is in Bitcoin,
my employer gotta have liabilities, matching assets.
Sure.
So it's gotta be Bitcoin all the way down.
It has to be more and more all the way down,
but given that government owns so much of GDP,
and government contract,
it's impossible to displace the government.
Well, until a government decides to use Bitcoin
as their legal tender.
Exactly, but the problem is if a government of where,
the thing is we're so, everything's so interactive,
like remember my example of Switzerland and so globalized,
that we are, the volatility between currencies
is very low when you have commerce.
What we call frictional volatility is about five to 7%
from experience, this is the minimum volatility
you can have, okay?
So, and sometimes it's close to zero,
like Hong Kong dollar, by construction,
the government compresses,
but up to 5% doesn't matter, it's transaction volatility,
you see?
But so what I meant is that so Bitcoin
must have exactly the volatility, all right?
Of zero or close to frictional, okay,
with respect to the US dollar and stuff like that,
for it to be adopted.
And if anything, the volatility has been increasing over time.
Well, I mean, volatility is measured
with respect to dollars.
I mean, in other words, at some level,
you could say if everybody was using Bitcoin,
you would say, oh gosh, dollars are so volatile.
Okay, the numerator, that is the most,
the least volatile, the way I expressed it is,
I take a basket of goods and services,
constantly revise, and see what numerator
would make that basket least non-volatile.
So why do people not use things like CPI as a medium,
I mean, because you cannot buy and sell CPI, you see?
And it's not, it requires dynamic hedging,
and effectively the CPI is pretty much historically
the closest thing to a CPI is the dollar.
But there's inflation with respect, I mean, the,
I know, so inflation compensated by interest rates,
you had to net out inflation by interest rates.
So people over time have settled for fiat
when they're compensated with interest income.
But so you're saying in a perfect world,
the currency would track the consumer price index,
let's say, but that's-
Or after interest, and this pretty much
what the Federal Reserve and everybody
have done historically, maybe not now,
okay, is try to do that, because when you think about it,
and I keep saying that the problem of the CPI
is that if you look at the way indices are built,
they map quantity changes and price changes.
So if you may have a new good that enters it.
So for example, I give the example of the thing
that was the most stable in Italy was a Gittoni,
the telephoned token, was, you know, that basket of goods,
they say the different regions were less volatile
in Gittoni than it was in the Italian lira, okay?
And the problem is, think about it, now you have,
it says the cost of a phone call,
and then price of communication collapsed.
Right, but that's a technology change
in changing the goods people want.
Now, I mean, you're making the statement
that the currency is never going to be
technologically obsolete.
Okay, so no, no, one comment I'm making
about tracking the CPI,
they are things called inflation index bonds.
But the problem is they will not track the CPI,
they will track the expectations
by the market of the CPI.
So for example, you buy them today for CPI 3% per annum,
and then CPI turns out to be 2%, okay?
You're gonna lose a lot of money.
And this price then for over this duration
what the CPI is gonna be, you see?
So it's difference between expectation.
So the goods and services trade off of expectation.
What I'm saying is I spent, I'm obsessed with trying
to get to minimize the effect of inflation
on my assets, portfolio and everything.
And so far, I think the best thing is by constructing
portfolios that have some short bonds
and stuff like that, cocktails or portfolios,
I can probably get close, okay?
But if I have to close my eyes by one item,
in spite of all these types of inflation, take the S dollar.
And let me tell you why.
Let's say you have 3% inflation a year.
Okay, that's what the last hour Bitcoin chain moved.
You see?
Probably, yeah, right.
So let me, let me check.
Definitely the lot less than Bitcoin moved today, you see?
So, yeah, so since we're speaking, it moved 2% maybe.
So you realize that the government has such an edge over us now
in controlling prices because they dictate the currencies
and they control salaries as well.
Well, in what way?
I mean, companies.
Companies do, but I'm saying that when you have a large bulk
employer paying you in this currency,
you see, determines the currency.
So to switch out of the S dollar into something else
is non-trivial, it's much more complicated.
And I don't see why the Bitcoin should be it,
but not something else.
But so, I mean, there's a practical matter.
One hears, you know, there's the whole story of, you know,
the Iranian oil traders who can't sell oil for dollars.
So they're selling it for Bitcoin instead and things like that.
Illegal activity.
So, so my argument, I said, someone, you know,
gave me criticism of my piece and economists.
He said, you know, illegal activity.
I said, yes, but it's a currency.
It's just there for illegal activities.
Okay.
So in other words, the currency for fraudsters, ransomware
and pariah, okay, it cannot be a currency.
It needs to have a bunch of suckers around them,
trade that currency for it to have a value.
Because you can't, I mean, if the Bitcoin is something
for hackers and ransomware people and stuff like that,
so who will take it off your hand, you see?
So to give you a fee out or something else against it.
Well, so your argument is for a currency to work,
it has to be a currency for almost everything
that people want.
Not for the bulk of what people, what happened is
the thing, what in the past you could have double currencies
like my metalism has prevailed, I looked in history.
The problem is when economies become developed
and become practically impossible.
Well, so this is your argument.
Sorry?
This is your argument about a single numeraire.
Let me give a very simple example, very simple example.
Let's say that you can buy goods at a store and return them,
and some people are pricing goods in silver,
others are pricing them in gold, all right?
And I use gold as a numeraire, all right?
So I go on days where gold is down, sure, see?
I return the merchandise, all right, in silver.
So you start arming people, like when I say Tesla,
I wanted to price its cars in Bitcoins, this is great.
I buy a car from Tesla in Bitcoin
and I have 30 days to return it.
If Bitcoin collapses, you see?
I return it, so no, I keep it, and if Bitcoin rises a lot,
I go return it and give my Bitcoin back, you see?
So you get arbitrage like hell, you see?
So you get, so you say, no, we're pricing it in dollars,
but you can pay in Bitcoin.
So I'm saying, okay, I can pay in Swiss Franc,
it doesn't make a difference, or can pay in Apple stock.
So the thing cannot be denominated in Bitcoin.
So the argument for currency not being there,
then you're left with other arguments that evaluation,
you know what, it's digital gold.
I say, well, it's not digital gold.
I mean, you have to settle on what you want it for,
you see?
Gold didn't become digital gold, like because by Fiat,
they say, oh, this is great, let's have this store of value.
It inches its way into the habits of people,
progressively over centuries,
till it became store of value.
Yeah.
So that's the idea.
So the best way to view it is to look at what technology
is used and go with that,
because 99% of technology, separatolo,
99% of technologies fail.
Yeah.
And so far, in 12 years, we haven't done much with this,
maybe there's some resistance,
maybe people love to have a custodian.
Well, I think that, look, the technology side of Bitcoin
is my impression is, what I had imagined would happen
is that computational contracts would start becoming big,
and that most transactions will be between bots, basically.
That most of the contracts that are being executed
are between machines, most of the transactions
are between bots.
At that point, it's a little weird for bots
to be trading in dollars.
Okay, let me go back to say it.
So the trading is probably done in bots,
but the price kernel in the market
is invariant to who's trading what, you see?
Because if bots are not coherent, they get arbitraged.
I understand.
So your basic argument, I mean, by the way,
this sort of comes back to a physics type story.
Yes, yes.
This resonates with a bunch of things
about the way reference frames are made in relativity
and things like this,
that essentially, your notion of a numeraire
that is somehow flat, this idea that there's no arbitrage
is, I think, a notion of saying,
we're going to define prices to somehow be flat
across all these different kinds of places.
Because if they're not flat, if there's curvature,
you can do this kind of loop around,
and that's your arbitrage, I think.
And I think that the, I mean,
I think there's probably a somewhat deep analogy
between kind of what we see in physics
and the way that we pick reference frames in physics
and so on, and your statement that economies work
only if there's a single numeraire.
No, not if there's a single numeraire.
You can have multiple numeraire,
but you cannot have all totally between the numeraire.
They're arbitrage malbs.
We call that arbitrage malbs.
Well, so you mean if there are multiple currencies,
but they're pegged together, they're not.
Sort of like the volatility between them
should not be beyond the transaction cost.
Is that enough?
Because if I go to the grocery store and buy two spaced,
okay, and come back and then the currency
of the grocery store moved by 2%,
I'm not gonna do the arbitrage, it's not worth it.
I'm just, I have to say for physicists who are here,
this reminds me a lot of coordinate charts
and the correspondence between coordinate charts.
That was, that was-
Engage theory to like normalize things
so that globally it's sort of invariant
to the local decisions.
Yeah, excellent, excellent.
I'm sorry because I had, there was a mishap,
you know, with the time zone.
I know, you probably have to go.
Yeah, I'm gonna be yelled at in a few minutes, but...
Okay, well, no, this is very interesting, and I-
I can continue, I can continue if you want, if you want,
because I wanna talk about things that I think are quite,
because here you're making me talk about things
that I'm not my specialty.
I never thought in terms of economics,
but I'd like to talk in terms of your,
what you call it, the computational irreducibility.
Yes, that's a whole,
that's a completely different conversation,
which we should have.
Maybe we should schedule this for a different time,
if you're-
Whenever I'm around, I would like to talk about this
and link it to the fat tails
and also to dimensionality problems.
Yeah, that would be interesting.
And finance as well.
Right, I think, yeah, okay,
so people are saying we should do a part two,
and I agree we should do a part two.
Part two, where at least, now I know it,
because it's putting me on the spot,
making me talk about economics.
In 37 years in the market, not once,
did I think, in terms of economics.
That's amusing.
Okay, so we have to,
I think we have several actual economists here.
No, not only that, but I've read books on economics,
goes here, goes out there, absolutely zero.
All right, do we want to, let's just let,
just for one second, I noticed we have Leigh-Anne here.
Does Leigh-Anne want to make a few comments
in defense of economics here?
Oh, I can't defend economics
because economics has so many different schools of thought
that are all arguing against each other.
But I just wanted to push back a little bit
to say that gold also could be considered a fetish
and not have a fundamental value.
If we ignore the fact that there is a few things
it's useful for, but overall, it's just some desire.
No, no, I mean, gold, gold to me, maybe a fetish,
it's not a big deal, but it will still,
I'll still pay something for a fetish,
but I will not pay for a fetish that may expire.
Okay, so what do you think about NFTs?
Nothing, because those are,
we're thinking about doing a whole bunch of stuff
with NFTs, because they're fun.
We could, for example, we could make an NFT
from this conversation.
Let me tell you one thing, maybe, maybe,
I have no idea, I have no idea.
I mean, I don't collect stuff, I have stuff,
I have collectable stuff that I don't collect books,
but I used to collect Roman heads upstairs.
And I'll tell you one thing, I don't understand the thing,
but there is, you can see a pattern
in how much people paid to collect,
they use it with their, a few money.
So when there's a lot of liquidity,
they use a lot of a few money to collectibles.
And like now, now there's a lot of liquidity,
people are gonna put NFTs and stuff like that,
but the minute there's tightness,
you see, the rise in Bitcoin is a product
of the injection of liquidity last March.
I mean, people bought any assets,
and now, of course, they're bored of NFT,
and tomorrow they'll have SFD, whatever it is,
they're gonna figure out, you see?
So that's fine, I mean, this has some value,
maybe for, if you enjoy it,
and you have satisfaction from it, it has some value.
Fetish goods have value, they're not zero,
there's an item, it's like consumer item.
Stochastic stopping time, but I'm paying for it,
like I'm paying, I would pay a cent a year
for my gold chain, so it has something.
But if I know it would disappear, you see,
and I don't wear it, that's the problem, okay?
Then it's another matter.
Well, so I mean, the contention
about cryptocurrencies in part is,
they have no ultimate real-world utility,
they are merely at an attempt to make a store of value.
That's a necessary claim.
I'm not sure that claim is correct.
I mean, I think that the whole story
of computational contracts and so on
is an argument against that claim,
although I have to admit that that world
has not really taken off yet, and maybe it won't.
Yeah, we'll see, but there's one thing,
I always, the one thing I've learned from my years
in finance to always look for a sucker problem.
And a sucker problem is when people have a nice story
that's coherent, well-tight, like they did in the 1990,
late 1990s, early 2000s, that's back,
and then come up with a story.
Oh, the web is gonna be wonderful,
that's thereforpet.com.
And as I tell you, inflation, money supply,
therefor Bitcoin, okay.
Okay, but I mean, any fundamentals story about a stock
is eventually something like that.
I mean, you say, you should buy, you know,
company X, Amazon or something,
because, you know, they're gonna take over
from bricks and mortar stores or whatever,
or they're gonna have bricks and mortar stores.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
There's always some kind of expectation
of a story for use, but Amazon, you think,
eventually they're gonna bring cash, some cash flow,
and we're gonna be able to use that cash flow,
you know, to accumulate stuff,
or it will gain the value from the inside, but.
Well, okay, so the argument has to be
that you don't find the story of why Bitcoin,
you know, the non-government connector.
No, no, no, because Bitcoin is zero sum, you see.
In an economy, these things are zero sum,
in the sense that it's like baseball cards,
because they are zero sum,
whereas the Amazon, you can say that it brings,
it creates economic activity that enhances economic activity.
Well, I could make the argument that cryptocurrencies
make it simpler to do certain kinds
of computational contract, right, turns out.
That's fine, but why buy Bitcoin for that?
I can, you can start your own crypto that does it,
or your own.
Well, just as you can start your own Facebook,
I mean, there's a certain network effect
that's hard to overcome.
Okay, so yes, but then I would go for other,
other cryptos should be worth more, like Ethereum.
Okay, as I said, Bitcoin is the first
and not the best technology.
Exactly, so eventually, it's like saying
that there's a network effect
that people should be using,
remember the Osborne, the first portable computer?
Yeah, I had one of those, yeah.
Okay, there you go.
Typically, the first-
For my space.
The first people go bust,
and then they have everything going for them.
Even Apple almost went bust.
Right, no, it is surprising that Bitcoin
as the first has also been the largest.
That is a surprising thing.
It is a surprise.
So I'm sorry because of this time thing,
I'd love to reschedule and-
To be continued.
Okay, part two, computational irreducibility and-
Risk management, a daily risk.
Okay, sounds good.
Great, thanks, thanks.
Okay, see you.
Thanks a lot.
Thanks, bye now.
Bye, thank you.
Part two of our discussion with Nasim Talab,
and I think I wanted to talk about
kind of the relationship
between some of the things that Nasim thinks about,
about risk in the world
and how things happen in the world
and some of the things I think about
in computational irreducibility and science and so on.
And I guess one way that maybe one can think about this is
the sort of traditional view of science has been
in knowing what will happen in a sort of riskless fashion.
If this is the input,
science tells us this is what's going to happen.
And in a sense, computational irreducibility
is the story of the extent to which that is not possible.
That is, you might have thought
once you have a scientific theory of
how the pandemic is going to develop
or how the climate is going to change or whatever it is,
once you have a scientific theory, you're done.
You can figure out everything.
You can base your behavior on what's being
on that sort of scientific knowledge.
But one of the things that's come out of science I've done
is that that's just not true.
That science in a sense sort of eats itself
from the inside because even when you know
the scientific rules by which something should operate,
knowing what's actually going to happen
is something that's kind of computationally irreducible
where you can't sort of jump ahead
and figure out what's going to happen
by any mechanism that's much more efficient
than just running each step and seeing what happens.
So I'm kind of curious in a, you know,
when you think about sort of risk of things,
how does this kind of, you can't know what happens
as an internal feature of science,
how does that relate to kinds of thinking about risk?
I mean, I kind of tend to feel that often
when you talk about risk,
there's a notion of probabilities involved.
And in my view of science, I like to think
if science is complete, there is nothing left to chance.
You are describing everything.
And this is, but computational irreducibility says
even when you have the rules to describe everything,
you haven't solved the complete problem.
So today I posted an aphorism retreat
in which I explained that survival supersedes science.
And let me explain why risk management and science
are two different professions, so to speak.
And why one supersedes the other
because there's a conditioning on,
you need to survive to do science, you see?
So when people think of science,
they have this notion that it is a hardwired solution,
an answer to problems and that science is definitive, you see?
Whereas science itself is a mechanism,
it's a process, not an answer.
It's a process by which you have
the closest thing we know to the truth.
That's pretty much the most coherent and the most,
and the story that has the least amount of holes in it
for the time being.
You mean as a definition of science?
As, it's a methodology, science is a methodology, right?
I mean, definition of science, if you go literally,
it means to know, which is not quite how it's done.
And the preparant view of science,
which philosophers like and no longer like, all right,
is that science is fundamentally incomplete
and you're adding something and it must have holes in it
so we know where it doesn't work
and update progressively based on that.
So that's my understanding of science is that we know,
just as we know more today than we did 10 years ago,
or definitely, I don't know, 20 years ago,
we know a lot more than 20 years,
so therefore it's not complete, nothing is closed,
it's not settled.
I would slightly take issue
with that a personal logical point of view.
I think that science has traditionally been
along the lines of we'll make this model
for how the world works, our model is not complete.
Therefore, over time, we'll learn more
that will allow us to add more stuff to the model.
However, there is one exception.
If we have a fundamental model for physics,
we can potentially have a model which just nails it.
It's like, this is how the universe works.
There is a model and it is the universe.
Now, that's the good news, the bad news is,
we end up with this computational irreducibility phenomenon.
So even when we have this complete model,
we can't necessarily know what will happen,
but I think it isn't correct to say
that science is fundamentally incomplete.
There is a form of science that is...
Okay, so I see.
So you're telling me that there exists a science
that has captured everything in its field
and it is settled and definitive?
I'm saying that there is, I think there's this one case.
I mean, it's the one little footnote
to the usual story of science.
The one footnote is, except in the case
of the fundamental theory of physics,
because that's the case where it is conceivable
and we think we've actually managed
to get a framework for doing it,
that we can actually know that we're sort of,
we're done, we know the foundation.
Now, it's not relevant to everyday life.
It's completely irrelevant to everyday life,
but in terms of the kind of conceptual
epistemology of science.
Okay, so let's assume it's an exception or...
I think that we'll converse to
that we have conversion one domain, either it's the exception
or maybe the rule because we'll converge
and anything to that, but we don't,
but not yet, as you can say, that's the idea.
So, but still, I thought there'd be this caveat
that even when you think you have a theory of everything,
it should always be open to some revision
because you have no idea whether that framework is the...
So you said the right one.
I mean, they must...
That's the theory of miracles.
That's the long probability, sorry.
That's the theory of miracles.
I mean, that is, is the universe governed by definite laws
or are there occasionally miracles
that go outside of those laws?
I mean, I think that this is the level of description.
Okay, so this whole question about whether it's possible
to have a theory of everything
at the level of fundamental physics,
I think is irrelevant to everyday discussions of risk
and how people lead their lives.
I think from the point of view
of the fundamental epistemology of science,
it can be important, but I think it's irrelevant
to the sort of the everyday theories about,
I don't know, trading stocks or figuring out about pandemics
or anything like that.
So I think we can put it aside.
We can discuss it.
It's an interesting topic.
No, no, no, no, it'd be very interesting
to wonder whether it is...
You can state that this is complete,
but within the system, but that's another problem.
So I'm saying, so to go back to this representation,
the science as a methodology
that's supposed to get you somewhere.
And let's assume that it's incomplete
and most domains with some exceptions,
maybe your exceptions, okay?
That the problem of risk management
is that you don't need to understand the process, okay?
Before, you know, to take action
because understanding may come too late.
So therefore, I have the sort of like the guiding principle
of the inserto is that if I have uncertainty,
it's easier to make a decision.
Okay, under uncertainty than under certainty.
This water, for example, I'm uncertain about...
Let's assume that I give you a glass of water,
I tell you I'm uncertain about the purity of the water.
What would you do?
I don't know, smell the water.
See whether it smells disgusting.
First thing, you'd say no, okay?
You'd say I want this other glass of water, no?
There's a choice, yeah.
Okay, so the idea is there's uncertainty about the water.
I won't drink from it, okay?
I'll drink from something else, okay?
I have uncertainty.
Example I keep giving is I have uncertainty
about the skills of the pilot.
Someone tells me we're not sure about the pilot skills.
I get off the plane, you see?
I take another plane or I drive or I swim or do whatever, okay?
So the idea that the inserto behind the inserto
is how to make decisions under uncertainty
and it's actually very easy to make decisions
under uncertainty, okay?
So now comes the idea.
If all doors lead to uncertainty,
so there's doors A, B, and C, they're all uncertain.
Yes.
Then what do you do?
If I'm uncertain about the, then you're randomized.
If you have no other option, but it depends.
If it's to have fun, I'd go for the most uncertain, you see?
If it's to have, to protect my life
because I could be poisoned or I could, you know,
have a problem that terminates.
So this is where I put a rank risk management, okay?
I have layers, okay?
Whereas the first thing is you want to survive
because, yeah, they're mistakes you don't recover from.
So whatever strategy you do,
it needs to ensure not just your survival,
but the survival of your species, okay?
So you want to avoid that worst case scenario.
And when I ask people, what is your worst case scenario,
is it trained in economics?
The first answer is my death.
Okay.
And then I want to answer, no, that's not your death.
They got to be a layer above you, do you own pets?
So what's worse?
You die or you die plus your loved ones, your pets,
your loved one, your neighbor, everybody's humanity died.
So there are layers that are worse than your death, okay?
So we need to protect, hence they have precautionary measures
to protect important layers
that don't have expiration time from disappearing, okay?
Or don't have a reasonable expiration time.
Like for example, humanity is not supposed
to have an expiration time.
Well, I mean, it depends who you are, right?
I mean, you know, there are people who say,
you know, humanity is destroying the planet.
The planet is important to preserve.
I would, okay, there's a balance here,
because if we destroy the planet,
then we won't survive as well.
So there's a, here's the,
sometimes you have full discussions attending them.
So I'm trying to say,
they make the difference between risk management and science.
We've survived thanks to paranoia for hundreds of millions
of years, however you define our species, okay?
And we didn't have science and our intention is to survive
and we have the right instinct to survive.
And if you look at how a cat behaves,
it has the right instinct to survive.
So I say that risk management,
surviving supersedes science.
Or as Warren Buffett says it,
in order to make money, you must first survive.
It's not like you play Russian roulette, okay?
You die and then later on, you're gonna have a good run, okay?
You're absorbed.
There's an absorption.
You're absorbed.
There's an absorbing barrier you wanna avoid.
So that absorbing barrier is central for us
and it has layers of absorbing barriers.
Me, my species, humanity, you know, stuff like that.
The universe, for example.
The universe, whatever it is.
I don't wanna destroy the planet, okay?
So because it's not supposed to have an expiration time.
So anyway, so this is risk management
and why it's more important than knowledge, okay?
Because our knowledge is fundamentally incomplete,
except in cases like yours
that are either inapplicable or rare, okay?
Or both, in this case.
You have, you know, it's incomplete.
So we assume that it's incomplete
and we agree on that without anything further philosophical
disagreement, you know, philosophical back and forth.
We agree that if it's incomplete, science is incomplete,
I must survive and I'm not gonna wait for science
to be completed before making the decision, okay?
So the mechanism for risk management
become very different from scientific mechanism.
I don't know what you mean by science.
I mean, science, but you know, I think we'll,
let's come back to the question of the definition of science
and what science really is
and what science claims to be able to do.
I mean, let me say that in the world
as the world is using science,
it is overusing and abusing science.
Okay, this, I agree because I've used this argument before
by saying you're doing scientism, not science, okay?
But to make my argument stronger,
I say even if we do science properly,
it's not making claims about these things.
About what?
So it's not making claim about completeness, okay?
For example, we don't understand everything about viruses
and the enemy of virus.
For example, when the virus hit, okay, we know that,
but there are things we know from science, okay?
That is the fat tail process.
Well, we think we know things from science.
I mean, that's one of the issues is whether
but we know what we know.
Okay, so there is a judge, okay,
telling you how you trust your trustee
and then someone trusts the trustee,
the custodian of the custodian if you wish.
We have that in ranking statistical distributions.
Well, we don't have that in science.
I mean, in science-
But science is, if you notice that there's empirical science
and empirical science outside physics
where the variance of results is so small
as to be deemed deterministic, you see?
We have most other, what we call science,
like medicine is entirely statistical.
It's a strange kind of science.
Okay, so it is statistical where you have these p-values,
you have these notions that depend
on understanding probability distributions
and canned probability distribution.
And in the previous session, for those who were not here,
we showed how the large numbers,
Burr and the central limit theorem
are the backbone of all these methodologies
and why they don't hold in some domain
or they don't hold in some domain
in ways that you think they hold.
And medicine is particularly bad offender in that regard.
I mean, medicine is-
It's a cycle of economics.
Right, but I mean, medicine, it is implicitly assumed,
everything is assumed to be a Gaussian
and it's not true and it's a big mess.
Okay, but in medicine, there's something worse even
that the misunderstanding of the mechanism of science,
you know, we're digressing into it,
but to explain the following,
that when you do evidence-based science,
you're making claims about an aggregate,
you're not making claims about individuals.
Yep.
And a lot of people don't get that the claims made
about an aggregate hold for an aggregate,
not for individuals.
So even medicine is largely Gaussian actually,
the problem is not there with medicine,
the problem is p-values.
Wait a second, there's several different points.
I mean, so first of all, the question is,
it's a good thing to like look
at the distribution of results from blood tests, okay?
So some of them are nice and Gaussian.
Human heights are roughly Gaussian distributed.
Human weights are not, they're log normal.
The, you know, human-
Height technically isn't log normal.
Anything that's bounded at zero would be sort
of like log normal, but it's low or various.
Right, okay, fair enough,
but it's a pretty good approximation to a Gaussian.
Yes, yes.
But there are plenty of, you know, blood test results
that have nothing to do with Gaussian distributions.
They're really very different.
Yeah, yeah.
But the, I mean, we're progressing into,
but I mean, but let me make a point about that.
And I'm not worried about that
because in medicine, very often,
you're looking at decisions that are Gaussianized.
And to give you an example, if you do not,
to give you a very simple example,
the patient is gonna die or not die, okay?
We're not dealing with an unknown number
of patients who may die.
When you look at that, it becomes tail risk.
And this is where pandemics enter the game.
And pandemics are patently not Gaussian.
It has an effect.
Whereas in medicine, if blood test results are not Gaussian,
okay, the impact would be Gaussian
or be bounded to one person.
Therefore, you reenter a thin-tailed distribution somehow.
And that was in a paper,
and actually in the Black Swan,
where I said that individuals, right,
whatever you do for a turned individual
or is confined to an individual
can be approximated with a Gaussian for decision.
Okay, but once you have collectives, okay,
that becomes a non-Gaussian, in a medical field,
like you're, go ahead.
No, I mean, one of the issues with medicine is
we're all different.
And we're all, you know,
and medicine and medical tests and medical statistics
are based on this idea that somehow there is,
it is like physics,
where you can do that quantum experiment
and, you know, the electron will always be the same electron.
But humans are all different.
And that means that-
That's exactly my point.
That's exactly the point I'm trying, you know.
Exactly my point where the problem of,
in a lot of things, in IQ test, in a lot of things
where people start mixing groups and individuals.
Okay?
Yes.
If I want to know something about attributes of individuals,
okay, I may be inspired by results from a collective,
but they may not necessarily apply.
To give you an idea,
if we start, because a collective is more abstract
than an individual, to give you a very simple example,
if I take the average human,
then the average human must have one breast, all right?
And one testicle on average,
or maybe a little less because of, okay.
So, we cannot generalize.
And that's Ketli's problem in the discuss,
there's some discussion about it in the Black Swan.
It's trying to get norms flowing from the general
to the particular rather than going from particular
to the general.
You see?
But I think this idea that, okay, you take,
there are certain situations
in which taking statistical averages makes sense,
taking an average, as in a mean, for example,
taking the numbers two, one, zero, whatever makes sense.
There are others where it doesn't make sense at all,
even in physics,
there are places where that doesn't make sense.
And I think that that's a particularly simplistic way
of combining things is just saying,
we've got these numbers,
let's add them together, let's take the average.
I mean, it's, you know, there are plenty of places
where, you know, in physics, for example,
you know, that lots of things are quantized.
You could say, well, you know, on average,
the, you know, we've got this laser or something
that's got some, you know, we could say
the average energy is this,
but nothing is that that energy.
It's because there's these two different quantized levels.
I mean, it's the same kind of thing
as you were describing for humans.
I mean, there's some.
So we can use averages for some properties, okay?
But the problem is a lot of people have the feeling
that it's more scientific.
It's more scientific to ignore clinical experience
and clinical results as they apply to an individual.
And it's not because when I look at,
they don't even understand their own statistics.
The statistics only are making claims on aggregates.
For sure.
So if I treat the aggregates as one patient,
this is what we gotta give them.
Six, like I had this experience when I had COVID.
I had COVID and they ran a clinical trial in the UK.
That was very formal and discovered that they had,
that you must give steroids in six milligrams dosage.
Okay, so I read the thing and I started calling out doctors.
They said, well, that's a little time,
you know, that works.
I said, okay, I weigh 220 pounds, okay?
You have 145, you know.
People in the sample.
In the sample 145, okay?
So there's gotta be some variation.
That's the first one.
And two gotta be something idiosyncratic, age
and stuff like that, that you can increase the dosage.
And I realized that, for example,
why my situation was different from the aggregate, okay?
I was in Lebanon on the third floor of my house
with no contact with anyone.
Everything foods come in via an elevator, all right?
So therefore I had absolutely not the same risk class
as others and the reason they lower the dosage
is because of hospital viruses, you see?
So when you start going into particulars,
okay, you can use general results
and fix them to particulars, you see?
The, and also I'm gonna tell you about
when I talk about racism, for example,
racism is the same problem, all right?
Let's talk about that, but let's finish on medicine
for a second because I think there are interesting points
to make.
So one question is the current practice of medicine
is all about statistics.
You know, it's all about we've done this trial,
this happens, that happens.
What's the alternative view of medicine?
Alternative view of medicine is to have a theory,
but medicine is extremely allergic to theories.
That is, you could say, you know, if, you know,
you should take steroids because we have this model
that shows how steroids are absorbed in the lungs
and it produces this and it does that.
Medicine has been a field, unlike physics, for example,
which has had a great time with theories.
Medicine has had, has decided that theories are doomed.
That is, because the alternative to saying,
let's just follow what the statistical averages say,
would be to say, we have a model for Nassim's lungs
or something and we're going to say, based on that model,
we're going to work out that he should have
two milligrams of steroids and, or, you know,
eight milligrams of steroids or whatever it is.
But that's the thing that is even more, you know,
that's the thing for whatever reason,
and I think it's a sort of society of science type reason,
is very, people, you know, people have gotten the idea
that there is no theory for biology.
There's no theory for medicine and there can't be a theory.
And people say, for example, in biology,
they say, and they're wrong, by the way,
but they say there can't be a theory
because everything is just the result of natural selection.
So in other words, that the way we are
is because of a bunch of historical accidents.
I mean, I should be curious what your point of view is.
And I, the only thing I understand
is how people make a mistake going from a general
to a particular, you see, or from a particular to the general.
And I gave the example recently because it's very similar.
Like, for example, if you want to make a decision
on who to hire to run a marathon, right?
Do you say, okay, I'm gonna interview someone
who runs marathons, or are you gonna say,
okay, I'm gonna find me an Ethiopian
who's born, you know, from this tribe, okay?
No, I'm gonna find someone who's gonna run the marathon.
You don't take whatever physical characteristics
of a group and then try to flow from it.
You use different criteria, okay?
So the mistake of evidence-based medicine
is that they often make the mistake of saying,
okay, let's bring an Ethiopian to run a marathon,
or let's bring a Swede to lift,
or sorry, a Bulgarian to wait, all right?
Because statistically, Bulgarians are better at deadlifts,
whatever it is, okay?
So let's go bring a Bulgarian.
No, I mean, you don't have to go call up
the Bulgarian consulate, all right?
You go to the gym.
So that's the idea that sometimes you use the wrong general.
Right, so that's the general.
So particularizing the general is a mistake
that is made in medicine.
In your case, you're saying, okay,
we may have a central model, okay?
And they're allergic to what in economics,
they call structural form versus reduced form.
That medicine doesn't mind reduced form,
but they're allergic to a more general form,
and that is because of the heritage of medicine,
historically, because of the problem
of the two branches of medicine,
that there was a tecnean episteme.
There was the barbers who became surgeons,
and they were lower class people,
and they had a lot of knowledge,
and then often they're called even empirics
because it was not considered good,
and the rest was dealt with by theologians,
who would sit down and there's a nice anecdote,
the mother of Louis XIV died of breast cancer,
not a single doctor saw her.
That's interesting.
It was just my theories.
They're cured by, you see the idea.
So this is why the history of medicine,
and the reason we're alive today
is because we're taken over by the barbers and the surgeons
who were lower class people working with their hands,
unlike the bishops and the upper class philosophers
who thought that they were running the field,
and the field today is a compromise,
but infectively, if you see how it's taught,
it's a pseudo story because they put you
to some medical school, they make you study
either molecular biology, molecular chemistry,
or molecular biology, and organic chemistry,
and all kind of stuff,
and then tell you, forgot about everything,
now you're in a hospital,
and this is where you start learning.
Yeah.
So it is still run by a model apprenticeship
in the model of just like you learned carpentry
or something like that.
I mean, it's a complicated issue.
I mean, this whole education thing,
and is it worth doctors learning calculus?
And one of my observations about medical folk
is most doctors can read a graph.
Many fewer can read histograms, many fewer,
of even quite respectable practice in doctors.
But should doctors learn calculus?
I mean, that becomes a sort of societal question
of what do you want the sort of threshold
of kind of ability to learn things, and so on,
to be to say, okay, this person's gonna be a doctor.
So I think it's a,
but this idea that everything is just based
on kind of case law, so to speak.
Everything is based on what you've seen before,
and that's sort of one approach,
which is probably not bad.
And then the kind of,
the more scientific overlay on that
is the statistical approach of saying,
we'll do this because evidence-based medicine
says the p-value of this is such and such.
Yes.
So let's talk about the statistical approach to medicine.
It's a mess, because what happened is,
unless you have Mathematica,
I'm not doing this to praise Mathematica,
but I do Monte Carlo's about what you get.
You don't have a feel for what you're doing.
You see, these people take like recipes,
this is a p-value.
And I wrote a paper that I was like accepted in a journal
provided I simplify it.
I say, fuck you, I'm not simplifying it
because it's simple enough.
They couldn't get that p-value is a random variable.
If I have an ensemble,
and it has one property, the p-value,
is that say the true p-value is 0.12,
it means that you repeat the same experiment
and you get a long-term distribution around 0.12.
53% of the observation will be below 0.05.
Okay.
So it means that you can get a 0.01 by repeating
two or three times the experiment, okay?
Was it the same knowing the p-value is 0.12?
So therefore, they don't get the p-value is stochastic.
So the idea is that my war in economics and elsewhere
is with people who use a statistical concept
without having figuring them out themselves.
If you don't have them derived yourself
by getting a feel what is, as we did last time
with a lot of large numbers,
you don't talk about large numbers
unless you've tried it and seen the result, you see?
So we classify people between what I call
the probability driven statistician
and what I call the cookbook statistician.
So take a cookbook, they give you,
this is the statistic, we're gonna do this, okay?
So in finance, we have a horror stories
with people using the Gaussian, all right?
But tell you, oh, it's not Gaussian,
but then they use a variance,
which only works if it's Gaussian.
If it's Gaussian, it's a metric that doesn't have
information elsewhere or correlation
that only has information, it's a relationship,
it's linear, you see?
Yeah, go ahead.
So one thing that applies to medicine,
to give you two or three examples,
I have a medical blog, I don't know if you know,
I have a medical errors on statistical errors
in medicine, and that took time
where they sometimes, someone was talking
about the golden ratio by using the blood pressure
of individual, the ratio of blood pressure
of systolic to diastolic supposedly should be 1.6, what?
One something that the-
1.20 over 80 or something, what is 1.20 over 80?
No, it's not 1.20 over 80, it's something else that-
But they changed it.
No, it should be the golden ratio, all right?
1.61 something, and the problem is it took
the average systolic divided by the average diastolic
rather than taking the average systolic
over the diastolic across the population, all right?
So you know, they got problems with that elementary thing
we spoke about last time, a function of an average
not average of a function, you see?
And you can recurse, if I had to just focus
on one point for the rest of my life,
the function of an average or the moments of an average
not the, sorry, the moments of a function
are not the function of the moment.
I think-
Yes.
The base problem is medicine wants to have
the authority of science, it needs to find a way to do that.
It goes to statistics to get that.
The idea that medicine is a case-based business
where it's just like, oh, I've seen a case like that
before, this is what we should do.
That's what in practice, better practitioners
end up doing.
The alternative would be, let's have a good model
of the human body and let's figure out by theory
what should happen in this or that case.
And people have accepted defeat on that approach
and don't think it can possibly work.
And so instead, they're searching
for sort of scientific certainty
and they think they find that in the statistics
of clinical trials and things like this.
And I think that that's, the problem is
people believe in science
and people have a largely religious at this point
belief in certain aspects of science.
And that's been, that is reflected, for example,
in people's need, I think, to say,
the medical result is, the evidence-based medicine result
is because they want something definite.
And that's the place to get something definite.
At the risk of really destroying many more fields,
I think there's a rule.
If you need the p-value
or if you need statistical results at a time.
Yes.
Because, and that applies to psychology is a lot worse.
Because the psychology is a lot more bullshit
and they have longer papers and fewer results
and no surgeons and stuff.
And so psychology, medicine, economics, oh my God.
And it feels like financial economics,
subfields, entrepreneurship, all that bullshit.
So they have, whenever you need statistics to drill a point.
I agree.
Okay.
I made this point myself.
It's not a science.
Now, there are some cases where you can do it properly
by saying, okay, I'm making claims about an aggregate
and I can see stuff, right?
They are, but most of the population of practitioners
or researchers, they don't get it right.
And we know from a lot, I mean,
and also the problem is the areas
that are in fact non-Gaussian.
So to tell you that the rule is N of one,
it's a clinical consideration
where you have a doctor, patient, it's clinical.
You need to know medicine.
N of 100, it becomes a statistical problem.
N of humanity was pandemic.
It's a Taylorist problem.
And the three are three different disciplines.
Yeah.
Well, look, and the results you get from N of 100,
some of it may not flow down or up.
It definitely don't flow up.
Look, my point of view is anytime when you need
to use fancy statistics like p-values
to tease out a conclusion,
the conclusion is deeply suspect.
I mean, the fact is people invented all that stuff
in the 1930s and so on.
When they were doing agricultural statistics
and things like this, where it was hard
to get a lot of data, in many fields today,
it's easy to get tons and tons of data.
And you see in lots of things I do, for example,
you can just see, okay, it's not clear what's going on,
just get more data.
And then you plot this graph and you can see
the whole thing is clustered in one corner
or another corner and you can make a definite conclusion.
I think the issue in medicine,
one of the problems is that this idea of clustering things,
I mean, it's deeply flawed because people are so different.
There are, when you do some clinical trial,
you're aggregating together as your example
of steroid dosing and so on indicates,
you're aggregating together all these things
which may, for theoretical reasons,
have utterly different results.
But you're just putting them together
and you're saying, we'll use statistics
which somehow is some scientifically magical thing
to tease out an answer.
But I have one point in defense of one methodology, okay?
And I don't know if you've heard about
the hydrochloroquine stories with people clustering.
They vote Trump, they like hydrochloroquine,
stuff like that, and the beauty of having the control group,
okay, would have a placebo or not placebo.
It doesn't have to be placebo,
having the proper control group,
randomly selected individuals,
you give them a direct word or something like that.
You notice that hospitals where hydrochloroquine
was successful, have a lower mortality rate,
effectively had populations that were younger.
Okay.
And your rate of death from COVID
doubles every 10 years, approximately,
beyond the age of 50.
So you realize if you have a 10 year younger population,
you're gonna have the death rate.
Right.
So, and you can even shoot for younger
as someone I won't mention did.
So therefore, their methodology of double,
you know, the double blind,
or not necessarily it has to be double blind,
but the randomized control trial,
that you take a population and you want it to be as close,
okay, the population that has the medication
to be as close to the population that doesn't have it.
So you can see an effect without all these things.
So there are some tricks that they do
that are have value, of course.
It's just that the results that they get, okay,
designed for the general,
you need to retranslate back from the general
to the particular.
Well, there are many other problems with clinical trials.
I mean, you know, the whole technology
of who do you have in a clinical trial
is a very bizarre business.
Because, you know, there's a lot of,
oh, you know, you don't qualify for the clinical trial
because, well, actually we think the drug
is not gonna work on you for this or that reason.
And, you know, it's the, I'm sure this happens,
analogous things happen in, you know,
in plenty of finance situations.
You know, we won't have you in this clinical trial
because, you know, you don't qualify for this reason,
which is in fact a proxy for the clinical trial
is gonna fail on you.
I mean, I think, you know, the interesting case
for clinical trials is genuinely personalized medicine.
How do you deal with that?
Is there any statistical way to deal with that?
In other words, if you say, you know,
we're all, everybody is different,
everybody has a different genome sequence,
you know, it's going to depend on some unknown aspect
of the genome sequence, what happens?
Now, you could say, well, just, I mean, you know,
it seems difficult to maintain this idea
that everything is based on statistics
if you are actually recognizing the fact
that people have a immense diversity
of different, you know, medical characteristics.
This I agree fully with you.
And it's the problem that needs to be solved
outside that Fisher or these theories
that came out of the bad statistical method.
They were, they came from heuristic statistics
rather than understanding the fundamental probability thing.
And they had their heuristic, right?
If it's NF30, then it's Gaussian,
therefore this, this, this, this and a lot of mistakes.
And I see even further mistakes,
like for example, correlation.
Correlation is a metric that has no meaning, all right?
Outside linear relationships.
And I have a paper called Food by Correlation on, you know,
on the web, waiting to be fixed.
And that Food by Correlation papers,
you're not supposed to show a bunch of things,
like for example, a lot of paradoxes that people don't know.
Okay.
That it's not transitive.
And the mistakes are made usually by psychologists
because in medicine, medicine is gold
compared to social science.
Social science is a mess.
It's a complete mess.
You know, one of the things you say that,
one of the things I've noticed is,
if you look at things like statistics
of people visiting websites,
then you look at the detailed behavior of people
when they visit a website.
One thing that has, I've been really struck by
is you look at curves for, you know,
the time interval between people clicking this
and clicking that and so on.
They are wonderfully smooth and quite tight curves.
In other words, there is some, you know,
there are some principles of human behavior,
which we don't happen to know,
but which are surprisingly predictable.
So in other words, you might have thought
psychology, things like that will just be a mess
because nothing is predictable.
I think that's not true.
I think we don't know how to predict it,
but I don't think it's true that there's nothing there,
that there's no possibility of a kind of Newtonian science
of those kinds of things.
I think there can be, we just don't know what it is.
Maybe I have a little statement,
nasty statement in skin in a game,
where I explained two things.
I said, anything you hear about statistics,
that works, that is not bullshit,
or okay, you can find it,
you should find it in Erasmus,
who compiled the classics about 500 years ago, all right?
So if you don't find it in Erasmus, it doesn't exist.
So once a statistician jumped on,
the one psychologist jumped on me,
say, you idiot, cognitive dissonance, all right?
That's a new concept, it didn't exist.
I said, you know, you can find it.
Erasmus, because you have portal to the classics,
or Montana or someone, of course you find it.
It's the sour grapes.
Ah, yeah, well what?
Which way precedes the Greeks,
because a lot of these Greeks, you know, fables,
existed already with the Assyrians.
I didn't know that, but it was a surprise.
Like I found a bunch of them in Assyrian texts
in Assyrian texts that preceded the Greeks
by about 8,900 years and they're not that well known.
It's a narrow field of seriology.
It's an interesting fact that human nature
has not changed throughout recorded history.
So our ancestors know so much more in that field.
You see, they may not know physics,
but they know a lot of us things.
So I said, whatever is not there, okay, OzR is bullshit.
And as we know, you know,
there's all these tricks that psychologists
try to figure out about humans.
The other statement I said,
if it's not an Erasmus explicitly,
or it must be known by used car salespeople.
All right, and effectively, you know,
all these Richard Taylor theories and stuff like that
were well known by advertising agencies.
How to manipulate people.
And the third category of people who know it,
so it said Erasmus, used car people and magicians.
Magicians had long before them known
about all these optical illusions
and illusions that you can have attentive, you know,
all these things that psychologists know.
So basically, some field have brought nothing
to our knowledge of human nature.
If not a degradation,
because they give us about 55% of the paper
don't replicate.
Well, right, but you know, one of the questions is,
you know, science, we were starting off talking
about science and what science could do.
And there's a certain model
for what kind of a thing science can do.
And there's a question when it comes to psychology,
for example, are there things of a kind which science,
as we currently imagine science can do or not?
And is it, you know, is psychology kind of a thing?
You know, could there be a Newtonian type theory
of psychology, which we just don't happen
to know what it is.
For example, you know, or to take a simpler case,
probably as immunology, you know,
we actually are very ignorant about how immunology works.
And, you know, there could perfectly well be
kind of a Newtonian like theory of that.
We just don't happen to know what it is yet.
And there are other things where I suspect
that fundamentally can't be a Newtonian like theory
of those areas.
I mean, I think that what-
To go back to what you called Newtonian theory,
if I understand, let me rephrase it so I understand it.
Okay, that's the way I understand it.
Newtonian theory means that you don't have to catalog
or describe every apple falling from every tree.
Okay, particulars.
I can have a general model by which I know how apples fall
and reapply it to how apples fall.
Yes.
If apples fall under the same, you know, equation,
they all must fall the same way.
Right.
What you call for Newtonian theory, okay?
Yes.
And that's exactly the mistake that people are making.
They think they have Newtonian theory
or they have the evidence-based thing.
Yes.
Because they've taken the average apples,
whereas it applies to every single apple, you see.
Right, but notice an important point.
You know, one of the things that physics has achieved
is it's built these pretty big towers of theories.
That is, you start off from some underlying set of principles
and you build this whole tower.
This follows from this, this follows from this,
et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
Mathematics has probably built the tallest such towers,
but physics has built fairly tall towers.
In medicine, I don't think they build towers.
If they did, they would all fall down.
And what you're describing, you know,
this function of an average, average of a function and so on,
that's the lowest level effort to build a tower
and it will collapse.
I mean, in other words, you could say, you know,
that's a difference between a kind of science
where you can build a tower and a kind of science
where you have one, you know, fact result
that you can't build on top of it.
And probably some of the errors you're describing
are attempts to build on this kind of sand-based foundation
that you get from taking essentially
these statistical results in medicine.
Yeah, I would add one thing to your thing,
that different explicit knowledge, right,
which was easy to grasp and more, I would say, fuzzy.
But, you know, you know, you can't phrase it very well
because it's more complicated to be expressed
and, but you understand sort of how it behaves.
So the Newtonian physics is an explicit theory.
Yeah.
Sometimes you have fields where you have
what we call experience, which is not an experience theory,
but in general way of identifying how apples fall
and knowing which one is going to hurt itself
and stuff like that.
So it's more of, it was called technique versus episteme.
Which means what?
Technique, episteme, technique.
Knowledge of the art.
One is not easy to put down in a neat form.
The other one is explicit.
So explicit versus tacit,
or explicit versus a little more complicated.
Well, so you might say experience-based
versus theory-based.
Exactly.
So the problem I had with statistician
is to explain that there is something
called clinical experience,
which doesn't generalize and it's not making claims
about general and making claims about particulars.
And they don't have a name for it.
They don't think it exists.
So they say, well,
either we have theory or empirical, you know, branches.
Okay.
And I'm trying to explain there's a clinical one,
which is very robust.
And what saved medicine so far is a clinical approach,
not the empirical approach.
You see, medicine has no theoretical approach,
although they claim to have one.
All right.
They have a so-called empirical approach,
evidence-based that works sometimes, but not really.
All right. You have to know how to fudge it.
And then they have a third one,
which is a clinical approach.
And I know from a clinical approach,
a good clinician would look at a patient,
oh my God,
or the patient doesn't open her or his mouth,
and they immediately take the person to the emergency room
and the person having heart attack, right?
The person doesn't know it.
Okay. They look and they see the sign
and that's clinical experience.
Like 50, 60 years of practicing.
But if you look at the textbooks in medicine,
and I'm talking about from the textbook from,
I mean, you know, the big main ones,
the one taught in Europe till recently,
because I was interested in text written
in Semitic languages,
but the Persian, you know, of course,
I've said now, or by Maimonides, right?
Maimonides.
I don't know.
He wrote a medical textbook? Maimonides?
I have a text of medical aphorisms,
and he wrote an Arabic,
and actually his normal name to say been my moon,
his name is, even Obaidullah, that was his name,
and he wrote an Arabic, right?
And he has, and he constantly referred to certain Jalinos.
Jalinos mean gallon, so there's a succession.
So Maimonides, and you look at, and it's all theory.
If this happens, and the humor like this,
and this happened like that, then this must happen,
and then you have to apply cold, right?
So they're trying to make these little theoretical,
I mean, these hard statements, right?
So someone can read the book,
but in fact, it doesn't work that way.
People learn from seeing patients.
Well, I mean, the developing experience.
What you're describing, and I'm curious actually,
to what extent that's, I haven't looked at Galen
in a very, very long time, and I had no idea that, Tim.
Galen dominated, Galen actually was lost
in Greek text, and it was recovered in Syria.
It was very present in Syriac test,
because in the ancient world,
the Syriacs were the doctors, all right?
The Caldeans were the, they'll start.
The Astrologians.
Sorry?
The Caldeans were the Astrologians.
You've got Astrologers, and Syriacs.
They both wrote in Semitic languages,
derived from Babylonian, from Semitic languages.
And the, I think a lot of the text came
from Aramaic, from, I mean, the Syrian Aramaic,
the Syrian dialect of Aramaic, the Syriac, called Syriac,
or, and then it'll translate into Aramaic.
So I'm translating into Aramaic directly.
Some taken up by a person like,
my model is referring to them.
I have it right upstairs, but I can give you a sample.
It's so funny.
It's hilarious.
Well, how similar is it to, you know,
in current, you know, current clinical practice?
There are these books that basically say, you know,
if you see these symptoms,
this is the decision tree for what must be going on.
This is what you should do.
How similar are those modern ones?
They are similar, except they didn't have
what they call evidence at a time, control experiment.
So it's just an impression.
And if you do, if you see this, do that.
Yes, very similar.
Well, how much worse were they?
Then the, I mean, how much has the,
has apart from drugs, which are a whole different story
because drugs have a quite different elaborate chemistry
that didn't exist back in those days.
Well, most of it.
I mean, the drugs existed a lot.
They have recipes for drugs, enormous recipes for drugs.
Yeah, right.
And they had all these plant, you know,
these things that said, look at a plant
with these kinds of leaves and use it for this.
Okay. So the way I'm gonna find similarities
is that we had knowledge in a lot of domains
in the ancient past.
Some domains of knowledge wasn't great,
but it helped us survive, okay, in medicine.
And the surgery was good, okay?
Because you could see the results,
there was very little bullshit.
And it was a, in Europe, it was a different past
from the other one.
They didn't have anesthesia, which was kind of a bad thing.
Then they didn't have anesthesia,
but they still saved lives, right?
And then they had alcohol.
And then they knocked you out or something.
They had waste, all right?
So, and then the other branch that we should look at,
that was monstrously successful.
And a catalog on antifragile,
how it preceded knowledge in it, preceded science,
or technique preceded epistemic is engineering.
The Romans had phenomenally, and we had recipes,
then that definitely were vastly more effective than medicine,
okay, because it's an easier field,
you would say, less complex in engineering.
And they had self-reinforcing concrete,
the concrete that under stress gets stronger.
And recipes we have lost completely.
And then the other thing, the interesting thing
is to say that perhaps they were saved from theory, okay?
Is that I have a tableau of,
I call it learn a teaching birds how to fly.
Like teaching birds how to fly means,
whether it's, the field comes from academia
and the practice follows, because if you read
the Wikipedia entry, or I don't know,
today's Wikipedia entry, what it is,
but you see that technology is seen as something
that's application of science to practical affairs.
Where in fact, I have a different route in mind,
the practice leads to technology, which leads to science.
And later on, those write the books are the scientists.
So to take the very simple case of engineering, right?
They were building cathedrals,
they were building that using heuristics.
Right, right.
10 people in Europe at the time
they were building new Euclidean geometry.
And they use it as mind puzzles.
Sure.
Okay, so the idea of science driving with these fields,
so there's a field vastly more interesting,
but it's not statistical engineering.
That is entirely clinical,
I say clinical empirical and theoretical.
Okay, that's entirely clinical.
And people forget that this must be a model
for a lot of other fields.
I think it's interesting that what you say about engineering
didn't get written down.
I mean, the science, the abstract science,
people wrote books about it and the books were passed down.
In engineering, the sort of engineering manuals,
maybe of the Freemasons or whoever,
didn't, those things didn't get passed down.
The same things happening with software engineering.
There isn't, the artifacts of software engineering
aren't particularly preserved,
relative to theoretical works on those kinds of things.
But I think, I mean, your point about the,
I think there are also cases where the science
has preceded the technology,
where in order to do the technology,
you need a certain amount of science.
I mean, I think in, there are certainly examples.
That's a good example.
What's that?
Like which example?
Take rockets, they're a good example.
You need to understand.
Okay, I have a very interesting story for rockets.
The jet engine.
Yes.
I had a bunch of texts here on the jet engine.
I discovered, one day I was talking about
the electoral formula at the London School of Economics.
And I was telling them,
listen, we had a vastly more sophisticated formula
for 200 years, and this is how we did prices.
And then the minute someone started using
the Gaussian distribution, our knowledge degraded, okay?
And so I give them the story.
A fellow came and told me,
but of course you have the story of the jet engine.
You don't know it.
He said, what?
I said, yeah.
For a long time, there were the jet engine.
The theory came later.
Yeah.
No, I mean, it's sure.
It's like the Wright brothers.
The Wright brothers, what needed to be invented there
was not a theory of aerodynamics.
It was what you might think of as engineering common sense
about control surfaces and so on.
But I mean, I think it's some,
I'm not quite sure, one of the points about science,
what is science and what do people think science can do?
I mean, there's a,
for some people, science is what happened
in the sort of Newtonian type period
of writing down formulas,
figuring things out from formulas and so on.
And we, for example, that's the thing
to which medicine, for example, is quite allergic.
Medicine doesn't think there are formulas.
I'm glad they are allergic to that for one reason,
because unless you do it right,
well, it was no error.
Why is it that you guys don't use no p-value?
Because when I compute p-values in physics,
I get 10 to the minus 15.
Yeah.
Which is the variation in the experiment,
not variation in the process.
Well, a great example of epidemiology
and the success or lack thereof
of epidemic predictions was an interesting case,
because a lot of people said,
we've got this scientific epidemiology model,
it's going to predict all these things,
let's make decisions based on these models.
And it turns out the models were wrong.
It wasn't surprising the models were wrong,
because, you know.
We wrote a paper saying, it's called on the error
of making a single point estimate
when you have a problem with your solution, you see?
And the error is made by,
and I said the error had been made by two people,
by the people who wrote these models
making a prediction, all right?
Because it's a distribution that has so much variance,
you can't make a single prediction,
you describe what can happen,
and it's fat-tailed, okay?
And the second, therefore you don't observe the average,
you see, you observe realization of the average.
And the second error is made by those who criticize them,
by saying, oh, your projections didn't play out,
you see?
So both were wrong.
So we wrote a paper called on, it was a fight we had.
It started with a Twitter, you know, comment,
which de-jointed into a paper with my colleagues.
We have discovered that the fat-stailed
random variable on the planet is by far pandemics.
And you take 500 pandemics, and we know they're fat-tails,
you remove half, you remove this,
you find that it's very robust.
Now that's a way to approach the process by saying,
this is scientific result that is fat-tailed,
and the same scientific result tells you, right,
that your methods of trying to look for the mean don't work,
okay, because this would call the dog being wagged
by the tail, okay?
So because it's all, the information is all in a tail,
and you don't see the tail.
So when we made that statement that we had a fight
with Ioannidis, he said, oh, let's wait
for scientific results to come before we take action
on a pandemic.
So yeah, let's wait for a car accident
before we put the seatbelt on.
This is the same kind of statement.
So the paper, and I think I sent you a copy of that paper
because I did the graph with Mathematica, right?
And I like, you know, I'm not as good as Diego,
here in the room with Mathematica,
but I'm, you know, one day I got close to Diego, all right?
So it was graphs anyway.
So I did the graph by showing an example
of if I have a log-normal distribution,
not even a fat-tailed distribution, okay?
With a high variance log-normal distribution
that you can have 95% of observations below the mean.
So how are you gonna make a prediction?
You're gonna be 95% wrong, all right?
If you get the mean right, you see?
So, and the second point, which is in dynamics of things,
is that in dynamic process, in other words,
where we have the feedback from people
in form of decisions, is that you see the predictions
are either self-canceling or self-fulfilling.
Yeah, so in this case, they were largely self-canceling
because it's like, if you predict the terrorist attack,
it won't happen, all right?
It's self-canceling.
But in the case of people who had caution
and it's self-canceled, but however,
I'm gonna say one thing about the models used
is that I saw you and Diego and your son
make these several automaton models
that were vastly more robust.
So in one afternoon, you guys nailed the model
or trying to do these things, vastly more robust
than everything they had in academia.
So I would say more robust.
I would say more revealing,
at least the things Christopher worked on.
The main thing was that you could tell you couldn't tell.
That is-
I guess the subject of today,
which is the computational irreducibility.
Yes, well, but I think in that case,
see the way I see the pandemic,
there are some sort of signs
of sort of computational irreducibility in modeling,
but there's an awful lot of just science we don't know.
And I think that the problem is people assume
you know some science, and oops, there.
No, no, no, I just have to pick up a call.
I'm urgent, so one second, one second, one second.
No, no, no.
yourself. Yeah.
Do you have a reference for the cellular
automata stuff you're talking about?
Well I think that was, Christopher wrote
some stuff. If you look on Christopher
ChristopherWolfin.com. There is a lively
conversation happening in Zoom chat.
Yes well so let's let's see who would
like to, I feel like it would be great
to open up this conversation.
Who would like, who has a good
question or comment that, okay James has
one. All right let's let's start off with
James and then we'll go to other people
as we can. Well I think it's two days ago.
Let's wait for him to come back and
let's, yeah, hello again. Okay we're
sort of opening this up to the
audience here. So I think we had,
let's, should we finish this thought and
then we had some comments and
questions from people.
I'd like to put the little, just a little
refresher because so I, so just for
myself, I don't drown, okay, that you
came with the approach that, a way to do,
there is a way, formal way to do science,
okay, that is similar to physics, the way
physics was done and, and, and why it's
properly done in physics and gave
results, you know, that may be not be
never, never beautiful results somewhere
and I was talking about the exception
as well as you did and why some fields
are allergic to such approach.
Economics is not, economics has physics
envy, they say, or the other one, so
could they be a different, every field,
and like engineering, every field has
own
properties? Yes. Or it could be something
general, that's, that's one and, and my
claim is that when you do statistical
things, the general is very different
from the particulars, whereas in physics
the general is not different from
particulars, okay. Well, right, I mean the
question is repeatability and the
problem in medicine is, medicine is a
fundamentally non-repeatable field, I
mean as an experimental field, because
all people are different, you know, when
you take x number of milligrams of, of
steroids or something, it will do
something different from when somebody
else, just because of what they ate or
what exercise they took or whatever
else, it will be, it is, it is deeply
non-repeatable, whereas physics, every
electron, for reasons that we think we're
beginning to understand, every electron
is actually the same, whereas humans are
all different, and I mean that's a,
that's a major sort of dividing line, I
would say, between those, those fields,
is, is, you know, it is, it's to have
something where you, now, now having
noticed that, you can then say there
can't be any theory in medicine, there
can't be any kind of chain of
consequences that you can draw about, you
know, this chemical causes this, causes
this, and so what you have to do is just
say, well let's just do the clinical
trial and see what happens, and you know,
I think, I mean, I'm, I mean, the thing to
me that is surprising is, you know,
historically, you know, pre-copernicus, I
think people probably generally thought,
if I can't figure it out with my own
common sense, that isn't true, whereas
Copernicus was sort of the dividing line
where, you know, Copernicus said, look,
you know, the Earth is going around the
Sun, even though we can't tell that the
Earth is going around the Sun, but the
science shows that Earth is, the Earth
is going around the Sun, and then, you
know, 400 years later, 500 years later,
you know, we built this giant tower, but
as soon as somebody says science shows
X, people say, oh that must be true then,
and I think that's a, and you know, I
think what you're saying is, you know,
but there's a, you know, statistics
provides a veneer of science in an even
worse way than some other kinds of sort
of scientific predictions work. I mean,
you know, as soon as you say statistically,
there is this number, 3.72, and you know,
that sounds very convincing and very
scientific, and you know, then people
base a lot of stuff on it, and I think
you're pointing out that
basing stuff on statistical results is
even more hopeless than basing stuff on,
on them.
No, right.
No, I mean, basing stuff on kind of these
cases where you can do theory, and yeah,
I mean, it's, it's, you know, I think the
the blind assumption that science knows
what it's doing in the modern world is
kind of, it's kind of bizarre to begin
with, but it's particularly doomed when
the science is merely a veneer of science
provided by putting numbers in statistics.
At least that's what I'm talking about.
Okay, I would say something, you know, I
agree that, that
with you, would I say one thing is that
what we see is coming from statistics is
by people who are using
cookie cutter type methods in statistics.
So one, you have statistical errors, and
that has been my specialty when I was a
trader, that was it. It's mispricing
because people were using the wrong formula.
Otherwise, I had no business, all right.
Without black trolls, I would have never
had a business, you see.
Thanks to science, okay, I had a
business. If it was no science, I would
never had a business, all right, because
and the second one, and the second
statement that I want to make is
that there is, there exists a very, very,
very rigorous way to work with statistics.
Okay, but it requires a little more,
not relying on these metrics, okay, taking
metrics and stuff like that.
See, it requires, because metrics can be
gained, and there is a way to deal with
probably, I call it the probabilistic
approach to problems, not the statistical
approach. Why use probability? Because
probability is more general and doesn't
have cookie cutter formulas.
Well, you're saying that, basically, if
you deal with the whole probability
distribution, and you look at what happens
to the whole probability distribution,
you can conclude things.
Or not, just look at it.
The whole probability, the concept of
probability.
Okay.
You see, the whole methods, probabilistic
methods. A probability distribution is a
simple subset of the ensemble probabilities.
And there are also things, and I think
there's a person in the room here, Trichonk,
who argues a lot about meta problems,
that how can probability, and we realize
probability distribution cannot tell you
what probability distribution is coming
from.
That was the first paper I ever wrote.
It's called, on the problem of not
observing probability distribution, you
don't observe it.
So, and what methodology do you need,
okay, to, and then I said, okay, you can
start, you can have a hierarchy of
distributions.
If I observe a tale of a large deviation,
I can rule out Gaussian.
Okay, so it is very similar to
preparing falsification.
I can rule out that this thing is
degenerate.
Degenerate means no distribution,
and things moving.
And, okay, if I see something, 10 sigma
events, I can, it's much more likely
that the distribution is not Gaussian.
It's 10 to the 100 times more likely
the distribution not Gaussian.
Right?
Than it being a 10 to the 10 event of
such low probability in a Gaussian.
Okay?
So, you can rank them and rule out what
it can be, and also use some scientific
theories to rule out that human height
is fat tailed.
Because if human height were fat tailed,
okay, you'd have, most people have to
have a mother.
So, you have to have a womb.
That's another human height being fat
tailed means once in a while you observe
someone who has a thousand come out at
all.
Okay?
So, this we can rule out on scientific
grounds, based on the way humans are
built and the way they scale and all of
that.
So, you can rule out.
So, you can put structure into
distributions.
So, the idea is if you're going to use
probability distributions, use it right.
And the problem is they waste their
time on details of things.
And then the other thing is do not go
to conclude this section.
In physics, you can go from general to
the particular and from particular to
the general, seamlessly.
In medicine, you can go from particular
to the general.
But you cannot go back from general to
the particular that easily.
And that's a mistake people make in
evidence-based science.
Yes, yes, yes.
Yeah, one of the most shocking
functions that we've added recently is
this function called learn distribution,
which is a machine learning-based
function that, given data, like a bunch
of pictures of cats and dogs, will try
and learn the distribution of pictures.
It's a very weird function.
And the extent to which it works,
and it works okay, is kind of interesting
because the extent to which it works is
a reflection of what are the typical
distributions of things that exist in
the world.
In other words, what's that, what are the
distribution of distributions, so to
speak.
And anyway, I, you know, I do, I'm
just curious, it's just a general
knowledge-type thing about doctors.
I've observed the following thing.
I'm curious whether you've observed the
same thing or different things and so on,
which is, you know, about probabilistic
estimates by doctors.
So if you deal with a young doctor,
you know, you have some symptoms, you
know, there are a bunch of possible
diseases.
Young doctors tend to overestimate
rare diseases.
Old doctors tend to overestimate
common diseases.
That's my observation, at least I don't
know whether, and the reason I assume
is because, you know, in medical school,
it's a question of a priori probabilities.
In medical school, you're presented with
all these weird cases of all these weird
things that, you know, while you should
see at least one example of somebody who
has this weird disease, whereas if you've
been practicing medicine for 50 years,
most people who show up have the common
diseases, so to speak.
And so you have a tendency to kind of
overestimate the probability of
common disease.
I don't know whether you've observed the
same thing or you have-
I was a victim of that.
Okay.
I was a victim of that.
I had, I was 30 in my 30s and I had
throat cancer and I wasn't smoking.
And old doctors say, well, too young to
have throat cancer and so you should
stop shouting.
And I was a pit trader where you shout a
lot.
So they say you have a singer's nodule.
That's, you know, it was, they ruled it
out because it was, I was the exception,
but a young person that's not having this
experience was smoking and had throat
cancer.
But for them, it's not, I mean, they ruled
out completely.
I mean, forget about it.
And then it turned out to be when I,
then I had an operation with a person
who removes the nodules, the nodules of
singers, opera singers, and it turned
out to be a tumor.
And what was the probability?
Did you, I mean, did you look up the
clinical trials?
I looked at it, the, the, the, the, the
distribution of people younger than 60
having, who smoke, even if you smoke, it
takes a long time to build is, is, is
tiny.
But, but, I mean, we live, I mean, you're
an exception.
We're, we're, we're, we're each an
exception our own way.
People don't get, I mean, that's why
there's such thing as identity, right?
See, and, and the way, I mean, you
recognize me in the street, all right,
and there's seven billion people, all
right, you recognize, and I recognize
you recognize, recognize Matthew,
Roman, and the E.K. Mads, James, you see
the idea.
So the point, the, the, the, the, the
statistics is, is actually much simpler
if you only use it on things where it
works and never outside.
Yeah.
The problem is people misusing it,
like, like, particularly in psychology,
I mean, when they do a noise versus
signal, they mistake the signal for
noise.
Yeah, it's, right, it's, well, let's see,
we should, okay, rather than discussing
that further, maybe we should take some
comments.
James, I think you had something to say.
Sure.
Well, you know, many of us are interested
in the parallel study of economics and
physics as part of why I'm guessing, you
know, we're having this, this conversation.
So Dr. Talib, I think many of us would
be interested in hearing maybe your,
your remarks or your comments on, on,
on these theories of non-ergodicity
that Peter is in Gell-Mann have been,
have been writing about, because I think
it could be a nice, it could be a nice
leeway into thinking about physics and economics.
Okay, to go back to what we're talking
about with, to put it in, in, in Stephen's
frame, we was talking about a framework,
okay, of averages, okay, and the idea
of ergodicity is never cross a river
if it's four feet deep on average, okay.
Well, if you remember last time I was
talking about a grandmother, and then so,
so the idea of using averages and stuff
like that.
So to do science, you've got to be able
to work with averages.
So sometimes they misuse it, and the
central problem is that you mistake a
vertical average for a time average,
and let me explain, it's very simple,
and that's an error that psychologists
made, like, big time.
If I take a hundred gamblers, I send them
to the casino, okay, and for one, each for
one day, okay, come back, I get the
average expected return from the casino,
and a lot of large numbers works
beautifully, tell them gamble for eight
hours, all right, or whatever, or whatever
you lose your money and come back, okay,
with your P&L, all right, so you can
figure out the return you can get from
a casino for a certain number of bets.
The works beautifully because casinos,
we built casinos because we know
probability, that's another one with
science, but the rest of the world
doesn't work that way.
Now, if I send one single trader,
okay, one single person to the casino
for a hundred days, okay, have complete
different picture, even if there's a
positive expected return.
So to give you the example I give in
skin and game is if on day 28, sorry,
okay, let's say that I have a hundred
indexed by one to a hundred, and number
28 goes bankrupt, number 29 is not
affected, you're taking the arithmetic
average, so as you add a zero, zero
doesn't impact on an arithmetic average
much by one over n, whereas if I take a
sequence of traders going to the casino,
and if I'm day 28, sorry, sequence of
single person going to the casino dies,
then it doesn't get it, all right.
So then you can't because you're taking
the different, it's a complete different
process, different mathematics, and for
the arithmetic average to match the
continuous compounded thing, you must
bet in log size, okay, so let me give
for those who are not into trading a
very simple example, all right.
People come to America and talk about
inequality, and then they write people
on inequality to do things, and there's
a French guy who wrote a big book on
inequality, he doesn't seem to know much
about much or anything, all right, his
name is Piketty, okay, talking about
inequality, he doesn't realize that to do
inequality right, you've got to take
every person throughout her or his life
rather than take a static inequality,
where people say inequality is
increasing, there was an article in
New York Times saying inequality is
increasing, all right, so they said, look
in 1980, it was this way, 2000, they're
not the same people at the top, so what
happened is that people don't know that
the more ergodic measure is to say
how many Americans will spend at least
a year in the top 1%, and it's effectively
15% of Americans or 12%, how many
Americans will spend at least a year in
the top 10%, 60% of Americans, compare
that to Europe that has a flatter
structure, okay, it's very different, so
it's like taking a Markov chain and make
sure that they are no absorbing
barrier, no absorbing probabilities, no
unit one or zero probabilities in a
Markov chain, so that's the problem
with taking, not looking at dynamics
for inequality, it's exactly the same
problem as risk management, you see, so
for example, when people say, oh it's a
fair bet and people are stupid, it's a
good bet, 55, 45, like in Richard
Taylor's, I had a Twitter fight with
him and started by, you know, it's
irrational to not take that bet, what
the problem is, you gotta look at if you
keep taking that bet all your life, unless
you follow a specific policy of Kelly
Criterion, for example, which has logs
incidentally, you gotta go bankrupt,
even if you have fair odds, because you
cannot survive, you're not taking
arithmetic vertical average, you're
taking, so you gotta take a strategy
that compounds a return, this is one
example of things that, in economics,
that practitioners know, and to tell you
that Richard Taylor, among his
accomplishments, I think his central one
has been that he found a disease called
mental accounting that says the
following, if you go to a casino and
increase your betting with money won
from the casino, it's called
house's money, all right, you're not
irrational because it's the same
dollars, okay, you're committing the
fault of mental accounting, whereas in
fact the only way to survive is if you
treat that money you got from a casino
as different money, so you're more
aggressive with the house's money than
you are with your initial endowment, for
example, so there are a lot of mistakes
made in psychology, particularly when
psychology meets economics, the things
blow up, so when you take, that's an
skinned game, I explained it at length,
in what I call the, what is it, the
risk-taking, the whatever, something about
the, I thought it was the next one.
No, it might be might be useful for
people, the sort of physicalized version
of what you're saying has to do with
time averages versus ensemble averages.
There you go, there you go, physicists
know that because they have a good
theory series, and economists don't make
the mistake in when they deal with
stochastic processes because they want
to make sure there's no absorbing
absorption, but they make the mistake
in psychology, psychology of
economics, and a lot of economics
feel like inequality, because what
concerns you is at birth, what chance
do you have, okay, not taking a snapshot
of society when it's dynamic, for
example?
Right, I mean actually I didn't know this
this thing you said about inequality as
a function of time, that's an interesting
statement. I mean the time average,
so what is, what do you think is a good
measure, you know, you can take, I don't
know, let's say you take the Gini index
or something, and you take one of these
which is, what is the correct time
average version, what is the correct
time version of that kind of measure?
Two things, I wrote a paper on the Gini
index by showing it's bullshit because
increases over time, because if I take
Europe, it would have a higher Gini
than the average countries, okay, so it
is super additive, okay, that's one
problem with a Gini, so I wrote a
paper on it that people didn't notice,
but that's life, okay, on that's because
there's some countries, you're saying
that the countries, when you take the
aggregate of all the countries, and
women, you take the aggregate of all the
people, or you take the aggregate of all
the people in the country, say the
average Gini in Europe is, the weighted
average Gini is, say, 0.3, you know all
of Europe is going to be 0.2.
By computing all of Europe, by taking the
Ginis of countries, or by taking the
individual Ginis?
Individual Ginis, individual Ginis.
What's that?
Individual Ginis, if you take the
individual Ginis, the individual Gini
of, say two countries are equal in size,
yes.
Okay, the Gini of the population will be
higher than the average Gini of the two
populations.
What is the formula, actually, for the
given a probabilistic distribution,
p of x, what is the formula for the
Gini?
I don't know, I don't find that.
You can get it, that was seven years
ago, I wrote that paper, and also I
showed that if I have a stochastic
process, generating a Gini, that if I
have a thousand observations, and then
10,000 observations, and you know what I
did then, I did what I did as I ran
in Monte Carlo on Mathematica for an
entire week, to see if I go to, you know,
if I have a trillion, a sample of a
trillion, what would we expect a Gini?
Right.
Keep going up with your, the Gini would
keep going up with, sorry.
So that's kind of crazy, but I'm just
curious from a pure mathematical point
of view, this observation that people
go up and down in that quanta.
That's the second point, that's the
second point.
So you've got to take a Markov chain,
approach those things, by saying a set of
measuring the Gini of the population, a
snapshot, okay, and see how it moves,
because they're not the same people who
are going to be at the top one percent,
year after year, okay.
What you must do is take the, find a
metric that takes an individual, okay,
today, and see, or based on experience, or
someone, 20 years ago, 30 years ago,
all right, and see how many times on
average they spend in every state, to
give you a very simple idea.
And this was Larry Summers actually,
although I had a little run-in with him
over, excuse the math and economics,
he actually has a metric, he took the Forbes
1980, and took the Forbes 2010, or 82, 2012,
and then 30 years later, he showed it's
not the same people.
Of course it's not, most of them have died.
It's not, no, no, the same families,
all right, okay, you take Italy, very
interesting, you take the Gini of 1540
in Florence, and you take today as the
same, the same last names.
Wow, okay, so quite, quite, quite
interesting, in front, I mean that tells
you something about social mobility,
they have a flatter, a flatter, right,
so I'm curious, and you know, people
talk about social mobility, and their
various measures of that, and so on,
but the thing you're describing is, you
know, there is, what you're describing
is an effective, quantile social
mobility, and I'm curious how you can
quantify that term, that thing.
I think the best thing is, I think,
someone asked me the same question, I
said the best heuristic is, say, the
probability of a hard shot to exit
the club, all right, so you take
more than 500 as a club, see how
fast it is to exit it, and Russia,
admirably Russia, people say, oh, look
at these, these, you know,
some very unfortunate ways to exit it
in Russia, I think.
Exactly, there are a lot of ways, but
the Russians have been exiting it,
I mean, replaced by new guys all the
time, so that's the interesting thing
in Russia, in the United States also,
some people exit the club, all you need
is another nest that collapse and
be entertaining, okay, or measures by
the government to, you know, to cut,
you know, the big, because the inequality
now is coming from tech firms, so the,
the, and you'll see, so basically it is
not so much by looking at opportunity,
how people rise, because the zero sum,
the rank of zero sum, by definition,
is how people fall. Fair enough.
Yeah, so reallocation you have, and I
remember an old trader telling me in
1987, when there was a crash, he told me,
look, he said, what, he said,
crashes, they're good for society, I told
him why, he said, they do a reallocation,
even socialists don't know how to do it
that way.
The crashes cause reallocation of money,
redistribution.
But so, so I'm curious, and if you look
at the Italian setup versus, I mean, can
you, can you see from the behavior of
markets, for example, have there been,
there have been crashes in Italy, there
have been crashes in lots of countries?
Yeah, no, but they hold on to privileges,
because it's built in the society. I
think the UK has a dual system where
you have a bunch of people who hold
to a grain of land, a bunch of things
like this, and they got the
technologists and immigrants, like here,
who, you know, become the billionaires.
But traditionally, it was much more of a
static society in UK, before, you know,
technological, but there have been papers
on social mobility in Europe, in Italy,
and stuff like that.
But nobody thought of doing a dynamic
genie, rather a static genie.
So which country wins, if you look for
Max?
You asked by far.
What's number two?
I would say Russia, you know, Russia,
because they have, I mean, they may not
have a lot of mobility from the bottom
to the top, like you asked, but they
have mobility from the top to the
whatever bottom you may define, whether
it's a jail cell, a cemetery, or just
becoming poor again.
Right, what?
How fortunate are undone, okay, is
something central.
So let's see, Sotaris had his hand up here.
Yes, hello for me as well.
I wanted to make a question about the
ecodistry, the non-ecodistry in the
casino, for example, behavior.
What is the case that, for example, in the
casino, we have different players?
Okay, so one would expect that what's,
what breaks their ecodistry is that,
is the possibility for choice of the
individual player, for example, if
instead of looking at the bullet, we're
seeing that the, we were looking at the
slot machines, then if 100 people played
so to speak, or the same person played
for 100 days, the same machine wouldn't
expect something different to happen.
No, no, no, no, you would, you would,
because you can, okay, the, I don't know
if you're setting it up to make slow
bets, but for the equivalent variants,
okay, it's neutral to whatever
lumpy or not, the distribution of the
lumpy or not.
No, so it's not about this, it's about,
for example, the 100 results will
either be given the same day for 100
people, or if the same person played 100
times, the progress will be...
You can go bust playing slot machines.
Sorry?
You can go bankrupt playing slot machines,
run out of money.
Yes, that's why I said, for example,
it's player playing once, while in the
roulette, you have the choice to what
you, what you choose, when you stop,
and again, in the slot machine as well,
if you put the choice inside, where
will I stop?
It also comes...
It should be the same, it should be the
same, because you play once, but then you
play, you know, it's...
The same, yes, this is different from my hypothesis.
Because you put only a coin in the thing,
but you can put a lot, you know, it's
sort of a variant.
Yes, yes, exactly.
You're saying, slicing the bet in smaller,
you're playing, in fact, Kelly, when you
play slot machine, because you're forced
to slide every bet to be a coin, no?
Exactly, yes.
Okay, yeah, so then your variance is not
the same as the other one?
No, if you put the...
That's the same variance, you see the idea?
Yes.
But you're correct, effectively the slot
machine forces you to not go bankrupt,
because you're gonna bet too slowly, only
a one dollar, and say you want a hundred,
you're gonna, you can only put one back,
you can't put the whole hundred.
Yes, yes, of course, but my question was
more towards the implication of choice,
and the reason why a precondition breaks,
for example, is it because in economics
we consider the individual itself
as fundamentally non-urgotic, or because
we have a system of...
No, let's not use, you know, go too much
in terracotism, but just saying that some
situation needs to be analyzed in, as Stephen said,
time average, and some other situation
needs to be analyzed as vertical average, okay?
But I know from my experience in trading,
is that people who look at...
And in my anecdote, at trading as only a
vertical average, okay, go bust.
Like, for example, if you play Russian roulette,
if someone tells you 80% of the doctors
think Russian roulette is harmless,
or I wish we would be correct, right?
It's a different statement from, you know,
you have 80% chance of making money,
20% chance of dying, and if you played
Russian roulette repeatedly, okay,
you would not be there to ensure the winning,
you see?
So, and with probably one, you don't go bust,
okay, and it doesn't take long.
So, that's the idea of to worry about ruin,
apply to a lot of things, and this is where
I was telling Stephen in the beginning,
risk management supersedes ruin, supersedes science,
in the sense that when you're uncertain,
you want to avoid ruined situations, okay?
So, your time average, okay, isn't your time,
isn't clipped by absorption?
Well, right, but by the way, it's worth pointing out
that the whole idea of eugodicity, you know, physics
can get away with eugodicity assumptions
in a bunch of cases to do with thermal equilibrium,
but it is actually, eugodicity is not as convincing,
even in physics.
I mean, eugodicity was a thing that was introduced
around 100 years ago as a nice mathematical mechanism,
but it isn't, you know, it's not as successful,
it's not like eugodicity is proved by physics.
There are certain mathematical systems
and dynamical systems theory where you can prove eugodicity,
but it's usually very boring eugodicity.
It's, I mean, this idea that you can always exchange
time averages for ensemble averages is actually rarely true.
So, the fact that it's definitively not true
when you have some absorbing barrier,
when you have, you know, the possibility of bankruptcy
or something, that's an extreme case.
But it's still, it's, I mean, it's an interesting extreme case,
more extreme than most of the cases in physics,
but it's still not true in plenty of physics.
I'm going to give you an anecdote.
Actually, it's not an anecdote, this is a statistical thing,
all right?
In 1998, a fund called Long-Term Capital Management,
yes, a very short-term life went bust.
And it's really the poster child of...
You should tell the story of Long-Term Capital Management.
So, Long-Term Capital started a firm
and two of their members got the Nobel Prize
for the Optional Pricing Forum at Denmark, okay?
And I am very familiar because I was in that business, okay?
And it was people who loved financial theory
and they said, they really believed that whatever
financial economics and all the techniques they had
worked in the real world.
And my belief was that these guys are called setting ducks
because they can make some money off of them.
So, and of course, in 1998, there was a blow-up
and we counted something like 52 PhDs in financial or economics,
all right, who were involved in blow-up, okay?
So, we counted how many financial people was PhD...
So, there were two kind of traders.
Traders who blow up because they ignore ruin.
They ignore ruin.
They give you a probability distribution,
they ignore ruin, all right?
They don't realize they can be ruined.
And when you're ruined, you don't come back, okay?
And it's very strange, out of the...
We counted how many, what we call people,
short vol, we call these people, all right?
How many people were short tails
out of the 53 financial economists or PhDs in economics
or finance who went to Wall Street and went?
Because it was not only the LTCM that blew up.
So many other firms blew up.
They were the same kind of people.
It's the same ecology.
They're emitting, it's like a crypto firm blows up.
You're going to have four or five blowing up
because they do have the same strategy, okay?
So one out of the 53 was not short vol, they're on risk.
Because they came in and said,
oh, risk is to be sold.
Let's sell the tail.
And they hold, oh, this is lottery tickets.
They're overpriced.
Someone read the book on lottery tickets.
Oh, it's overpriced.
So let's sell.
These are the same.
They're not the same as lottery tickets, okay?
So because you have, you know, unbounded stuff,
a lot of people are on a trade and stuff.
So it's a sucker game.
So it is telling as a description of what happened in that science.
I think we did the back, I did,
I mentioned one of the books, those numbers,
I did back to the envelope.
I think by then had counted 44 by then, okay?
44, because we follow them.
This guy, this guy, what is this guy, this guy from,
and usually Ivy League, Harvard, MIT, Harvard, Yale, and they all blew up.
And the same thing repeated itself, 2007, 2008.
So it's not a great advertisement for economics PhDs.
It's not for financial economics for those who go into markets.
It's not a very good description that these guys,
people who are caught were those guys, okay?
Because the first thing they do is they go sell the tail.
And of course, they can't figure out,
don't, you don't cross the river if it's on average four feet deep.
They only look at the average.
So that mistake of a good city and mistake of fat tail
was combined in that population.
But the same people caused Fannie Mae to blow up.
Because that's again how, again,
they don't understand that if you hit a patch, you hit a patch.
Well, it's your intuition.
I mean, I'm curious about, you know,
you think the sort of the absorbing barrier of if you keep going too long,
eventually you will, I mean, so how, I mean,
you know, what is your, I mean,
you've managed to keep doing this trading stuff for a long time.
I've been an auction trader.
I started 37 years ago.
And I'm going to tell you one thing.
I saw a population of people disappearing.
And they disappear from the book.
You don't know what happened.
So they don't teach others.
In my days, it was like, when I talk about why I want to protect medicine's current status as
know how rather than know what, you know, take Naive versus Episteme,
is because my day, when I started trading, there are two kind of traders.
There's the old traders who didn't like formulas.
They priced an option organically, you know, with the whims
and then the relationship between items and stuff like that.
And then there was the scientific crowd, the formulas.
So what happened is that because of there's something called MBA that came about,
so people started getting classes in MBA and learning finance from professors.
So instead of having a practitioner, teacher, practitioner, teacher,
practitioner, teacher, practitioner, you had the old days to be not an option
trader or to be a trader, you go work for a trader, you clerk for a trader,
you pick her or his brain, and then you become a trader.
So you've learned all these tricks.
Now you have you disrupted by having the chain of knowledge goes from professor
writing papers to, you know, professor writing paper professor,
with students getting in between without any feedback from reality.
And that chain, okay, you don't want to protect medicine for getting that
because still today, doctors are learning from doctors.
You see, so you want to, it works maybe in the absence of a general theory, it works.
In finance, all right, things are worse.
I mean, I wrote the black swan right before the crisis 2008 explaining
that these guys don't don't know how to price tail risk.
Right.
Today, exposure to tariff is bigger than it was 2008.
Systems still don't handle this.
Still use something called the value at risk.
And they still use all the crap that was there still being used.
Why? Because you don't have learning.
You don't have a skin in the game.
But so yeah, so if you look at the hedge funds that exist,
I don't know how many 1500 or so hedge funds, whatever the number is,
I don't know if that's the right number, the, you know, when they're,
how many of them, I mean, you're talking about ones who hedge funds,
hedge funds are okay because hedge funds have skin in the game.
You see, it's financial institutions that don't have skin in the game.
But you mean they, the fact that they have skin in the game causes them to take a different
approach. Okay. So it's both ways.
But I say, I feel safer today that risk was transferred to hedge funds.
You see, because the guys at Fannie Mae will never learn.
Yeah.
Build out by the taxpayer, they'll never learn.
The guy at JP Morgan will never learn.
There's the guys that, you know, knowing they can be built out by the taxpayer,
whether they were or not.
So the big financial institutions don't have the same rigor as hedge funds.
And, and, and, and we were saved and hedge funds didn't come naturally.
It came because of the Volcker rule.
Thanks to the, probably someone who saved this country twice, you know, Paul Volcker, right.
And the Volcker rule is a beautiful thing because it prevented banks from trading.
The money went to hedge fund and about every year about two, three thousand hedge funds
failed and not one of them makes a newspaper.
Okay. So your point is it's a natural selection topic.
Exactly. Natural selection and also because owners of hedge fund have to put
a large chunk of their net worth in a hedge fund.
Someone may tell me LTCM, they have their money in the fund.
Okay. But I would say that it's necessary but not sufficient.
Fair enough.
Okay. And necessary because once you wiped out, you wiped out.
You see, it's a different type of wiping out.
Let me make, give you the representation I give to simplify the, the, the, the point
in, in, in skin in a game.
Okay. Restaurants have skin in a game in a sense that it's your credit card that counts.
Okay.
They are prizes.
So whatever system, but there is a peer review system for restaurants
where they have wards and, and this is a peer review system.
And journalists and stuff like that.
So there are two mechanisms and a friend, a former trader who decided to lose his money
slowly in a, in a restaurant business reported that he said, you go, you know, you have all
these prices and they don't make it to the gala dinner.
You see, they don't make it to the gala dinner.
Just to tell you, mechanism of peer review is not as good a mechanism as survival.
You know, organic survival.
And the plumber is not paid by committee of plumbers observing, you know, that's paid by,
by himself.
So these, these are arguments for capitalism, so to speak.
I mean, there's a, there's a, I mean, as opposed to kind of the, the elite decides
who's a good restaurant, who isn't.
It's kind of, the market decides.
Yeah. It's, it's, it's an argument for capitalism, you know, a smart car form of capitalism.
But also we, we, it's an argument against academia because basically it's a peer review
mechanism and we're not sure that, that peers are, you know, good without some kind of either
adult supervision or market.
No, no, that's a, we, I think we probably both, I suspect agree that the sort of the peer review
system of academia is a, is a hopeless kind of hopeless, but I played it to be able to say
hopeless, right?
I had to write 75 scholarly papers.
Okay.
I started on five years ago.
I wrote 75 paper, published them in whatever journal you want.
I mean, I published, I picked, no, but I say, okay, in medicine, I'd rather have the
paper peer reviewed.
It's necessary, but it's not sufficient.
All right.
I treated that way because that way, you know, there's someone checked something.
All right.
As just like, there was a checking of that stuff by some specialists.
That's the way I view it.
No more.
What if they think it is sufficient?
Right.
Well, that's again, it's, it's a belief in the kind of the, the perfection of science,
so to speak.
People believe there is this thing called science that operates in certain ways that
gives, you know, 3.72 as a result, it's peer reviewed.
Therefore, that's the way the world is and we can predict based on that.
And this is, you know, it's kind of crazy in my view.
I mean, in, in, uh, yeah, interesting.
Well, let's see.
We had some other, let's see.
I think Raphael had his hand up.
Is Raphael still?
Yeah.
Yeah.
I had a quick question about the last conversation about the law of one price and sort of these,
there was various interpretations in terms of curvature and gauge symmetry.
One thing I was trying to figure out is in economics, when you say the law of one price,
is that a syntactic thing?
And what I mean by that is just, it's just another way of accounting for what is actually
a definitive value.
Whereas in physics, right?
If you have a gauge symmetry, it's almost like the formula can't detect the difference.
But in reality, there could be a difference.
It's just at the level of say, like the Schrodinger equation, you know,
the phase doesn't actually change the observable result.
But in the law of one price, is it that it's actually like one sort of S, you know?
No, no, no.
Okay.
The law, it's not a law.
Okay.
Whatever you call it is called law, the, the open law, this law, they're not laws.
Law of the Michigan, they're not laws, but they, they're interesting and you use them
as a vague guideline.
All right.
So, but, but let me, when I talk about the law of one price, okay?
If the price of Tesla is different in Arkansas than it is in California, and if it's, okay,
but it's only $1,000, nobody, nobody cares.
But if it's an order, one order of magnitude different, then, then only idiots would buy it
in Arkansas, the rest would, you get the idea, you go drive to California, pick it up, and
have a good day.
So, this is what I mean by, by law of one price.
It's quite central in seeing how things should be in the world, but it requires,
okay, market, some kind of market structure, okay, no transaction costs.
No transaction costs, and, and, or no barriers to commerce and stuff like that, that may exist.
You may be forced to buy your car in, in, in Brazil, if you live in Brazil, all right,
you can't really import cars easily.
So, therefore, it doesn't hold, you see.
So, you got to realize what things hold.
So, this is why I don't like the notion of law, as much by saying, by using a,
gotta be some other word, because they, they tried to imitate physicists and they,
and they thought they were doing very well, you see.
So, they, they, they use the vocabulary, the methods and everything, you know,
and people thought it was a law.
It's not a law.
So, for me, it's arbitrage.
We're going to take about arbitrage, and I did all form of arbitrage, and it's always
humbling to do arbitrage, because you think that in arbitrage that, that two items are very
similar, cannot diverse too much in price.
You think that can happen, and no, you have all kind of crazy things happening.
And because of very good publicity, you may go bankrupt on a good trade.
And I've seen someone go bankrupt on, on excellent trade, like you can convert to put
into a call, all right, where you, you, you, you can convert it to school, convert whatever.
And the, but the problem is a put, a put plus underlying is called a call minus,
is equal to a call minus short underlying, okay.
And the problem is he converted it, so he had a, there was a rally, and you're losing
money on the underlying that you have to pay cash for.
And the call is a book entry, you know, that's making money, but he couldn't cash it out, okay.
And so, so far, so the person was insolvent because it has the right trade.
And this happens at times of tight liquidity.
So, so whenever you think in terms of arbitrage, you got to look at exceptions
of where it doesn't work, like this law of one price.
So there's not a law.
It could be a tendency for things to go the same, the same direction, and it applies
beautifully to currencies, like when currencies are in the same economic zone,
you don't have a lot of diversions in price.
But you still have enough to just to, for someone to make a living arbitrage in the two.
What do you mean arbitrage in between different, you know, cycles of currencies,
for example, or for example, let's take a very simple.
I talk about Turkey, all right.
So someone here from Lebanon, they were buying their medication from France,
not from Turkey, you can get the same thing at the fifth of the price in Turkey.
All right.
So, so the passive arbitrage is instead of buying from France, you buy from Turkey,
and it's a lot cheaper.
Active arbitrage is you go buy it in Turkey, package it, you know, as, you know, in a way to
become French, because they are techniques, and then sell it as French.
And the Italians do that all the time.
So long as something's made in Italy, some proportion is made in Italy.
So they make the thing in China.
And then put the made in Italy label on it.
And for a while, you know, they're arbitrage, the difference between labor between Italy and
China for a given quality of work, because the same quality action.
Okay.
So this is what I call arbitrage.
And you have convergence as you have more globalism.
Globalization, globalization, you have, you cannot have too much divergence in prices.
So is price something that's like, I guess it was more of a epistemological question.
It was more like, is price something that like, is intrinsic to the item?
Or is it something that's like constantly like?
I could decide, but the value, I've seen Bitcoin for me is valued at zero, but the price is 34.
And a lot of people don't get it.
Say, well, sell it to me for zero.
I paid a thousand for it.
I said, no, you didn't.
If I wanted to show it, it was a sell at 34.
You see, but I value it at, so you have your valuation and you have the price.
There are two different items.
Okay.
The two different items.
And, but if you have a good valuation in the long run, prices should converge to it.
Like for a long time, I thought that these CDOs were worth zero.
All right.
Not a hundred.
Okay.
And, and of course they were going for a hundred and I was wrong.
And then they ended up being worth zero.
All right.
So that's not, yeah.
So they have valuation and you have price.
Some options I see now trading for 10 cents are, to me, worth two dollars.
Okay.
That's valuation and that you don't have in physics.
Okay.
Which part do you not have in physics?
Price and valuation.
So, so each field must have its own rules, you see, of what we call science, not science.
Sure.
And, and economics was completely destroyed by trying to imitate physics.
Sure.
No, no, this, this, look, it's what I find interesting, you know, listening to you talk
about puts and calls and this and that and the other, it's a, you know, it's a somewhat different
framework for thinking about things than one is used to from a field like physics.
It's a, you know, it's a different, you know, many fields have different ways of thinking.
Sometimes those ways of thinking produces for results.
Sometimes it's kind of hopeless.
Sometimes they produce useful results, you know, in their own framework, but nobody else
cares about it.
But let's say I think we had a couple more questions and then probably we should wrap up soon.
But, but yeah, I have, I have to be in a restaurant at 7pm.
Okay.
All right.
We got, okay.
Quick, quick, come.
So Assad and then Roman and then we should wrap up.
Yes.
Thank you.
Yeah.
I was really interested and you said the easiest decision you can make
is when you have uncertainty to say no.
And I'm interested in seeing your opinion on something like where you can't say no,
like for example, talking about climate change and the release of.
Oh yeah.
No, no, no.
Climate change, we, the, the, for 10 years and then we ended up writing a paper,
me, a statement, me, Yanir and the friends of Yanir.
And the, and we got heat from both sides.
And my point is we don't, the more, the less we understand the world,
the less risks you should take with things that are new dumping and large quantities in,
in the atmosphere.
Plus there's a notion of non-linearity.
Like if I jump 10 meters, I'm harmed more than 10 times that if I jump one meter.
So if they, you know, there's a non-linearity in those response.
Okay.
There's always some kind of S curve and can become that.
So whatever it is I'm saying, we don't understand.
These models, climate models, right?
The more uncertain we are about these climate models, the less we should pollute.
Okay.
Or spread across pollutants.
So we got heat from everyone.
All right.
Say, oh, you're saying our models are wrong.
All right.
And then the other guy's saying, oh, you want us to, you know, you're, you're,
you go with the world economic forum.
So, so on both sides, we got heat.
You see, they are because it's an easy decision with the climate.
It's an easy decision.
I go with the paranoid.
What do you think of these?
Like when they say, well, in 50 years, temperature is going to increase three degrees.
These statements are based on a mean of 20 models.
All these, all these statements.
I take the variance between models as, as, as better indication of what not to, of what to do.
You see, it's very simple.
Like Warren Buffett says, no, a thousand times for every time he says, yes.
All right.
He said, I don't have to invest there.
All right.
I don't have there are other things to do.
All right.
So you don't have to use a fossil fuel.
You use other things to do.
Okay.
Spread.
Okay.
You don't, the, the, the, the, the, I don't know.
And people say, I say, I have uncertainty about whether it's good or not for the climate.
All right.
But I don't want to take that risk because there's uncertainty, the more uncertainty.
And we actually modeled it.
So this is an interesting thing about probability is you can use probability models
because there's one advantage.
Even in France, probability adds up to one.
You see.
So, so you know that you have a structure of a probabilistic model.
You can make decision or have some insights about things.
Thank you.
Interesting.
Okay.
Roman lost.
All right.
So with basically, there's the rise of a lot of models recently, which allow people to basically
predict their investments in some way is through basically computer tools that let them just make
it a lot easier to see the market and that sort of thing.
And even some that are trying to forecast with those, do you think in the future,
is that going to be a positive change?
Because it's, it's basically getting more people to act rationally or a negative change
because it's making people not use common sense.
I could see it.
We haven't discussed undecidability and stuff like that, but there's a problem when you have
recursion where I know that you know and that you know that I know model other people will
lend the market changes and stuff.
And the only successful use of automated models I've seen is in doing short-term brokerage.
When I was a pit trader, how do you make money in a pit trader?
It might be stupid.
All right.
And buying on the bid, selling on the offer and going home flat.
That's how the rule is.
All right.
Sorry.
I don't know what those terms mean.
What are those terms?
Okay.
Buying on the bid, it's like I'm a car dealer.
I buy for 10,000 and sell for 12,000.
Right.
And I have, it's worth 11,000 in my mind.
I have that edge.
All right.
So that's what a market maker does.
All right.
So of course it's, you're going to be wrong with valuation, but it washes out if you buy and
sell a lot.
So firms like Renaissance, they do that with industrial thing.
And instead of two-dimension, two, they do it with an n-dimension.
So they spot things and they keep doing buying and selling all the time.
100,000 times a day sometimes.
So they were my clients and when I was still a bank market maker,
and then it would come in and they want 96 million of yen Aussie currency.
All right.
You give them a quote.
And then they come back.
They want the equivalent of in euro of Swiss.
So I see that they're doing payers, you see.
They're doing, they're buying here, selling here.
So in other words, the law of one price, they're trying to arbitrage.
It's, yeah.
You can never actually have a law of one price.
It's a law of generally close-ish prices unless something happens.
Close the framework of how things should trade and there's divergence of one.
So they buy it, okay.
So, but a market maker provides liquidity.
They provide systemic liquidity.
A market maker stands up and tells you, I buy the share for 10,000.
I sell for 12,000.
All right.
Then you sell them a lot.
Now I buy for 9,000, sell for 11,000.
So market makers tend to make money, you know, in that way.
All right.
And sometimes the market moves either caught short or long.
So you have a bad month, but the rest of the time you're okay.
So that's pretty much where this is why people used to pay $15 million at a time
to become market maker on the American Stock Exchange, to become a specialist.
So you pay $15 million to get that edge, what's called order flow.
All right.
So what I've seen people successfully do is transform that approach with order flow
to make it electronic.
And that's Renaissance.
That's a job of Renaissance.
Okay.
That's most of what they did.
And other firms like that, they don't have a huge model of the world and stuff.
They have some, okay.
They may overlaid with some view here and there,
but it washes out under the frequency of transactions.
Yeah.
So if you're wrong and your prices shouldn't be 11, but 10 and a half,
all right, or 10, you still have enough of an edge.
It doesn't matter much.
So this is what I did as an option market maker.
I was trading options.
I had price, you know, valuation, and I ended up buying and selling,
buying and selling, and you inventory, you take the risk of inventory.
So you lose sometimes, you make some time.
And because you lose sometimes, you make a spread wide.
So that feeds you.
So you can say the edge is somewhere halfway between 10,000 and 12,000.
That's bid and ask.
So car dealers make money that way.
You say, they buy on a bid, sell you on the ask.
All right.
And so you can, but I've never seen people have electronic systems.
Okay.
So I'm being, I've been called, you know, you better, you better disappear though.
I got it.
I got it.
I got it.
So we wrap up.
So thank you very much for this wonderful conversation.
Yeah.
Yeah.
It was a great conversation.
Thank you.
Yes.
And, and, and hopefully, you know, I'll pick your brain next time.
And hopefully someday on, on computational usability,
because we're using it in the precautionary principle.
All right.
I want to hear about that.
Okay.
Bring another time.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
And have a great day.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye everyone.
