Let me see here.
OK, can everybody see my slides?
Yes, yes.
Perfect.
OK, thank you.
So if anyone is interested afterwards in reaching me
or finding any of the primary papers, the data sets,
the software, everything is at this website.
So what I want to talk about today
is this idea that pre-neural bioelectrical networks
underlie a kind of somatic intelligence.
And I want to talk about the implications
of this for regenerative medicine,
but also for evolution and some things like that.
We can start by thinking about Alan Turing, who
needs no introduction.
This is the forefather of computer science.
And he was very interested in intelligence,
in different embodiments.
He was interested in what is fundamental about intelligence
as aside from any one particular implementation
and in the basics of computing and so on.
But he also did this really interesting early work
on morphogenesis, the idea of the generation of pattern
from chemical signals during embryonic development.
And so one might ask, why would somebody
who's interested in intelligence and in computation,
why would they be interested in studying morphogenesis?
And I think Turing, although he didn't write explicitly
about this, I think that being the genius that he was,
he saw deeply that these are the same problem.
And I think fundamentally, this is a very important idea
that developmental morphogenesis and intelligence
are really the same problem.
And here's why.
We oftentimes, there's this idea that there are,
let's say, collections of ants and termites and bird flocks
are kind of collective intelligence.
And then people think about, well,
is this really an individual?
Is it really a collective intelligence?
How do we think about it?
But then they say, well, those things
are maybe controversial, but I am a true centralized
intelligence, right?
I am a single being, I'm a centralized intelligence.
And of course, this isn't correct
because we are also made of parts.
So our brains are a collection of cells.
We are all walking bags of cells, basically.
And this is the sort of thing that we're made of.
This is a single cell.
This is called the lacrimaria.
And this is, of course, an independent organism.
This is not a human somatic cell.
But all of our cells were once independent living organisms.
And so you can see the high level of competency and autonomy
that this little creature has in addressing
the problems on its own scale, so physiological, metabolic,
things like that.
All of us made this amazing journey
across the Cartesian cut.
We were all once a quiescent oocyte,
so just a single cell, where people would say, well,
that's just physics and chemistry.
There's no cognition there.
It's a chemical system.
And then eventually, we end up being something like this,
which is a complex organism with behavior,
and maybe even something like this,
which is a very complex, has human level metacognition
and will make statements like, I am unique
and I have mental properties that don't exist
in other creatures and so on.
And so the key thing to realize is that this journey
is incredibly slow and gradual.
The developmental biology offers no sharp lightning bolt
to the left of that line,
we were just chemistry and physics,
and then boom, after this, now you're a cognitive creature.
I mean, there's no such thing in developmental biology.
It's a slow, gradual process.
And so we really need to understand
how the scale up of cognitive capacities
happens during this process,
of course, on an evolutionary timescale,
but also on each of us on a developmental timescale.
And this connection between information in the brain
and information in the body can be really seen
in the plasticity of certain biological forms.
So here, for example, is a planarian.
So this is a flatworm.
They have two interesting properties.
One is that they're smart,
and so you can train them for specific memories,
for specific behaviors, and they regenerate.
So if I amputate the head off of this planarian,
the tail will sit there and eventually regrow a new head.
And so this is something that McConnell discovered
in the 60s, and then we later confirmed
using modern automated techniques.
If you train a planarian to recognize these little
bumpy disks as the place where they find food,
and then you cut off their head, which contains their brain,
the tail will eventually regrow a new head,
and that new animal will show behavioral evidence
of recall, he will still remember the information.
So these memories not only are potentially stored
outside of the brain, but also imprinted
onto a completely new brain as it develops.
So you see this ability of information moving across the body.
You see the conciliance of information about shape,
about anatomical shape that we have to rebuild
that the head is missing, we have to rebuild it,
but also restoring this cognitive information.
So these are really, really quite connected.
That plasticity, that ability to recover personal identity,
and by the way, if you're interested in philosophy
and the question of personal identity,
and the question of what happens
if somebody makes a copy of me, are they also me?
What happens to the individual?
Here, you can do this in planaria, right?
You cut them into pieces and every piece
will have the original information.
Now, who's the original, right?
It's kind of a philosophical puzzle.
But this plasticity exists in vertebrates as well.
So this is a frog tadpole.
So here's the brain, here are the nostrils, the mouth.
And what we've done is we've produced the tadpole
with no primary eyes, but we did put some eye precursor cells
on the tail and they form a perfectly good eye,
and that eye connects to the spinal cord.
And we show using this device that we've built,
we show that these animals can see quite well.
So we can train them on visual tasks,
even though this eye does not connect to the brain
and it's not in the head.
So that plasticity, and you didn't need thousands
of generations for this to evolve,
that this architecture is already ready
to be scrambled in this way
and still have adaptive function.
And that has huge implications for evolution.
So the interesting thing about biology
is that we are all multi-scale systems,
not only structurally, so we all know that we're made
of organs, tissues, cells, and molecular networks,
but actually functionally at each level,
these layers solve various problems in various spaces.
So they're competent to solve different types of problems
in different action spaces.
Now, and we call this the multi-scale competency architecture.
Now, what do I mean by these problem spaces?
Well, we are, and many animals are very primed
and very good at recognizing agency and intelligence
in three-dimensional space.
So medium-scale bodies moving at medium speeds
through space and doing intelligent things,
it's easy for us to recognize that.
But it should be clear that when we look at various systems
and assign to them some kind of estimate of their intelligence,
we're really taking an IQ test ourselves
because we're not very good at recognizing
intelligent behavior in other problem spaces.
So for example, imagine that you had an innate feeling
for your body chemistry, the way that we have vision
and hearing and so on.
Imagine if you could feel your blood chemistry.
I think it would be very easy for us to recognize
the workings of our liver and kidneys and so on
in physiological space as different kinds
of intelligent behavior, meaning problem-solving behavior
with different levels of competencies.
So the spaces that we deal with are physiological space,
the space of all possible gene expressions.
So this is a transcriptional space.
And my favorite, which is morphous space, right?
This is the space of the different parameters
that establish different anatomical shapes,
like these different head shapes.
So I'll give you, we're gonna spend most of today
talking about problem-solving in this anatomical space.
But I wanna say one thing about transcriptional
and physiological spaces, just to give you an idea
of just how clever our cells really are.
So this is a planarion.
This is what that flatworm that I talked to you about.
And what we found is that if we expose this planarian
to barium, a solution of barium chloride,
what happens is barium is a non-specific
potassium channel blocker.
So the cells can't pass potassium
and that makes the cells very unhappy.
And especially in the head where there's lots of neurons
that want to transfer potassium,
their heads explode, their heads literally explode overnight.
And if you leave them in the barium,
what happens is that in a week or two,
they regrow a new head
and the new head is completely insensitive to barium.
So we asked a simple question transcriptionally,
what is different about this new head?
Why does this new head not mine the barium?
So we just compared all the genes that are expressed
in these guys versus these guys
and we pulled out a very small number of genes.
And now here's the amazing fact is that
a planarian never encountered barium in the wild.
So there's no evolutionary history for barium exposure.
There's no reason why they should have a built-in mechanism
for expressing certain genes when they encounter barium.
This is a completely novel problem for them.
And so you can think about this as being stuck
in this nuclear reactor control panel
where every 20,000 genes or however many they have,
every knob is one gene and it's melting down.
You're faced with this terrible physiological stressor.
How do you know which genes to turn on and off
if you've never seen this challenge before?
And the amazing thing is that you don't have time
to do a random walk.
You don't have time for gradient descent.
The cells don't turn over very fast.
The way that you might in the bacterial colony
that you might see that,
they find their way through this transcriptional space
very efficiently given a completely novel challenge.
So when we don't know how this works,
it's very interesting to think about how this works.
So overall, what we are interested in is diverse systems.
So not traditional brain-y systems necessarily,
but all kinds of other things,
whether evolved or designed,
that are able to navigate different problem spaces
with different degrees of competency.
So all the way, and this notion
of having different degrees of competency in navigation
was described by Norbert Wiener and colleagues
in a very kind of cybernetic scale
of thinking about how behavior could be controlled.
And what they wanted to do was establish a kind of continuum
with some good transitions here,
all the way from completely passive behavior,
which you would just say is just physics,
all the way up to what we see in humans,
which is metacognition and things like that,
and all of the steps in between
in a way that was not tied to specific architecture.
So we're not saying brain, we're not saying neural network,
we're not making any assumptions
about what the substrate is.
What we're saying is there are different kinds
of behavioral competencies with respect
to reaching specific goal states in that space.
And when he says teleology, he doesn't mean magic
and he doesn't mean human level.
I know that I know what my goal is,
it just means the ability of a system
to reach a specific goal despite perturbations.
And these are the different levels of sophistication
for different systems that might be able to do that.
And what that allows, this kind of approach allows us
to do something interesting,
which is the goal of my framework,
which I call TAME, TAME for technological approach
to mind everywhere.
It allows us to think about using the same tools,
a very wide range of potential agents.
So yes, familiar subjects of behavioral science
like humans, like mammals, other mammals,
birds, maybe octopus,
but also really weird creatures,
like colonial organisms, whole swarms,
synthetic new life forms.
I'll show you one at the end of this talk.
Artificial intelligence is that might be
entirely software based
and maybe someday exobiological agents
because all life on earth is basically
an N equals one example of evolution.
So we want general purpose tools
to be able to recognize competencies.
I'm not saying anything about consciousness.
At this point, I'm not saying anything
about human level intelligence.
I'm saying basic problem solving competencies
at different levels of sophistication
that might exist in unfamiliar guises.
And here's my favorite example of that,
which I would like to talk about.
We all start life as a collection
of embryonic blastomeres
and then eventually you get this.
So this is a cross section through a human torso.
So you can see all the amazing order that's here, right?
So all the tissues and structures are all positioned
and everything's in the right size, the right orientation,
the right position relative to each other.
Where is this amazing amount of order encoded, right?
Where is the pattern?
Now, people are often tempted to say,
well, it's in the DNA, but we can read genomes now
and we know what's in the DNA.
What's in the DNA is a description
of the micro level hardware,
the proteins that every cell gets to have.
The DNA doesn't directly say anything
about this large scale structure.
The structure arises from the behavior of individual cells,
from the physiology that drives individual cells
to interact and create something like this.
So we're interested in that collective behavior.
We're interested in how groups of cells know what to make
and when to stop building.
As workers in regenerative medicine, we'd like to know,
well, if a part is missing, how do we recreate it?
And as engineers, we wanna go further and say,
well, can we push these cells to do something else
besides what they normally build?
Can they build something completely different?
And so what I wanna talk about is the idea of the endgame
of the, how I see the endgame of this whole field
is with this notion of an anatomical compiler.
So imagine that in the future,
you will be able to sit down in front of a computer
and draw the plant or animal that you want.
Not at the level of molecular pathways,
but the level of functional anatomy.
You're just gonna draw like here
as this three-headed planarian.
And if we knew what we were doing
and if we had a mature science of morphogenesis,
this system would be able to compile that description
into a set of signals that would have to be given to cells
and cause them to build whatever you wanted them to build.
To be super clear,
this anatomical compiler is not a 3D printer.
We are not talking about micromanaging the position
of all the cells and creating a 3D printed ear
or something like this.
Or the anatomical compiler is a communications device.
It is a way to convert from an anatomical specification
to the signals that have to be given to a collective of cells
to get them to build something the way
that they normally build other things
in development and regeneration.
Why do we want this thing?
Why do we want this thing?
Well, all problems of biomedicine
with the exception of let's say infectious disease
boil down to the control of collective cell behavior.
If we had a way of convincing cells
to build anything in arbitrary structure,
we would automatically have the solutions to birth defects,
to traumatic injury, to cancer, to aging,
to degenerative disease.
We could make synthetic biobots on demand.
All of these things would be solved
if we solved this simple problem
of how do you communicate to a collective of cells?
What do you want them to build?
Now, you might think that,
so why don't we have this yet, right?
We've had all this incredible advance in genomics
and molecular biology.
Why don't we have something like this?
Well, I just wanna show you a very simple example
of a problem.
Here's a basic axolotl larvae, baby axolotl,
they have legs.
And so this is a salamander, they have legs.
Here is a frog larvae.
This is a tadpole of a Xenopus frog.
They do not have legs.
And so in our lab, we can do something
which is make a chimeric embryo.
We call it a frog-a-lotl.
And I can ask a simple question.
Do you expect the frog-a-lotl to have legs?
And you have the genome.
So we have the genome for the axolotl.
We have the genome for the frog.
Can you tell me if a frog-a-lotl
is going to have legs or not?
And if it does have legs,
are those legs gonna be made entirely of axolotl cells
or will they have some frog cells included?
So unfortunately, we have absolutely no
conceptual framework that will allow you
to derive that information from the genomics.
We just can't do it.
And so where we are today is here.
We're very good at manipulating molecules and cells.
So pathways, genomic editing, those kinds of things.
We're very good at that.
But we're really quite a long way
from control of large-scale structure and function,
which is really what we want.
So what I would argue is that where we are
in biomedicine today is here.
It's where computer science was in the 40s and 50s,
where you had to interact with the machine
at the level of the hardware.
So CRISPR, pathway editing, single molecule approaches,
protein design, all of that stuff,
all the most exciting advances in molecular medicine
are around the control of the hardware.
And we know very well
from the information technology revolution
that that's just the beginning.
And that what we really want to understand
is how to take advantage of the higher-level affordances
of living bodies and really exploit
what ends up being the agency of cells and tissues
as they solve various problems.
And so that's, I wanna talk today
about those kinds of approaches.
So I talk a lot about competencies and intelligence,
and so let's give a definition.
I like this definition by William James,
which is intelligence is the ability
to reach the same goal by different means.
So what we're talking about here is, again,
when we say goal, we don't mean something
that's a second order.
I know what my goal is.
I mean, humans have that ability, but you don't need that.
It's the ability of some system to exert energy
to reach the same state in various means.
Now, why would there need to be various means?
Because there might be interferences of some sort
that prevented from doing the thing that it normally does.
And so the degree of intelligence
and the type of intelligence that a system has
is how it handles those interventions.
What abilities does it have to get to where it needs to go
in its problem space, despite various interventions?
Somebody once, well, I wish I could remember who said this.
Somebody had this great quote where intelligence
is a continuum that makes the difference
between two magnets trying to get together
and Romeo and Juliet trying to get together.
The difference is simply in the degree of sophistication
of things that are going to happen
when you try to prevent them from reaching their goal.
In one case, very little sophistication at all.
All they can do is try to minimize the energy.
And in the other case, lots of sophisticated tricks
to try to get there.
So let's talk about this kind of intelligence
that's related to biomedicine in particular.
So development is incredibly reliable.
And so we know that an embryo most of the time gives rise
to a normal, very complex body, but it isn't hardwired.
And so if you cut this embryo in half,
you don't get two half bodies.
You get two perfectly normal monosygotic twins.
And that's because in this morphogenetic state space,
the ability to reach its goal, this ensemble of states
that we consider a normal, healthy embryo,
you can get there from a variety of starting positions.
And in fact, as I'll show you momentarily,
by avoiding various local maxima,
avoiding various problems and doing new things
to get to where you need to go.
So here's one very sort of well-known example.
This is a salamander known as the axolotl.
These guys regenerate their limbs, their eyes,
their jaws, the portions of their brain and heart.
And here's what the limbs look like.
If you amputate anywhere along the axis of the limb,
it will regenerate.
The cells will grow exactly what's needed,
no more, no less, and give you a complete, perfect limb.
Now, the most, many amazing things about this,
but the most amazing thing is that they know when to stop.
These cells are growing.
No individual cell knows what a finger is
or how many fingers you're supposed to have,
but the collective makes exactly the right number of fingers.
And then it stops when,
when a correct salamander limb has been completed.
And if you deviate at that point
and you cut off some fingers or whatnot,
it will continue to grow
and it will only stop when the correct pattern has completed.
So if you're into computer science,
this looks like some sort of means and analysis.
And basically it's an error minimization scheme
that allows the system to detect deviations
from a stored set point and work towards that.
Now salamanders aren't the only ones that have this.
Human liver, for example, is highly regenerative.
Even the ancient Greeks knew that.
I have no idea how they knew that.
Human children regenerate their fingertips.
Deer regenerate large amounts of bone,
of vasculature and innervation every year.
So there's some mammalian examples of regeneration.
The other example.
But here's one of my kind of favorite examples
because this illustrates a very interesting point
that you can think about as top-down control.
So this is the cross-section
through the lumen of a salamander.
And what you can see normally is there's about eight
to 10 cells that form this kind of structure.
And one thing you can do here
is that you can make these cells larger,
much, much larger.
And when you do that, when you make them larger,
the system adjusts and a smaller number
of these large cells make the same shape lumen.
And now you can do the most amazing thing of all,
which is to make the cells incredibly large.
And when you do that,
just one cell will wrap around itself like this
and form the exact same structure.
And this is remarkable for a couple of reasons.
One of them being that this is a completely
different molecular mechanism.
In the first case, you have cell-to-cell communication
and delta-naught signaling and all these things
that are important in forming a tubular genesis.
In this case, it's cytoskeletal bending.
And so in the service of a large-scale anatomical goal state,
meaning that having a tubule of the right shape and size,
different molecular mechanisms,
different underlying molecular mechanisms
are being called up to reach that state.
So if you're into neuroscience,
this is very familiar because in cognition,
you have this exact example where you have large-scale
kind of executive control and goal-directedness
that has to feed down into the individual circuits
and eventually to muscle voltage states
to execute the problem.
It's a top-down control and it happens here
in morphogenesis in this amazing example.
So this is a different example
that we discovered a few years ago,
which really shows you the need to look for competencies
in unexpected places.
So here again is our tappel, here are some eyes,
the nostrils, the mouth is back here, the brain.
And these tappels have to rearrange their face
to become a normal product.
And so it was thought that this process is very mechanical.
So every normal tappel looks the same,
every normal frog looks the same,
and all then you would have to do is somehow the genome
would just program a set of hard-wired motions
where every part of the face would move in the right,
in the right direction, the right amount,
and then you get a normal frog from a normal tappel.
So we tested the hypothesis,
and so I think this is really critical
before making any sort of assumptions
about what the level of competency of a system is.
You have to do experiments.
And so we asked, we did this experiment.
We said, I wonder if it really is hard-wired.
What we did was we made these called Picasso tappels.
So basically they're scrambled.
Everything's in the wrong place,
the jaws are off to the side,
the eye might be on top of the head, everything's scrambled.
And what we found is that these animals
make largely normal frogs.
Why?
Because all of these organs will move around
in novel unnatural paths,
and in fact, sometimes go too far
and actually have to move backwards,
they will all move around
until they get to a correct frog pattern,
and then they stop.
So the genetics does not specify
somehow a set of hard-wired rearrangements.
What it specifies is a system that is able to reach the goal
despite completely abnormal unexpected starting positions.
And this is very important.
Evolution, and I think this is a more general claim
that I would make,
is that evolution doesn't just make specific solutions
to specific problems.
It actually creates hardware
that implements a problem-solving machine
that is able to exert problems
of various kinds of information processing
to reach regions of anatomical space,
physiological space, and so on,
despite novelty.
I'll show you a bunch of examples of that.
So what we started thinking about then was this.
I mean, this is the typical story
that appears in the textbooks,
which is the process of morphogenesis is this.
You have genes turning each other on and off,
they make effector proteins,
there are local interactions in terms of physics,
and then eventually this magical process of emergence
where complexity arises from lots of simple local rules.
Now, this is certainly true
when there are many systems
where complexity arises from simple rules,
but this is not the end of the story.
And in fact, this is, I think,
just not even the major part of the story
because what we see now is that this process
is not simply feed-forward emergent.
If this final form is deviated from its goal state
by injury, mutations, teratogens, whatever,
what will happen is that feedback loops will kick in,
both at the level of physics
and at the level of genetics,
which will undergo various other actions
to try and get back to the state.
So this is very much, in the cybernetic sense,
this is very much a goal-directed system
that regeneration,
regulative development, metamorphosis,
all of these things are trying to get
to specific regions of anatomical morphospace.
They exert energy to do so,
and they have diverse competencies,
more than just pre-wired kinds of behaviors.
They exert various competencies in order to do that.
Now, this is, on the one hand,
this is nothing too new.
Biologists are well aware of feedback loops
and homeostatic kinds of loops like this.
So pH, temperature, and so on.
Of course, we know cells do this.
But the interesting thing about this process
is that the set point for that homeostatic process
is not a scalar, it's not a single number.
It's not just pH or metabolic level.
It is an anatomical descriptor.
So it's a shape.
So that leg will continue to regenerate
until a correct salamander leg has formed.
So in some sense, it is a descriptor
of a complex multicellular anatomy here
that's driving this thing.
And so this whole kind of odd view
of looking at these systems as navigational agents,
as opposed to just emergent physics and chemistry,
makes a very strong prediction.
It suggests that if there is an explicitly encoded set point
somewhere, then we ought to be able to find it.
So find the physical mechanism of that encoding.
We ought to be able to decode it.
And so to understand, to be able to read it out.
And we ought to be able to rewrite it, to re-specify it.
And that's what we've been doing.
And I'll show you how that works.
One of the sort of conceptual implications of this
is really important.
It means that if this is true,
then we have the ability on a biomedical level
to rewrite that set point
without having to change the machine.
In other words, the amazing thing
about your thermostat in your house
is that you can change the set point
without needing to rewire the thermostat.
The hardware stays exactly the same,
but you can make it do new things.
And computers, of course, are reprogrammable.
And that's the beauty of it.
You can run multiple things on the same hardware.
Currently, molecular medicine is all about this portion.
That is, if you want to make a change here,
we have to figure out which genes we would need to,
let's say CRISPR to make that change happen.
And in general, moving backwards,
this is an incredibly difficult inverse problem
that's going to limit the applications
of CRISPR and genome editing technologies,
because in general, you cannot reverse this.
We have no idea what genes to change.
If you wanted a salamander with three-fold symmetry
instead of bilateral symmetry, genes would you change.
We have no idea.
So it would be really nice if it were true
that cellular collectives had a set point.
You could change the set point
and it would then build.
You wouldn't have to solve this terrible inverse problem.
So how does the brain handle a goal-directed navigation
in its problem space?
Well, of course, it's got this hardware
where individual cells have these little ion-channel proteins
that enable the cell to reach a resting potential.
And those potentials are propagated to their neighbors
through these gap junctions, this electrical network.
And that electrical network, that hardware
allows a certain set of behavioral software where,
and here you can actually see the readout in this group
that this amazing video of the electrical activity
in the living zebrafish brain.
And so neuroscience is committed to this idea
that all of the cognitive content of this system,
of this mind is encoded in this physiology
and in this electrical activity,
that if we were able to read and understand,
basically decode,
and this is what people work on neural decoding,
if we could decode this electrical activity,
we would know what the memory is, the goals,
the capacities of the system are.
So the good news is that this amazing architecture
of this hardware and software is extremely ancient.
In fact, it's as old as bacterial biofilms.
Most cells have electrical connections
with each other, all cells have ion channels
that set their electrical state.
And what you can do is you can run
a very parallel kind of research program
using all of the techniques from computational neuroscience
to try and decode the information processing
of the body cells as they try to solve anatomical problems.
And here it is parallel to this brain scan.
This is a frog embryo putting itself together.
And you can see, we can now image all the electrical states
as this happens and try to decode them.
So the isomorphism is very strong
because here what you have here is the DNA
which determines the micro level hardware.
This becomes an excitable medium,
which has the ability to have certain electrically
implemented the information processing tasks.
And what it does is it controls,
it makes decisions at a large scale decisions
to control muscles to move you through three-dimensional space.
That same architecture exists in your body.
It's extremely ancient,
both evolutionarily and developmentally.
And what it does is use the exact same kind of tricks.
So the DNA specifies the channels,
but then you get this excitable medium
that is able to have memories and decision making
at the level of the network.
And what it does is issue commands
to all kinds of cells, not just muscles,
and those commands move your body configuration
through morpho space.
That process takes you from the shape of an egg
in an early embryo through progressive stages.
And if you're a caterpillar further through metamorphosis
to become a butterfly and so on.
So the exact same thing,
what evolution does is pivot the same trick,
this ability of electrical networks to process information
and to integrate information
through different problem spaces
starting off with metabolic
and then moving forward into anatomical
and eventually behavioral
and eventually linguistic in the case of humans.
So we developed some tools to study all of this.
So here's a time lapse movie of the frog embryo.
This is done using a voltage-sensitive fluorescent dye.
So this technique was developed by Danny Adams
to help characterize what the cells are saying to each other.
We also do a lot of computational modeling
to link to the molecular biology,
what ion channels and pumps and gap junctions
are responsible for these things.
And I wanna show you two kinds of patterns.
So this is, we call this the electric face.
This is one frame taken from a voltage movie
of a frog embryo putting its face together.
And what you see is that long before the genes turn on
to actually become, to actually regionalize
and then implement the face anatomy,
you already can read out the pattern memory
that tells these cells what to do.
Here's where the mouth is going to go.
Here's where the eye is going to go.
The other eye will come later to, you know,
the placodes out here, this pattern is already there.
We know this pattern is instructive
because if you move any of this,
and I'll show you in a minute how we do it,
the gene expression moves in and the anatomy moves.
We'll show you that.
So this is a normal pattern
that's required for face development.
This is a pathological pattern
that occurs when you inject the human oncogenes
into an embryo.
Eventually they'll make a tumor,
but before that tumor is histologically apparent,
you can already see from the cells
aberrant voltage signature
that they've disconnected
from the electrical network of the rest of the body.
They have their own weirdly depolarized voltage.
They're basically like amoebas at that point.
They're just going to treat the rest of the body
as external environment.
This is metastasis.
They've rolled back to their individual unicellular past.
So how do we do these kinds of experiments?
We've borrowed a lot of tools from neuroscience.
We do not use, there are no applied fields,
no electrodes, no electromagnetic radiation,
nothing like that.
This is manipulating the native interface,
the native bioelectrical interface
that cells expose to each other
to enable them to program each other's activity collectively.
So what those are are ion channels and gap junctions.
So we can use all of the techniques from neuroscience.
So we could mutate the channels
to give them new properties.
We can put in new channels.
We can block channels pharmacologically.
We can do it with light.
So optogenetics, all the same tools.
It's very interesting that neither the tools
nor the concepts of neuroscience
can tell the difference between brains and other tissue.
So all of the stuff works.
So we do, we steal everything from neuroscientists,
all the neurotransmitter machinery and drugs,
optogenetics, active inference, perceptual by stability,
you name it, all of these concepts
are directly transferable
because the difference between other cells and neurons
are, there are some important differences,
but all of them are capable of the key thing,
which is to make these electrically
active information processing networks.
So let me give you some examples
of what happens when you make some of these changes.
So one thing you can do is we can micro-inject
into this frog embryo,
some RNA that encodes an ion channel,
let's say a potassium ion channel,
that will set the same electrical state
that we observed in the eye field and that electrical face,
the embryo, the electric face in the embryos.
When you do this, what you've communicated to the cells
is that they should form an eye
and you can do this to cells in the gut,
on the tail, anywhere,
not just in the anterior and erected arm
where the textbooks tell you
are the only cells competent to make eyes,
that's actually not true.
If you go further up the chain of command
and edit the bioelectrical pattern,
and any cells in this body will make a complete eye.
These eyes have all the right layers of retina,
optic nerve core, all the stuff is here.
Notice a couple of interesting features here.
One feature is that what we have not done
is reprogrammed specific stem cells for specific fates.
We put in a very simple signal,
we don't try to micromanage the cells.
This is basically a subroutine call.
We're communicating to the collective
that the eye state is what it should make.
We are not trying to micromanage the individual cells.
And so this is modularity.
This is really like a subroutine call.
We just say build an eye here,
the all the downstream cascades turned on after that.
The second amazing competency that these cells have
is they can do what ants and termites do,
which is recruitment.
So here is a lens,
this ectopic lens is sitting out in the flank
of a tail somewhere.
These blue cells are the ones
that we've actually injected with ion channels,
but there's not enough of them to make a proper lens.
And so what they do is they recruit their neighbors,
these other brown cells that are completely wild type,
there's no extra channel there,
but they're recruited by these cells a secondarily.
So there's two levels of instruction.
We instruct these cells, hey, make an eye,
these cells instruct their neighbors,
there's not enough of us, you've got to help.
And so they have the ability to detect
whether there's enough of them to do the task.
And if there's not,
they have the ability to instruct their neighbors to join in.
And these are cells that otherwise would have made
but pieces of the tail.
And so these are some really interesting capacities
of the cellular collective to get its job done.
We can make, so in addition to eyes,
we can make extra limbs here,
you can make extra forebrains,
you can make extra hearts,
we can make otocysts or inner ear organs,
or you can make fins.
Now that's interesting because tadpoles don't have fins,
there's more of a fish thing,
we'll get to that momentarily.
But so targeted misexpression of ion channels,
meaning creating a new bioelectrical state
calls up different organs.
You can not individual cell states, but actual organs.
And we can take advantage of this biometrically,
for example, here's a frog.
Frogs normally do not regenerate their legs.
So if the leg is lost 45 days later,
there's nothing going on here, there's a cross section.
We came up with a cocktail,
and this is the work of Kelly Chang in my lab,
who basically created a cocktail
that triggers regeneration decision in this wound,
24 hour treatment,
and then legs grow for up to a year and a half,
and we never touched them during that point.
But after 24 hours, already the signals have been passed
to convince the cells that this is the path
through morpho space they should be taking,
not towards scarring, but towards regeneration.
And so immediately you turn on these MSX1,
which are these pro regenerative gene,
by 45 days you already have some toes,
you've got a toenail up here,
and eventually a very respectable frog leg
that is touch sensitive and motile, meaning it's functional.
So the idea for regenerative medicine
is that we should be looking for triggers
for ways to communicate to the cells
what structure they should be building,
not trying to micromanage the process the whole time.
And so I have to do a disclosure here,
because David Kaplan and I are scientific co-founders
of a company called Morphosuticals Inc.,
which seeks to now take those discoveries
and move them into mammalian.
And so we're doing this now in rodents,
hoping to learn to do organ regeneration,
and ultimately, of course, the human patients some day.
So I wanna switch a little bit to this other model system,
these planarian, and as I've told you,
the planaria are amazing.
They're so good at repairing body damage,
they do this continuously, they're actually immortal.
There's no such thing as an old planarian,
they continuously replace dying cells.
And as a result, individual worms are basically immortal.
And the amazing thing about that
is that when you cut them into pieces,
each piece needs to know what it's missing
and what needs to be rebuilt.
So that anatomical control
that makes them cancer resistant and immortal and so on
needs to be able to always recognize
what part needs to go where.
And so typically it's 100% reliable.
If I amputate the head and the tail
and I take this middle fragment,
it will give rise to a perfectly normal one-headed worm.
Now, one of the interesting things that we found
is that there's an electrical circuit in this fragment
that determines how many heads
and how many tails it's supposed to have.
That's the memory, the memory is literally electrical.
And so what we can do is we can take this one-headed animal
with normal transcriptional profile.
So the anterior genes are in the head, not in the tail.
And when you amputate this guy,
he gives rise to a two-headed worm.
This is not Photoshop, these are real animals.
Why would I just told you that it's 100% fidelity?
Why would it give rise to a two-headed worm?
Well, that's because what we first did
was to use drugs that target ion channels
and the gap junctions to reset the electrical pattern memory.
This is normal.
This is what the fragment normally has, one head, one tail.
We can reset that to say two heads.
And you can see it's kind of messy
where the technology is still being worked out.
But we can reset this pattern to be two heads.
And then when you cut, then it makes a two-headed animal.
Now, here's the really critical part.
This electrical map is not a map of this two-headed animal.
This is an electrical map
of this perfectly anatomically normal one-headed animal.
It's a latent memory,
meaning it doesn't do anything until we injure it.
And when you injure it,
that's when the cells consult this map
and realize they need to make two heads
and that's what they do.
So a single body, a single one-headed planarian body
can store one of two different representations
of what a correct planarian looks like.
I promised you at the beginning
that if we have this homeostatic loop,
you have to store the set point somewhere.
Somewhere you have to say what the correct information is,
how does it know what's correct?
This is how.
That information is stored in electrical memories
that we can actually now read out and edit and write
to some extent, much like people are trying
to instep false memories into brains.
So another kind of neat thing about this
is that if you're interested in the brain
and this ability, they call it mental time travel,
the ability to remember things
or imagine things that are not true right now, right?
So the ability of a system to store states
that are not actually true right now,
that time shifting, that's what you see here.
This electrical memory is a counterfactual.
It is not a true description
of what my anatomy looks like.
It is a counterfactual memory of what I will do
if I get injured in the future.
It's a memory of, it's basically a plan for the future.
It's a very primitive way of doing counterfactual memories
that might be the kind of evolutionary precursor
to complex counterfactual thought in brains.
Now, why do I keep calling this a memory?
Because if you cut these two-headed animals
and you take this middle fragment,
with no more manipulation,
it will continue to form two-headed animals.
Now, keep in mind, there's been no genetic change here.
We haven't rewritten the genome.
The hardware is exactly the same.
What we've done is given it a brief physiological stimulus
that altered the memory of what the set point
for this regenerative process is.
So the question of what determines the number of heads
in a planarian is kind of subtle.
It isn't the DNA.
What the DNA does is produce an electrical machine
that by default, stably settles on the memory
of a one-headed structure.
But it's rewritable and it has memory.
And once you rewrite it to a two-headed state,
that's what it keeps.
And we do have a way of actually turning them back
so we can take these two-headed animals
and rewrite the memory back to a one-headed.
So here you are.
You see a video of what these guys are doing.
This is all the properties of memory.
It's long-term stable, it's rewritable,
it has conditional recall, which I just showed you,
and it has discrete behaviors.
And so what we are doing now,
and we're very interested in collaborations
and Shreya and I are collaborating
on these kinds of things,
is to take what we know about the state space
of these electrical circuits
and map them to anatomical outcomes,
which are attractors in this morpho space,
and understand how that process gives rise
to these kinds of amazing abilities,
such as if the system is deviated, it comes back,
it recovers missing information.
These are all things that people who study
artificial neural networks
and connectionist models of cognition,
these are all things that people study.
And so we want to kind of integrate that field.
Interestingly, this is not just about head number,
it's also about shape.
So if we perturb the electrical network in this guy,
when he tries to regenerate his head,
you can get the same genetics
to form a flat-headed Pifolina,
or a round-headed S-Mediterrania,
and the distance between this guy and these species
is about 100 to 150 million years.
So what you can do by changing the electrical pattern memories
is to select between attractors in the state space
that normally correspond to other species.
One way that could have happened
is genetic assimilation.
So a bioelectric, environmentally induced bioelectric change
that causes head shape change
that then eventually ends up being assimilated
into the genome as changes in ion channel properties
and whatever.
So evolution might use this very rapid,
it's akin to the Baldwin effect
when learning becomes eventually assimilated
into genetic behaviors.
Evolution could make use of this very powerful mechanism.
And in fact, and so it's not just the head shape,
it's the shape of the brain
and the distribution of stem cells
is exactly like these other species.
So you're literally making ahead of another species.
It's not even about existing other species,
you can make shapes that don't belong to any species.
So the morpho space of possible shapes is quite large.
You can make the spiky forms,
you can make this cylindrical kind of three-dimensional thing,
you can make combination forms.
Evolution doesn't use it,
presumably these don't make very successful worms,
but the cells, the hardware,
the genetically specified hardware of a wild type genome
is perfectly happy to form these other forms.
So what we're looking for is a full stack kind of a framework
in which we can start from knowing what the channels
and pumps are that determine the hardware of the cells,
but then we can now start to understand on a tissue level
the changes in the bioelectric large scale properties,
getting to what does that mean for organ specification
and ultimately getting to a kind of a symbolic algorithm
of the decision-making at the organ level
about where heads and tails and all the other organs go.
And we have this,
we've started work on this bioelectrical simulator.
So Alexis Pytoc has made this amazing system
that allows us to actually simulate some of this stuff
and link chemical networks
with the electrical downstream electrical information processing.
I want to show you one quick success case
of using such a thing for biomedicine.
This is a tadpole brain, forebrain, midbrain, hindbrain
in animals that are exposed to teratogens like nicotine
or other alcohol, other kinds of teratogens.
There are severe brain defects.
And we said, okay, could we make a computational model
of the bioelectric pattern of a normal brain
and show what happens to that pattern
under various deformations.
So we made this pattern
and it showed us some really interesting features
of why things go wrong.
And what that model was able to do is then say, okay,
if that's what happens to the electrical pattern,
could we, what we need to do to fix it?
So which channels and pumps could be open or closed
to get back to the correct bioelectrical pattern
even though you were exposed to this nasty teratogen.
And in fact, we did this with even a genetic change
which is a mutation in notch.
So notch is a very important neurogenesis gene
in the absence of improper notch function.
The forebrain is missing,
the midbrain and hindbrain are just a big bubble.
The animals have no behavior.
It's a very severe defect.
What the computational model was able to do
is pick out a channel for us,
specifically this HCN2 ion channel.
We had some interesting properties
and the model, the computer model was what told us
that if we turn on this channel,
the bioelectric state should basically come back to normal.
And when we did that,
and you can do this either genetically
or through a couple of drugs
that are already human approved drugs that target HCN2,
they, these animals went back to normal.
They had this, so these animals have the same notch mutation
but you can see the brain structure is normal,
their IQs are indistinguishable from controls.
They get their behaviors back.
So this is an amazing thing.
Not only are we now to the point
where a computational platform
can actually predict therapeutics
by quantitatively asking
what does the bioelectric change need to be?
And then what drugs do we have
that will induce that change?
But this is an example of fixing a hardware defect.
So the notch mutation,
fixing a hardware defect in software
by brief stimulation of the physiology with a drug.
So now I'm not arguing that that's gonna be true always.
There are many hardware defects,
let's say enzyme mutations and so on
that are not fixable this way.
But it is remarkable that some genetic defects
can actually be repaired this way.
So what we are working on is this kind of a system
that basically,
and you can play around with this thing a little bit
although it's very early stage still,
the idea is that you should be able to take your knowledge
of the correct and the incorrect state,
run it, the model will tell you
which ion channels and pumps can be targeted.
We know what the drugs that exist
for all these different channels
and it should basically suggest electroseuticals.
So combinations of drugs to address different kinds
of problems with cancer repair of injury,
birth defects and so on.
And so just for the last couple of minutes,
I want to say a couple of quick things
about coming back to this idea of let's zoom out
from the biomedicine and just think about
what we've learned about intelligence and cognition.
We know that this thing has competencies
in a certain very small cognitive light cone.
Basically local environment is what it cares about.
It has cells have a little bit of memory going back,
a little bit of predictive power going,
looking forward in the future,
but basically both spatially and temporally,
the goals that the system pursues are very small.
What evolution did is create a set of policies
for electrical networks that allow them
to pursue much bigger goals.
So this collective pursues the goal
of having this anatomical state
and you can deviate it and we'll do its best
to get back there.
Individual cells have no idea what a finger is
or how many you should have, but the collective does.
And it's the network that's able to do this.
But it has a failure mode, the failure mode is cancer.
And when cells disconnect from this electrical network,
this is glioblastoma, they basically roll back
to these individual cell behaviors
and their light cone shrinks, okay?
And so we can think about the scaling up of cognition
from individual cells that have a very small
spatiotemporal cognitive capacity
to larger networks that have more computational capacity
for memory, for prediction,
and for integrating spatially information across a distance.
This has a very clear testable biomedical prediction,
which is that, well, here's our tumors induced
by human oncogenes.
What we can do is we can say,
we're not gonna change the hardware,
we're gonna leave the hardware defect in,
we're not gonna remove the cells
or try to fix the genetic mutation.
What we will do is force these cells
to be in normal electrical communication with each other.
And so when we inject the oncogene,
what we also inject is an ion channel
that despite what the oncogene gets does,
which is to electrically decouple the cells,
it will cause them to stay connected.
So this is the oncoprotein here,
it's very strongly expressed.
In fact, it's all over the place,
but there's no tumor.
This is the same animal, there's no tumor
because the physiology overrides the genetics.
Some hardware defects can be fixed in software.
So if you connect these cells to the group,
they will not have the metastatic single cell goal
pursuing behavior,
they will work on a collective project,
making nice skin, nice muscle underneath all of that stuff.
So you can see how these ideas of cognitive scaling
lead directly to novel therapeutic approaches
that had never been tried before.
So the last two minutes or so,
I just wanna show you one amazing kind of example
of cellular competencies and plasticity.
We wanted to know whether cells
could reboot their multicellularity
and what their novel goals would be
if we took them out of their normal context.
And so this is the work, I have to do a disclosure.
Josh Bongard and I have founded this company
for computer design by robotics.
This is all, everything I'm gonna show you
is done in collaboration with the Bongard Lab
and Doug Blackiston and my group did all the biology
and Sam Kriegman did the computer science aspects.
So what we did was we,
so Doug takes these frog embryos,
he takes the skin cells from the top,
these are cells fated to be epidermis, so skin,
and we dissociate them and then just pipet them down
into this little depression.
What might they do?
Well, they might die, they might spread out,
they might form a two-dimensional monolayer,
many things they could do.
What they do instead is, whoops,
they overnight, they coalesce together like this
and they form this little thing we call a xenobot.
Here it is, we call it a xenobot
because Xenopus laevis is the name of the frog
and it's a biorebotics platform, so it's a biobot.
One thing these xenobots do is they swim, they move.
How do they do it?
They have little hairs called cilia
on the outside of their bodies.
Normally the cilia are used to redistribute mucus
down the body of the frog,
but here what they do is they row
and the ones on this side row this way,
the ones on this side row that way.
And so the thing moves on its own,
it's completely spontaneous, we don't pace it,
we don't activate it, it's on its own.
They have a wide variety of behaviors,
they can go in circles, they can patrol back and forth,
like this, just keep in mind, this is skin,
there's no neurons here, there's nothing else.
They have some collective behaviors,
so these two can interact with each other,
these are resting doing nothing,
this one is going kind of on a long journey.
Here it is navigating a maze, so it moves forward,
it takes the turn without bumping into anything
doesn't have to bump into the opposite side,
it takes the corner, and then at this point,
due to some internal dynamic,
it turns around and goes backwards,
came from no control by us,
this is completely spontaneous behavior of these guys.
If you image the signaling, this is calcium signaling,
it's very, this is the kind of thing you would see
in imaging brain activity.
And so we are now, of course,
analyzing using information theory approaches,
what the integrated information is inside
or in fact, between, are they communicating?
We don't know yet, well, that remains to be determined.
They can regenerate, so if you cut them in half here,
so think about, you can cut them almost in half,
look at the amazing force that it takes
to fold this thing up like that,
so they do regenerate,
and then here's the most surprising thing of all,
which is by modeling, so Sam and Josh computationally
modeled this and basically evolved in an AI kind of environment,
used evolutionary algorithms to evolve different kinds
of xenobot shapes and simulate their activity.
And one thing that we learned is that they like to make piles,
they like to find loose material and collect it into piles,
and so we tested whether that would be true of real bots,
we gave them a bunch of loose material,
so these are cells,
these white things are just loose skin cells,
and we found something incredible is that,
yeah, in fact, they run around and they collect these cells
and they collect them into piles and they compact,
and the piles become the next generation of xenobots,
which then mature and go on to do exactly the same thing,
so they just continue to reproduce copies of themselves.
Now, a couple of interesting things.
First, the only reason this works is because the xenobots,
like us and like evolution, are working with an agential material,
they're not working with passive particles,
they're working with an agential material
that also knows how to cooperate with each other
to become something interesting, meaning another xenobot.
So this is taking advantage of that agential capacity
of the bots.
The second thing is that this is Von Neumann's dream,
a robot that's able to go out and make copies of itself
by finding objects in its environment.
So this is a very early form of that.
There's no strong heredity here.
All the bots look the same, but they do replicate,
and so this is, we call this kinematic self-replication.
We've made it impossible for these guys
to replicate in the normal froggy fashion,
but within 48 hours, they are able to do this.
And so the last thing I wanna just discuss
is the kind of evolutionary implications of this.
This is a normal frog with a normal frog genome.
When you ask what does this genome encode,
it's common to think while it encodes a frog,
but actually what it encodes is a little machine
that can, under normal circumstances,
it has a default frog developmental stages
and normal tadpole behaviors.
But under other circumstances, it can be a xenobot.
It can form the xenobot.
It has its own developmental stages.
Who knows what this is?
This is a completely novel thing.
And then they have their own different xenobot behaviors.
Now, we didn't add anything to go from here to here.
We didn't add any new genes.
We didn't add synthetic circuits,
no weird nanomaterials.
All we did was engineer by subtraction,
meaning that we removed some other cells
and we asked what is the native behavior of these cells?
Because if you look at a typical embryo skin,
you would say that what does it know how to do?
Well, it knows how to be a boring two-dimensional layer
on the outside of the embryo.
But that's because the other cells
are basically bullying these cells,
behavior-shaping these cells into doing that.
On their own, left to their own devices,
this is what they actually do.
This is the default behavior.
So you can imagine evolution as searching this space
of behavior-shaping signals
that cells will send each other to get them to do
what they want, to get them to do something adaptive.
This is the default behavior of those cells.
And the final thing is this.
When we think about why does a certain organism
have certain shapes, behaviors, properties,
the answer is usually well evolution
because eons of selection have given
at these particular goal states in anatomical space,
in behavioral space, in morphological space, and so on.
But actually, there's never been any xenobots
and there's never been any selection to be a good xenobot.
So there's no straightforward selection story
that explains these behaviors.
So we have to start thinking differently
about where goals in these spaces come from.
I think that's very interesting.
And we don't know what the cognitive capacities
of these guys are yet.
We're working to understand what can they sense,
what are their preferences, what can they learn, and so on.
So I'll just stop here by saying that all of this
is the conceptual stuff is discussed in these papers,
which I'm happy to send to anybody.
I wanna thank the postdocs and the students.
