So today we're very happy to have Daniel Robbins from Albany, who is going to tell us about the
composition of defaults, content symmetries, and anomalies. Please, Daniel, take it away.
Thanks, yeah. So it's the usual, you know, title, form, the recollection of random terms, but
really, it's basically about a bunch of work I've been doing over the past couple of years. So a
paper a couple of years ago with my student Thomas Vandermillen, and then four papers and counting
together with Eric Sharp from this year, where we're really starting to uncover
a fairly interesting structure. At the end of the day,
we may or may not be getting anything, you know, really new, we're not getting new constructions
exactly. But I want to claim that we're, we've got sort of new ways of thinking of anomalies and how
they fit together when you, when you gauge things. And in particular, in the presence of trivially
acting symmetries. So, and I also just want to say, with all of this, my student Thomas has
put in a lot of work and he's on the market this year. So if you enjoy the story we're telling,
then consider keeping an eye out for his applications. All right, so I want to talk
about two dimensional CFTs and global symmetries and taking orbifolds. So basically gauging those
symmetries. This is an old story, of course, a slightly more modern way to think about these
things I would claim is through the language of topological defect lines. So in this picture,
any global symmetry, so if you've got a global symmetry group gamma, any given element g of
gamma, you can think of g, you know, the action of that group on your, on your theory in terms of some
line, line operator g. So if you've got the cylinder here, you've got some state coming in from below.
If you put that line around the cylinder and then fuse it down here,
you just get the action of g on that state. These lines are topological. So the corresponding
line operators commute with the stress tensor. And that means we can freely deform
