In the first lecture, we discussed the universality of spirituality and religion.
But if people have perceived the reality of spiritual phenomena throughout the course
of human history, and if this perception has an important connection to the brain, then
one of the first questions that we might raise is, why do we have a spiritual brain in the
first place?
It's undeniable that many people classify certain feelings and experiences as spiritual.
People talk about feeling God's presence, or experiencing a peace that goes beyond any
physical explanation.
But do these spiritual experiences, or these perceptions of spiritual experience, have
a purpose?
Are they there because they do some good for the individual, or even for the species as
a whole?
These are not merely rhetorical questions.
After all, some scholars have questioned whether spirituality and religion is a good thing,
especially when religions often cause great animosity and violence among people.
Noted evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins even went so far as to say, and I quote,
faith can be very, very dangerous, and deliberately to implant it into the mind of an innocent
child is a grievous wrong.
So I don't think we can take spirituality for granted.
We really need to ask ourselves, why do we have a brain that's capable of spirituality?
Of course, many great philosophers and theologians have pondered this from a religious or spiritual
perspective, but today we are going to think about it from a neuroscientific and even evolutionary
perspective as well.
But before we launch our scientific exploration, we probably should define some of the terms
first.
And in particular, we need to define what we mean by the word spiritual and what we
mean by the word religious.
So take a moment to think about these questions.
How would you define religiousness?
How would you define spirituality?
It's always been one of my favorite exercises to do with my classes to ask the students
these questions on the very first day, and I go up on the board and write down the two
up on the board and ask them to go through what they think the definitions for these
two terms should be.
And interestingly, every year we come up with very different kinds of definitions.
Now historically, many thinkers have grappled with those same questions and have tried to
define the essence of religion.
Friedrich Schlermacher, who lived in the late 1700s and early 1800s, put an emphasis on
religion in a more cognitive, visceral, or intuitive way.
He defined it as a feeling of absolute dependence.
Rudolf Otto, in his book The Idea of the Holy, defined the essence of religious awareness
as awe, which was a mixture of fear and fascination, what he called the Mysterium Tremendum et
Fastenans.
But in the past several decades, the meaning and purpose of religion has become a subject
not only for theologians like Schlermacher and Otto, but for scientists as well.
For example, my late colleague and mentor Eugene Dequilly began to look at spirituality
in the early 1970s.
He wanted to try to find how brain functions, which appeared to have evolved over time in
human beings, were related to the development of spirituality and religion in humans.
Then in the 1990s, another scientist named James Austin wrote a book called Zen and the
Brain, and in it Austin explored how brain functions, particularly those that are associated
with different neurotransmitters, the chemicals in the brain, were related to meditation practices
and the experiences that come out of those practices.
More recently we have developed improved methodologies for studying the brain, and these methodologies
have opened up a multitude of avenues for exploring the neurological and physiological
aspects of spirituality.
Now as I and other scientists explore these new frontiers, we also need definitions for
spirituality and religion, just as Schlermacher and Rudolf Otto did.
But as we look for definitions that will work for us, we scientists are confronted with
an interesting issue, one that's probably not as critical to theologians and philosophers.
We have to define these terms in such a way that the definitions are experimentally useful
to us.
In other words, we must develop what we would call an operational definition of religiousness
and spirituality.
If spirituality is defined only as the human experience of the soul, well that's really
too vague and too difficult to ever apply any kind of scientific analysis to.
So how might we actually begin to think about these definitions a little bit more specifically?
On one hand, we might want to have a very narrow kind of definition.
The advantage from a scientific perspective, from an operational perspective, is that we
can at least better know exactly what it is that we're looking at.
So we might want to define religion or spirituality in a very specific way.
The downside of that is that if we go too narrow, then we might wind up excluding a
huge group of people or a huge and important belief system that doesn't fit perfectly
within that particular definition.
For example, if we define religion as pertaining to a theistic concept of God, then what are
we going to do with a billion Buddhists who don't have that kind of notion of a personal
kind of God as we do in the Judeo-Christian traditions?
On the other hand, we might say, well let's just define the term very broadly.
That way we can include everybody.
But the problem with having too broad of a definition is that sometimes we might be
including things that aren't really an actual religion.
For example, one of my favorite examples of this is that one of my best friends considers
his religion to be the Philadelphia Eagles.
Now unfortunately, it's a very depressing religion for him, but the important point
here is does that really count as a religion?
And of course on a more serious note, when we think about different cults and different
belief systems, should we actually include them as part of the definition of religiousness
or spirituality?
So if we have too broad of a definition, we might be too inclusive.
If we have too narrow of a definition, then we may wind up missing certain things that
are very important in terms of what we think of when we talk about religion and spirituality.
And finally, once we do have definitions, we have to be able to develop some very appropriate
measurement tools so we can try to get at what those definitions are and how we can
understand them better.
We can develop tools such as brain imaging studies.
We can look at different subjective measures and try to get a real good feel for what that
person means when they talk about their religious or spiritual beliefs and how it ultimately
affects them as a person, both in terms of the way they live their lives as well as in
their body as a whole.
Several years ago, I participated in a really wonderful consensus conference that brought
together 80 scientists from around the country in order to assess the relationship between
spirituality and health.
But pretty quickly, we all realized that we had to understand what we meant when we were
talking about spirituality and religiousness so that we can move forward in our goal.
The group finally settled on the following definitions, which I want to provide to you
as an example, not so much because they are necessarily the best or the most accurate
definitions, but because they were an attempt to operationalize the definitions of spirituality
and religiousness.
So here's how this particular group defined spirituality.
We decided that spirituality referred to the subjective feelings, thoughts, experiences,
and behaviors that arise from a search or quest for the sacred.
In this particular definition, search referred to attempts to identify with or articulate
or even transform the way they thought about the sacred.
In fact, think about how you may have engaged in this search throughout your life.
How have you identified yourself from a religious or spiritual perspective?
Do you agree even with the notion that spirituality is actually a kind of search?
In this definition, sacred was defined a little bit broader, and it referred to what the individual
perceives as either a divine being, ultimate reality, or ultimate truth.
For most people in the United States, the sacred relates to God in the Judeo-Christian
tradition.
But there are many ideas about what is sacred.
Think about what is sacred to you.
Do you have certain religious or spiritual ideas that you hold sacred and that are the
goals of where you try to enter and engage in your sense of religiousness and spirituality?
So now we have an operational definition for spirituality, but what about religiousness?
Well, religiousness refers to the search for sacred goals, but it can also refer to the
search for non-sacred goals.
And those non-sacred goals could include things like finding a sense of identity, or belonging,
or perhaps even a sense of meaning in life, or a sense of trying to be a helpful person.
Now normally this is done in the context of some kind of spiritual criteria.
So there's something that the person still feels is spiritual, and yet they might want
to engage it a little bit more specifically for a particular goal.
For example, a lot of people in the Jewish tradition may feel that they want to find
a sense of belonging to a group of individuals, even though they may not buy into completely
the actual religious content of their belief system, but it's all within the context of
that religious belief system.
Another important aspect of religiousness, which actually is one of the things that I
find seems to pervade almost all the definitions people have of religiousness, is that the
means and methods of the search receive some kind of general validation and support from
within an identifiable group of people.
That means that there's a group of individuals who say this is the way in which we are to
believe, and we will hold these doctrines in a particular way that we will engage as
part of our sense of religiousness.
Now with these operational definitions in mind, let's get back to the primary question
of this lecture.
Why do humans have a spiritual brain?
Or to put it another way, why do we have a brain that is so strongly disposed to a search
for sacred objects and goals, such as God or ultimate reality?
Well there are several main ways I think of approaching this question.
We can look at it from an evolutionary perspective, a neuroscientific perspective, and also a
religious perspective.
Now I want to spend a little bit of time going over each of these approaches to see if we
can get a better answer to why we have a spiritual brain.
Several evolutionary scientists have argued that religion is adaptive.
The argument is that given certain adaptive aspects of religion, the brain continued to
evolve in order to maintain these elements.
These elements were ultimately expressed in religious and spiritual concepts.
In particular we see a correlation between the evolutionary development of the human
brain and religious and spiritual activity.
In fact by exploring the shape and the size of the skull of different species that came
before human beings, we can determine the size of different parts of the brain.
Now actually the first evidence of religious activity appears to be about 70 to 100 thousand
years ago in the burials of certain neanderthal species.
Neanderthals had a much larger brain than prior human ancestors, particularly the cortex
or the outer part of the brain that's responsible for a lot of our higher thought processes.
As we see the largeness of this brain in neanderthals, this coincided with the beginning of burials
but not just the burial of the person but the inclusion of different tools, flowers,
or even painting on the body itself.
We don't know the real meaning of these burials of course but we can get some sense as to
what may have been going on, why did they engage in this kind of burial practice.
Maybe they thought that there was something that the body or some spiritual part of the
person would go to and therefore needed the tools and the flowers.
Of course we also don't know if the brain size per se is the same as brain complexity.
Just because neanderthals and other species that came before modern human beings had large
brains, that doesn't necessarily mean that they were as complex as the modern human brain.
In fact one species, the chromagnon, who was a precursor to the modern homo sapiens had
an actual larger overall brain size.
But as I was just alluding to, size does not necessarily relate to complexity.
Of course there usually is some kind of relationship between complexity and size but not necessarily.
Now given the size of the chromagnon brain being similar to modern human beings, it would
be very interesting to see how they may have expressed spiritual beliefs.
And there are several interesting lines of evidence that the chromagnon did have spiritual
beliefs.
In ancient caves they painted figures on the walls of animals that appeared to be killed
during the hunt.
This possibly was related to the notion that if they envisioned a certain future outcome,
for example if they thought that there would be a successful hunt, that simply that thought
process, that painting would help to lead to that idea of becoming true, that they would
actually have a successful hunt.
The chromagnon also made the first sculptures or figurines which we have found and they
were usually in the shape of a very fertile female.
The implication with this is that this is the first evidence of worshiping a female or
fertility god.
The notion that if they believed in a fertile god that it would help them to create better
fields for plowing and driving food and that they would have lots of children and continue
to survive as a group and as a species.
But religious and spiritual phenomena are highly complex involving emotions, thoughts,
perceptions and behaviors.
So in order for this to happen it probably required a highly complex brain.
So we can return again to how we start to think about what it is about religion that
helps to make that brain adaptive.
Is the emergence of spirituality, how did that coincide with an increase in the brain
size and it appears that we are starting to see some evidence that that may actually
be the case in the Neanderthals and also in the chromagnon.
Now from an evolutionary standpoint this is quite intriguing.
What survival value might religion actually have?
Did spirituality give our ancestors some evolutionary edge?
Was it in some ways adaptive for them?
Well a number of evolutionary theorists actually think so and they make the argument along
several different lines of reasoning.
First of all religion appears to foster social cohesion.
What do we mean by that?
Well there seems to be several lines of evidence that link religion to social cohesion in a
historical way.
As we saw in our first lecture at the temple of Gobekli Tepe there appears to be religious
beliefs that actually precede social structure.
The idea here is that the religious beliefs were what ultimately brought people together
and that that is what created the social interactions between them.
In fact many anthropologists have pointed out that virtually no civilization has ever
arisen without religion.
From Mesopotamia to Egypt to Greece to Easter Island there have always been some kind of
religious or spiritual beliefs that have played a prominent role in those civilizations.
Some evolutionary theorists cite the fact that religions appear to create a set of
morals and laws by which a society can live by.
These are the laws that people will follow in that society.
Now think about that.
The commandments of the Bible provide many rules by which we live and therefore they
teach us to not kill others, to not covet something that somebody else has.
And if we live by those rules it helps to foster a greater sense of connectedness among
the people and it allows them to live in a society that doesn't break down into some
type of immoral mass that they can't work out the civilization in.
So it's possible that religion is able to help individuals to not just put together
a society around a belief system but to actually allow them to live better and more effectively
together.
Religion also appears to provide a basis for authority.
If you think back historically most leaders in history were considered to be somehow related
to God.
Maybe they were actually descended from God or given their leadership roles by some divine
process.
This is certainly the case in ancient Egypt in which the pharaohs were essentially considered
to be gods.
In fact that's part of what led to the development of the pyramids and the elaborate rituals
that went around that so that the pharaohs' lives would go on in perpetuity, that their
godliness would be maintained.
Julius Caesar actually took on the name Divine Julius and in today's world the Dalai Lama
is supposedly the reincarnation of the Buddha.
So we always have the sense that in order to gain a certain degree of authority that
this is part of what religious and spiritual traditions support.
They support the notion of the authority to be followed by the groups of individuals
who are part of that civilization, part of that society.
Furthermore, most moral codes actually ask for respect of the authority including parents
and elders which is what we see in the Bible.
So these processes help to create a very cohesive society because they get people around a particular
authority figure and this is part of what may make that civilization actually run and
run smoothly.
In addition, religious rituals are social activities that actually help to bind people
together.
We'll talk about rituals later on in the course but I just want to say for a moment that as
the process of ritual emerges, as people engage in a ceremony or a mass or some type
of church practice, this is a way of bringing people together and through the process of
the ritual actually engages them as a group to form a sense of community.
Religion also has other interesting aspects to it which help an individual and also a
group of people to survive and be effective.
It helps to provide a sense of control and comfort.
The argument here is that our evolutionary ancestors lived in a very dangerous and capricious
world.
Death was always lurking around the corner for them and religions may have evolved as
a way of providing them with an answer to the finality of death.
It gave them a sense as to what was going to happen to them and therefore it made life
on earth a little bit more tolerable and since it also asked them to engage in certain behaviors
that would help them in death, such as being a good person, being a moral person, then
it helped to again further foster this kind of social cohesion.
Religions also provide a sense of control.
Now sometimes this control was real.
For example, in agrarian societies, the earth and the seasons were part of the religious
beliefs and activities.
In this way, many ancient cultures used the fertile earth mother or the earth goddess
as a religious figure.
This was a way of helping them to control the ways in which they planted, harvested,
and there were rituals that were developed around these particular activities so that
they could create enough food supply for the entire society.
And in this way, the control that religion provided for them was a sense of real control
over the world around them that enabled them to survive more effectively.
Sometimes the control from religion is actually just perceived.
But even if it's perceived, the notion maybe from the Chromagnon with the cave paintings
who thought that they would get some control over the hunt because they did the painting
in the first place, maybe that's not real but they perceived it.
And by doing that, it helps to settle their minds in order that they can do what they
need to do in order to survive.
In this particular example, they approached the hunt more positively.
They thought for sure that they were going to be successful.
And when people think for sure and are optimistic about the outcome, they act in ways that actually
helps to achieve that outcome.
It's not a guarantee but it can help them in order to be more effective.
Now according to some evolutionary theorists, all of these different factors ultimately
led to a successful survival advantage.
And because of this, this is why religion became such a powerful force in human history
and became a part of how the human brain actually worked.
Now so far we've been looking at some of the evolutionary explanations for why human
beings might have a spiritual brain.
But let's turn now to a slightly different explanation, namely the one that I would refer
to as a neuroscientific explanation for having a spiritual brain.
Now to some degree, this can be considered an evolutionary argument but it is based more
on how the brain has come to work.
So if the brain develops to solve important survival questions such as how to develop
crops, how to domesticate animals, then it can also comprehend the big philosophical
questions about the nature of reality.
Why we're here?
Why we exist in the first place?
And what's the meaning of why we're here?
Well the brain will also begin to consider religious and spiritual answers to these questions.
In this way, religion itself is not so much specifically adaptive but is actually the
natural consequence of the neurobiology that arose for adaptive purposes.
Now to some degree, this is referred to as an epiphenomenon.
The point here is that religion didn't develop because it was adaptive.
And in other words, the brain didn't come along with this process because the brain
and religion were adaptive together.
The brain adapted for a different kind of reason altogether to help us to solve problems.
But at some point in that process, religion and spirituality came along for the ride.
And that's why it's called an epiphenomenon because it's not the responsible, causative
element for the evolution but it's something that arises on the side, so to speak, as the
result of some other aspect of evolution.
In fact, Stephen J. Gould once referred to this in some of his work about evolution when
he talked about the wing of a bird and how a wing developed.
And he made the argument that half of a wing doesn't fly.
He made the argument then that there was no way that a wing would develop in order to
anticipate flight.
It wasn't flight itself that drove the evolution of the wing.
The wing developed for some other reason, maybe so that the animal could radiate heat
away from its body, but as it became bigger, at some point, it actually took on the ability
to help the animal fly.
And once that happened, then it began to be able to function more specifically and develop
more specifically as a wing.
In the context of the epiphenomenon of religion, a similar argument is sometimes put forth
that the brain didn't arise to create religion, but as the brain arose to develop its many
processes to help us solve issues and problems in our world, religion became a part of that.
And then, of course, once religion became a part of that, it was something that helped
to continue to advance the evolution of the human mind because in and of itself it ultimately
became an adaptive process.
Now, of course, in addition to the evolutionary and the scientific explanations for why we
have a spiritual brain, there is also the religious argument.
The religious argument simply points out that if a God exists, it would certainly make sense
that the human brain would be designed in order to comprehend God.
Of course, I think this does make sense from the religious perspective.
After all, it would be kind of a fundamentally silly proposition for God to somehow be up
there in heaven and for us to be down here on earth and have no way of actually connecting
with God, of understanding God or communicating with God.
It would make sense then that we would have a brain that had its different processes so
that we could actually express religious ideas, maybe pray or meditate upon God, think about
God, and even develop ideas and beliefs about God that becomes a part of the way in which
we live our lives.
So whether we take a specifically religious perspective or a neuroscientific perspective
or an evolutionary perspective, all of them seem to come together in terms of helping
us to understand how and why a spiritual brain may have actually come about.
So no matter how we look at the reason for having a spiritual brain, it seems to me that
one conclusion is clear.
The brain appears to be built in a way that allows it to have an inherent tendency to
search for sacred goals and objects.
Furthermore, as we'll see throughout this course, I think this tendency will enable
us to have a large range of religious and spiritual experiences, will be able to engage
in different rituals, the development of stories and doctrines, engage in practices that benefit
our health and well-being, and develop philosophical and theological concepts all as the result
of these different evolutionary and religious processes that come together in our brain.
Now how and why the brain developed this spiritual tendency, we may never really know for sure.
We may never know which of these answers is actually correct.
In fact, I put it to you.
What do you think makes the most sense?
What questions might you raise that would challenge each of the arguments for why we
have a spiritual brain?
The good news is that even though we may not be able to ever fully explain why we have
spirituality or religion built into the brain, the fact that we do provides us with many
great topics and issues to explore as we continue our journey to understand the spiritual brain.
