How might science look at religion?
It turns out that even the authors of the Bible understood the need for good research
study design. I'm thinking in particular of the first chapter of the book of Daniel
where we have something that looks a lot like a nutritional study. Daniel is
talking to an official of King Nebuchadnezzar's court and the official
is worried about Daniel's diet and Daniel says to him, please test your
servants for ten days and let us be given some vegetables to eat and water
to drink. Then let our appearance be observed in your presence and the
appearance of the youths who are eating the king's choice food and deal with your
servants according to what you see. So he listened to them and in this manner
tested them for ten days. At the end of the ten days their appearance, Daniel's
appearance, seemed better and they were fatter than all the youths who had eaten
the king's choice food. Today we're going to follow in Daniel's footsteps and
try to identify some of the elements of a well-designed scientific study.
Specifically we're going to talk about the design elements that need to be
considered when science undertakes to study spirituality. Now it's important
that we do this because from this point forward we're going to be looking at a
number of research studies and we'll appreciate the information that these
studies can and can't give us if we first take time to understand the
principles of research design. Now you'll remember in the first lecture we talked
about my study of nuns and nuns in particular doing centering prayer. Well a
study like that doesn't just happen off the cuff. A great deal of thought had to
go into the design and preparation of a study like that. In fact it took a lot of
thought and discussion before my colleagues and I came up with the design
for these imaging studies. There were so many questions we had to address before
we could even get started. So let's suppose you have your own burning
questions regarding spiritual phenomena. In fact usually when I do give a
lecture to my colleagues, students, or even the general public there are many
different study ideas that people keep suggesting during the question and
answer period. And to some degree this is what I hope you will get from this
particular lecture. An ability to stretch your own scientific legs if you will
and think about how you might study the spiritual brain.
Maybe you want to know why religion sometimes results in a very positive
thought or behavior and sometimes in a very negative behavior. Maybe you want
to understand how being religious can help you if you have cancer or some
other type of disorder. Perhaps you want to study intercessory prayer and the
ability to actually affect someone at a distance through prayer. Or maybe you
want to know, like I did, what happens in the brain during a practice like
meditation or a mystical experience. To get at any of these questions you have to
begin by designing an experiment.
Typically the first question of any scientific experiment is what's the
question? What is the thing that you want to answer? Now it can't be too general
because there'd be no way for you to actually get a hold of it and measure it.
If you remember back to our definitions of religiousness and spirituality we
talked about whether we had to be very specific or very general. When you begin a
research study you have to kind of get down to some specifics. So for example if
you want to study the effects of prayer on the brain, what specific type of prayer
are you going to study? Are you going to look at centering prayer like we did? Maybe
you want to look at doing the rosary or some other type of prayer. And which
tradition do you use? Do you want to study someone from the Christian tradition,
Jewish, Buddhist, Hindu, Muslim or any of the others? So for example the study I
mentioned in lecture one focused not on prayer in general but specifically on
centering prayer. Our primary question was to determine how prayer affected the
brain but again we debated about whether centering prayer was really the best
type of prayer to study. And these are the kinds of questions that we all have
to begin to think about when we look at any study of the spiritual brain. After
all in this case centering prayer you know on one hand is good because it's
something that a person can easily do in a laboratory kind of environment. But
of course that was one of the questions that we needed to address because if we
look at other practices which may not be so conducive to being in a
laboratory environment we may not get a good study. And in fact if we talk about
trying to scan the brain during these practices different scans require us to
be in different positions. I mentioned in the last lecture one of the modalities
of imaging the brain is called Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging or
fMRI. It's a wonderful technique but you have to be lying down in the scanner. So
if you are going to do a practice where you need to be standing up you can't do
it in an MRI machine. Now if we think about the kind of prayer that we're
going to study we also have to think about what we compare it to. What are the
other types of practices that we might compare it to? Should we compare it to
sitting still, resting quietly? Should we compare it to other types of meditation
practices? And of course this creates a great deal of complexity in terms of how
we decide to design the study. So it's nice if you can focus in on studying one
type of prayer because that makes it easier but the problem is is that if
you're just looking at the one type of prayer like centering prayer then how do
we know if the results that we get are generalizable? How do we know that that
can be applied to all different kinds of prayer? Again though one of the good
things about picking one particular type of practice is that it makes it easier to
know exactly what we're studying. So it makes the data stronger even though we
may or may not be able to apply it to other kinds of practices. So now you know
what question you want to address with your study and therefore the next thing
you have to ask yourself is who are you actually going to do the study with? Now
sometimes this is obvious. For example if you're going to do a Christian prayer
such as centering prayer you probably aren't going to invite a group of
Buddhists in to do the centering prayer. You need to find people who know how to
do that particular prayer but who should you actually study as part of your
study? Should they be very religious, moderately religious or only slightly
religious? And how do you decide that? Do you want to take people who are very
familiar or expert with the practice or people who have never done it before?
What questions will you ask to assess their level of expertise? Now if you
remember in our study of the nuns doing centering prayer we decided to take
people who were very expert at doing this practice. The reason that we decided
that is that we wanted people who we felt very comfortable would be able to do
the practice, would engage the practice fully and were comfortable with it. But
the downside is that the results tell us what an expert does when they do
centering prayer and it may not be as useful in telling us what the general
public does in their brain when they engage centering prayer. So it's
helpful to think about very deeply the kinds of individuals who you want to
study so that you can actually design the study in as an effective way as
possible. Now once you decide on which people you're going to study you have
to think about what instruments or techniques you're going to use for the
study. So in addressing this particular question you have to plan not only on
what types of instruments to use but how you're going to actually analyze your
data. Now again let's think about the instruments for a moment in the study of
centering prayer. We could have done functional magnetic resonance imaging but
most of the nuns felt that they were typically seated when they did the
practice and the other problem with the MRI if you have never had an MRI it's
very noisy. It's actually about 110 decibels of a lot of banging noises so
it's not a very conducive environment for doing a practice like prayer or
meditation and therefore we might want to make sure that we have a technique that
we can use that would make it more accessible for them, easier for them to
do the particular practice. And again once you have all of this information you
have to combine and analyze the data, the imaging data with the subjective
experiences that they have and think about how you want to do that. So wow
that's really a lot of questions that you have to think about before you even
start doing the study. So clearly studying spirituality with science is not
very easy to do. You have to contend with so many different critical issues if you
want to get data that is ultimately worthwhile, interesting and useful.
So what I'd like to do in the rest of this lecture is to take a closer look at
some of the important issues that we have to think about in terms of how we
design scientific studies to look at spirituality. In the process we'll circle
back on some of the questions and some of the ideas that we've already
addressed and we'll try to look at them in even greater detail.
One of the biggest problems that I as a scientist and perhaps all scientists
face in studying spirituality from a neuroscientific perspective is what I
call the problem with paradigms. And here's what I mean. When it comes to
understanding or explaining reality, science has a very specific perspective.
Spirituality and religion has quite another. For one thing spirituality is
very experience driven. It doesn't rely on experimentation the way science does.
For example a person of faith can usually offer some kind of evidence but usually
experiential, personal experiential evidence that supports his or her own
belief system. But this is not tested from the perspective of science. There
were no scans that were done that helped them to prove that they should be
religious or spiritual. Maybe the person actually had an experience, some kind of
epiphany when they were in church or watching a beautiful sunset. Maybe they
had a very intense experience like a near-death experience or maybe they just
were walking along the street and suddenly everything just seemed clear to
them. But as a scientist I often think what actually should we accept as
evidence? Again if you go into any church or synagogue or mosque and ask the
congregants who are there, if they have evidence that God exists in their lives,
most of them would say absolutely. But does that constitute scientific evidence?
A lot of non-believers would say absolutely not. We need to have a better
way of looking at what spirituality, what religion is to help to prove whether
it's right or wrong.
And then there's another intriguing problem with paradigms and that relates to
studies of intercessory prayer. Over the last 20 years there have been a number
of studies looking at the effect of intercessory prayer on various aspects of
human health. One of the earliest studies back in the 1980s asked people to pray
for other patients who are in the hospital with heart problems. The reason
that this has such a potentially powerful impact on paradigms is if the study
actually shows that intercessory prayer works, what does that mean in terms of how
we understand the nature of our world? We typically don't think about the
possibility that somehow in my mind or spirit that I can reach across space
and affect somebody else. And yet some of these intercessory prayer studies have
demonstrated results that suggest just such a possibility. And clearly there's
a lot of controversy over how these studies were done, how well they were
done, and certainly the meaning of these studies. But the implications on the
paradigms of how we understand science could be profound.
In addition to the problem of paradigms, any scientific study of spirituality has
to confront the issues that we spoke about in the earlier lectures about definitions.
In fact, in our last lecture we talked a lot about developing an operational
definition for spirituality and religiousness. But think of all the other terms that might
need to be defined in any given study of human religious and spiritual beliefs.
What does prayer actually mean? There are many different types of prayer. For some people,
prayer is just repeating a phrase over and over again or a hymn over and over again.
For some people, prayer is conversational. They talk to God. What about other kinds of
experiences that are associated with spirituality, like forgiveness, love,
or even revelation or salvation? What do we mean by these terms? This list goes on and on.
And if we ever are going to look at a study that tries to understand those experiences,
then we have to do a better job at defining them. So definitions are an issue for all types of studies
and certainly for studies of religious or spiritual ideas, we are definitely going to have to
try to find our best way of defining these particular terms. That was one of the reasons
why we actually studied Centering Prayer because it was a very well-defined practice. We knew exactly
what the nuns were doing. We knew how they were doing it. We knew what kinds of experiences,
feelings, and thoughts they were going to have during the practice. And therefore,
when we saw the results on the brain scans, it became much easier for us to relate those changes
to what we knew they were doing as part of the Centering Prayer. But if you take a broader
perspective on what prayer is or meditation, you may find a change in the brain and it may
have nothing to do with what other people think of as prayer or meditation.
Then there's the critical issue of how do we actually measure spirituality? How do we do this?
In fact, it was kind of amusing when we first started our studies,
like with the Franciscan nuns, I wanted to get a sense as to how spiritual they felt.
And I designed a questionnaire where the very first question was, on a scale of one to ten,
how spiritual do you feel? And as I started to utter those words to the first nun,
I realized how ridiculous sounding of a question that was. How could you ask that question
and put a number on that kind of a feeling? So we try to get it other ways of measuring
spirituality, other subjective ways. And these subjective measures usually require some kind
of self-reporting. On one hand, this is great because it gives us an opportunity to develop a
scale or a list of questions where we can assess what a person feels spiritually or religiously.
These measures are sometimes very useful only within a particular tradition, though. For
example, we might have questions about beliefs and Christianity, which apply to Christians,
but may not work so well for a Jewish or Muslim population.
In my own research, I decided that we really needed to have more information on the subjective
nature of religious and spiritual experiences. If we could get this information, we could better
evaluate and design neuroscientific studies, because we would know a lot more about the
thoughts, the feelings, and experiences that people actually have when something spiritual
happens to them. And we could therefore directly tie this subjective information
into the brain functions that we can study with our scans. But how can we get this kind of subjective
information? Well, we wanted to make sure that we used a variety of different ways to get at what
a spiritual experience actually was and what it felt like. We also wanted to get information about
the people who were having these experiences, and we wanted to use different existing measures of
spirituality to see how they related to each other. We thought about how we were going to do this for
quite some time, and we decided to turn to the internet, since this provides a great platform
for getting this kind of information and getting it from lots of different people in a relatively
short period of time. So what did we do? We began by designing a website that was as comprehensive
as possible in getting at all the different aspects of what spirituality was for people.
We started out by asking some very basic questions about the participants. So if somebody came to
the website, first they were just asked questions about how old they were, what gender they were.
We asked them questions about their religious tradition of origin, how they grew up,
and we asked them where they are today. We asked them about other issues related to their lives.
What stressors did they have? Did they have any very intense medical problems, for example? Maybe
they were struggling with terminal cancer. Are they on any different medications or drugs? Have
they had problems with taking drugs in the past or drinking too much alcohol?
Then we asked them questions based on a variety of well-tested and validated questionnaires.
These different questionnaires got at a variety of different aspects of what spirituality and
religion is for people. So we asked them questions about the meaning of religion in their lives.
We asked them questions about their fear of death, about how they applied their religion
in their lives. Did they go to church, go to synagogue, and partake in a lot of social interactions,
or did they do something more personal? Ultimately, we asked them to describe their
spiritual experiences to us. We just gave them a little box and we said,
write as much as you want to do. The box just kept going and some people wrote a paragraph or two.
Some people wrote pages. The simple question was, describe to us what your spiritual experience
was. The results from this survey have been, as far as I'm concerned, absolutely incredible,
and we're still going through all of the data from over 2,000 individuals who hit the website.
I'm going to share some of the results of this study at different points in the course.
Some of this information, some of the most powerful information, came in the form of the
narratives, the descriptions that people provided about their spiritual experiences,
but other data related to how the different measures of religiosity actually worked.
For example, we developed a series of questions designed to find out how open people were about
different religious beliefs. Some of the questions were more abstract. We just said,
are you open to other people's beliefs? We asked them, do they agree with that or
do they disagree with that? We realized that people may often say, oh yes,
I'm very open to other people's beliefs, but how do they bring that into their actual lives?
We asked other questions that had a more practical implication. We might ask a question,
for example, of would you marry somebody outside of your religious tradition?
About 25% of the respondents said that they would not marry somebody outside of their religious
tradition. So overall, we found out that many people are at least somewhat open to other belief
systems, but very few people are totally open to other beliefs. And we were able to then begin to
compare openness with other aspects. We found that older people were more open to other people's
beliefs than younger people. And we began to even delve into it more deeply in terms of gender,
religious traditions. All of these are the kinds of questions that we now have an opportunity
to be able to explore in more detail. Another very interesting possibility,
which some of my colleagues and I have pondered, is whether it's possible to develop some
external measure of spirituality.
For example, it's possible that we could go to different spiritual teachers,
priests, spiritual leaders of a monastery, and ask them to evaluate how their students are doing
from a spiritual perspective. Wouldn't it be fascinating to ask the students and ask the
teachers and see if they match up? It might be the case that a student feels that they have
been completely spiritually enlightened while the master says, no, no, you're not even close.
And then of course, we have the even more profound question of which person is actually right.
So it is not even clear whether spirituality or religiousness can actually even be isolated
for measurement, because we always have to ask the question, how does it make you feel?
How does it make you think? And even if we get an external impression, we're asking them,
what do they think? What do they feel? And that to me is really begging the question as to,
are we getting at something which is truly inherently spiritual, or are we getting around
what spirituality actually is? Because we always have to ask how it makes you feel, think,
or understand the world. Now, one other possibility, another intriguing suggestion from some of my
colleagues, is to use a kind of subtraction technique. What if we could do brain scans,
subjective measures, and throw all of that into the mix? And when we look at the data,
we find out that the person is still feeling something in some way or something still being
measured that nothing else accounts for. So if we factor everything out, we might finally be
left with something which is truly inherently spiritual. In fact, in kind of a musing way of
thinking about the research studies that we've done looking at brain scans, I have always argued
that perhaps one of the most interesting results that we could have had from our research study
of the nuns doing Centering Prayer is that they would have had an intense spiritual experience
and absolutely nothing changed on the scan. If this were the case, we may have captured
something that was not a brain state per se, but something else entirely, something unmeasurable
by scientific means, something that might actually be spiritual.
For the time being, however, we researchers must make whatever connections we can between the
subjective descriptions of the spiritual experiences and thoughts and feelings that people have
and the objective measurements of the brain and other physiological processes.
Now, spirituality and religiousness are usually described in terms of psychological,
emotional, or cognitive processes. And as we began to see in our previous lecture,
science has developed some tools that enable us to measure these kinds of processes,
at least to some degree. We can begin to look at different physiological measures in the body.
So if we can look at changes in heart rate and see how they relate to the positive emotional
experiences that a nun might have doing Centering Prayer, is that associated with an increase in
their heart rate? Is it associated with a decrease in their heart rate? If somebody engages in a
prayer practice, does it change their autonomic nervous system activity? Does it change the
hormones in their body? Does it change their immune system? And there's some evidence to
support that some of these practices actually do help to boost the way the immune system works.
And of course, what this whole course is about are the neurophysiological measures.
What's going on in the brain in terms of its activity, in terms of the different neurotransmitters,
the chemicals that are going on in the brain, can we get that information and combine that
with what the person experiences subjectively so that we can find out, for example, that the more
active their frontal lobe is on a spec scan or an MRI scan, the deeper is their experience of the
spiritual. Or perhaps if we see more profound changes going on in the orientation area of their
brain, that that's associated with experiences where they lose their sense of self and they lose
their sense of space and time. What type of study do we ultimately need to evaluate the spiritual brain?
Well, there are all the different kinds of advantages and disadvantages to all of these
different types. So let us consider developing a new study in which we may want to use imaging
of the brain to determine which parts of the brain are turned on or off during a specific
practice, perhaps the rosary as one example. Now, again, we have some important questions.
Do we want to make this a longitudinal study, meaning we want to study people over time
so that we take people who maybe have never done the practice before and see how they do
over a period of months? Or do we just take a cross-section of the population and look at
people who are expert at it and those people who are just starting to do it and see where the
differences are? Of course, if we take that cross-section, we may miss the transition as to how
somebody ultimately comes to do it better and better. On the other hand, if we want to follow
people longitudinally, sometimes that's difficult because we don't know how long we have to follow
them and we still may miss the actual transition point of when they start to really get the practice
and really feel intensity of the experience. We might want to do some kind of correlational
research. We might want to compare doing the rosary to mental health issues, maybe alcohol use,
depression, or anxiety. But each of these have limitations as well because if we see an effect,
how do we know for sure that it was the rosary and not a variety of other factors that are going on?
And there are other considerations we'll need to take into consideration for our rosary study.
We want to measure the brain changes, but we have to decide if we want to look at
kind of general activity in the brain, maybe focus on specific areas like the frontal lobes
or the amygdala, or maybe even look at neurotransmitters, chemicals like serotonin and dopamine,
which have been shown to have very important effects on our emotions.
We also need to make sure that we compare the measures that we get with the imaging
with something subjective. This is what I've been saying all along. We want to understand
what the people feel. Are they doing the rosary properly? Are they getting the experiences that
we hope that they're going to get? And how do we know that they've gotten them? In fact,
the American Archbishop Fulton Sheen, who actually hosted a nighttime radio program called The
Catholic Hour for 20 years, he described the rosary this way. He said, the rosary is the best
therapy for these distraught, unhappy, fearful, and frustrated souls precisely because it involves
the simultaneous use of three powers, the physical, the vocal, and the spiritual, and in that order.
So if we design a study of the rosary, do we need to take into consideration the actions
and the experiences and the feelings? And how do we measure them? We have to determine the type
of change that we're interested in. We may want to determine changes in the brain's blood flow
or changes in measures of anxiety. But we also have to make sure that whatever changes we find,
that they are relevant in the sense that they actually mean something to the person.
So for example, if I find that the person's brain increases its activity by 2%,
they might say that's great, but so what? So we need to make sure that what we find is
true, significant, and also relevant. And in a larger way, we have to think about who should
actually be studying, why each group might be good or bad for studying the rosary. In fact,
we might even contemplate the possibility of having atheists try the rosary, or we might restrict it
to those who are truly expert at it in terms of a religious population. And if we find a change,
we may want to make sure that it is a change that is directly related to doing the rosary and not
by doing one of hundreds of other types of practices that might be similar.
So we need to have a good comparison state.
The problem is, is that in science, we typically like to have what we call the placebo,
or the control condition. What is a good control condition for doing the rosary? It involves
manipulating your hands. It involves repeating certain things outwardly, internally. So do we
want somebody to be doing something with their hands, or do we want somebody to simply be resting
there quietly? All of these are the questions that we really have to take into consideration
to make sure that if we find a change, that it is a real change, it's meaningful in the context
of the practice, and it's something that can have some usefulness in terms of understanding its
effect on us as human beings. So why is all of this discussion about study design important?
Well, for one, it tells us something about the capabilities and the limitations of science.
It's something that I've been deeply interested in since I am a scientist, and I want to know
how far we can push science. And if we don't ask all of these very compelling questions,
we might not understand exactly what science can tell us. But more importantly, it helps us to
understand what kind of information regarding religious and spiritual phenomena we can actually
obtain. So we now have a better sense of how this entire field of research has developed,
and we can use this information when reviewing, when we review the array of studies that we will
consider in all of our upcoming lectures.
