I'd like for you to imagine a beautiful starlit night.
Two people, Jane and Tom, are sitting near their campsite far from the city, staring
up at the stars in silence.
Both of them, let's imagine, feel amazement at the beauty and the immensity of the universe.
But that's where the shared experience ends.
Tom senses a powerful presence in the night, a creator perhaps, or a spirit that connects
him with everything he sees, even the most distant star.
Jane by contrast, enjoys the experience but reflects only on the natural beauty around
her.
The stars are merely distant suns, fun to look at, but nothing more.
So far in this course, we've been talking about the seeming universality of religious
practices and experiences in the human species.
But our campsite scenario raises a very important question.
If we all have a spiritual brain, why are there non-believers?
This question is at the forefront of many atheist minds.
From a neuroscientific perspective, the question is slightly different.
Is there a difference in the brains of people who believe and those who do not?
The implication is that there might possibly be something distinctive about the brain's
structure or function that influences whether people become either believers or non-believers.
And that implication in and of itself is a fascinating component to an even bigger question.
Is it the brain or something else that determines whether you believe?
But let's get back to the first question.
Why are there non-believers?
Well, you know already that I'm a stickler for definitions, so first of all, what exactly
do we mean when we talk about non-believers?
After all, atheists, like religious individuals, actually come in many different types and
flavors.
A scientist, for example, might be an atheist because they don't believe in any kind of
supernatural process of the universe.
It's all what we can see from a scientific perspective.
We can do experiments, understand the physical world around us, and that is it.
On the other hand, a Buddhist, for example, might look at the world in a very spiritual
way even though ultimately they don't actually believe in a god, at least a god in terms
of the monotheistic traditions like Christianity and Judaism.
So even though they don't believe in God, they have this very intense sense of spirituality
and they believe in an afterlife.
This is very different than a scientist who is an atheist or someone who might consider
themselves a materialist, both looking at the world in which there is just the material
aspects of the world and nothing beyond that.
And of course, other people consider themselves to be agnostic.
They don't really believe in God, but they're not so sure.
Maybe there is, maybe there isn't.
But if you actually ask them, are they religious or not, most of the time they would say, no,
I'm not that religious or spiritual.
Okay, so now we have a pretty clear idea of what we mean by a non-believer.
Not every non-believer shares the same epistemological principles, but for our purposes we'll say that
broadly a non-believer is someone who does not believe in a supernatural realm.
They don't require a notion of God to explain their existence or the existence and nature
of the universe.
Given that we have these two broad classes of people in the world, believers and non-believers,
let's now turn to science to see if it has any tools or techniques for evaluating the
differences between them.
One approach is by taking believers and non-believers and actually scanning their brains.
A few studies have actually attempted to do this in various ways.
For example, several studies have compared those who meditate or pray as part of their
spiritual tradition to people who do not meditate or pray.
The results of these studies have actually been somewhat striking.
Most of the studies have actually not measured the function of the brain so much as the size
of the brain, and they can actually quantify how big different parts of the brain are.
When these studies have looked at the difference between those who have been doing practices
like meditation and prayer for many, many years, what they find is that those people
who have been doing those practices actually have thicker brains.
Their brains are actually bigger, and particularly in the part of the brain called the frontal
lobe.
Now, if you remember from our previous lectures, the frontal lobes are involved in our ability
to focus our attention, to concentrate on things, and to control and regulate our emotions
and our behaviors.
When people engage in prayer or meditation, clearly they are heavily focused in the practice,
and therefore it may make sense that just like exercising a muscle, they've exercised
their brain and actually made it thicker.
Now, I've talked to you a little bit about some of our research.
I've been able to study people who are engaged in different types of meditation practices,
and we talked at the very beginning of the course of our study looking at Franciscan
nuns in prayer.
So we can actually look at whether or not there are not just structural changes in the
brain, but whether or not there are actually functional changes as well.
Our research actually points to several very interesting changes or differences between
those people who have been engaged in these practices of prayer and meditation for many
years in comparison to those who have never done these practices.
Similarly to what the MRI study showed of increased thickness in the frontal lobe of
the brain, we have actually found increased blood flow, increased activity in the frontal
lobe of the brain.
It suggests that when people do these practices for many years, always drawing on the activity
levels of their frontal lobe to engage in that practice, they're actually setting the
stage for that frontal lobe to function in a whole different way.
It actually even at rest functions in a more active way.
Another very interesting finding that we have found with regard to our studies of people
engaged in prayer and meditation has been in a different structure, a very central structure
called the thalamus.
Now we have not really talked much about the thalamus yet, but the thalamus is actually
one of the most critical relays in the brain.
The thalamus actually takes in all of our sensory information, and particularly that
from our vision and from our hearing, and brings it up to the higher parts of the brain
so that we can create a sense of our reality.
It also helps different parts of the brain to communicate with each other, so it controls
sensory information, it controls our cognitive processes, and some people even think that
it is the seat of consciousness.
It is essential for our entire experience and understanding of reality.
What do we find when we looked at the long-term meditators?
Interestingly, when we look at the long-term meditators, their thalamus is very asymmetric.
What I mean by that is that we have a thalamus on the left and the right side, and it turns
out that long-term meditators tend to have one of those sides be more active than the
other.
When we look at the general population, in general, they're pretty evenly balanced.
So if you think about what's going on with regard to the brain, it looks like their brain
is looking at the world in a very, very different way, because this thalamus that regulates
all of their sensory information and the ways in which they think is actually functioning
differently than a person who has not done this kind of a practice.
Now these results, the MRI studies showing changes in the thickness of the brain, our
studies showing changes in the activity levels of the brain, are very intriguing because
they do, in fact, show a difference between those people who are religious and spiritual
and those who are not, or at least those who have done long-term meditation and prayer
practices, but this raises an even more fundamental question, which is a chicken in the egg kind
of question.
That question is, did the spiritual people have thicker brains or more active frontal
lobes in the brains to begin with, and that that is what attracted them to their spiritual
beliefs and practices, or did their brains change over time as the result of doing these
practices and of being spiritual?
In other words, what came first?
To answer this chicken in the egg question, we need a longitudinal study.
When we have done the studies that we've talked about so far are really just taking a one-time
look at the people who are religious and the people who are not and trying to make a comparison,
but how have they changed over time?
Can we take people who are early on in their lives and follow them over time, or can we
take people who maybe have never done a practice like meditation or prayer, had them begin to
do a practice and study them for many months or even years?
So if we can evaluate what happens in their thought processes and their spiritual beliefs
over time, we might better determine whether the brain causes people to believe or not.
It's also possible that the longer the person believes in something, the more their brain
changes to accept that belief.
Now, I'm a pretty avid tennis player, and one of the analogies that I always think about
is playing tennis in this regard.
So we all are able to play tennis.
If I put a racket in your hands right now, you could probably go out and play tennis,
hit the ball.
And if all of us went out and practiced for hours and hours every single day, we would
all get a lot better, but we would also have to acknowledge that some people are just going
to naturally be better than others.
And I think this tennis analogy applies very nicely to the notion of people who are spiritual
because on one hand, we might argue that everyone has an ability to be spiritual to some degree,
but the more we engage it, the more spiritual we can become.
And it raises some fascinating questions as to if you took somebody who really wasn't
that spiritual, at least in terms of their predisposition, and you had them engage in
these practices a lot, well, they might actually get to a moderate level of spirituality.
On the other hand, someone who might be predisposed to being a very spiritual person, if they
were never able to engage in any kind of religious or spiritual practices, then perhaps they
would ultimately not be all that spiritual.
So to some degree, there may be something built in inside of us, but it may also be
something that is learned and changed over time.
Unfortunately at this time, in terms of the research, there are no longitudinal studies
that have specifically compared the way a believer's brain changes over time and compare
that to the way a non-believer's brain changes over time.
However, we will be considering some other interesting longitudinal studies later on
in the course that may shed some light on this fascinating issue.
For now, let's look at another approach that uses imaging technology to compare brain activity
in believers and non-believers.
As someone studying spirituality in the brain, I was very interested in trying to get at
some way of understanding where this difference would actually be in the brain.
And I started to engage in some kind of fun conversations with some friends of mine who
are very staunch atheists.
And I said to them, well, you know, would it be possible for you to actually come into
our lab and we could scan your brain when you are meditating perhaps?
These were all people who actually had a fairly active meditation practice, even though they
were atheists.
And I said, could you come in and instead of meditating the usual way that you did, actually
meditate on the idea of God.
Actually what I was doing was asking an atheist to contemplate God.
And I thought if we could actually scan their brains while they were contemplating God,
I could compare what was going on in their brain to what was going on in the brain of,
for example, our Franciscan nuns, who also meditated or prayed on the idea of God.
So that's exactly what we did.
We brought a few of my friends in to actually scan their brains while they contemplated the
notion of God and we scanned them at rest and during this contemplation.
So what happened in their brains?
Well, we looked at the frontal lobes, which as we know turned on in the Franciscan nuns.
And what happened to the atheists who was contemplating God?
Their frontal lobes actually didn't turn on.
In fact, if we looked at the scans, it looked like one side of the frontal lobe actually
turned on a little bit and the other side actually turned off a little bit.
So what's going on here?
I mean, if the frontal lobes help us to concentrate on something and to focus on something and
they're having a real problem in actually doing it, maybe they're struggling with a
sense of cognitive dissonance.
They're trying to focus on something that they really don't like very much.
They really don't feel comfortable focusing on it.
And clearly the nuns do.
They are really able to engage the concepts of their prayer, of their meditation, and
of the notion of God.
So already we're starting to see where there are certain differences between those people
who are atheists and those people who are believers when they actually engage the topic
or the concept of God.
What about some other studies that could be done to look at the difference between atheist
and believers?
In fact, you may actually be able to think of some ways of studying the difference between
these two groups of people.
One of the arguments has frequently been that those people who are believers are not as
logically sound as those people who are non-believers.
The non-believers are more skeptical.
And studies have looked at the ability to interpret syllogism's logical arguments to
see how religious people and non-religious people actually interpret these logical problems
and these different patterns.
So several studies have actually been designed to look at this difference.
Now syllogisms are usually used in some way of trying to get at how well they are able
to think logically.
But what one very interesting study decided to do was to kind of tweak these syllogisms
from being simply logical questions to being questions that were either pro or anti-religious.
So for example, a pro-religious syllogism would be something like the following.
If to succeed in life, you have to be Christian.
And if a person named Thomas wants to succeed in life, then Thomas should become a Christian.
Now internally, this is a logically accurate statement.
You don't necessarily have to agree with each part of that statement.
But if you look at the given first two statements, the third one follows logically.
But it is also a pro-religious syllogism because it speaks very positively about religion.
Now an anti-religious syllogism might be something along the following.
If being religious is found to be bad for people who have depression, and if you suffer
from depression, then you should try to be less spiritual or religious.
Now again, internally this makes logical sense.
Whether you believe in those first two statements or not is irrelevant.
If you accept them, then logically they make sense.
So this study looked at religious and non-religious people and asked them a whole series of these
pro and anti-religious syllogisms.
The results were very intriguing.
And perhaps to some degree not surprising.
The religious people actually did better on the pro-religious syllogisms than the non-religious
people.
And not surprisingly, the atheists, the non-religious people, did better on the anti-religious questions.
So the results suggest that both groups make logical mistakes.
They just happen to make them in the direction of their prevailing belief system.
So the ways in which we think about ourselves, the ways in which we believe about our world,
actually change the way we understand our world.
Another study also demonstrated the difference between believers and non-believers in a very
intriguing way that also bears directly on our question about how the brain responds
differently in one group or the other.
But it started out a bit as a non-brain study.
They brought believers and non-believers in to their lab and they asked them to look
at a series of photographs.
These photos had been distorted so that they looked a little bit like a Rorschach kind
of test.
They were very difficult to tell what was actually in the photos.
Within the photos, though, there were some real and some non-real elements.
So there may be a picture of a dog, for example, which was actually in there.
And then maybe there was some other pictures of a tree, for example, that it kind of looked
like a tree, but that really wasn't in the picture.
And they asked believers and non-believers to describe what these photos look like and
the things that they saw in them.
What were the results?
Well, they were very interesting.
Believers were more likely to see things that were there, but also sometimes saw things
that weren't there.
On the other hand, non-believers never saw things that weren't there, but sometimes did
miss the things that were there.
So again, each group made mistakes, but in directions that were consistent with their
beliefs.
The idea is that those people who believe are more willing to accept other pieces of information
as part of reality and hence could see other things in those pictures than what were actually
there.
On the other hand, the non-believers tend to have a lower threshold as to what they'll
accept as being real, and they cut off where that threshold was so that they didn't see
some of the things that actually were there.
But there was one other interesting part of this study.
The experimenters actually gave to the non-believers a drug that actually helps to increase the
amount of the chemical dopamine in the brain.
Now we haven't talked much yet about the neurotransmitters in the brain.
We're going to discuss this in much more detail later on in the course.
But for now, what I want you to know about dopamine is that it's very involved in our
ability to perceive the world, it's very involved in our emotional responses, and it's also
very involved in our ability to move and to behave properly in the world.
What happened when they actually gave a drug that increased the level of dopamine to the
non-believers and then gave them those same pictures again?
Well the non-believers actually responded much more like the believers did now.
They actually saw some things that weren't there and they picked up almost all the things
that were there.
So in this context, this study shows that dopamine may be a very important mediator of
how we interpret our sensory information and how we may actually turn into somebody who
believes in a spiritual way or in a non-spiritual way.
It would certainly be interesting to see if there was some deeper relationship between
these neurotransmitters and specific aspects of spirituality.
The relationship between dopamine and spirituality actually takes another very interesting turn
in a study that was conducted by a Dr. Dean Hamer who was a behavioral geneticist at
NIH.
Hamer has actually analyzed the DNA from many different people to try to get a sense as
to what aspects of DNA affect our personality.
The way this study worked is that he gave a whole series of personality tests to over
a thousand individuals asking them all kinds of questions about their emotions, about their
thought processes, all different kinds of things.
And he also took blood samples from them to look at all of their different genetic patterns.
And in this study, he identified one particular gene that he ultimately called the God Gene.
This gene was found to correlate with people's feelings of what was called self-transcendence.
So what is self-transcendence?
It's that feeling of being able to get beyond yourself, to connect to something which is
simply beyond the material world.
And of course this sounds very much like the spiritual experiences that people often describe.
There's this sense that they can go beyond their self, they can get beyond where they
are in the everyday reality world, and connect with something that is greater than the self.
What was particularly interesting about this result is that this so-called God Gene was
involved in producing something called the V-MAT2 receptor.
We know for example that the V-MAT2 receptor actually regulates the concentration of dopamine.
And it also regulates the concentration of another neurotransmitter chemical called serotonin.
As I mentioned, dopamine and also serotonin are very involved in our emotions, very involved
in our sensory perceptions of the world, and therefore have a great deal to do with how
we experience and think about our world.
Now some scientists noted that the effect of this gene on the differences in spiritual
beliefs is likely to be very, very low, maybe less than about 10% of the actual effect.
But Dr. Hamer was very quick to point out that this God Gene does not imply that this
is the only factor in making someone spiritual or religious.
But it does seem to be part of the process.
So now some religious people of course were very concerned that religion was actually
being reduced only to our genes, ignoring the spiritual doctrines, our culture, and
various traditions that have had an impact on what makes people religious and spiritual.
And of course most importantly, they argue that focusing in on the genes actually ignores
even the existence of God.
But Hamer responded that the existence of such a gene would not be incompatible with
the existence of a personal God.
Religious believers, he said, can point to the existence of God genes as one more sign
of the Creator's ingenuity, a clever way to help human beings acknowledge and embrace
a divine presence.
In fact, Hamer repeatedly notes in his book that this book is about whether God genes
exist, not about whether there is in fact a God.
Now one of the advantages of Dr. Hamer's study is that it looked at a relatively large number
of people.
But in order to fully evaluate and answer this question about believers and non-believers,
we may need to greatly expand the population of people that we are going to study.
So we could study, as a bunch of research has already done, the contrast between atheists
and religious people.
That is obviously the most simple way to do it.
We take people who are very religious, we take people who are very non-religious, and
we look at the differences between them.
But we might also try to consider studying the general population, because there we're
going to get a much greater range.
And we could see how spirituality is expressed along a continuum of many different people
and many different cultures and traditions.
It's a little bit like trying to study music.
There are a lot of different ways that we could get at how we as human beings process
and think and experience music.
One way would be to compare the expert musicians to those people who are completely tone deaf.
That's a little bit like our comparison of religious people and non-religious people.
We're taking those who are and those who really aren't and see where the differences are.
We could also compare musical abilities in the general public.
So we could look at how a huge array of people think about music from those who are fairly
tone deaf to those who maybe practice the piano when they were kids, to those who like
to sing in the shower, to those who are actually expert musicians.
In fact, it might actually be interesting to study children before they've ever had
any kind of musical induction or any kind of musical lessons and see which of them become
musicians and which of them don't.
Again, it'd be very helpful then to see which of them became novices and experts to see
where those differences are.
One other possibility, which has always been intriguing to me, is to not just look at the
experts and the non-experts, but to look at the people who are truly gifted in this particular
practice.
Wouldn't it have been fascinating to have been able to study Mozart's brain, for example?
Here we have a person who looked at music from an entirely different perspective from
almost everyone else who has ever lived.
What would that person's brain look like and how would that be different from everyone
else?
Now extrapolate this to our discussions about religion and spirituality.
So we could study believers and non-believers, as we said.
We could look at the general population or maybe we actually focus on those who are at
the very pinnacle of spirituality, the mother Teresa's of the world, the Dalai Lama.
There are many different fascinating possibilities that we can begin to explore to help us better
understand the spiritual brain and why some people are more spiritual than others and
how spirituality is expressed throughout humanity.
So it appears that there may be some very important differences in believers and non-believers
and the differences may be manifested in how they think and interpret reality, but ultimately
these differences are also reflected in the structure and the function of their brain.
Different parts of the brain react differently in believers and non-believers and of course
there is probably a broad spectrum of belief and few people are at the extreme of either
unshakable belief or absolute unbelief in a spiritual phenomena or God.
As scientific research becomes more sophisticated we will be able to better analyze these differences
along the entire spectrum of belief.
But in the meantime it's fascinating to consider how far belief may be determined from birth
by our genes acquired through our interactions with other people or perhaps even acquired
through an actual encounter with God.
