In our last lecture, we explored some possible neurological and genetic differences between
believers and atheists.
To me, this exploration raises a fascinating question.
If people can become believers or atheists, how does this actually happen?
When in each of our lives do we find our beliefs?
In his book Stages of Faith, Dr. James Fowler offered a template for spiritual development
over the course of a human lifetime.
He actually identified seven stages of development, beginning at stage zero, which was a pre-stage,
and going through stage six.
Each stage, he felt, corresponds to a particular period in a person's life from infancy through
late adulthood that has to do with the development of a person's spiritual or religious beliefs.
Now, Fowler's model is not meant to be taken too exactly.
After all, not everyone goes through all seven stages, nor does everyone attain the same
level of spiritual development at the same time or within the same context of their life.
It is also not clear whether different traditions and cultures actually have different levels
or types of spiritual development.
As I pondered some of these developmental questions, I started to turn toward my background
in brain imaging.
I have performed scans on people from infancy through adulthood and actually even at the
point of death.
And what I found fascinating in my studies of the human brain is how it changes and develops
throughout a person's life.
If that is the case, then perhaps we can learn something about spiritual development by looking
at the brain's development.
So if we consider spirituality from a neurophysiological perspective, we might expect that spirituality
develops along the same lines as the brain.
In addition, we might expect that both spirituality and the brain develop in a similar way in almost
every person.
So there should be certain universal processes that we can understand in the context of a
person's spiritual or brain development.
And with that in mind, I actually began to see how well Fowler's model of spiritual development
matched what was going on in the brain during its development.
And I came across a rather remarkable association.
So in this lecture, let's look at Fowler's model of spiritual development and see what's
happening in the brain at each of the seven stages.
In order to accomplish this, we will use what we know about the brain's development from
a variety of brain imaging studies, including those which are both structural and functional,
that have helped us to delineate how the brain actually develops throughout our life.
We will eventually strive to develop a very integrated model that might be called a Neurospiritual
Development Model.
So let's begin and think about Fowler's model and the first stage that he talks about.
In this case, it is stage zero, which as I mentioned a few moments ago is actually a
pre-stage and corresponds to infancy.
Fowler actually refers to this as the stage of undifferentiated faith.
From a neurological standpoint, there is little in the way of higher cognitive functions
during infancy, especially with regard to integrating all the different sensory and
cognitive information that exists out there in the world.
So as a result, there really can't be any identifiable or differentiated sense of faith
or belief system.
The infant operates almost exclusively in a stimulus response mode without really thinking
about anything in particular.
Even if the infant is raised in a highly devoted religious family, he or she really cannot
absorb any of the cognitive information or the ideas that come about within the context
of their particular religious or spiritual perspective.
Now this is still a very important stage even though there's no real religious ideology
or concepts that are developing in the brain.
This is the stage where the seeds of all of this occurs, the seeds of trust, hope, love
and spirituality are developed.
Of course it is imperative that the environment provides enough consistency and nurturance
and is not one in which there is a lot of deprivation.
When animals at least are raised in a very sensory and love deprived situation, the result
is a brain that is very disconnected.
There is very few neurons that actually connect to other neurons and therefore they are not
able to develop in the same way that they would if they were brought up in a very enriched
kind of environment.
So such isolation is arguably associated with an overall lack of connections in the brain
and not only between the neurons themselves but between the individual person or animal
and the rest of their entire environment.
If such a lack of connection persists beyond this stage then the individual's association
areas that we talked about that help with all of that higher brain functioning may not
form adequately and this prevents the person from being able to explore their world and
their spiritual sense and meaning in the first place.
So this stage is critical to overall development both psychologically and spiritually.
Now what actually is going on in the brain throughout that first year of life?
Well the brain function patterns that are seen on brain scans basically show that all
that's really working in the infant's brain is the sensory areas that receive all of the
information from the outside world, the motor areas because clearly infants can move and
a lot of the very core structures, the thalamus that we mentioned before and the brainstem
that connects the body and the brain to each other.
There are no significant higher cortical functions and subsequently there's no evidence for any
kind of well integrated cognitive functioning in this stage.
Of course anyone who has ever been around an infant can attest to this that they don't
really think about anything.
They really just function on a very stimulus response, they feel things, they can move but
that's really about it.
Now at about 8 to 9 months there's a beginning of increased activity in the frontal lobes
and other brain association areas that correspond with the advent of some cognitive thought
processes and social interactions.
In fact it's actually not until the infant is about 1 to 2 years old that the brain scan
actually qualitatively looks like an adult brain.
Interestingly if we look at people's brains as they get much older, people who have very
severe dementia from Alzheimer's disease for example, it's amazing that their brain actually
looks very similar to a child's brain.
So we might actually be able to infer a little bit about where spirituality may ultimately
go as an individual develops all the way through life to the very end stages of their life.
Now this brings us to the second of Fowler's stages.
Now remember his first stage actually started zero so this next stage is actually stage one
and Fowler refers to stage one as the intuitive projective stage, that's what he calls it.
For Fowler stage one extends from about age 2 to about 6 years old.
During this stage a child is able to gain some control over his world through the use
of language and symbolic representation.
The child is beginning to speak, they're beginning to think about things but their thought processes
are typically in a very magical kind of way, they're not constrained by the usual logical
operations that we as adults tend to think along and again, for anyone who's had any
time to interact with a child in that 2 to 3 year age range, we understand that.
They are really just trying to understand their world and they put together things in very
very fun but also strange ways.
Now during this stage a child has begun to integrate and conceptualize some spiritual
ideas, they're beginning to understand what God is in the ways in which society has started
to ingrain it within them and typically this is done through stories, through fantasy,
through different dramatic representation and that's why we see often times children
taking part in church plays or having fun at holidays and hearing these religious and
spiritual stories for the first time.
They might be asked to engage in very simplistic prayers, the bedtime prayer, grace before a
meal and this is what a child basically can draw on in terms of their information about
religious and spiritual ideas.
Now the neurophysiological development at this time is associated with a progressive
increase in the brain's overall metabolism particularly in the cortex, particularly in
those higher areas of the brain.
This initial increase metabolism is probably related to an overproduction of neurons and
their connections.
In fact it's fascinating but it's really during this kind of childhood time period that the
brain actually has the highest metabolism that it will ever have throughout our lives.
So what's going on during stage one?
Well basically in the brain the child's brain is establishing so many different kinds of
connections all the time.
There's a great deal of expansion and really overconnectedness between the neurons.
The result is that there are very few clearly defined rules and there is a sense of blending
many different kinds of experiences and ideas.
The child would therefore perceive the world as being comprised by many overlapping ideas,
experiences, feelings, all different kinds of unusual and kind of illogical ways that
appear to be fantasy to older individuals but to the child they make a lot of sense.
Children in the stage therefore are likely to not see a whole lot of problem in blending
all kinds of unusual ideas about God especially with very mundane kind of issues.
For example the child may think that God makes the toaster heat up the bread.
In fact one person I know used to believe that they could contact God by tying a letter
to a helium balloon and letting it go from their backyard.
Another person reported that when they were young they believed that black and white animals
like pandas and zebras were actually ones that God had forgotten to color in in God's
coloring book.
So we can see that there are some very unusual and funny ways in which children begin to
think about their world and particularly about their sense of spirituality and about God.
But they also have a developing sense of their self and that comes along with increased activity
in the brain particularly in the frontal and the parietal lobes.
With this developing sense of self comes the beginning of experiencing concepts such as
death, sex, different taboos of society, things that they shouldn't be doing, different moral
ideas and ultimate conditions of existence, what it means to be here on earth.
However children will not likely be able to make sense of all of these very complex issues
in the same way that a mature adult would.
So they're starting to get a notion of what these ideas are all about but they're not
yet really able to engage them because they have so many different connections that there's
no way for them to really create a very coherent idea about what the world is and how they
should begin to understand it.
Fowler's next stage, stage two, occurs during the school age years from about six to ten
years of age.
He refers to this stage as the mythic literal stage and it's during this stage that a child
begins to internalize myths, different stories, beliefs, observances and so forth that symbolize
belonging to their community or their religious or spiritual group.
As the child internalizes these ideas it enables them to compose a world view and an ideology
that they can now begin to foster and create as they grow up.
However for the child at this stage beliefs still are relatively literal in terms of their
interpretation.
They think about religious ideas, doctrines in very concrete ways and usually even the
moral ideas and rules and attitudes that they come across are thought of in very kind of
cut and dry ways.
Now what's going on there in the brain is very interesting because I mentioned in the
last stage they were over connected so what's starting to happen is that the brain is starting
to cut back different neural connections and typically it starts with the inappropriate
ones.
By removing inappropriate neural connections the brain allows for the appropriate connections
to form and this process likely involves very specific neural rules by which some connections
are strengthened and others are actually cut.
In the neuroscientific world we sometimes refer to this as being pruned back.
Now the rules are likely associated with the elaboration of different stories or myths
or ideas in order to provide information and understanding of the world around us to the
child.
Now we'll be discussing myth in a later lecture but for the purposes of what we're talking
about right here it's important to note that during this stage two stories, drama and myth
are the primary venues in which these different ideas are experienced.
And again what's going on here is that through these stories the child's neural connections
that are wrong, the wrong ways to think about God, the wrong ways to think about morality,
those start to get cut away and the person begins to develop the kinds of neural connections
that support the behaviors and the ideas that they are told to believe and that ultimately
will work for them as they grow up into adolescence and adulthood.
So let's talk about the next stage which is stage three and it's really the adolescent
stage.
For Fowler he calls it the synthetic conventional stage.
An adolescent sense of spirituality is likely to be built upon notions of religion and spirituality
that were established in the prior stages, in the childhood stages.
But during the synthetic conventional stage there is the elaboration of basic ideas of
the person's overall world perspective.
So this is really the period in which a person's basic approach to life, relationships and
their self and spirituality become galvanized, they become fully elaborated or at least
work towards being fully elaborated.
Now of course many religions recognize how spirituality matures at this stage and actually
incorporates specific religious ceremonies such as the bar or bat mitzvah of the Jewish
tradition when a child turns 13 or the confirmation ceremonies in the Christian tradition.
These ceremonies recognize that the individual has left his or her childhood belief system
and is beginning to develop into the belief system of adulthood.
From a brain perspective this is a very complex stage as almost every one of us knows as we've
gone through it.
But it's during this stage that many different factors including our hormones, sexual maturation,
peer groups, all of these different things have an impact on the brain's continued development.
More and more of the inappropriate connections that were formed in childhood are being cut
but also the higher areas of the brain are forming and establishing the right connections
for that person throughout the rest of their life.
So they're beginning to think about things in a much more detailed way.
The adolescence world begins to extend beyond their family into their peer group, into the
other groups of people who are around them, their teachers and so forth and all of these
things are taking part in what's going on in the spiritual development and the brain
development of the adolescent.
So neurophysiologically this seems to be expressed by the continued development of different
higher parts of the brain and corresponds to a time where the overall metabolism in
the brain is actually beginning to decrease.
In fact it decreases most dramatically between the ages of about 11 and 20 years because
it's cutting all of those connections to establish the connections that the brain wants so that
we can go forward with the rest of our lives.
So what we think is happening now is the person begins to have more formal operational thinking
as they get to the end of adolescence.
They're able to understand ideas from very complex perspectives.
They have the ability to think about other perspectives so we can actually understand
a little bit more about what other people think.
Maybe people who don't agree with us or maybe people who disagree with the ways in which
we were raised in the first place and again as many of us know as we enter into adolescence
and into early adulthood these are the times that we really question the ideas and concepts
that we were raised with.
Now the brain has the ability to continually change but this ability to change something
called neuroplasticity the ways in which the brain can continue to adapt and change to
our environment this begins to decrease very notably as there's a decrease in the metabolism.
Now of course there's still significant room for the continual development and expansion
of all different kinds of new ideas and concepts but these ideas are not likely to be as foundational
as the ones that were formed in childhood and if you think about it and research has
shown this that most people when you ask them where their religious and spiritual beliefs
are in adulthood will tell you that they are very similar to the ones that they developed
in childhood and adolescence.
So once those very foundational beliefs begin to form and are ingrained within the neural
connections of the brain that is something that stays with us and continues to be with
us through the rest of our lives.
So now we come to adulthood and Fowler's stage four which he refers to as the individuative
and reflective stage.
This stage occurs when there is really a more full break between the person's own belief
system and whatever or whomever had been the authority figures in their life before.
There is a critical distancing of one's established value system and this stage usually does occur
during young adulthood usually around the college age years but it can actually happen
as late as the ages of 30 to 40 years old.
This stage is a time when one begins to take responsibility for their own choices their
own actions irrespective of what other people feel.
And neurophysiologically this stage is associated with the fullest development of our cognitive
and emotional processes.
These are now at the adult levels of the brain functioning and scans demonstrate very substantial
activity going on and interacting between all the different parts of the brain the higher
parts of the brain the emotional parts of the brain that allows us to create a very
stable and substantial view of the world and certainly much more so than all the different
changes that were going on in the previous stages.
There are very few new neural connections that are established and the pruning of connections
is also limited in the brain.
At least they are in some reasonable kind of balance so this stage is where stability
starts to kick in.
This is the stage where a person's overall personality and the way they are going to
be throughout their life really takes hold and because there is such a balance between
new connections and old connections this is the stability portion of our stage of development
and also our stage of spirituality.
Now as one moves into mid adulthood we begin to enter into the fifth stage of Fowler's
model that he calls conjunctive faith stage.
The initiating factor that propels a person into this stage five is typically some kind
of disillusionment with the person's compromises issues that they faced in life and a recognition
that life is a lot more complex than one's ability to use the logic and abstract thought
processes that had been developing since adolescence.
This leads to the search for a more multi-leveled approach to life, different ideas about truth,
morality and also different ideas about spiritual and philosophical issues and traditions.
It's at this stage that the individual is ready for very significant encounters with
other traditions in a quest going back to our definition a search for meaning and value
in life.
So there is now an integration of the self that was previously unrecognized or even
suppressed.
As they went into adulthood they were trying to find themselves, they found themselves
but now they're questioning that.
The end result is basically a reworking or even a reclaiming of one's own identity and
perhaps even a reclaiming of their faith by an understanding of their life experiences
and how it relates to them and perhaps how it relates to all of humanity.
Neurophysiologically this stage is associated with an overall decrease in the brain's metabolic
activity.
This decrease begins around the age of 40 and completely progresses very slowly throughout
the remainder of the individual's life.
Now what's interesting is that the decrease in general is unknown to the person even though
it may ultimately reflect or at least contribute to the notion of disillusionment since the
brain no longer appears to be able to find the answers that it was striving so hard to
find with its full complement of its cognitive and emotional functions.
Part of the reason why the person doesn't perceive this in a very dramatic way is because
as this decrease begins to occur it is in balance.
All of the different parts of the brain continue to decrease very slowly so we tend to not
notice it even though it starts to creep into our various ideas and thought processes.
Now as we get into our final stages of development we're getting into the older adulthood and
what's going on here is that as all of these neural connections are continuing to get lost
there may be a sense that not only the answers but the questions are slipping away from us
and that it is unlikely that we are ever going to be able to get to what we were ultimately
searching for from the beginning at least on the present path.
Now the self may also be perceived to be somewhat slipping away since the connections between
the neurons subserving the self and our sensory environment, our thought processes, all of
these are decreasing.
This is what we see on the scans and this is what begins to happen within the person
themselves.
The result may be a concern that the self can no longer face the struggle to know and
understand about our world.
So the final stage is what is sometimes referred to as the universalizing phase stage and this
is stage six of Fowler's model.
The transition to this stage may be spontaneous, it may require deep reflection or some kind
of personal struggle, maybe a struggle with a person, a spouse or a health related issue.
The ultimate goal is the notion that the person needs to achieve a more universal conception
of religion and the universe.
In universalizing faith there is a sense of unity between the self and the tenets of that
particular person's religious tradition.
What I mean by that is that they begin to feel more deeply connected with their tradition,
they return to that tradition, they want to take part in it and they realize that the
ideas and the beliefs of that particular tradition actually do have the meaning that they were
looking for.
For some this may actually represent a sense of a union of the self with God or even ultimate
reality.
This universalizing stage really creates a sense of oneness, a sense of connectedness
between the self and something greater than the self.
This may result from a variety of different practices or even experiences and this relates
back to some of the things that we talked about when we first discussed the brain scans.
For example, the brain scans of the Franciscan nuns that when we saw a decrease of activity
in the parietal lobe of the brain, that part of the brain that helps us to establish our
sense of self, maybe it's that decrease of activity in that area that's associated with
this universalizing stage of faith.
Looking in more detail at this stage of faith from a neuroscientific perspective, we can
actually make some very interesting observations.
Basically, the brain has had a progressive decrease of activity in all of the cortical
areas and particularly in the parietal lobe.
So not only do we see a decrease of activity in the parietal lobe when a person is actually
in meditation or prayer and experiences the loss of the sense of self, but it can actually
happen naturally as the person's brain gets older.
So perhaps this is part of what's going on in this stage of development where we begin
to experience a union with God, a union with our spiritual self that arises from this overall
decrease of activity in the cognitive and the sensory areas of the brain that help to
support our overall sense of self.
So since there is already this decrease and an overall decrease in the interconnectedness
of different neurons and different connections in the brain, this may actually contribute
to this type of experience typically occurring as people get older.
Now we will return to the experience of spiritual union with God in later lectures, but for
now I want to pull together what we've learned from today.
Ultimately, the brain and spirituality appear to develop in parallel throughout the lifespan.
It is through this developmental process that we come to our religious and spiritual belief
systems.
First is children through stories, as adolescents where we begin to create our own belief systems
and finally into adulthood where we consolidate our beliefs.
And as we grow and develop, our brain grows and develops along with us, and this appears
to parallel our spiritual growth and our spiritual journey.
It is interesting to reflect on how our beliefs have changed throughout our life and what parts
of the brain might ultimately be involved in helping with that change.
So after this lecture, spend some time reflecting on where your beliefs started, where they
have gone, and where you are now in your belief systems.
Are you more or less religious?
Are you more or less spiritual?
It will be an interesting, reflective exercise that may give you some fascinating insights
into your own life and your own spiritual development.
