In the previous lecture, we considered the origin of myths in the human brain.
We learned that myths are powerful stories that affect multiple parts of the brain and
tell us something meaningful about the world and about ourselves.
But these are only stories, they are only words.
And while they typically can have a great impact on individuals and groups, what if
there was a way to make the impact of the myth even stronger?
As we are going to discover today, religious rituals do exactly that.
Consider for example the following account, which was given by one of the people who responded
to our online survey of spiritual experiences that I described previously in lecture 4.
This was the description.
She said, without any warning, I had an overwhelmingly enlightening experience during the dwarf spirit
ritual of Taiwan's Sisyat people.
This is an indigenous population with many ancient myths and rituals, and the dwarf spirit
ritual involves appeasing spirits of an ancient group of short-statured people who became
embroiled with the Sisyat.
The ritual includes all kinds of elaborate costumes, flags, and especially music.
For this individual, she described the following.
She said, it was such a blissful experience that I was totally transformed overnight.
I was never a religious person before, but from that day on, the only thing that's meaningful
in my life was to find a way back to that bliss.
Now that's really a remarkable account.
This individual is saying that a ritual that isn't even part of her tradition transformed
her.
It completely changed the core meaning of her life.
Now how is that possible?
What is it about rituals that gives them such power over people?
I think the simplest example of this is that the brain is designed to act out our thoughts.
In fact, while I'm speaking to you right now, what am I doing?
I'm moving my hands.
So the movement of my body is a part of my communication process.
And in fact, if you think about it, we really learn much better when we combine movement
with cognition.
Let's go back to the tennis analogy I brought up in a previous lecture.
You could read all the books you want about how to hit a tennis ball, but until you put
the racket in your hand and try it out yourself, you're never going to be able to do it well.
But on the other hand, if you can combine what you read and learn with the actual act
of doing, then that greatly enhances the way in which you understand the world and the
way in which your brain works.
So ultimately, it's really wonderful if we can find a way to act out myth.
Understanding out myths would result in a very powerful understanding of the important
points of that myth.
And in fact, we wouldn't have just a cognitive understanding, a knowledge of the story, but
we would feel it deep inside.
It would be a visceral feeling, something we would feel throughout our body.
And of course, it would be emotional as well.
The cognitive process is probably what we all think of whenever we hear the word understanding.
But when you feel intense happiness or awe, that's an example of emotional understanding.
And when you think about an experience in which you have truly felt something throughout
your entire body, maybe you felt great happiness or great joy, it wasn't just an emotion anymore.
It was something you felt throughout your body like a huge rush of energy.
That's that visceral understanding that we all can have about our world.
What ritual does is to involve these visceral and emotional levels of understanding and combine
it with the cognitive understanding.
And that, as we will see, is why rituals can pack such a punch.
But first, let's back up a bit and ask a very basic question, the kind of questions I like
to ask.
What exactly is a ritual?
Well, many scholars have struggled with the definition of ritual, but rituals appear to
have some very general common elements.
One of the first ones is that rituals are structured or patterned.
What do I mean by this?
Most rituals seem to have a very specific set of things that need to be done.
What is done, how it's done, when it's done, maybe there are certain objects that are used,
and all of these different elements are connected together as part of a particular idea or myth.
Take for example the common Christian practice of the Holy Communion.
Although of course there is some variation among different churches and beliefs about
how to do this ritual, there seem to be some very common elements and certainly within
any particular church, it's done almost the same way all the time.
Typically a person is going to get up, they're going to walk to the front of the church,
where they kneel or genuflect before the priest, they receive a wafer, and then they
drink wine.
This is very structured and of course combines all of these physical actions of the ritual
with the notion of literally incorporating Christ's body as part of the host, or the
wafer, and the blood as part of the drinking of the wine, which is all part of the practice
of the Holy Communion.
This ritual gives the whole concept a much more powerful emphasis, since the person doesn't
just understand the notion of receiving the blood and body of Christ, but actually does
it, they actually experience it themselves.
Another essential element of rituals is that they are rhythmic and repetitive.
They tend to recur in the same way or in the same form with some type of regularity.
This rhythmicity to them is what gives rituals perhaps their greatest strength and is so
important to the actual participation and practice of these rituals.
The rhythmicity can be in many different forms including music, different phrases, movements
or dance, or even that certain ideas are repeated over and over.
So what makes rituals particularly powerful are how this repetition occurs and not only
occurs but occurs on so many different levels.
Take another example of a ritual, the Passover Seder in Judaism.
For those people who participate in the Seder, they sing songs at specific times, they say
certain prayers, they make certain movements such as washing the hands or perhaps standing
or sitting, and then they hear the stories repeated over and over about Moses and about
how the Jews escaped slavery in Egypt through God's help, God's intervention.
And all of this comes together in terms of understanding the importance of the Jewish
covenant with God.
So during the Passover ritual itself, the Seder itself, there is a great deal of rhythmic
elements which as we will describe in a few moments has a very powerful impact on the
brain and body.
But another aspect of the rhythm is its repetition over the course of your entire life.
You first participate in the Seder when you're a child, as an adolescent, and then into adulthood
and even old age.
Throughout your life, there is the rhythm of doing the Seder at the same time of year
with perhaps the same ideas and the same stories, and this further helps to bind your body and
your brain to the ritual.
And more importantly, it binds your body and brain to the ideas and the stories that are
associated with that ritual.
It's something that literally lasts your entire life.
There is an even larger or global notion of this rhythmicity and repetition because not
only does it occur across your lifetime, but it actually is performed across generations.
For the people who participate in the Seder, they have it with their parents and their
grandparents when they're a child and then as they grow older, they have it with their
children and their grandchildren.
This generational rhythm binds the ritual and its ideas to an entire people and in fact
throughout history, throughout centuries and millennia.
It binds everyone who participates in this ritual into a singular community and a singular
group of people.
So all of these rhythmic and repetitive elements contribute to the effect that ritual has on
the brain, but how exactly does ritual actually work?
What does ritual do to our bodies and our brains?
Well, one of the things that rituals do is to help to synchronize our emotional, our
perceptual, and our cognitive brain processes, as well as bringing in our sensory and motor
areas as well.
What I mean by this is that the rhythms of the ritual that we were just talking about
physically affect your body.
In fact, your body in general is always a wash in rhythms.
Your body is built on rhythms.
You have a heart rhythm, a breathing rhythm, you have hormonal rhythms, and if you attach
electrodes to your brain, electroencephalography, you can actually watch your brain rhythms
as well.
When you experience an external rhythm, such as a prayer or a song, your body's rhythms
actually begin to synchronize with it.
Think about it for a moment.
What happens when you're listening to fast rock and roll music?
It revs you up.
You feel it.
You feel it deep down in your body, and you can feel your whole body turning on to that
music.
And of course, if you want to go to sleep, you put on slow music because that slow rhythm
begins to calm you down and relax you as you get into that feeling of slowness.
Furthermore, as you engage the rhythm, you will start to feel it within your body, and
it drives your body and your brain.
The rhythmicity activity actually drives your hypothalamus and ultimately your amygdala
to generate a very powerful kind of emotional response.
When you return to that fast music, that rhythm stimulates the arousal system of your autonomic
nervous system, and therefore it activates your arousal system, activates your hypothalamus,
and ultimately your amygdala.
So you have a very profound emotional experience that you may never have had before.
And since our emotions are tied to our thoughts, we incorporate the feelings into our thought
processes, into our cognitions.
Thus if we have a thought about the importance of God in our life, we connect it with a ritual
that generates a strong feeling of happiness or love, and we begin to imbue our thoughts
of God with all kinds of positive emotions.
Now many of the studies we have performed using brain scans to study prayer have shown
that this type of ritualistic practice clearly causes all kinds of changes in the brain and
in the limbic system.
So rituals clearly cause strong responses in the individual participants, but rituals
go one better.
Rituals synchronize these processes not only within the individual itself, but among other
participants in the ritual.
This may be an even more important part of how rituals actually work.
They not only connect an individual to the myth in a very powerful way, but connect one
individual to another.
How does it do this?
Well it does this we think by breaking down the dichotomy, the separation between one
person and another.
How or why would this happen?
Well, to answer this question, let's look at the possible origin of rituals.
Rituals certainly appear in human beings, but they also appear in virtually every other
animal species as well.
In most animals, the primary type of ritual that exists is the mating ritual.
These rituals perform two basic functions.
On one hand, the ritual helps to properly identify a mate, another member of their species, so
that they can join together in the mating process.
After all, animals generally don't usually get too close to each other, but rituals help
out.
They bring them together in ways that they normally wouldn't come together.
You think about lions, for example, in the wilderness.
They usually stay pretty separate, but then when it's time to mate, they need to figure
out a way to come together, and this is where rituals begin to help out.
These rituals are enormously elaborate at times, even for some of the simplest creatures.
Take for example the mating ritual of a butterfly, called the silver-washed fritillary.
When a male of the species spots a very nice looking female, he closes in with amorous intent.
The female actually takes right to the air, and the male flies several looping circles
around her, with his wings almost brushing by her body.
The two of them perform a rather spectacular joint flight, with the male darting acrobatically
above and below her, as she glides approvingly, hopefully, on a straight path.
When the flight is completed, the butterflies land, posture, and exchange sense, and in all,
it appears that the male actually performs about seven distinct acts, and the female
must respond appropriately to each one before the mating can begin.
But this ritual, like all rituals, involves a rhythmic pattern of activity.
It includes smells and sights that enable the butterflies to form a union and come together
for mating.
Now it turns out that the physiology of these kinds of rituals is based on the rhythms that
synchronize the brain, so that it begins to actually diminish the usual flow of sensory
information entering the brain.
Normally, the butterflies, or other animals, or even human beings, we use our sensory information
to identify objects that are in our environment, determine what is friend or foe, food or prey,
and by stimulating the brain in a very specific rhythmic way, these normal sensory processes
begin to shift.
The animal begins to look at the world in a very different way.
They begin to recognize this other animal as something that it can join with, something
that it can connect with in a very profound way.
Of course, human beings are not immune to these processes as well.
Think about where and how we meet and select a mate.
Usually the environment has all kinds of rhythmic stimulation, like going to a dance, for example.
Even the act of sex itself is highly rhythmic, as we all know.
It's known absolutely to affect the autonomic nervous system in a very profound way.
In fact, it actually requires an activation of both the arousal and the quiescent arms
of the autonomic nervous system to be stimulated, to be associated with sexual orgasm.
Now that's fascinating because we've talked about the importance of turning on both arms
of the autonomic nervous system to create a tremendous sense of alertness and arousal
and energy, and at the same time a great sense of blissfulness and calmness.
This is in part the experience of sexual orgasm, it is an ecstatic experience.
But we also find another place where we hear the term ecstasy used.
It's actually used to describe profound spiritual experiences.
Remember the story of our tribal chieftain from our last lecture.
He mentioned that perhaps both the arousal and quiescent arms of his autonomic nervous
system might have been mutually activated at the most intense moment of his enlightenment.
The activation of the autonomic nervous system, as we discussed, activates the hypothalamus,
which is the primary pleasure center in the brain.
So it is not too far a stretch to see how ritual can be a very useful kind of practice
in creating a powerful unifying experience, whether that experience is religious or otherwise.
Now on a brain level, as I mentioned earlier on in this lecture, ritual appears to be able
to join the cognitive with the experiential and to do so in a very unitary kind of experience.
Remember our description earlier of rituals surrounding the Holy Communion or the Passover
Seder.
You not only cognitively understand how you are connected to your spiritual group, how
you are connected to God, but your entire body participates and you unite your body
and brain with a connection to something that is even greater.
It is your religious group, your spiritual group, or even God.
This unitary experience is critical since it helps to join the person with the ritual
itself as well as with the others who are participating in that ritual.
This connects the person who is engaged in the ritual, connects that person to the myth
that is part of that ritual, to God and perhaps the universe.
How does ritual do this?
As in animals, the rhythmic activity causes very interesting changes in the brain.
Via the autonomic nervous system, the rhythm of rituals drives the brain and actually causes
some very important changes.
In fact, there is increased activity in the hypothalamus, thalamus and limbic system in
response to what is going on at the autonomic nervous system level.
Of course, these are very central parts of the brain that are involved in how we experience
and how we feel about things going on around us in our world and contribute to the powerful
experience that we get during rituals.
But some parts of the cortex, however, will also experience changes in activity.
In particular, the parietal lobe, which generally helps us to form our sense of self and our
sense of space and time, may actually experience a decrease of activity.
If this area decreases in activity, it no longer is able to clearly distinguish between
the self and the rest of the world.
So we can't determine that spatial relationship between ourselves and what's going on outside
of ourselves.
The result would be a loss of the sense of self, a loss of the sense of space and time,
but the loss of the sense of self is usually experienced as a blending of the self with
something else.
The ritual or the myth that is incorporated into the ritual is what that person begins
to feel connected to.
And if this blending is intense enough, the person may feel that they completely become
one with the focus or the stories involved in the ritual.
Now in most religious rituals, its focus is God.
So a person engaged in a very intense religious ritual might ultimately feel that they become
one with God.
A meditator, for example, who may not necessarily believe in God per se, might feel that they
become one with the universe instead.
Most rituals can cause increasing feelings of oneness or connectedness as the rhythms
of the ritual build and as the person's brain becomes more and more affected by these rituals.
In addition to the sense of connectedness or oneness, the ritual also results in profound
feelings of excitement or relaxation depending on the nature of the ritual.
And this ties back into the autonomic nervous system.
If there is this intense energetic feeling, it might be a very fast ritual and that causes
a great feeling of arousal as the arousal part of our autonomic nervous system kicks
in and turns on.
If it is a very intensely calming and slow ritual, then they might feel overcome by this
overwhelming sense of blissfulness and calmness.
But again, even this blissful feeling is mediated by the autonomic nervous system that
calming part the quiescent side of the autonomic nervous system that makes us feel calm, slow
and blissful.
Now since we are talking about some of the differences regarding fast and slow rituals,
you might begin to wonder what other elements and variations actually occur within rituals.
And if there are other elements and variations, what types of experiences might result from
them?
In the study of rituals, there are actually many different forms.
Rituals have an impact on multiple sensory systems.
Their visual stimuli, things that we smell, things that we hear, they're the physical
activities that we talked about, for example, with the Holy Communion.
There are cognitive and emotional elements that are a part of the ritual.
So think about the rituals that you know, maybe ones that are particularly important
to you.
Think about the beauty of the place of worship, where you do them.
Maybe there's the burning of incense, the smells that you take in as you participate
in that ritual.
Maybe there's the sound of the organ or a beautiful singing choir that regales us with
songs of God or of spirituality.
There may be a variety of different musical patterns that are either fast or slow.
And we've discussed this to some degree about how they activate the autonomic nervous system
to engender a feeling of great energy or great calmness.
And if you put that together with a particular idea, perhaps the power of God, then you might
want something which is very uplifting so that you feel the power within you.
And if you want to experience a sense of God's love for you, then perhaps you want a ritual
that incorporates a very slow, calming feeling, rhythm, and music.
Now up to now, we have generally been thinking about rituals performed by individuals, such
as prayer or meditation.
And we've even talked about the scans that we have done when people engage in these kinds
of practices.
These rituals create great personal meaning for people, and they create incredibly powerful
experiences that reinforce the person's belief system.
But rituals can also be done as a group.
In fact, some rituals either require groups or are most effective when they're performed
in a group setting.
Think about going to a church or a synagogue service.
When you do that, you take part with other people, holiday gatherings where you bring
lots of people together.
And of course, there are even great spiritual events, such as those that occur at Metka,
bringing millions of believers together that strengthens the entire experience, not just
for the individual, but for the entire group.
Why do these group rituals work and what do they do?
Well, group rituals help to synchronize many brains to the rhythm.
Our brains have neurons that are actually called mirror neurons.
And not surprisingly, these mirror neurons mirror whatever it is that we see going on
around us.
If I lift up my arm, there's a neuron within you that to some degree lifts up your arm
as well.
And if I smile, then there's a neuron inside of you that makes you feel a smile coming
on.
So when a group of people engage in a ritual, they all feel it, and they all feel each other
as part of that ritual.
In addition, since they all experience a sense of oneness or connectedness, they feel it
with respect to each other as well.
They come together as a group.
And that group forms a oneness that they all feel connected to.
This is why rituals are frequently used when people are going to war or on athletic teams
or even in religious groups, because it binds them all together in a common cause.
Think about one of my favorite rituals, which is going to a football game.
It's a great example because it's also a non-religious ritual, and we've been talking
a lot about religious ones, but there are so many similarities between the non-religious
ritual of football and many religious rituals.
For example, the football game is very repetitious.
Just like going to church, it happens on Sundays.
And there are specific songs that you sing at certain times of the game.
There's the smells, not of incense, but of hot dogs and beer.
And ultimately, there is a sense of thousands of people coming together to support a common
cause.
Ultimately, rituals are all around us, and they help the brain guide us through our lives.
We have waking up rituals, eating rituals, work rituals, sleeping rituals.
Think for a moment about your own rituals.
What are the things that you do every day in a similar way?
How does that rhythm help you?
What happens when you can't use your rituals?
For example, I have a waking up ritual, which I try to do almost every morning.
I get up, I brush my teeth, I wash my face, then I go downstairs and I make and eat my
breakfast, then I come back upstairs, and I shave and brush my hair and get dressed.
If I have to cut all of that short or do it differently, it really kind of disrupts the
rhythm of my day.
It actually makes me feel a little uncomfortable, so it's actually disrupting my brain itself.
I feel like I'm kind of getting off on the wrong foot.
And if rituals are all around us and used for both religious and non-religious means,
it would seem that they are generally good for us.
That's why we do them.
And in general, this is true.
But one of the things we do have to watch out for is that rituals actually do have
a dark side.
In fact, I always like to say that rituals are a morally neutral technology.
There's something that human beings can use for great good, but unfortunately, sometimes
for great bad.
Studies have shown that if you question people within a group, practicing rituals together
decreases the aggression that people feel within the group.
So they feel more connected to each other.
They feel more loving and compassionate to each other.
But rituals increase aggression across groups.
So one of the most important questions that we have to think about in the context of the
unitary experience that's felt during rituals is, what exactly does the person feel at one
with?
If they feel connected to just their group, it may actually foment hatred and anger and
violence towards other people.
If on the other hand, it is a sense of connection with the entire universe, then it may be a
kind of experience that is very positive.
So we have to be very cautious about what rituals do.
They can turn someone into a terrorist or to follow a very destructive kind of cult,
which clearly use rituals as an important tool for inducing very strong ideas about
what people should believe and how they should behave.
Or we can turn rituals into something which is very, very positive and something which
can contribute to the overall welfare of the individual as well as society as a whole.
So rituals provide a powerful mechanism for reinforcing myths.
Rituals help to make the story of the myth felt not just cognitively, but emotionally
and viscerally in your entire body.
Rituals get that entire body into the act and help create some of the most important
experiences, spiritual or otherwise, that human beings are capable of having.
