In our previous lecture, we saw that rituals provide a powerful form of experience that
involves the entire human body.
We also began to explore some of the underlying neurological and biological processes that
are involved in religious and even non-religious rituals.
In this lecture, we're going to take that exploration further.
We're going to look at two spiritual practices in particular, meditation and prayer, and
we're going to examine the biological underpinnings of these practices.
But as we explore the biology of prayer and meditation, we also have to reflect on what
our newfound knowledge might tell us about the true nature and meaning of these practices
and the experiences that they elicit.
Can practices like meditation and prayer alter our physical well-being?
Can they have an impact on physical circumstances and realities outside of ourselves?
Are the effects of these practices only in our heads?
These are the questions that will crop up at various points throughout this course,
and one of my goals for this particular lecture is to give a solid foundation for addressing
them.
But more importantly in this lecture, I want to cover some of the specific biological effects
of spiritual practices.
Perhaps the best way to begin our discussion is to reconsider our story of the monks arguing
about the flag waving in the wind.
If you remember that story and its conclusion, the idea was that it was actually the mind
that was moving.
It was not the flag, not the wind, not even reality itself.
It is the mind that appears to make everything move for us.
But in today's world, we now have the neurosciences which allows us to relate the brain to the
mind, and hence we can now look at how the brain actually allows us to be spiritual,
which of course is the ultimate goal of this entire course.
So what has neuroscience been able to tell us about spirituality, and more specifically
about spiritual practices such as prayer and meditation?
Interestingly, the knowledge we're gaining from studying meditation and prayer experimentally
is not only teaching us something about these particular practices themselves, it's also
giving us some valuable insights about the way our brain regulates a variety of basic
physiological and neurophysiological processes.
And these processes include not only what's going on in the brain itself, but changes
to our heart, our heart rate, our respiration, and even metabolism throughout the entire
body.
As we've learned, there are many methodological questions that arise when considering a study
of meditation or prayer.
For example, in our prior lecture on methods, we saw the importance of asking questions
like the following.
What is the best way to study the biology of spirituality?
What are the best types of practices or experiences that we can study?
And how do you actually measure the experience itself and try to correlate it with something
that's biological?
We've also talked about the importance of defining the practices and objects under study.
So toward that end, let's take a look at some of the defining aspects of meditation and
prayer.
When it comes to meditation, there are of course many different approaches, perhaps thousands
of different approaches, and many different meanings associated with these various practices.
But we can begin to identify some specific aspects of meditation that are common, perhaps
across almost all types.
One of the most common elements of many different meditation practices is that it involves the
ability to focus a person's attention.
In many ways, this is one of the key elements of all meditation practices that we focus
our mind on something.
It could be a visual object, a sacred object that we have, it could be a word or a phrase
as we saw in our very first study that we talked about, the Centering Prayer Study.
But basically, the person continues to focus their mind, to focus their attention on this
particular object throughout the entire practice itself.
Now while this is going on, it's always interesting to me that this is such a simplistic thing
to do, just to focus on something.
But as this happens, a person starts to notice many other feelings and experiences start to
crop up.
One of them is a more emotional kind of feeling.
So they may actually feel a sense of arousal.
They might feel that their whole brain and body is turned on by this particular practice.
Or perhaps just the opposite, maybe they'll start to feel this incredible sense of calmness
and blissfulness come over them.
They may feel a more profound sense of blissfulness than they've ever felt before in their lives.
As they continue to do this practice, another thing starts to happen.
This one is a little harder to understand if you've never had this kind of experience
before.
They begin to feel a diminishment in their sense of self.
What I mean by that is that they literally begin to lose the sense of who they are as
an individual person.
They no longer experience themselves as who they are, but they start to notice a blurring
between the boundary of their self and the object that they're meditating upon or their
self and the rest of the world.
In fact, sometimes they even get to a complete loss of a sense of space and time during this
particular type of practice.
If they continue to do this focus and continue to do the practice, they might actually experience
something even more profound than all of these other experiences combined.
It is a sense of almost an eruption of ecstasy, this incredibly powerful rush of all kinds
of emotions coming over them, and eventually not only do they lose their sense of self,
but they experience something that they may describe as a feeling of absolute unity, the
notion that almost all things blur into one, everything becomes a gigantic oneness.
Now we'll be talking more about this particular type of experience later on in the course,
but for now I wanted to give you at least a brief idea about what meditation is, what
it does, and how it actually has an effect on what the person is experiencing.
Coming now to prayer, we can say again that there are many different types of prayer and
many different meanings associated with the various ways that prayer is practiced.
But once more there are some common elements of almost all types of prayer practices.
Now for one prayer is similar to meditation in that it frequently involves focusing attention.
This focusing of attention is usually more specific in the context of a religious idea.
They might be focusing on a particular prayer, on a particular phrase from the Bible, on
the belief in God or some belief about their religion.
But as they're doing this intense focusing, the person may also have a feeling of arousal
and a feeling of calmness depending on the circumstances.
And just like meditation in very intense practices of prayer, they actually feel a complete loss
of the sense of self, the loss of a sense of space and time.
And of course prayer can result in some very profound spiritual or even mystical experiences
of ecstasy or absolute unity, just like we see in practices of profound and deep meditation.
Now there are some ways in which prayer differs from meditation.
For example, some types of prayer are actually more conversational.
If you think about this in the context of saying grace at a meal, it's a way of talking
it out, talking about what your beliefs are.
And of course many people pray to God simply as a form of talking to God.
It's just a way that they can converse with God and try to communicate something back
and forth with God.
So this is one of the ways in which prayer is very distinct from meditation in which
it has a very specific religious content to it.
And of course prayer typically involves a verbal kind of practice.
So this is something that allows almost anyone to participate in prayer and it's a way of
engaging in the prayer process through language, which is often different than what we see in
meditation practices, especially those that involve visualization.
Now each religion has its own specific prayer and frequently specific ways of doing these
particular prayers.
In Judaism, we find individuals dovening back and forth.
They move back and forth with their body, bending at the waist as they go through the
prayer.
In Islam, individuals are to pray five times a day while facing Mecca.
Prayer also usually has the particular goal of connecting the individual with God.
So with all of this prayer going on, what do we think is happening in the brain?
It turns out that the data suggests that prayer is a highly complex process.
It involves many different brain structures and functions.
And to me, this of course makes a great deal of sense because the prayer practices and
their associated experiences are so rich and diverse that it seems that there has to be
many different parts of the brain that really get into the game as far as these spiritual
practices are concerned.
So let's review for a few moments some of these essential areas of the brain in terms
of what they normally do for us and then focus on the brain scan studies which can detail
for us exactly how these areas get involved in practices like meditation or prayer.
So if you remember, the frontal lobe right behind the forehead is a very important area
of our brain that helps us to concentrate, to focus our attention on whatever task we
have at hand.
So it might make sense then if we think about what's going on during prayer or meditation
if they are concentrating, would we see changes going on in this area of the brain that helps
them to engage in that particular practice?
Now we also know that this attention-focusing area can block information from moving back
and forth within other parts of the brain.
In fact, one of the areas of the brain that we talked about a few lectures ago called
the hippocampus which is part of the brain's limbic system and also very involved in the
ability to remember things, this is an area that starts to get blocked by the attention
area.
It can actually be the kind of thing where if a person is engaged in a deep practice such
as prayer or meditation that they become so intensely focused on the prayer that they
start to screen out all of the other irrelevant information, irrelevant sensory information
that is trying to get into their brain so they become intensely focused on this particular
practice and maybe we'll see changes in the brain in these areas that are involved in
the practices of meditation or prayer.
I also talked about the parietal lobe, the orientation part of the brain located in the
back part of the brain.
This tends to take all of our sensory information and helps to create for us a sense of ourselves
as well as a sense of space and time for us.
So if a person is describing as we just discussed losing their sense of self, losing their sense
of space and time, what could be going on in that parietal lobe during the practice?
And as far as the emotional elements of meditative and prayer practices, as we just discussed
they can be intensely emotional, intense feelings of arousal, bliss, other feelings
of love, compassion, or maybe even fear or awe.
So we would expect some very substantial changes to be going on in the limbic system, that
emotional center of the brain when somebody is engaged in a prayer or meditation practice.
And finally, a very central structure.
We talked about the master controller of the brain called the hypothalamus.
This is a part of the brain that regulates the autonomic nervous system, those arousal
and calming parts of our body.
Well if a person engages in a practice of prayer or meditation and they feel a deep sense of
arousal or a very calming sense of bliss, what's going on in that autonomic nervous
system and in that hypothalamus that might regulate that kind of an experience?
So how do we come to know what's going on in these different parts of the brain involved
in prayer?
Well my colleagues and I over the years have used a variety of different neuroimaging techniques
to evaluate different prayer practices.
As we spoke about in prior lectures, some of these include spec scans, the ability to
inject a small amount of a radioactive tracer that follows blood flow or some other aspect
of the brain's function that we can measure with the scan.
Or we might do magnetic resonance imaging to see what changes are going on in the blood
flow of the brain that tells us something about the level or the changes of activity
that are associated with these particular practices.
So let us look at some of the studies that I have performed with regard to prayer and
meditation practices.
Now we've already spent some time going over the study with Franciscan nuns.
If you remember in that study we studied nuns who had many years of experience doing a kind
of prayer called centering prayer.
It's a type of contemplative prayer and we used spec scans to measure changes in blood
flow in the brain.
And again if you remember the brain works very nicely that the more active a particular
part of the brain is, the more blood flow it gets.
So we can actually see patterns of activity changes in activity on these spec scans while
the person is actually in prayer.
And also remember that one of the real important elements about how a spec scan works is that
we inject a radioactive tracer at the time that the person is doing the prayer practice.
Once that tracer gets into their body and up into their brain it gets locked into the
brain so it can tell us exactly what's going on in the brain at the moment of prayer or
meditation.
Now what we can then do is compare the resting state when the person is not doing anything
in particular to the activation state, the state when they are actually engaged in the
practice of meditation or prayer.
And we can look at these brain scans and see what areas of the brain are turned on or what
areas of the brain are turned off.
And we can also not just look at the scans themselves but we actually have the ability
to apply a quantitative analysis.
We can tell how much percentage wise a part of the brain is turned on or how much of the
brain is turned off.
Now when we looked at the results of the prayer study we saw some very interesting changes
that relate directly to what the person is doing subjectively and the kinds of functions
that the different parts of the brain that we just talked about help us with.
So for example we found substantially increased activity in the frontal lobe during the prayer
practice.
This makes so much sense because they are focusing their mind very deeply, focusing their brain
deeply on the prayer practice and therefore we are seeing increases of activity in the
part of the brain that helps us to focus attention.
We also see a substantial decrease of activity in the parietal lobes.
Now remember the parietal lobes help us with our orientation of our sense of self.
So it makes sense then that as we lose our sense of self we see a concomitant decrease
in the part of the brain that helps us to create that sense of self, the parietal lobes,
that orientation part of the body.
And we also see an increase in the activity levels in a very central structure called
the thalamus.
If you recall we talked about what the thalamus does in a prior lecture that the thalamus
is a very key central structure in the brain that helps to connect different parts of the
brain and helps us to interpret all of the sensory information that's coming up into
our brain.
So the fact that the thalamus was substantially increased tells us how active of a practice
this actually is.
And I think that this is a very important point that when people engage in a practice
like prayer even though they may feel calmer it is not in and of itself a calming kind
of practice.
It's a highly active practice that activates many different parts of the brain and the
increased activity in the thalamus is reflective of that.
It's telling us that lots of things are going on in the brain during this particular prayer
practice.
Now how does the changes that we see in the brain during the prayer state compared to
what we saw in a group of people who were doing a kind of Tibetan Buddhist meditation?
Now the Tibetan Buddhist meditation practice was a visualization technique.
They created a visual image in their mind that they brought their attention to.
They focused on this particular visual image that was usually of a sacred object and they
concentrated on that for a period of up to an hour or more.
Now what was interesting is is that just like the practice is somewhat similar to what we
see in Centering Prayer we also saw certain similarities as well as some differences in
the brain scans.
For example we found that there was very significantly increased activity in the Buddhist meditators
in their frontal lobes.
Again this makes so much sense because they are also concentrating deeply on the particular
practice and hence we see increases of activity in the frontal lobes that signifies their
intense concentration during the practice.
We also see decreases in the parietal lobe, that orientation part of the brain.
Again this makes so much sense because they also lose their sense of self, lose their
sense of space and time just like the nuns and therefore see decreases of activity in
the area of the brain that normally helps us to feel our sense of self and to feel our
sense of space and time.
Now we also have begun to delve into doing functional magnetic resonance imaging studies
of spiritual practices and experiences because there are certain advantages that these kinds
of studies have over spec imaging.
One of the main advantages that the FMRI studies have is that there is no radiation involved.
We don't have to inject a radioactive tracer into the person and that's obviously something
that's very nice for the subject.
The other bigger advantage is that the FMRI can actually obtain multiple images throughout
an entire imaging session.
So we can take a picture of your brain now and in a minute and in two minutes and in
five minutes and in ten minutes and all the way through the entire practice of the meditation.
When we were talking about our spec studies a few moments ago, all that is able to do
is capture that one point in time.
When I do the injection of the tracer, once that gets into the brain, that's the picture
that I get.
It doesn't give me any other information other than that one moment in time.
Whereas the FMRI can actually allow us to study multiple states of the brain over time
and as we've been talking, meditation is not something that just occurs instantaneously.
It's something that is a dynamic process that starts to occur over many minutes or even
hours and the FMRI allows us to do that.
Now one of the disadvantages of the FMRI is that all it can look at are changes in blood
flow.
It's not able to look at some of the more specific neurotransmitter or chemical changes
that are going on in the brain and that's something that really requires spectimaging
or another related kind of imaging called positron emission tomography, PET imaging and
we'll be talking about this more in our lecture on the neurotransmitters and how they relate
specifically to spiritual experiences and practices.
But in returning to the FMRI studies, there are several very interesting studies that
have been performed.
One functional magnetic resonance imaging study was done with 15 carmelite nuns and
actually asked them to reflect on their most powerful mystical experiences that they had
ever had.
The study was performed at the University of Montreal and basically brought in a group
of very learned, very experienced nuns.
When they came in on the imaging day, they were asked to simply think back on the mystical
experiences that they had had and to reflect on them for a period of time, typically very
short, maybe about five or even ten minutes at most, while their brain was being scanned
by the FMRI.
What was interesting were the changes that were seen in terms of the brain activity.
So again, like our studies of the nuns and the Buddhist meditators, there was increased
activity in the frontal lobes.
They were concentrating.
They were focusing on the experiences that they had had and that was associated with
a change of activity going on in the area of our brain that helps us with concentration
and attention.
Now the FMRI also allows us to get at some more subtle changes going on in the brain
and for example, we see changes in the brain of these carmelite nuns in the limbic areas
that are involved in the emotional content of these experiences.
Now we were not able to observe that as well with our studies, but this particular study
shows us that the limbic system is very involved in what these practices and what these experiences
are all about.
The other very interesting finding in this particular FMRI study was an increase of activity
in the brainstem.
The brainstem is the part of the brain that ultimately helps the brain connect down through
the autonomic nervous system to the rest of the body.
So this speaks to the idea that not only are there changes going on up in the brain itself,
but these changes are being translated down into the rest of the body so that it is experienced
not just cognitively and emotionally, but viscerally as well.
It's experienced all the way down throughout their entire being.
So these findings are somewhat similar to the studies that we were just talking about
with our Franciscan nuns and the Buddhist meditators, but there have been some interesting
differences across these groups.
For example, when we looked at our Buddhist meditators relative to the nuns, one of the
things that we saw in the Buddhist meditators was an increase of activity in the visual
area of the brain.
Remember back, the Buddhist meditators were doing a visualization technique.
So it makes sense that the visual areas of the brain were what were turned on during this
particular practice.
On the other hand, the nuns actually activated the language areas of the brain because they
were doing a kind of verbal practice.
They were doing prayer.
And if we look at the fMRI study of the Carmelite nuns, one of the things that they saw in this
particular study was actually an increase of activity in the parietal lobes in that orientation
part of the brain.
Remember, we tended to see decreases of activity in the parietal lobes.
So why was there a difference?
Well, maybe it has to do with the experience itself during the study.
With the Carmelite nuns who had increases of activity in the parietal lobe, what was
going on probably was that they were actually focusing their self, their orienting their
self towards the experience.
They were concentrating on how their self was related to the experience.
And hence because they were having an increase in what their self felt like, we see an increase
of activity in the part of the brain that helps them establish that sense of self.
On the other hand, in our meditators and in our nuns doing prayer, they lost their
sense of self, and hence we see a decrease of activity in this particular area of the
brain.
In fact, this is a very crucial point since many studies of meditation and prayer have
had the person doing these practices for anywhere from a few minutes to an hour or more, and
it may take a while for the person to convert over from concentrating on the self and the
relationship of the self to God or to the object of meditation to the point where they
begin to feel this sense of oneness and sense of unity where they completely lose their
sense of self.
And again, this is why these kinds of studies will be so valuable because we can actually
start to see what's going on not just at one moment in time, but we can look at things
throughout the entire process.
And therefore, throughout these practices, we will expect to see progressively different
experiences and progressively different things changing in the brain as the person undergoes
these different kinds of experiences.
Now other studies have actually tried to use functional magnetic resonance imaging to not
evaluate the practice of prayer or meditation, but to see the changes of these practices
that they cause in terms of our emotions or our cognitive processes.
In fact, one FMRI study looked at 12 experienced as well as 10 beginner meditators, and they
scanned them not during the practice of meditation, but they scanned them while they were looking
at different types of pictures, pictures that had either a positive, a negative, or neutral
emotional stance.
So some of them were very happy kinds of pictures, some of them were very angry and very scary
kinds of pictures.
And they asked the person to look at these pictures while they were either in a meditative
state or a non-meditative state.
And it turned out that the experienced meditators, they had a decrease of activity in the frontal
lobes when they were looking at all of the different emotional categories of pictures.
There were no changes in the brain regions involved in emotional reactivity.
On the other hand, the beginners actually showed a decrease in the left amygdala that
part of the limbic system that helps us to see fear in different emotions.
There was a decrease in the amygdala during the emotional processing.
These findings suggest that the long-term practice of meditation leads to emotional stability
rather than by eliciting control over the limbic system.
And another study actually showed that meditation can cultivate positive emotions which actually
alter the activation in the brain areas linked to empathy and our ability to respond to a
variety of different emotional stimuli.
More recently, studies have been performed that are starting to look at neurotransmitters
and how these neurotransmitters are associated with different practices like meditation,
prayer, and other types of religious experiences.
We will be discussing this in much more detail in an upcoming lecture, but a few studies
are worth noting here briefly.
One pet study showed that there was a release of the brain's central dopamine during a yoga
meditation practice.
Dopamine of course is very involved in our emotional processing and also how we perceive
our reality.
Another study actually used something called magnetic resonance spectroscopy, which is
a way of determining the chemical structure and the chemical milieu in the brain at a
particular point in time and showed an increase in a particular neurotransmitter called GABA,
which is an inhibitory neurotransmitter.
It helps to calm things down and they solved an increase of this GABA during a particular
type of practice called yoga asana meditation.
So these studies are starting to show not just the changes of activity in the brain,
but how there may be very specific chemical findings and chemical changes in the brain
and we'll be talking about these a little bit later.
Physiologically in the body we see that meditation and prayer practices result in an overall
decrease in heart rate, blood pressure, a decrease in the body's metabolism, and a variety
of hormonal changes as well.
Also we see increases throughout the body in a variety of different chemicals such as
serotonin, dopamine, GABA, which we just mentioned, and a decrease in some of the stress hormones
in our body, stress hormones such as cortisol or norepinephrine, which is kind of like adrenaline.
So spiritual practices such as meditation and prayer can have an impact on the brain
and the body in multiple ways.
Different practices typically have different patterns of brain activity and different changes
that go on in the body, although there are also some similarities across all different
kinds of practices.
The changes in the brain associated with a given practice ultimately depend on the specific
elements of the practice and the experiences that are associated with that particular practice.
Thus emotional components affect the emotional centers of the brain.
If there are behavioral components, things that the person is supposed to do in terms
of movement, this activates the motor areas of the brain.
And if there are things that we're supposed to think about, cognitive components, then
this affects the cognitive, the higher cortical areas of our brain.
And yet as different as all of these practices and experiences may be, what's also a fascinating
issue is that they are all ultimately considered by the individual as something that is spiritual.
Now in this lecture, we have seen how the tools of science can open up new windows on
the complex phenomena of prayer and meditation.
Interestingly, what we've also begun to see is that the exploration of spirituality actually
has the reciprocal effect of improving our knowledge of human beings as biological creatures.
By understanding the biology of prayer and meditation, its effects on our heart rate,
our hormones, our immune system and our brain, this leads to a greater understanding of the
ways in which these practices might be able to affect our overall health and well-being.
And this will be the exciting topic that we will consider in the next lecture.
