Suppose you picked up the newspaper and saw the following headline,
Elderly Christians less likely to die in the 30 days before Christmas than in the 30 days after.
Would this headline surprise you?
What if I told you that there are actually hundreds of scientific studies that show a relationship between religion and health?
Well, it's true, and as a matter of fact, the interest in this topic is rapidly expanding.
For example, before the 1990s, only about 25 to 50 papers a year actually dealt with the relationship between religion and health.
But since the year 2000, there have been over 400 papers published every year on this particular topic.
And what those papers are consistently showing is this, religion really does have an effect on health.
But what is this effect specifically?
How and why does it occur?
And is it always positive, or is it possible that sometimes it's negative?
These are some of the questions we're going to tackle in this lecture.
We've already seen that religious practices cause measurable changes in the brain and the body,
but today we're going to start examining the more practical side of these effects.
Specifically, we'll look at how religion and spirituality relates to our health and well-being.
Of course, any attempt to link spirituality and health has to deal with the significant challenge right out of the gate.
How do you even measure or attempt to develop a measurement for spirituality?
And let's say, for example, you want to compare the overall health of a relatively spiritual person with the overall health of someone who is less so.
Well, to do that, you need to find some way of measuring what makes one person relatively more spiritual or more religious than another one, right?
You have to be able to place the people you're studying on some scale of spirituality or religiousness.
Otherwise, there's no way you can compare the health benefits or detriments of one group over another.
So how do researchers make these kinds of measurements? What data do they rely on?
Some of the earliest work was actually done by asking some very basic questions.
Usually they just ask a question like, how often do you go to church?
And of course, people started to realize pretty quickly that, as I like to say, just because you're in a garage doesn't make you a car.
Just because you're in church doesn't necessarily make you a religious or spiritual person.
So we started to look at other ways of getting at this question. What are a person's religious attitudes?
How often are they engaged in religious practices like meditation or prayer?
So these are the kinds of questions that we can try to get at to get a feel for how religious or spiritual somebody may actually be.
Now as a scientist, I've often tried to go to the medical literature, the psychological literature to find questionnaires and scales like this
so that I could use them in my studies, but unfortunately, they're often very hard to find and a lot of times they're underutilized.
In fact, many of the times these measures are not even in the scientific literature,
but they've been published in these kind of back-end hard-to-find journals
and it makes it very difficult to be able to include these kinds of scales in research that's ongoing today.
Fortunately, we're getting better and better at making these kinds of measurements and more and more measurements are available.
But there's a couple of other problems that go on with these kinds of measurements
and one of the most pressing ones is that almost all of these measures of spirituality and religiousness rely on self-reporting.
What I mean by that is that we have to ask the person, we have to say, how do you feel?
And of course, if we do that, we don't always know if we're going to get an honest answer from that person
and it's also difficult to know how one person might answer in comparison to another.
It's a little bit like trying to measure pain.
Some people are very good at tolerating a lot of pain and some people are panicking at the smallest site of pain.
So how do we know how to measure what pain is for that particular person or one person versus another?
And the same question comes up with spirituality and religiousness.
Now, I also want to raise one other very important point that pertains to this lecture and the next one on religion and health.
When we discuss data from different studies, for the most part, they relate to population-based analyses.
Now, by this I mean that if a study shows that religion or spirituality is correlated with, let's say, a reduction in the risk of heart disease,
then on average, the critical word on average, being religious is associated with a reduced risk.
But there are plenty of religious people who get heart disease and certainly plenty of atheists who do not.
So we always have to be careful about how we interpret this information,
but at least it gives us a starting point to try to understand this overall relationship between spirituality and health.
Now, as I mentioned, we do have ways of measuring the religious activities and commitments of individuals,
and this allows us to look at groups of people with, let's say, a very high level of religious commitment
and to compare their health outcomes with those of people who have a relatively low level of religious commitment.
Let's take a look at church attendance.
As I mentioned, this is one of the easiest ways of asking the question, and while it's not perfect, it still is pretty good.
Usually, the more religious and spiritual you are, the more you're going to go to church.
Now, a large variety of studies have actually found that going to church, church attendance,
is positively associated with improvements in heart disease, blood pressure, lung disease such as emphysema, liver disease such as cirrhosis, and even suicide.
In fact, one of the earliest papers to report this association was published in 1972 by researchers at Johns Hopkins,
and it was based upon an analysis of about 50,000 people in Washington County, Maryland.
Researchers divided the people into either those who went to church once or more per week versus those who went to church less than once a week.
The study found that those who went to church less were twice as likely to die from heart disease.
They were also twice as likely to die from emphysema or suicide.
However, there was no association with going to church and cancer deaths.
And a more recent study of almost 4,000 older individuals showed that those attending church more than once per week were 46% less likely to have died over the next six years.
And in a study of 40 heart transplant patients, a very specific kind of population, strong religious beliefs predicted improved physical functioning, higher self-esteem,
decreased anxiety in what was going on around them, and ultimately enhanced compliance with the medical treatments.
If all of this is going on, it would seem that having a religious belief would correlate to an overall better health and well-being,
whether it's for the general public or perhaps even for a specific population.
One interesting study that also is relevant is that increased worship and practice was inversely related with the perception of disability among the elderly.
So again, simply by engaging in practice, having a religious belief, the person actually felt better.
They felt less disabled.
And in cancer patients, religious beliefs have been found to be associated with a reduced perception of pain.
In fact, there are a variety of studies now which are starting to get at and show that those people who turn to religion to cope with various problems
and who are religious in and of themselves actually do regulate their pain responses better.
They actually feel less pain than those people who are not religious, and the more they engage in their religious beliefs,
the more they focus on their religious beliefs at a particular moment in time, the less they respond to painful stimuli.
Now researchers have even found a relationship between religious activity and overall mortality, the risk of actually dying.
For example, multiple studies published in the 1980s and 1990s identified a correlation between frequent church attendance and a reduction in all-cause mortality.
So that means that the more people actually went to church, the less likely they were to die.
And remember my caveat before, this is a population-based conclusion.
It does not specify an individual effect, and therefore there are certainly plenty of people who go to church who die,
and there are plenty of people who don't go to church who live long, healthy lives.
But when we look at the population itself, we see a very significant relationship.
Another interesting study of 232 patients undergoing cardiac surgery, for those individuals who received support from religion,
they actually had reduced mortality.
So again, these results and others like them are extremely compelling and fascinating.
It really shows us that being religious or spiritual seems to have some very powerful benefits in terms of your health and well-being.
It is remarkable to me that the medical establishment does not actually stand up and take notice of these kinds of studies
and really look at the data as something that is very important in terms of how we should actually help patients.
In fact, for me personally, as I've gone through my research and gone through the patients who I've talked to and interviewed for our studies and talked to in the hospital,
I've always been so fascinated by how powerful religious and spiritual beliefs are for these individuals.
It is so critical to their health and well-being, and when they are able to engage their religious and spiritual selves,
they do tend to feel better, function better, and actually live better and live longer than those people who are not religious and spiritual.
And hence, I really feel so strongly that the medical establishment needs to look at this data,
try to understand it better, and try to find ways of helping patients to better engage a side of themselves that might be very valuable for their overall health and well-being.
Now, on the other hand, the picture isn't all rosy, and there have been some studies that have shown a potential negative relationship.
In fact, in a very interesting study of nursing home patients, there was no clear relationship between death rates and religiousness.
Now, what did the authors conclude by this?
Well, one of the possibilities is that maybe when people are in a nursing home and very elderly, maybe they're very religious,
but because they're disabled, because they're in the nursing home, they can't engage their religious selves the way they normally would.
They can't get to church, they can't get to the mass or the different ceremonies that they want to, the holidays that they want to celebrate,
and that actually can be disturbing to them.
It can upset them and actually cause them to live a shorter life.
In fact, those individuals who struggle with their religious beliefs can really have a negative impact on their physical and ultimately their mental health.
Now, researchers have looked at church attendance in general and its possible relationship to health,
and another fascinating line of research actually measures the comparative health outcomes of specific groups of believers.
And what we seem to be finding is that the faith tradition that you identify with may actually have an impact on your health.
For example, Mormon males have a decreased rate of cancer and all-cause mortality when you factor all other health-related factors out compared to non-Mormons.
In fact, Seventh-day Adventists also have been found to live longer on average than the general population.
But there are many potentially relevant factors involved in being religious that may have an impact on your health.
So for example, as we just heard, there may be something about your specific religious affiliation or preference.
What's the group that you identify with? How do you identify with them?
And how important is it a part of your life and your overall way of dealing with your health and well-being?
Of course, it's also important to us to understand a person's religious or spiritual history.
How have they gone down this path of their spiritual self?
Do they go through periods of time where they really struggled with their religious or spiritual beliefs?
Or have they always been a very devout religious or spiritual person?
It's important for us to understand the relationship between private and group practices and health and well-being.
We know for sure that social interactions and social support are very powerful mediators for improving health and well-being.
And maybe deriving support along those lines becomes very important for those individuals.
That that group interaction and that ability to derive social support is something that is crucial to their overall health and well-being.
And of course, the beliefs that people have could be very, very relevant in the context of how they look at themselves and how they actually survive.
If you remember the headline that we opened with, well, that really was a study.
It was a study that was conducted in 1992 where they looked at over 2,800 individuals over the age of 65 years in the New Haven, Connecticut region.
And they evaluate them and they looked at when they died.
And what they found was that yes, in fact, that elderly Christians as well as Jewish individuals were less likely to die in the 30 days before important holidays compared to the 30 days after.
So what does this mean?
Well, there's this implication that the belief in trying to get to that holiday, the belief that they really, this was something important to them,
that this was something that would actually enable them to survive longer and get to that holiday and get to that very important event in their lives that motivated them and that got them through.
So we can see how powerful religious beliefs and ideas can actually be in helping an individual to stay healthy or to stay alive as long as they possibly can.
What about other patient populations?
Well, we also have a variety of studies that have shown that people who are chronically ill, people who are suffering from cancer, dementia, heart disease, liver disease, so often they use religious and spiritual practices as a way of helping them through.
It's a way of helping them to cope.
It's a way of helping them to make some sense out of what's going on in their lives.
And because of this, they derive a great deal of support and power from that so that they can deal with their particular situations.
In fact, one of the reasons why I think the health care system needs to look at this is that many studies have shown that being a religious or spiritual person because of all the different effects that it has actually makes you more compliant with treatment.
And if that's the case, people are going to do better.
Now, spirituality among cancer survivors is also associated not only with better health habits, but better social and emotional support.
So again, we're starting to see this entire structure and matrix of who we are as human beings that helps maintain our health and well-being, that religious and spiritual beliefs can be an extraordinarily important part of all of that.
In fact, cardiac patients actually identify religion and prayer as one of the most frequent ways of trying to cope and deal with very, very stressful surgical procedures, medical procedures, and help to get them through those procedures.
And because of that, they frequently feel that they do better through those procedures because they are less stressed, they're more relaxed, they have a more positive attitude, and all of this together helps them to deal with those situations and deal with their health problems in a more effective way.
Now, so far we've been focusing on research that shows the health benefits of spirituality.
But as I mentioned at the beginning, it's important to note that sometimes religion can have a negative impact on your overall health and well-being.
So what are the ways in which religion can be viewed negatively?
Well, one of the things that people frequently cite is the notion that they believe that God is punishing them, and that's why they've gotten a particular disease.
They've gotten cancer, they've had an addiction.
This is an example in which God is punishing them for the things that they have done bad in their lives, maybe punishing them because they weren't spiritual enough.
And again, this is a very important issue for us because even though we may find a beneficial relationship between being religious and health,
we also need to think about the opposite of that and the possibility that if somebody looks at their religious or spiritual beliefs in a very negative way or looks at God as punishing them,
then they're going to have an overall poor outcome.
They may feel like, well, why should I go through treatment? Why should I try to beat this cancer if this is the punishment that God has for me?
We also have to be very cautious that we don't want to get into this notion that a lack of religiousness or a lack of spirituality is actually blamed for as the cause of a physical or psychological disorder.
This can be a very destructive idea to get into.
It's something that physicians and health care providers have to watch out for.
Patients may feel that way, and sometimes their clergy or family may support that kind of a notion for them.
But as a health care provider, what I think we ultimately have to do is try to find ways of changing their religious and spiritual attitudes around into something which is more positive.
Another interesting problem is that spirituality and religiousness are there because they have intrinsic value.
You are religious because you're religious, not because you think it is an intervention that may help with your health.
In fact, I always remember this somewhat humorous moment where we were giving our very first research symposium on spirituality and health,
and we were very proud of ourselves that we were kind of leading this field.
And after we presented all the data and some of our brain scans and the relationships with positive health, there was a minister who stood up in the back and he said,
you know, I think what you people are doing is terrible.
You know, religion is not an intervention. It's not something that you do in order to stay healthy.
And of course, I agree with that.
It's not like we can tell people to, you know, because they're sick to go home, take two prayers and call us in the morning.
It's not like aspirin.
And therefore, we have to be very cautious about how religious and spiritual beliefs and practices are actually used in the context of health care.
If it's something that's important for the person, then helping them to engage that is something that can be a very powerful mediator for their health and well-being.
But it really doesn't make sense to ask an atheist or an agnostic to begin praying to God because it might help them with their heart surgery.
Even a positive experience that somebody may have can also lead to a potential negative health outcome.
For example, as we'll hear later on in the course in a lecture on near-death experiences, sometimes a person may have a near-death experience which is so overwhelmingly positive.
And after they've come back, they've been revived and they want to tell people about this and they go and they tell their family.
Maybe they tell their clergy and they get a lot of very kind of odd looks, very condescending comments.
You know, they're there, you know, you were just a little crazy then or it was just the medication.
But for the person, it was a deeply meaningful experience and therefore all of a sudden this incredibly overwhelmingly positive experience for them is now met with a great deal of frustration and anxiety
and even causes depression because they feel that they can't share that with the people that they care about and love.
They may feel ostracized and therefore we have to be cautious about even when somebody has a positive experience how it can ultimately turn negative.
And perhaps the final negative aspect of health in terms of religious or spiritual beliefs comes in the form of cults and very bizarre kinds of religious and spiritual beliefs.
In fact, cults really represent a very interesting and problematic example because the participants often feel that they actually benefit from being part of that cult.
Even though they may not be able to function well in society and of course as I often hear in terms of some kind of humorous response,
cults ultimately create a very poor outcome especially when they end in mass suicide.
This is the way a lot of cults actually do end and therefore from a health related perspective, it's a very, very bad thing.
But we have to then think about the ideas about how religious and spiritual practices and beliefs can be beneficial and watch out for the ways in which they can be very negative.
And this of course raises a very interesting question.
Should patients and doctors discuss religion?
And if so, how?
Now when I was at the University of Pennsylvania, I was part of a group of researchers including the Pastoral Care Office who wanted to engage this question more actively.
And they actually interviewed patients and physicians to see what the answer to that question was.
The results from evaluating about 200 patients in the pulmonology department showed that about 70% of patients wanted their physicians to ask questions about their spiritual and religious beliefs.
Now of course this was highest among religious individuals who also said that their religious beliefs were likely to have an impact on decisions they made about their health including end of life issues.
But even about half of the non-religious individuals thought that it was a good idea to talk with a physician or to have a physician ask them about their religious and spiritual ideas.
Now why would they think that?
What they said was that it showed that the physician cared about who they were as a person.
The physician wanted to know who this person was and how all the different things that were going on were going to affect their lives and their health.
And therefore even if the person wasn't religious, it was still reasonable for a physician to ask the question,
are you a religious person and do your religious beliefs help you in some way?
Or is there something that I need to know as your physician that your religious and spiritual beliefs may have an impact on your health or your decisions about health?
Now given all of these effects on religion and health, we might wonder how it happens.
In scientific terminology, what is the mechanism of action by which religion exerts its health related effects?
And ultimately as the overall topic of this course is, how is this related to what's going on in the human brain?
Now I like to break down the mechanisms of action into what I call the indirect and the direct mechanisms of action.
The indirect mechanisms of action relate to how religions change a person's behaviors and what they do in life that ultimately has a health benefit.
So for example, we find out that people who are religious often have decreased participation in very high risk behaviors such as drinking alcohol, smoking, taking drugs or even being promiscuous.
For the most part, the reason is that these religious traditions tell people not to do these things.
And of course if you have a religious tradition that's telling you don't drink, don't smoke, don't be overly promiscuous, maybe even eat certain ways, well this sounds a lot like what a very good doctor would tell you to do.
And of course if it has the benefit and the strength of a religious tradition, then people are going to more likely follow those particular edicts.
And therefore we happen to find that simply indirectly by religions telling you to do certain things, it could have a very powerful health benefit.
Now we've talked a lot about church attendance. Well, church attendance has a very beneficial effect on health, but what might the mechanism of action be?
Well it turns out that when you go to church, one of the great things that you derive from that is social support.
You're working with other people, you're talking to other people and by interacting with all these other people, that social support has a very profound impact on who we are as human beings.
We are social beings, our brain functions in a social way and the more social support we have, clearly the better our brains function and the better our bodies function.
Now, I want to spend a few moments talking about the direct mechanisms of action and we discussed some of these mechanisms in the prior lecture.
Because we can actually look at how religious practices, practices like meditation and prayer can have a direct impact on health itself.
For example, meditation and prayer can induce a kind of relaxation response.
This is the term that Dr. Herbert Benson up at Harvard University coined back in the 1970s and this relaxation response lowers your heart rate, lowers your blood pressure.
And if you think about a lot of the health related issues in the world today, high blood pressure, high heart rate, these are things that are associated with an increased risk for heart disease and stroke.
So if you're engaged in a daily practice of prayer or meditation, maybe it actually directly lowers your effect or your possibility of having a stroke or heart disease.
This particular effect is believed to be mediated by the hypothalamus and the autonomic nervous system, the part of our body that regulates how our heart rate goes, how our different aspects of our body function.
And therefore, if a practice like meditation or prayer reduces the arousal side of that autonomic nervous system, brings up the calming side, then we would expect to see improvements in our heart rate and our blood pressure that are physically and directly mediated by these practices.
If we have a lowering of stress as the direct result of doing these practices, then we see a decrease in our stress hormones, particularly the stress hormone cortisol.
Cortisol, as many of you may know, is also something that you take to suppress the immune system.
So think about this. If your stress level is lower by engaging in prayer and your cortisol level lowers, then its usual function of suppressing the immune system goes away and the immune system works better.
So it's possible that if people engage in their religious and spiritual practices that not only do they lower their heart rate and blood pressure, but actually their immune system begins to work better.
There are some studies that have shown that immune system function is actually improved when people engage in these kind of practices.
For example, patients' white blood cell counts increase and their actual functionality seems to improve.
Now, of course, we still have this larger question of, well, if your white blood cells that help to mediate your immune system actually are working better and are greater in number,
does this actually imply fewer infections or lower risk of cancer? These are the questions that research is now starting to get at.
But there is certainly the implication that all of these direct mechanisms of action may be very important for reducing our risk of a variety of different disorders, including things like cancer, heart disease, and stroke.
Now, one of the other questions that we also have to think about are whether or not these changes are specifically related to religion and spirituality.
Can you engage in any kind of meditation practice, even if it doesn't have something to do with spirituality?
And of course, to some degree, the answer is that any of these practices can have benefit, but typically what we find is that the more an individual is engaged in that particular practice,
the more they believe in it, the stronger their feelings are, then the more powerful those experiences actually are, and the more powerful their health-related effects actually are.
One other thing that I'll just touch on is the possibility that prayer actually works, that there's a way of praying for somebody that could actually have some benefit for them.
We know that prayer can be beneficial for the individual. We've seen the changes that go on in the brain.
Is there a way that this kind of intercessory prayer actually works?
There's some fascinating studies that have been done that help to show that maybe it does work sometimes, but at this point, it's still a very controversial area.
We don't really know if it works, and even if it did work, we don't really understand exactly how it might actually happen.
So we can begin to look at all of these direct effects. We can ask questions about whether we're rewarded for the good behaviors that we do, and at the top of this lecture, we looked at a very intriguing headline.
Throughout this lecture, we have noticed that there seems to be a very strong correlation between good health and religious beliefs.
And now that we've considered all of this additional evidence, I think we can say the following.
That religion has proven to generally have a positive impact on health. It reduces the risk of getting certain diseases. It may even reduce the risk of dying prematurely.
But you can't pretend to be religious in order to get its health-related effects. You are religious because you believe in it, and if it has health benefits, then that is just an added bonus.
So doctors and scientists like myself are still trying to determine exactly how religion exerts its health effects, both positive and negative.
We're starting to get at a fairly good idea of the mechanisms by which this happens, but of course one remaining question is whether or not there is something simply about being religious that causes a health benefit.
And now that we've described some of the connections between religion and physical health in general, we're going to move on to the next lecture to an even more specific topic, which is how does religion affect our mental health.
I will see you next time.
