Monica was a 32-year-old with an onset of depression.
Although her therapist discussed a number of issues with her, Monica was still not
responding well to therapy or the antidepressant medications that were
prescribed for her. In one psychology session, her therapist asked her about her
beliefs in God. This first surprised Monica, but then she reflected on her
feelings for a few moments. She had a reasonably religious upbringing, especially
because her mother was a very religious woman. But when her mother died from
cancer, Monica lost all interest in religion. After all, God must not be
very compassionate to have taken her mother, and particularly at such a young
age. The therapist then asked Monica whether she thought God was on her side.
No, Monica said emphatically, although this bothered her since she felt that she
should be better connected to God. From that point on, the therapist and Monica
explored the connection between her depression and her negative beliefs about
God and religion. As Monica worked through this issue, she actually found a way to
forgive God for her mother's cancer. And this ultimately started to make Monica
feel better and less depressed. She eventually got over her depression and
found new meaning in her life and in her relationship with God. Now, this example
is not universally applicable, but research has repeatedly shown that many
people who have psychological problems also express some kind of issue with
their religious and spiritual beliefs. And for this reason, there appears to be
an important relationship between religion and mental health. The relationship
is often complex, and it makes us consider when is religion something
beneficial for mental health, and when can it be something instead that is
indicative of problems with mental health? Perhaps these ideas raise an even
larger question, one that is not frequently addressed, but may even be a
little bit awkward for many of us to consider, let alone talk about. And that
question is whether religious thinking is a sign of mental health, or if a
well-balanced person who maintains a personal support system can actually
engage in religious thinking, either as a sign of something, or is it a sign of
something normal or even delusional? And in this lecture, we're going to look at
the relationship between religion and mental health from a scientific
perspective. We'll consider a range of effects, both positive and negative, and
we'll see what these effects can teach us about the nature of our spiritual
brain. So let's begin by asking a fundamental question. How does religion
affect mental health? Well, as our opening story about Monica shows, this simple
question might have a very complex and perhaps even contradictory answer. In
Monica's case, religion seemed both to exacerbate her depression and ultimately
to assist her on her path to recovery. In other words, there seem to be both
positive and negative ways that religion can affect a person's mental health. So
why don't we start with some of the upbeat news, the positive effects of
religion on mental health, and then later on we'll talk about the negative. Now,
for example, religiousness and spirituality has been shown in a large
number of studies to reduce anxiety and to encourage a person's impulse
control. In fact, even in dealing with patients who are faced with illnesses,
especially chronic ones like cancer and heart disease, many individuals cite
religion as an important way of reducing their overall anxiety. Patients will
pray prior to surgery or perhaps other types of treatment like chemotherapy so
that they can find some kind of comfort. From the medical perspective, this can
help people respond better to the treatment and actually enables them to be
more compliant. They can deal with it better and they can engage it better so
that they ultimately have a better health outcome. Another positive effect is
that religiousness and spirituality can foster intimacy and cohesiveness with
others. As we discussed in the second lecture of this course, this has been
hypothesized to be one of the possible evolutionary adaptive advantages of
religion. It creates more cohesive societies. And as we saw in the
discussion of rituals, these rituals actually can generate very intense
feelings of connectedness and even a feeling of oneness among the
participants. So religion and spirituality clearly can create great
feelings of intimacy and cohesiveness and these can contribute to a person's
overall mental health. Why? Because they can feel more deeply connected to the
people around them, their spouse, their child, their people who they work with.
All of these are very important elements in a person's overall mental health.
And if religious and spiritual beliefs and practices can help create that
feeling of intimacy, that feeling of connection, then that social support can
be very beneficial for their mental health and it can lower their feelings of
anxiety and depression.
However, this positive effect can sometimes be balanced
by the increased antagonism that people can feel towards those individuals
who are outside of their particular faith. And we'll talk about this a little
bit more in a few minutes. Now, other studies have actually shown
that religiousness and spirituality can actually enhance a person's sense of
meaning and a sense of purpose in life.
For example, most studies show a correlation between people's religious attitudes
and their sense of having this purpose in life. This is something that can happen
on a doctrinal level because the religion actually provides some kind of context
for meaning in the human life. It tells us how we are to be human beings.
It tells us why we're here. It talks about our relationship with God, for example.
And all of that together helps to create a sense of purpose and a sense of what we're
supposed to do here in life. And of course, having this sense of purpose
can be very beneficial to mental health because so oftentimes people get lost
in terms of what their purpose is. And especially when people feel anxious or
depressed, they wonder, they ponder about why they're here, what's the meaning
of all of this. And religions can actually help to provide that.
In fact, religions can provide a very strong sense of meaning and purpose,
but you don't necessarily have to be totally religious or spiritual in order to
get that. There are other ways in which people can derive meaning in life.
In fact, if you remember from our definitions of religiousness, sometimes
it can actually be a non-religious goal that we strive for.
And therefore, it doesn't always have to be religious or spiritual, but the data
certainly supports the notion that religious beliefs and religious faith
is an extremely important source for meaning in people's lives.
As we discussed in the last lecture, this data pertains to populations
and not necessarily to any given individual. So you could be a religious
person and still struggle with your sense of meaning and purpose.
But on the whole, religious and spiritual beliefs can be very beneficial
with regard to this particular element of our mental health.
Yet another possible effect of spirituality is that it fosters personal growth.
By pursuing spiritual goals, people actually create a framework
within which they can grow personally.
So when we use phrases such as personal growth or social cohesion or even a
sense of purpose, these are rather broad ways of
talking about mental health. And on one hand, this is helpful because it
tells us something about the global picture of how we can be
healthy, how we can maintain our mental health, how we can maintain a positive
attitude about our life and about what we're doing here.
But a large number of studies have also explored the relationship between
religion and specific mental health problems, such as depression,
anxiety, or even substance abuse.
And these studies show something of a mixed bag in terms of their results.
Some, for example, indicate that religion can improve
these specific problems, while others suggest that religion can actually
worsen a problem. And to some degree, this may depend a lot
on the actual setting within which the problem is occurring
and how that person feels religiously or spiritually,
along with whatever psychological problems they're dealing with.
So for example, as we noted a few minutes ago, anxiety can be improved when a
person derives comfort and strength from their religion.
But anxiety can also be worsened if people feel that they struggle with their
religious beliefs, if they feel like they
don't fit into their religious community, or if they find themselves
believing in a God that is punishing them. So on one hand, we can find ways in
which anxiety can be benefited, but on the other hand, sometimes that
anxiety can be augmented. Now, for example, one very interesting
element of anxiety is actually thinking about it on a far more global scale,
something that people have referred to as ontological anxiety.
This ontological anxiety relates a little bit to what we were just talking
about, that sense of meaning, that sense of why we're here.
Sometimes that creates anxiety for people as they struggle with that question.
In fact, this was the basis of the work of the social psychologist Eric Fromm,
who proposed that human beings have a strong need for a stable frame of
reference as they go through their life, and that religion
apparently fills this need. In effect, human beings crave answers to
questions that no other source of knowledge truly
has the answer to address. And in some sense, it is only a way in
which religion can somehow try to answer that question.
In fact, I'm often reminded of a very interesting story that was told to
me when I was in medical school, and it had to do with this notion of
creating a framework within which we function.
It was talking about an individual who was a doctor who was working in Africa,
and there was an individual who had gotten malaria from a mosquito bite,
and the patient came to him to get the antibiotics to help to cure the malaria.
But then a short time later, the doctor saw him going into the tent of the local
medicine man. After he came out, the doctor said,
why are you doing that? If you believe in the effects of medicine,
why are you going to talk to this other person who can
only deal with it in a spiritual context? And the patient just looked at him and
said, well, I came to you because I got bitten by the mosquito,
and I go to the medicine man to find out why. So it's this ontological anxiety
that we all have about why things happen to us and how we understand it,
that religious and spiritual beliefs can help us
to make better sense of and to quell that ontological anxiety.
Now, the social context within which different disorders occur also can
influence anxiety, and therefore if we turn to religion and spirituality as a
way of deriving social meaning, social support,
helping us to cope with various issues, then that will help to improve our
overall mental health and well-being. For example, chronically ill patients
frequently use religious and spiritual practices as a way of helping them to
deal with those particular problems. And we talked about this a little bit
in the physical health lecture, but it bears repeating in the sense that
so often times when you have a physical health problem,
there's a psychological mental health element that comes along with it.
Those fears, those anxieties about death, about pain, about what's going to happen,
and those individuals who deal with these problems, they turn to religion
and spirituality, whether they have cancer or heart disease,
to try to help them get through these different issues that they face.
And by providing a sense of cognitive support, emotional support, and social
support, these religious traditions can actually
help people as they deal with whatever problems that they face.
And whether it's a cardiac patient or a cancer patient,
each of these can benefit, each of these patients can benefit
from the spiritual beliefs that they have. In fact, religious rituals themselves
can be very beneficial as an individual goes through different
church ceremonies, as they go through meditation practices, prayer practices,
as they develop support from their congregation, all of these different
elements can come together to help to support a person
and help them to resolve whatever psychological mental health issues that
they are facing.
Now by this point, we've been able to see that the relationship between religion
and mental health is very complex, and while in principle the relationship
can be beneficial, it is not necessarily a cure-all,
and it may even in certain circumstances lead to a worsening of conditions.
Perhaps the relationship between religion and substance abuse is the most
complex and intriguing of all.
Many people have studied this relationship between substance abuse
and religion for a variety of reasons. In general,
there is the primary hypothesis that addiction to drugs is similar
to a very strong belief in religion. It's this notion that you're addicted to
something, and whether you are addicted to drugs or addicted to religion,
there may be a relationship. And perhaps if you can
shift that addiction from drugs to religion, that can be a more beneficial
avenue for an individual to take. Now what supports the
notion of this link? Well, there is actual research. In fact,
religious and spiritual involvement predicts less use of and less problems
with alcohol, tobacco, and drugs. And there are
denominational differences as well. Denominations that have a very strict
stance against the use of alcohol tend to have a much lower
risk for having alcohol problems, and therefore
Mormons, for example, tend to have among the lowest
incidence rates of substance abuse because it has a very strict rule against
it. Spiritual and religious involvement is
also associated with higher success in smoking cessation programs.
So the more you are spiritually motivated, it tends to have a beneficial
influence in lowering a person's ability to overcome
their smoking addiction.
Also, religious involvement is very low in patients who are treated
for substance abuse. And therefore, if there are
interventions, such as Alcoholics Anonymous, that engage people in a
kind of spiritually based intervention, then this is often associated with a
much better outcome, whether the person is treated in a hospital or as an out
patient. These kinds of spiritually associated
treatment programs can be very beneficial. And in fact, when people
have studied these kinds of spiritually oriented programs in detail, they find
that these kinds of programs do at least as well, if not better,
than those who are treated with a variety of other approaches.
In fact, when you incorporate other kinds of practices like meditation and
prayer-based interventions, these are also associated with a decrease
in drug and alcohol abuse.
It's also interesting that Alcoholics report
negative experiences with religion and often hold a very punitive concept of
God. This goes back a little bit to even our first story of Monica,
the notion that that negative view about God, that can actually lead people
down the path towards a negative perception of their
health and well-being, a negative mental health, and even
lead people into substance abuse. And there is some evidence that following
the treatment for substance abuse, there is an increase
in a person's sense of meaning in life.
There is also some evidence that there are common motivations for substance
abuse as well as spiritual pursuits. They both seem to
fill a certain emotional need, a certain support
that the person seems to require, and by again trying to shift a person away
from their addictions, away from these negative beliefs
to something more positive, we can actually get to
a better, stronger health, mental health perspective,
and into a better relationship even in the context of spirituality.
So, given the fact that there are these very positive relationships between
spirituality and mental health, some researchers have actually
tried to more explicitly develop treatment approaches that combine
religious and spiritual content with more traditional psychotherapy techniques.
When they have studied these kinds of combined interventions,
they have actually looked at their effectiveness and how well they can be
used and in what context to see how well they work, especially for
specific disorders such as anxiety or depression.
And in general, these studies have shown that, excuse me,
in general, these studies have shown that combined interventions are as
effective, if not more effective, than standard psychotherapy.
Now, of course, this especially is true with religious clients.
If we go back to our story with Monica, she had these religious beliefs and that
was an important element of herself and her life,
and by engaging that, the therapist was able to work through
her spiritual issues as well as her psychological ones.
Now, interestingly, what the research also has shown
is that a therapist themselves, they don't necessarily have to be a
specifically religious person to do this kind of integrated psychotherapy
that combines psychotherapy and religion with the patient. However,
it is very important that the patient is open and willing to do this.
And again, if it's a person who is a very staunch atheist, then this is not the
right kind of program for that individual. But if there is a person who
does have some strong religious or spiritual beliefs,
positive or negative, I think it's a very important area for a therapist to
begin to explore to see where and how it may have
contributed to whatever mental health issues the person faces,
and are there ways of converting that into something that's more positive so
that they can actually benefit and derive some psychological support as well.
In the following first person account from a patient struggling with depression,
we can sense this internal revolution, a spiritual transformation, if you will,
as the patient actually embraced their religious traditions.
And when we see this, we can see how powerful of an experience this actually
can be.
The patient said this, it is easiest just to describe it
without too much detail here as a force of energy that just came over me
and was perceived by me as a peaceful force
that had either come from an external source, maybe God,
maybe was physiologically triggered by my severe emotional state.
But it was at that moment that I realized I would never be alone again
and that something, something out there was there to help me
and to support me. It was an incredible shift in my life
and brought whole new perspectives to me relative to my religious beliefs,
the world, human dynamics, and to healing.
So for this particular individual, this spiritual transformation that occurred
in the context of them seeking therapy and treatment for their depression
is what ultimately took them out of that mental health problem
and took them in a whole new direction that was
both beneficial from a spiritual as well as a psychological
perspective.
So if these kinds of interventions can be so effective,
we might also wonder what other religious and spiritual practices might be
useful in helping people with various types of mental illnesses.
Some of these are not specifically religious,
but they are often part of the basis of what religions are about.
For example, forgiveness. Forgiveness is something
that actually is a very complex process.
And if we think about what's going on in the brain when somebody
undergoes this forgiveness process, it may actually be very complex.
Think about a time when you forgave somebody. What was the whole process
that went on there? Well, before you can forgive, it starts
with some kind of injury to yourself. It starts with some kind of insult to you.
And therefore, you have to start with a sense of yourself.
And if you think about the human brain, well, that sense of self may have
something to do with our frontal lobes that help us to kind of
organize ourself and also our parietal lobe, which is that
orienting part of the self. And it's that parietal lobe that may help to
begin to compare how ourself relates to others.
In fact, this is a little bit of a quantitative function as well.
We say, are we doing okay? Are we in some kind of equilibrium with somebody
else? Are we at an advantage over them or a
disadvantage? And therefore, we may ultimately be able
to perceive some kind of injury. This is probably mediated by the limbic
system, our emotional centers of the brain that say, wow, something bad just
happened to me. And of course, you have to have a causal
function as well in the brain that remembers the event itself.
I always think about if you have an Alzheimer's patient, for example,
and you go in and you insult them and then you walk out of the room and come
back and they don't remember the insult, well, there's no forgiveness process
there. But if you remember what's happened,
you remember what were the causal events that led up to it,
then you can start to think about what happened, how I was injured,
who did it to me. And eventually, you can use your abstract and
emotional processes to try to reconcile that injury.
You will reframe your understanding of the relationship between you and that
person who injured you. And of course, this may apply to you and
another person or it might even apply to you and
God if you have a particular perception of a relationship with God.
As we saw in our story with Monica, she was angry at God and part of the process
was to forgive God for the death of her mother.
So the ability to forgive God or to forgive others for whatever went
what is going on in your life, whatever they caused in your life,
this can have a tremendous benefit in terms of your overall psychological
well-being. And there are substantial evidence to
show how psychologically powerful the forgiveness process
actually can be for people. And for that reason, it has also been
incorporated into the psychotherapy process just like other aspects of
religious and spiritual content. Now, other practices like rituals,
prayer, meditation, these have also been shown
to be very effective at helping to reduce stress and anxiety.
There is a large literature base that shows that practices like mindfulness
meditation, and I was even involved in a study
looking at the effect of the rosary, which showed that there was an
overall reduction in anxiety levels for people and levels of depression.
So simply engaging these practices can be very beneficial
in helping people with their overall feelings of depression, anxiety,
and other problems of mental health. And to some degree, the more universal
concept of suffering is something that people can acknowledge,
can reflect on, and can decide whether or not
that suffering can ultimately be converted into
a very powerful positive force in their life, or are they going to continue to
wallow in whatever is going on that makes them suffer.
Now, as I mentioned at the beginning, there is a lot of research and data that
support the positive relationship between religion and mental health.
But it's not always good, and it's not always beneficial.
There are many circumstances where being a religious or spiritual person
or just feeling these religious or spiritual feelings
can go wrong, and they can become detrimental to the individual
or to the society at large. So let's take a look at some of these
negative aspects of religion on mental health.
People suffer from their problems with spiritual or religious ideas.
Often, it can be in the form of being angry at God,
struggling with what's true in life,
trying to recollect problems that you have with your parents,
and maybe arguments that you have because of their religious tradition,
and it's different than what you believe. These kinds of problems
with what a person actually believes can cause a great deal of internal
struggle and strife, and that can lead to
psychological anxiety and depression. And of course, there are problems with
psychological, physical, and even sexual abuse
that have resulted in people who have very negative views about religion.
We even see examples today where this abuse has happened specifically in the
context of religious and spiritual traditions,
and therefore it can cause a great deal of problems and confusion for people
when they think the religion is supposed to be there to support them,
and yet somehow it winds up creating a great deal of harm for them.
As we mentioned in the last lecture, people can also follow some very bizarre
kinds of beliefs that ultimately lead to cults.
And of course, in today's world, we have the whole issue
of when religion leads to violence and hatred. How does this happen?
What is the difference in a person's brain who is very religious and yet has a
deep sense of anger and hatred for other people who
don't believe just like them? And how do we contrast that with a very
deeply religious or spiritual person who is open and loving to all people?
Now at the top of our lecture, we consider the story of Monica,
the young woman who was wrestling with psychological problems.
As we said, she had been a very religious person who felt conflicted
about her faith when her own mother passed away due to cancer.
In the end, Monica was able to reconcile her faith
with her mother's passing, and Monica remained a spiritual person
despite what had happened. Religion and spirituality may play
a crucial role in our psychology. In fact, integrating religion and
spirituality into psychotherapy may be very successful
if done in the appropriate setting, since religious and spiritual beliefs can
sometimes contribute to mental illness and sometimes can be useful
in helping people find their way out of mental illness.
Understanding the religious beliefs of an individual might be just as important
as understanding their psyche. There can be so many reciprocal interactions
that contribute to mental health and well-being,
and ultimately, these interactions play out
in the brain, in the emotional and cognitive centers
that enable us to feel and to think. By embracing the notion of the spiritual
brain, we can help to make our approaches to mental illness
and mental health as effective as possible.
