It's 11 p.m. January 1st, 1901.
In Topeka, Kansas, inside the Bethel Bible School, a group of students have spent the
previous three days praying, their goal? To contemplate the idea of the biblical verse
that reads, to receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. Now, as Midnight draws closer, one
of the students, 30-year-old Agnes Osman, asks her spiritual teacher, Charles Parham,
to lay his hands upon her and pray. When he did, Agnes began to speak in a language no
one had ever heard before. For three days this continued. Some of the other students
thought Agnes was just babbling, and others thought that she was speaking Chinese, but
they all agreed that she had been touched by the Holy Spirit, that Agnes, in fact, had
been given the gift of speaking in tongues. The phenomenon of speaking in tongues appears
commonly enough in certain Pentecostal church services, but it is by no means limited to
that setting. For example, there was a case of a hospital patient found to be mumbling
incoherently. This was believed to be a psychotic episode so the patient was seen by a psychiatrist
who actually recommended very strong anti-psychotic medication. But as the medical team was getting
ready to administer the medication, the family came in and told them that, no, no, no, the
patient's fine. She's just speaking in tongues. Well, there are certainly interesting stories
about speaking in tongues, but what do they all have to do with a course on spirituality
in the brain? Well, today we're going to look at phenomena like speaking in tongues, and
we're going to consider whether they are symptomatic of brain dysfunction, or if perhaps there might
be evidence suggesting that spiritual phenomena like speaking in tongues may actually indicate
a sort of supernormal functioning of the human brain. What do speaking in tongues look like
or sound like? Well, people who speak in tongues sound like they are speaking some kind of
language, but when researchers have actually done a linguistic analysis, it shows that
it doesn't have any kind of resemblance to a typical language. The practitioners feel
as if the Spirit of God is taking over them. Interestingly, there are those religious individuals
who actually say that this is the work of the devil, and that it isn't the Spirit of
God, but it is the devil that's causing this to happen. And of course, those in a more scientific
mind actually think that it's a psychological abnormality. It may actually be some kind
of psychotic episode or some problem with the brain. But here's what I can tell you
from our own study of people speaking in tongues. In our Speaking in Tongue study, it was fascinating
because it was actually one of my favorite studies. After all, when you see someone perform
meditation, it's kind of boring. You don't really see very much all the fireworks, all
the mental fireworks at least, are going on inside. But speaking in tongues is entirely
different. In fact, as I prepared to study our very first Pentecostal subject, I had
no idea what to expect. I had never seen it before. I didn't know what was going to
happen. I didn't know if the subject was going to drop to the floor, start running around
the room. I had visions of the exorcist in my mind with their heads spinning around.
I was really pretty uncomfortable as to what was going to happen. In spite of that, I greeted
our first subject as she came in through our laboratory doors, and I talked to her. She
was a very sweet, very intelligent sounding middle-aged woman. And she described to me
the importance of speaking in tongue in her life. She told me how important it was, how
spiritual it was for her, and how it really had in many ways transformed who she was.
After I talked to her for a little bit, I explained to her how the experiment was going
to work. I described it in detail. And I described how we were going to create two states for
her. One of them was when she was going to actually just be doing gospel singing. And
this was going to be the first brain scan. We used our spect scanner, the same one that
we had used for the Franciscan nuns doing prayer, the same one we had done with the Buddhist
meditators. And I told her that we were going to do the first scan while she was actually
just singing, doing religious singing. And then I told her that the second scan would
be taken while she was actually speaking in tongue.
Now we got her IV hooked up and asked her to begin gospel singing. Now part of the reason
that we had her do gospel singing was that I realized right away that if I had her speaking
in tongues in one scan and sitting there quietly in the other, of course I would see all kinds
of things going on. But I was really looking for something that would be spiritual and
something that would be specific to speaking in tongues. So I realized that if she's going
to be moving around and dancing and singing something, then that should be the two states
that I compare. One where she's just singing in English and the other where she is singing
in tongues. So first she came in and did the gospel singing. She sang for about 10 minutes.
She really got into it. I injected her with the radioactive tracer that measures the blood
flow in her brain. I actually allowed her to finish singing to continue for about another
5 or 10 minutes and then we scanned her. Now came the moment of truth. We told her that
she could begin to speak in tongues whenever she wanted to. And she started off listening
to the same gospel music. She started to sing again. She started to sing in English. But
after a few minutes she slipped into something that I had never heard before. It was just
for a few seconds but it sounded like some kind of weird language. And then it went back
to English. Then the strange sound occurred again and lasted a little bit longer. And
then after a few minutes the only sound coming out of her mouth was the speaking in tongues.
After about 10 minutes of speaking in tongues, I injected her with the radioactive tracer.
I had let her speak in tongues for about 10 more minutes and then we scanned her again.
Remember with these spec scans at the moment of the injection, that's the picture I get.
So the scans were going to show me something as to what was going on in her brain when
she was engaged in the moment of speaking in tongues. What did the scans show? Well
there were some very interesting differences. One of the most important differences, the
most important changes that we saw was in the frontal lobes. Remember that the frontal
lobes right behind your forehead are what make us feel like we're in control of our actions.
It actually, when we're talking, when I'm talking to you right now, my frontal lobes
are turning on to generate the words, to generate the thoughts and to tell you exactly what
I'm thinking. And if I move, it's my frontal lobes that make me move. But what happened
when the person was speaking in tongues? Instead of increasing in activity, the frontal lobes
actually decreased in activity. Does this make sense? Well let's think about what's
going on. Remember in meditation or prayer, the person is willfully concentrating on that
particular prayer, on that particular phrase or on that particular image. What was going
on here? They weren't concentrating on anything. In fact, what they seem to be doing is letting
all of their control, all of their conscious control of what was going on go away. So that
the experience for them is that their will is literally taken over. And what they believe
is taken over by the Spirit of God to make this vocalization happen. When this happens,
it looks like their frontal lobes literally shut down. The part of them that normally
makes them feel in control actually decreases in activity and it allows them to have this
experience that they're not the ones who are actually in control of this process. The scan
also showed some very substantial increases of activity in the thalamus. Remember that
very central structure that regulates all of our sensory information and connects all
the different parts of the brain to each other and also in the limbic and emotional
centers of the brain because this was a highly emotional practice. Now amazingly when the
person was speaking in tongues, she literally had tears coming down her face. She was oblivious
to everything that was around her. She was in a completely different state of mind. But
once she stopped, she returned quickly to being that pleasant, intelligent sounding woman
who I'd met at the very beginning. So what are we to make of these very intense types
of spiritual states and practices? Are they normal or are they abnormal? And is the brain
functioning appropriately or totally dysfunctionally? Think about my subject, the Pentecostal Woman
I just described. Although the scan showed distinct changes in her brain when she was
speaking in tongues, that in and of itself does not answer the larger question. Is this
normal or not? This is the question that we now will wrestle with. For example, many people
yourself included may typically have in your mind the notion of that schizophrenic patient
who ends up being in the inpatient hospital believing that they are Jesus Christ or the
next Messiah. And people who have mania like people who are schizophrenic often have had
an experience of something called hyper-religiosity. Hyper-religiosity refers to a person who
becomes intensely religious. In fact, they focus on many spiritual and religious ideas
to the exclusion of all other things in life. Sometimes people with schizophrenia have hallucinations
that's certainly something that we know well. But when they hear voices, sometimes they
take on a religious context. They think that God is speaking to them or angels are speaking
to them. And therefore, this schizophrenic person has a problem in understanding where
these different hallucinations are coming from. And they sometimes think that they have
a religious origin. And in that regard, they become very hyper-religious. They focus very
intensely on the religiousness of these ideas and these things that are swarming around
in their brain. And as we'll see in a few moments, I'm going to talk a little about something
called temporal lobe epilepsy. Seizures in the temporal lobe, a part of the brain that's
located along the side of the brain. This has also been associated with people who are hyper-religious
and may even contribute to people having religious conversions. But I think that there's a
significant caveat here that I want to talk about. We have to be very careful about over-pathologizing
spiritual experience. In fact, in current psychiatric practice, we tend to label people who have
these very unusual experiences or unusual thoughts as abnormal. But as I asked before,
what exactly is normal and what exactly is abnormal? When I teach my classes on this
topic, I actually challenge my students with this question. Maybe you should think about
it for a moment. Have you ever had a profound religious or spiritual experience? And if
so, did you find it normal or abnormal? Have any of your friends ever told you about an
experience like that? And when they did, what did you do? What did you think about that?
Did you kind of acknowledge that they had it, but in your own mind thinking, boy, that
person is really crazy? Maybe they're just, you know, or they had some kind of really
bizarre experience, some kind of psychotic episode, but that certainly wasn't right.
That certainly wasn't normal. How do you define normal and abnormal? And this is actually
not so easy since it depends to some degree on the norm of society. If you live in a society
that is very pro-religious, like the United States currently is, then being a religious
person is relatively normal. But if you live in a society that is very anti-religious,
like some of the communist countries, then being religious may actually be abnormal.
And in fact, because of that, it can actually be bad for your health, both physical and
mental. Take another interesting example about this delicate problem of normalcy. When a person
has a loved one who has died, a very frequent experience is to see or hear the person who
is deceased. In fact, in the psychiatric profession, their primary manual called the Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual, which essentially defines everything we need to know about mental
illness, they define that experience as a normal hallucination. This is very interesting
because we don't normally think about hallucinations as being normal. Usually they're associated
with very severe derangements in brain functions such as schizophrenia. So why are these types
of hallucinations considered to be normal? And it's a bit of a slippery slope. If these
kinds of hallucinations are normal, then who is to say if hearing God's voice is normal
or not? We might go a step further and question whether an otherwise psychologically normal
person can have a normal or an abnormal religious experience. I was amazed at the subjects that
we studied who were speaking in tongues because they seemed so normal. They were completely
normal when they were not speaking in tongues. As a group, they generally had good jobs.
They were married. They raised children. They were a completely normal human being. But when
you watch them speak in tongues and see them doing something that looks and sounds so incredibly
different from what we would consider to be normal behavior, then what we would consider
to be normal behavior? What do we make of that? And of course for them, it is completely normal.
Not only is it normal, it's sacred. But what about schizophrenic patients? Can they have a normal
religious experience or a normal religious belief? I mean, not all schizophrenic patients believe that
they're Jesus Christ. Maybe some of them are religious and that's okay. So at some point, it seems
that we need to take a closer look at how we define what is normal and what is abnormal
and specifically in the context of psychology and spiritual experiences.
Some scientists have taken a very reductionistic approach to this entire issue. In fact, one group
of neuropsychologists from the UCLA Reed Neurological Research Center went so far as to evaluate a
variety of leading historical religious figures and actually attempted to diagnose their mental
dysfunction that they suffered from. For example, they cited St. Paul's conversion on the road to
Damascus in which he sees a sudden bright light. He falls to the ground, he hears the voice of Jesus
and the experience actually appears to result in blindness for him for about three days.
Well, these neuropsychologists looked at this description and they said many of the elements of this
experience have occasionally been described in people who have seizures. They can hear voices.
They can have unusual visual disturbances and sometimes they can even have prolonged blindness.
Joan of Arc stated that she persistently heard this voice accompanied also by a great light and therefore
similar to St. Paul, some of her symptoms have been reported in patients who have had seizures in their temporal lobes.
So this group of neuropsychologists offered a possible diagnosis as an epilepsy for Joan of Arc.
They also suggested that perhaps she may have even had tuberculosis in her brain and that this contributed
to the process. This may have been what caused some of the seizures.
St. Teresa of Avila, a medieval mystic, had many visions, but she also had headaches.
She had loss of consciousness and tongue-biting. So again, as our neuropsychologists looked at these descriptions
and these different symptoms, so to speak, they suggested as well that such experiences could have been related to seizures.
And the same may even go for Joseph Smith, the founder of the Mormon Church.
Smith had experiences in which he felt great fear. He saw a pillar of light and he heard voices.
He is quoted as saying that when the experience was over, he found himself lying on his back, looking up at heaven.
So what are we to make of this entire exercise?
Well, on one hand, it's a little bit of an exercise in futility because there is no way to go back in time and put EEG electrodes on
each of these individuals and see what was going on in their brain and try to find out whether or not they actually had seizures.
The bigger issue, however, is this. Today, anyone who has experiences like those of Joan of Arc or St. Teresa is usually regarded as having a brain pathology
and therefore we just treat them accordingly. We treat them as if they have a psychological problem. They have brain dysfunction.
What is our modern approach accurate and is it appropriate? Can mental disorders actually explain all that we think about when we think about religion and mysticism?
Well, here are some reasons why I think that this is not always a good argument for the nature of religious experiences.
First of all, mental illness is typically chronic. It's something that exists maybe from the time that they're a child, theoretically all the way out until a person dies.
But when we see people who have had these very profound religious and spiritual experiences, mystical experiences, most of the time it's not something that occurs throughout their entire life.
Most of the time it's something that occurs on a very limited scale. Sometimes they have only one or two of them.
So it seems a little unusual that suddenly somebody would have a seizure or several seizures and then never have them again.
In fact, seizures themselves are usually very repetitive and somewhat similar.
So if you have a seizure disorder, you usually have very similar kinds of experiences time and time again.
And that doesn't totally explain the diversity of these very powerful religious experiences that some of these religious figures have described.
Another aspect of these types of brain dysfunctions is that they typically are associated with poor function.
They have poor social relationships. They don't think clearly. Their emotions are all over the place. They have cognitive impairment.
But most of the time when we look at these religious figures, they perform cognitively, emotionally, extremely well.
They're able to galvanize entire populations of people.
So it seems that when we think about these kinds of experiences, it doesn't seem appropriate to extend some kind of pathology to describing them.
In fact, many mystical experiences are usually described in very positive ways.
In fact, an earlier study from the 1980s that actually looked at the language of altered states of consciousness assessed the different ways that people describe
different types of experiences that are sometimes considered related, especially in the context of brain dysfunction.
They evaluated descriptions of schizophrenic patients and the states that they were in, drug-induced states and mystical states.
Not surprisingly, when these investigators actually looked at the description of these different states, the drug-induced state and mystical state
and schizophrenic state, they found significant differences.
The schizophrenic states were usually described in negative terms as if it was, in fact, an abnormal process.
One of the examples that they used was a quote from a patient who said,
I do want to explain, if I can, the exaggerated state of awareness in which I lived before, during, and after my acute illness.
There was this recognition by this patient that it was, in fact, an illness, that it was abnormal.
And that's not typically what we see when we are looking at people who have had spiritual experiences.
Drug-induced states were described primarily as having very intense sensory perceptions.
One of the quotes was, I observed the myriad, multi-form ideas and images passing across sensations and emotions flowing inward and outward.
The light that illumined these images grew brighter and brighter until I was almost frightened by the intensity of their brilliance.
Mystical states were typically described with words that related to ultimate reality and meaning.
The experience took hold of me with such power that it seemed to go through my whole soul.
So it seemed as if God was praying in, with, and for me.
And as we will see in later lectures, the mystical states truly represent a unique state of mind.
So clearly there is some kind of relationship between brain disorders, brain dysfunction, and unusual religious or spiritual experiences.
But how far can we go?
I mean, this has led some to suggest that all religious beliefs are derived from some type of a pathological process.
As we saw with the neuropsychologists, they suggested that religious figures of history all may have had some kind of brain dysfunction.
Some have argued that perhaps even all types of strong religious beliefs have their root in a brain disorder such as temporal lobe seizure activity.
They argue that such seizure activity may actually be subclinical, so that the person is not really aware of it.
They don't manifest as somebody who has seizures.
We don't see them falling down to the ground all the time.
But when they're having these little mini seizures, it actually has an impact on their experiences and beliefs and actually induces very, very strong and intense spiritual feelings or religious experiences.
Now, such a hypothesis is theoretically testable, but it is very problematic to evaluate since it's difficult to know when such activity will occur and what type of an effect it might actually have on the individual.
Furthermore, only a very small percentage of patients who actually have something like temporal lobe seizures actually have reported these unusual religious experiences.
It may actually be less than 5% of these patients who have actually had unusual religious or spiritual experiences.
The simple truth is that it is a gross generalization, I think, to assume that religious beliefs are born from a pathological process in all circumstances.
It is also perhaps unfair to classify them as born of normal brain experiences as well.
Perhaps there is something in the middle of these two dichotomous positions that will tell us something about the true nature of what these experiences are and what's going on in the brain of people when they actually have them.
In fact, this discussion also gives me an opportunity to raise an intriguing philosophical question which we are going to encounter in various forms throughout the rest of this course.
And this question is, how do we know what the true nature of these experiences actually is?
Put another way, what is the reality of such an experience?
Some of you may have seen the movie called Phenomenon, in which the lead character played by John Travolta transforms from a kind of regular everyday guy and mechanic into an absolute genius.
In fact, he actually begins to develop certain powers of the brain, such as telekinesis.
And in the end, they find that he actually has a brain tumor which somehow has enhanced his brain's function.
Is there a real life correlate of this kind of an experience? Well, it turns out that there may be.
A neuroscientist named Jill Balti Taylor wrote a fascinating book called My Stroke of Insight.
And in this book, she describes the mystical experiences that she had while actually suffering a stroke.
So it appears that when the brain is suffering from some type of dysfunction, the result can be some of the most powerful and important experiences in a person's life.
And if the movie Phenomenon actually holds any kind of shred of truth, maybe somewhere in that dysfunction,
the brain connects us to reality in ways that we normally cannot attain.
So if a person has an intense religious experience and we can document seizure activity, does that negate the experience or not?
Consider the possible conclusions we can draw from finding seizure activity in a person during an intense spiritual experience.
One conclusion, which is perhaps the more medically or scientifically biased conclusion, is that the seizure actually caused the experience.
The experience, therefore, is purely a manifestation of the brain's dysfunction.
In other words, the experience is not truly real, at least with regard to attaining an actual spiritual state or at least in terms of relating to something that is out there in the world.
But if we interpret the results from a spiritual perspective, we might conclude something very different.
The spiritual person might argue that the seizure activity represents an actual heightened activity state of the brain.
We know that this is certainly true scientifically. We know that we can see intense activity going on, intense electrical activity going on in the brain when a person has a seizure.
So is this heightened state of activity, is it possible that in that heightened state of activity the brain is able to truly perceive an actual spiritual realm?
In this way, the experience is truly real and the seizure activity paves the way for such an experience.
In a similar manner, the speaking in tongue study shows us what is happening in the brain of someone who is speaking in tongues.
The scan does not tell us whether the tongues is generated by the brain or the brain is somehow responding to the actual spirit of God creating the experience.
This also raises another intriguing question that challenges the title of this particular lecture.
Does brain dysfunction really represent dysfunction?
Or should we consider that it represents a kind of supernormal functioning?
Think back to the start of our lecture where we considered Agnes Osman and her three-day odyssey of speaking in tongues.
Was she literally touched by the Holy Spirit?
Or was Agnes just crazy in the crudest sense of the term?
Was this purely and simply a case of brain dysfunction or something marvelously spiritual?
Or yet a third possibility?
Was she perhaps so filled with religious faith that her brain activity reached a new level of functioning, an unusual level but one that is within the range of most normal humans?
It's an intriguing possibility and in my opinion one that science really should explore.
