Dimethyltryptamine, or DMT, as it is referred to, is a naturally occurring neurotransmitter
found in trace amounts in mammals, including human beings.
In large amounts, however, DMT can lead to hallucinations, visions, and feelings of intense
euphoria.
Its impact can be so profound that DMT has even been called the spirit molecule.
Several scientists have been studying DMT, as well as other chemicals in the brain, to
see what role neurotransmitters play in spiritual experiences.
For example, could it be that those who are more religious may have larger amounts of
certain brain chemicals?
And if so, how might they play into the topics that we have explored in our last lecture,
where we looked at speaking in tongues and other kinds of experiences that may involve
a supernormal brain functioning?
Well there is growing evidence that many different neurotransmitters are involved in religious
and spiritual practices and experience, and in this lecture we'll look at that evidence.
Now to begin with, let's review some basics.
Neurotransmitters are the chemicals in the brain that allow for transmission of information
to occur between the nerve cells.
They are particularly involved in the space between the neurons, and that's something
called the synapse.
So this is the space between where one neuron ends and the next one begins.
And there are a variety of different kinds of neurotransmitters.
Each of them have many different kinds of functions.
So ultimately we have to wonder if there really is a spirit molecule.
Is there a spirit molecule, one that is necessary, for creating the spiritual experience that
so many human beings have?
Certainly there are some molecules that play an important role, but given the richness
and diversity of religious experiences, it seems very unlikely to me that one molecule
will actually be able to explain it all.
Of course, some experiences make us happy, other experiences make us sad, some rev us
up, and others calm us down.
And all of this is regulated by different kinds of neurotransmitters.
And as we have seen through some of our prior lectures, some of the neurotransmitters like
dopamine or serotonin are these very chemicals that will make us feel revved up and feel
very energetic throughout our body, while other ones will actually help to calm us down
and to make us feel that feeling of blissfulness.
Now let's talk about some of the specific neurotransmitters that may ultimately play
a very vital role in a variety of different religious and spiritual states and experiences.
For example, one of the neurotransmitters, glutamate, is actually considered to be stimulatory
or excitatory.
What glutamate actually does in the brain then is increase the activity in the next neuron.
So if one neuron fires and it wants to communicate with the next neuron, it can release glutamate
in a little package that goes across that synapse, across that space, and it tells the
next neuron it's time to fire, it's time to get excited.
And for that reason, glutamate is referred to as being excitatory.
Some neurotransmitters, like something called gamma aminobutyric acid or GABA, are inhibitory
neurotransmitters.
They decrease the activity in the next neuron.
So if one neuron wants to actually shut down another one, it will release GABA so that
it actually quiets the functioning in that next neuron.
And it's interesting to note that certain drugs, for example, anti-anxiety drugs, actually
have a very big impact on the GABA system.
So drugs that many of you may be familiar with, such as Xanax or Valium, actually affect
the nervous system at the level of these GABA neurons and GABA receptors that actually
help to calm us down and make us feel less anxious.
They make us feel calmer.
And a growing number of studies are pointing to the involvement of these different neurotransmitters
in religious and spiritual experiences.
So how can this involvement be traced by the researchers?
How can we actually get some information that tells us what's going on at the level of these
different neurotransmitters?
Well, there are actually several different approaches that researchers have taken to
try to explore what neurotransmitters are doing in the brain and in the body that help
us when people have different religious and spiritual experiences.
Now one type of study actually involves measuring the neurotransmitters that are in the blood.
Now on one hand, this is a very easy approach because you can just draw some blood out of
somebody's arm and measure exactly how much of a particular neurotransmitter like glutamate
or serotonin is actually circulating in their body.
The downside of it is that it doesn't necessarily reflect what's actually happening in the brain
at any given time.
So it's one way of getting at the information as to what is going on when people are engaged
in different religious and spiritual practices, but it may not necessarily tell us the entire
picture.
In general, what have these actual studies shown that have looked at the blood levels
of different neurotransmitters?
Well in general, what these studies have shown is that there is an increase in serotonin
and an increase in dopamine.
Now if you remember back from our prior lectures, we did talk about the possibility that serotonin
and dopamine may play a very important role in religious experiences, so it's not a surprise
that these levels are increased when a person is engaged in a practice like prayer or meditation.
GABA is also increased.
Now this may be very important because as we've talked about, sometimes certain areas
of the brain are shut down during spiritual experiences and sometimes they're turned on.
So maybe when these different areas are shut down, maybe it's related to a release of this
GABA and we'll talk about this more in a few moments.
Two other neurotransmitters which are also affected during these experiences are cortisol
and norepinephrine.
Cortisol and norepinephrine are some of the main stress-related neurotransmitters and
actually affect the brain and the body very strongly.
So the fact that there is a decrease in cortisol and norepinephrine during spiritual practices
such as meditation and prayer may tell us something about how those practices help to
lower and reduce our stress levels.
But how can we ultimately really study the more specific relationship between what's
going on in the brain and the neurotransmitters in the brain and spirituality?
So let us look in more detail as to how studies have been done to try to figure this out.
Now I mentioned the first approach was to just see what's going on in the blood.
But how can we start to figure out what's happening in the brain itself?
Well, one clever approach is not so much to measure the neurotransmitters in the brain
but to actually use a drug that blocks their activity.
So one group of researchers actually took two different drugs.
One of them is called naloxone and the other one is called flamazanil.
Naloxone actually blocks the opiate system in the body.
So naloxone actually affects drugs like morphine.
In fact, that's what it was primarily developed for to help people out when they've had an
overdose of morphine by blocking its effects.
But it can also block your brain's natural opiates that may or may not have an impact
on spiritual experiences and practices.
Flamazanil is another drug that actually helps to block the GABA receptors.
So it's very important in affecting that particular system.
Now one of the questions that we can ask is would we expect these receptors to be involved
in meditation and can we figure out a way of blocking them to see if that actually happens?
And basically what happened was that these researchers gave these two different drugs
to one particular expert meditator to see if it would actually block their meditative
experience and they also measured the electrical changes in the brain with EEG to see if that
was affected by these drugs as well.
The findings were very interesting.
In general it showed that both of these blocking drugs really had very little effect on the
meditation practice.
The person reported feeling exactly the same in terms of the depth of their meditation,
the experiences that they typically had during their meditation and it turned out that the
EEG changes actually weren't any different either.
So the EEG that the person normally had during meditation actually was almost essentially
the same.
Now of course one of the real downsides of this study was that it was a very small study.
It was only done in one subject.
So it's a little hard to know exactly how to interpret this information but it does
tell us a little bit about how these different neurotransmitter systems may actually be involved
in spiritual practices.
So we've seen a couple ways that researchers can try to get at the relationship between
neurotransmitters and spirituality.
One way is measuring the neurotransmitters in the blood, the other way involves using
drugs that actually block different neurotransmitters.
A third way is to actually conduct brain imaging studies that specifically look at what is
going on in these neurotransmitter systems in the brain itself.
This of course has been an area of great interest in my own research where we can actually inject
small amounts of radioactive tracers that are similar to dopamine or serotonin and even
though we inject them into the bloodstream, they get up into the brain and they bind to
the very receptor systems that we're interested in.
So these are wonderful and fascinating approaches to actually seeing what's going on in the
brain itself and of course as with some of the other brain scan studies that we talked
about, we can see what's happening in the brain at rest, we can see what's happening
when a person is engaged in prayer, meditation or any other kind of spiritual practice.
But of course as with all studies, there are some complexities in looking at neurotransmitters
by doing brain imaging studies.
One of the biggest problems is the complexity of how these different neurotransmitters interact
with each other and that's something that we have to think about very carefully because
it turns out that if you turn on serotonin, you might also affect dopamine or if you turn
on the opiates, you might also affect the GABA system.
So since it appears that many different neurotransmitter systems could be involved, there are certainly
many opportunities for developing brain imaging studies and we're just beginning to see some
of these studies coming about in the literature that tells us a little bit more about the
nature of these practices and the nature of their experiences.
For example, one study actually used positron emission tomography, PET imaging, to evaluate
the dopamine system in meditators.
Now again, remember that PET imaging is a way of looking at how the brain works by injecting
a small amount of a radioactive tracer that the scanner picks up and shows where that
tracer went.
So in this case, the scan was performed with a specific tracer, something called raclopride,
which acts a lot like dopamine in the brain and it actually binds to the dopamine receptors
in the brain so when you put the person into the scanner, you get a picture of what their
brain looks like in terms of where dopamine goes in the brain and they scan people while
they were at rest and then they ask the person to engage in a very intense practice of meditation,
very similar to some of the other studies that we've talked about that looked at blood
flow in the brain, but now they were looking at dopamine.
So what did these particular investigators find?
Well after the meditation practice, they found that there was less radioactive binding in
the dopamine system.
Now you have to sort of think back a little bit about how this all works because the radioactivity
is actually attached to what look like dopamine molecules and they go to the receptors.
So if there's less radioactivity after meditation, that means that their own brain released more
dopamine and that means that dopamine release is actually a part of the meditation process.
When people engage in meditation, they increase the amount of dopamine in their brain.
And as we've talked about a little bit already in previous lectures, dopamine is part of
the neurotransmitters that are involved in our positive emotions and in our reward system.
So when we feel good, when we feel excited, when we get a sense of happiness or euphoria,
most research shows that there is a release of dopamine in the brain.
One of the main ways that we know this is that the recreational drug cocaine actually
causes a very intense release of dopamine in the brain and that's part of what's involved
in the euphoric feelings, the high that people get with cocaine.
So if people are engaged in a meditation practice and they have a release, an increase of dopamine
in the brain, maybe that helps us to understand why it feels so good for people when they
meditate, why it almost gives them a kind of high that makes it such a powerful experience
for them.
What about other neurotransmitters and how they have been studied in the brain itself?
A different study used a technique called magnetic resonance spectroscopy.
This is a very elegant technique that can measure the amount of neurotransmitters in
certain parts of the brain.
It's a little bit like an MRI, in fact it uses an MRI machine and what it actually is
doing is almost taking a chemical biopsy, it's going in, reaching into the brain, finding
a piece of that brain and telling you exactly how much of different molecules and chemicals
there actually are.
So this particular study decided to focus in on GABA.
And remember we talked about GABA as being one of the main inhibitory neurotransmitters
in the brain.
What they did was have people engage in the meditation practice while they were in the
scanner and what they found based on this magnetic resonance spectroscopy is that there
was an increase in GABA in the brain.
Now this may be crucial because it could help to shut down certain areas of the brain during
the meditation practice.
Remember that one of the things that may occur during meditation is that as the individual
focuses more and more on the object of their meditation practice, they begin to block out
or screen out sensory information into other areas of the brain.
And one of the most important areas that might be affected is the orientation part of the
brain, that part of the brain that's located towards the back top part of our head that
helps us to feel our sense of self, to orient that self in the world and to give us a sense
of space and time.
So it may be that by having an increase in GABA that actually helps to regulate or block
the flow of the sensory information into this orientation area and that this may actually
help contribute to the experience of no self and no space that the person may actually
subjectively experience during that particular practice.
So we've seen that dopamine and GABA both appear to play an important role in the meditation
practice and the experiences that people may have.
But let's delve a little bit deeper into some of the other ways that neurotransmitters might
get involved in religious and spiritual experiences.
Now to some degree, this is based on how we know the different neurotransmitters work
and the descriptions that people give us about how meditation and spiritual practices actually
affect us.
So this provides us a beginning for us to continue to explore the relationship between
these different neurotransmitters and how they are related to spirituality in general and
practices like prayer and meditation in particular.
So we've talked about glutamate already.
Glutamate is the main excitatory neurotransmitter and since these spiritual practices and experience
typically involve the activation of the brain, many different parts of the brain, it seems
likely that glutamate would be a very important part of that.
So we might expect to see that when a person activates their frontal lobes to help them
focus their attention on the prayer practice that they're actually releasing glutamate
to tell the brain to focus its attention and to activate other areas of the brain that
help us to focus attention and actually turn on other parts of the brain including our
emotional system and the systems that connect to the rest of the body.
But interestingly, such practices also require the brain areas that regulate other areas
to actually shut down.
And as we were just talking a few moments ago with regard to GABA, maybe GABA is a very
important inhibitory neurotransmitter that plays a prominent role in these experiences
because it helps to shut down the activity in areas like the orientation part of the
brain so that part of the experience that the person gets is a very powerful sense of
the loss of self and the loss of space and time.
So as far as what GABA can do for us, it also interacts with glutamate so that we can see
these very complex kinds of interactions that help to turn on and off all different
kinds of parts of the brain.
Now what other kinds of changes might we expect to be happening?
Well interestingly, studies have shown that a release of glutamate from your frontal lobe
also causes a release of a neurotransmitter called betaendorphine from the hypothalamus.
Betaendorphins are the brain's natural opiates so it's sort of like the structure of morphine
and it's been shown to be able to enhance or induce feelings of euphoria.
Now we know that betaendorphins are released when people experience pain because it's trying
to help the person manage that pain and that's part of why morphine has been found to be
so effective as a pain reliever especially in people who have very severe pain problems.
But what about spiritual experiences?
Well if a person has this kind of euphoric feeling during a spiritual experience or perhaps
some other kind of experience like a near-death experience then maybe it's the betaendorphine
that gets involved.
However we also have to remember that other study that we talked about a little while
ago that showed that blocking the opiate system at least didn't diminish the meditative experience.
So to some extent the jury is still out in terms of how the opiate system may actually
be involved.
There's some evidence to suggest that it might be related but there's other evidence to suggest
that maybe it's not the primary neurotransmitter that's going to be involved in spiritual practices.
An increase of glutamate in the brain can also result in an increase in neurotransmitters
that have similar effects to a drug called ketamine.
Now ketamine is a drug that is frequently used as an anesthetic but if given in high
enough amounts it is also something which is called a dissociative hallucinogen.
What this means is that if you take this drug it can cause you to hallucinate and specifically
that hallucination makes you feel as if you're kind of leaving your body behind.
So you dissociate from your body, you go away from your body and you have this kind of an
experience, a very powerful kind of experience.
So when I say that an increase of glutamate can have an effect similar to the effects
of ketamine what I'm saying is that both can potentially lead to a very intense experience
and one in which people perceive that they are leaving their body.
Now interestingly these kinds of neurotransmitters specifically those related to an increase
in glutamate have been linked to spiritual experiences and one in particular the near
death experience.
Consider this example that I want to share with you.
This is one of the participants in our online survey of people's spiritual experiences where
people were describing the different intense experiences that they had and this one was
actually of a person who had an experience while taking the drug ketamine.
The individual described the experience as follows.
He said, I had a near death experience from ketamine.
I went up a rainbow into a place that was like a big womb.
I felt my physical pain, my emotional pain and my fears and worries all dissolve.
I felt like I was being hugged by a million people who really loved and cared for me and
were all holding me.
Eventually I heard a voice say the words, you can breathe now.
I opened my eyes and I was back.
So this type of experience shows how drugs that affect specific neurotransmitter systems
can result in very powerful experiences including experiences that have this very strong spiritual
element to them.
And we will be talking about these kinds of drug induced states in a future lecture but
it's important here to understand in the context of how these different neurotransmitter effects
are related to spiritual practices.
Now we have talked previously about how during spiritual rituals there is the stimulation
of the autonomic nervous system.
Now interestingly when we talk about the stimulation of the autonomic nervous system
that stimulation can be either bottom up from the body up, the body responding to different
rhythms and so forth up into the brain and also from the brain down.
But in the context from the body going up, activating the autonomic nervous system can
turn on the hypothalamus, that very key regulator in the center of the brain and the hypothalamus
can then stimulate a part of the brainstem at the very core of our brain to produce the
neurotransmitter serotonin.
Well we've talked a little bit about serotonin but why would a release or an increase of
serotonin be relevant to these kinds of spiritual experiences?
Well it turns out that an increase in serotonin may actually have some very potentially interesting
effects on the brain and particularly as it relates to spiritual practices and experiences.
For example, drugs that actually help to increase the serotonin slowly form many of the antidepressant
drugs, drugs like Prozac and Zoloft.
These are the drugs that actually help by activating the serotonin system.
On the other hand if you get a very rapid increase in serotonin, this can result in
all kinds of hallucinations, in fact the famous drug that does this is LSD.
So if serotonin can be involved in these very intense sensory experiences and also perhaps
in the overall practices themselves, then serotonin may actually be very involved in
what spiritual experiences and practices do for us and may have some impact on the kinds
of qualitative and subjective experiences in terms of lowering our sense of depression,
lower anxiety that is also a part of what these experiences do for us.
As I mentioned earlier, different neurotransmitters relate to each other and an increase of serotonin
actually causes a release of dopamine and as we've already seen, dopamine release has
been observed in meditation practices and other types of spiritual practices as well.
Remember that dopamine is known to be associated with feelings of euphoria and since we're
talking about dopamine and serotonin, it's a good time to even go back to a connection
with what we were learning in lecture five.
In that lecture, we talked a little bit about the research from Dr. Dean Hamer and in that
particular study, what Dean Hamer found was that there was a relationship between a particular
gene and feelings of self-transcendence which he thought was related to a person's spirituality.
Remember that that gene coded for something called the VMAT2 receptor and he found a very
significant correlation between this gene and the person's feelings of spirituality.
Now as we noted in lecture five, the VMAT2 receptor is particularly involved in regulating
dopamine and serotonin and since these two neurotransmitters are highly implicated in
religious and spiritual experience, it may be no surprise that the gene that Dr. Hamer
studied is sometimes referred to as the God Gene.
Also remember from that same lecture how in one study, dopamine was used to actually alter
a non-believer's perception of the world.
Remember it changed their ability to see things in the world that they were not able to see
previously and sometimes even see things that weren't there.
It actually turned their brain into functioning more along the lines of a believer than a
non-believer.
So the results from these initial studies suggest many complex interactions.
Several practices and experience may have a variety of different neurotransmitter effects
and we're only beginning to scratch the surface and trying to understand what those effects
may be.
Dopamine and serotonin may work together or they may actually inhibit each other at different
times depending on the practice and the experience.
The neurotransmitters also are likely to interact with the autonomic nervous system and hence
other parts of the body and the brain.
So it tells us a lot about this incredibly complex functioning of the neurotransmitters,
the chemicals in the brain and how they may be related to the practices such as meditation
and prayer.
And finally in thinking about the spiritual brain, it appears that the neurotransmitters
really do play a fundamental role.
They may be involved in helping to make people religious or not and we can see that neurotransmitters
are very important in the underlying biology of religious and spiritual states and the
practices that help bring them about.
Science is really only beginning to understand the full implications and importance of how
neurotransmitters are related to our spiritual practices but it is likely that if our brain
perceives itself to be able to communicate with God, the neurotransmitters are a fundamental
part of that process.
In fact neurotransmitters may indeed be spiritual molecules which can enable us to have religious
beliefs and spiritual experiences.
They may truly be the brain's transmitters to God.
