Mr. Wright wasn't expected to make it through the night.
He had cancer throughout his entire body, and in 1957 there was not much that could
be done for him.
But Mr. Wright had heard that there was a Dr. Klopfer who was doing an experiment with
a new drug called Crebiosin.
Dr. Klopfer agreed to put him on the study and admitted him into the hospital to give
him the drug on a Friday and left for the weekend.
Now, Dr. Klopfer really wasn't too confident that this was going to really be very helpful,
but basically the patient felt that he was in such desperate straits that this was his
last chance and Dr. Klopfer agreed.
Now on Monday when Dr. Klopfer came back to the hospital, he really didn't even think
that Mr. Wright would be alive, but not only was he alive, his tumors had actually shrunk
to about half their size.
Dr. Klopfer gave him that medicine for 10 more days and all the signs of his disease
disappeared.
Ultimately, Mr. Wright was discharged home with no evidence of cancer.
Now two months later, the Food and Drug Administration reported that the studies with Crebiosin were
ineffective and when Mr. Wright heard about the reports, he immediately became ill again
and his tumors actually returned.
Now, Dr. Klopfer was a good scientist and he thought that maybe the response had something
to do with the patient's belief that the drug actually worked even though the drug
in and of itself was not working.
So, Dr. Klopfer re-admitted Mr. Wright and gave him injections of just sterile water
even though he told the patient that it was a new super refined double strength product.
Once again, Mr. Wright had a dramatic response and remained well for some time.
Until the newspaper published the headline, nationwide tests show that Crebiosin is a
worthless drug in the treatment of cancer.
And after reading this, again, Mr. Wright fell ill, returned into the hospital and actually
died two days later.
Now it seems on one hand that his belief in the drug was such a powerful mediator for
the effect and that once his belief in the drug disappeared, his resistance to the disease
expired as well.
So what does this story tell us?
Well, Mr. Wright's case certainly is very dramatic and it's probably even unique in
so far as we don't typically think of cancer as being able to respond to a placebo like
those injections of sterile water.
But in other ways, Mr. Wright's case is really just one of a remarkable many studies and many
examples of what scientists often call the placebo effect.
Now the placebo effect is the phenomenon whereby a placebo improves a patient's condition simply
because the patient has the belief that it will be effective.
I'm sure that many of you have heard about the placebo effect, but modern medicine has
generally had a very negative view about it.
Doctors tend to look at the placebo effect as kind of being unreal or maybe even being
the power of nothing.
But if the power of nothing is very powerful, maybe we should try to understand it a little
bit more.
In my role as director of research at the Myrna Brinn Center of Integrative Medicine
at Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia, I have often felt that doctors need to give
more consideration to the placebo effect.
In fact, if the placebo effect works, why don't doctors use it more often?
Most research studies have shown that the placebo effect works on average in about a
third of the situations.
And in some studies, the placebo effect is actually seen in as many as two-thirds of
patients.
This is particularly true in studies of psychiatric disorders such as depression or anxiety.
In fact, in those conditions, the placebo sometimes works as well if not better than
traditional antidepressant and anti-anxiety medications.
Given these fascinating statistics, some scientists have tried to unravel the mystery
of the placebo effect.
I actually found three brain scan studies that were particularly enlightening regarding
the mechanism of the placebo effect.
One of the studies actually looked at people with depression.
And in that study, they looked at the effect of the placebo on the brain's serotonin receptors.
And what they found was that the brain released serotonin when the patient responded to placebo.
Another study looked at pain.
And what they found is that when people responded to the placebo when they had pain, they actually
had a release of the brain's own opiate molecules, the endorphins, in the brain.
And the final study that I found was a study of patients with Parkinson's disease.
And these patients who actually have a complete deterioration of their dopamine system, when
they responded to the placebo and their symptoms got better, their brain found a way to release
dopamine.
So to me, these studies are very compelling and tell us something about how the beliefs
that we have that help us to engage the placebo effect can have such a powerful and very specific
effect on the human brain and ultimately our body.
But beliefs have an impact on many other aspects of our lives.
And therefore, we find them in advertising, in our cultural interactions with other people,
certainly in our politics and what we think is right and wrong in politics and who should
be our president and who should represent us.
We have moral beliefs and, of course, the traditional way we think of beliefs is that
we have religious and spiritual beliefs.
Even though beliefs are all around us, we might wonder a little bit about why do we
need them so much?
Why does our brain create beliefs?
In fact, we might ask the question, why do we believe anything at all?
Well, this is one of the questions that has perplexed me since I was a child and propelled
me down this entire path of exploring the topic of the spiritual brain.
Because to some degree, in my mind, I realize that, well, if we exist in the universe, the
universe is everything that's out there.
Somewhere our brain is moving through this universe and only has access to a very small
percentage of that everything.
I mean, think about it.
You're listening to my lecture right now and your brain is taking in that information,
but it doesn't know what's going on in the next house or the next city or the next country.
Your brain only has the information upon which it receives right at that moment.
On top of that, the brain filters out a lot of the information that it receives so that
you are actually only consciously aware of a very small amount of what's actually out
there in the world.
So our brain is ultimately left with trying to derive our entire understanding of the
universe by working with a very tiny amount of information.
So I would argue that we need to establish beliefs, the brain needs to establish beliefs,
so that we can work at all effectively in the world, that we can navigate ourselves through
the world and survive.
And I would actually argue that the brain is and has to be a believing machine.
It needs to create those beliefs so that we can in fact survive.
But what exactly are beliefs?
Well, according to the Oxford English Dictionary, a belief can be defined as the followed.
A belief is a feeling that something exists or is true, especially one without proof.
Now this is an interesting definition because one of the things that it does is it draws
a distinction between things that can and cannot be proven.
But what constitutes a proof?
Well there are very different approaches to what constitutes a proof.
It's very different for science, for religion, for philosophy.
In the scientific model that I tend to live in as a researcher, for me a proof is a randomized
double-blind placebo-controlled trial.
But that doesn't necessarily follow for someone who is trying to make a philosophical argument
and try to find a philosophical proof of something, or somebody who is religious who wants to
have some kind of proof that their religion is the right way to think.
Now I actually would think about beliefs a little bit differently.
And again, I'm looking at this a little bit from a brain perspective and we talked about
in a much earlier lecture the importance of operationalizing some of our definitions.
And I want to do that for the definition of belief right now.
I would say that a belief can be defined biologically and psychologically as any perception, cognition,
emotion, or memory that a person consciously or unconsciously assumes to be true.
Now why did I choose this definition?
Well there's a couple of important points to it.
One is that it speaks to the importance of our perceptions, our thoughts, and our emotions
as helping us to generate our beliefs.
And a little later in this lecture we're going to see exactly how all those different
components come together to help us form our beliefs.
But the definition also includes another important aspect which is that beliefs can be conscious
or unconscious.
Now why is this important?
Well there's some interesting studies that have shown how important the unconscious mind
is for the things that we do and the ways that we think.
And it turns out that so often is the case that when we are making our decisions about
life that these unconscious beliefs keep cropping up and affecting the decisions that we make.
So our beliefs can be conscious, they may be unconscious, but either way they have a
very powerful effect on the ways in which we deal and go about our lives.
Ultimately within the brain these different elements are all swirling about, our perceptions,
our thoughts, our emotions, and even the ways in which our brain interacts with other people.
And that's a very important piece to the beliefs that we hold as well which we'll explore
in a few moments.
So let's think about these different elements of beliefs and how they work, how well they
work, and how well they may not work.
Now we've already talked a little bit about the fact that the brain exists in a huge infinite
world and the brain even though it takes in a very small amount of the overall information
is still taking in millions of pieces of information and only a very limited amount of that actually
even reaches our consciousness.
So there are many pieces that remain in our unconscious mind and unfortunately the brain
tries to fix all of these things that are missing.
It fills in perceptual gaps, it even makes mistakes as we'll see in just a few moments.
But one of the things that to me is sometimes the most amusing but also the most problematic
is that the brain never bothers to tell us when it's actually made a mistake.
So we all go through our lives believing the things that we do, thinking that we believe
them and thinking that we understand them even though our brain may be fooling us all
the time.
So let's see how this may happen.
Let's talk about the perceptions that come into our brain.
We may be having all of our beliefs sit on a mountain of misperceptions.
In fact studies have shown that there are so many ways of tricking the brain from a perceptual
point of view.
Consciousness can be generated in so many different ways that will fool the brain.
For example one type of illusion is where we actually may see a shape in a picture that
isn't really there.
Maybe we would see the corners of a square for example but we don't actually see the
square and yet somehow our mind fills in the lines and we can actually see the lines and
the shading around the lines that is important for creating the shape even though it actually
is not there.
Other illusions rely on more complex patterns, maybe a checkerboard kind of pattern that
typically has its lines all very horizontal and parallel and perpendicular and yet there
can be a way to make a checkerboard look as if all of the lines have a curvature in them.
Even though you know that the lines are straight you can't help but see the curvature and these
are just static illusions.
One of the most interesting illusions I came across on the internet was a little dragon
statue that's just sitting there on a table and it's got a little face that looks at you
and as you walk around this statue it looks like that little dragon keeps following you
with its eyes and whether you look up or down or left or right it keeps following you and
looks like it's moving around with you to follow you even though it obviously is remaining
perfectly still.
So at one level the brain sometimes makes us believe that we see things that aren't
really there.
It sometimes constructs a reality that on closer examination turns out to be nothing more than
an illusion.
But even beyond the question of illusions the brain is always constructing perceptions
of the external world.
So now the question becomes what does our brain do with those perceptions?
Well basically it begins to think about them.
So the perceptions come in through the brain, through the eyes, ears and so forth and now
you start to apply your cognitive processes to help interpret those perceptions and to
try to create for us a sense of what that world is.
Now interestingly our cognitive processes actually do a lot with those perceptions.
They tell us how things work.
They find causality in the world.
They try to establish connections between objects in the world and therefore these cognitions
help us to make sense out of those perceptions.
In fact to some degree the cognitions help us to find those proofs that we were talking
about earlier in our definition of beliefs.
We see something happen and we now use our cognitive processes to compare that to what
we have in our memory.
Does it make sense to us?
If we hear a story on the street, if we read something in the newspaper or watch something
on television, are we applying that information in a way that makes sense to us and can we
use that to create our beliefs and also to defend and maintain them?
After all if you confront somebody who has a different kind of belief than you, you will
use your cognitive processes to try to convince them otherwise.
One of the tools that cognition also uses to help to build and maintain our beliefs is
our memory.
For example the memory that someone once snubbed us at a party serves as a proof for
our belief that this individual is hostile to us and therefore is a person that should
be avoided.
But how reliable is memory?
Well in the 1980 presidential campaign Ron Reagan would sometimes cite the story of a
World War II pilot whose plane had been hit by enemy fire.
He was going to jump from the plane but one of the crewmen was too injured to jump and
the pilot said, never mind we'll ride it down together.
Reagan would even sometimes have tears in his eyes while telling this story.
Turns out that this actually never happened in real life but was a scene from a movie
called A Wing and a Prayer.
But in Ronald Reagan's brain it made him think that this was something that really happened.
And this of course happens to all of us.
Just as our brains fill in the gaps of our visual perceptions so that we sometimes see
things that aren't really there, our cognitions can kind of grab these different bits and
pieces of information and put together an entire story which often may be false and
nevertheless feels as if it represents a true reality.
A story that we believe because we think that we're accurately remembering the way things
really happened.
And you can even reflect back in your own life the ways in which you have tried to remember
things or used your memory, how often have you said something only to have a spouse
or a friend say, no, no, no, that's not the way it happened at all.
Indeed one of the reasons that memories, even the false ones though, can be so powerful
is that they often contain such strong emotions that are attached to them.
Again, think about the example from Ronald Reagan.
Those tears in his eyes were real.
That emotion was very real for him, even though the memory was not accurate.
So emotions are also very important for placing value on our beliefs.
In fact, strong emotions elicit strong beliefs.
Well, again, remember, why does this happen?
Well, because your brain wants to remember important things and forget the unimportant
ones.
It assesses what is going on around it and it uses its emotional powers to decide what
things are important and what things are not important.
And of course, this pertains to both positive and negative emotions.
In fact, negative emotions actually typically have an even more powerful effect on what
we remember.
And if we think back again to what happened in 9-11-2001, it was that negative emotion
that made those memories so powerful for us.
And of course, positive emotions can also create very powerful memories for us and ultimately
very powerful beliefs.
Of course, we also use our emotions to help us to defend our beliefs.
I mentioned a few moments ago that the first thing that we do when we come in to confront
somebody who has a different belief system from us is that we start to logically, rationally
try to convince them otherwise.
And what happens when that doesn't work?
Well, things get heated.
Our emotions kick in and we use our emotions to try to support and defend our beliefs.
So perceptions and thoughts that do not have a strong emotional content may actually never
become a part of our belief system.
But those that do wind up becoming a very essential element of what our beliefs are
all about.
In fact, there's one other important element to our belief system as it pertains to emotions.
And that has to do with what happens when we wind up confronting evidence that goes
against our emotions.
Well, in that case, we see how our brain responds to that in such a way that we have a decision
to make.
We have to decide whether our existing belief system is correct or the other belief system
is correct.
And when we are confronted with this problem, with this paradox, our emotions are triggered.
We don't like the fact that we might be wrong and our emotions take over to try to reestablish
our beliefs and to argue very strongly against an alternative belief system.
And this actually spills over into how we interact with other people and how that has
an important role in shaping our beliefs.
So we've seen that our beliefs are shaped by the way the brain perceives the world,
by how the brain thinks and remembers our world, and how we actually feel emotionally
about those experiences.
But social beliefs are also very important in influencing the beliefs that we hold.
Beliefs are actually incredibly strongly influenced by other individuals that we interact with
throughout our life.
Think about your own life and think about your own beliefs.
Where did your beliefs come from?
For most of us, our initial beliefs come from our parents.
They helped to form our initial beliefs about everything, about how to be a good person,
what we should do when we're working, what political party to believe in, and what religious
ideas and beliefs we should hold.
And as we get older, we begin to have interactions with society at large.
We begin to interact with our peers, our teachers, and all of them contribute and affect our
belief systems.
In fact, society can actually be set up in such a way that it leads to beliefs of an
entire population, which could be cultural, political, or religious.
And we see large groups who come together that help the individuals form their beliefs.
In fact, studies have shown that group consensus heavily influences our beliefs.
Some very simple studies have been done where they put a test subject into a room with one
or two or even more other people who try to convince the test subject of a particular
answer.
And what's interesting is that the more people that you put into the room that try to convince
them of a specific answer, the more that test subject is likely to accept that answer, even
though it's so obvious that the answer is wrong.
So given the influences of our perceptions, emotions, thoughts, and social interactions,
how do beliefs actually form and work in the brain?
Well, if you remember from one of our earlier lectures, we talked about the fact that neurons
that fire together wire together.
And the neurotransmitters that we've talked about, the nerve cells as they interact with
each other literally strengthen the connections when we use them.
So if we have a particular belief, the more we bring our mind to that belief, the stronger
those connections become.
And of course, the brain also works in the context of use it or lose it.
So as those beliefs that you hold, you begin to kind of let certain beliefs go, those connections
literally become weakened.
So when we do have an emotion or a thought that we focus on, those neural connections
actually support that particular belief.
It strengthens that belief.
And in fact, if it is true that neurons that fire together wire together, then the more
that we get neurons to fire together, the stronger that belief becomes.
Repetition is therefore an essential element for forming and strengthening beliefs.
But are there religious and spiritual activities that are repetitive?
Almost all of religious rituals and practices are repetitive.
Remember that was one of the essential elements as to why they have created such powerful
experiences for us.
And that's part of why those kinds of practices also have such a powerful impact on our belief
system.
This is why practices like meditation and prayer and other types of religious rituals
work so well because they are very repetitious.
In fact, the more we continue to focus on a particular religious or spiritual idea through
a practice like meditation or prayer, the more that becomes the belief that is ingrained
within the neural connections of our brain.
And as we also have found, it's very important to tie our beliefs to other useful information
and to our behaviors.
We use our emotions to support the beliefs that we hold, and we reject beliefs and ideas
and data that contradict those that we hold.
Of course, these processes are true for all beliefs, not just religious and spiritual ones,
but social ones, political ones, and scientific ones.
So I want to return to my earlier statement that the brain really is a believing machine.
Our beliefs are constructed out of our perceptions, our emotions, our thoughts, and the personal
interactions that we have with other people.
As each of these different factors affect the very neural connections of our brain,
they also affect our beliefs.
But while the brain does a great job formulating beliefs that work well for us and help us
to understand our world, beliefs are also fraught with many potential flaws.
We have seen that the brain can make many mistakes at all different levels while constructing
its beliefs.
It can make mistakes in its perceptions.
It can make mistakes in terms of how it remembers things.
It can use emotions in ways that may be too strong or too weak to support a particular
belief.
And of course, all of our beliefs ultimately can be heavily influenced by those individuals
who are around us, the people that we rely on most.
So while we often think that our beliefs are so much a part of who we are and that we have
come to them in our own way and in our own mind, the data actually supports unfortunately
just the opposite, that our belief systems and the ways in which we come about them have
all kinds of flaws.
And again, as I've mentioned at the beginning, the brain doesn't ever tell you when your
believing brain is making a mistake.
And when that happens, your brain struggles to figure out a way to create a new belief
that incorporates that into a way of thinking about the world that hopefully will be accurate
and will work for you as an individual.
So perhaps at the very least, this consideration of beliefs shows us the importance of beliefs
because they affect every part of our life.
And also, every part of our life affects our beliefs.
After all, every part of our life affects our brain.
And if our brain is a believing machine, then it affects all of the beliefs that we hold.
Think about our patient, Mr. Wright, and how beliefs had such a profound impact on his
brain and on his body.
But with this information, we also must be very careful about our beliefs.
In fact, given the problems that we've seen in terms of the mistakes that are made, we
should always constantly challenge our beliefs.
We should question them.
And part of what has been a conclusion in my own mind is that if all of our brains
are doing the best job that they can at trying to understand the world, perhaps we should
be much more compassionate about other people's beliefs.
Because after all, their beliefs are just an expression of their brain's best attempt
at understanding the world.
