Where does a religious idea come from?
What gives birth to theological concepts?
For example, we may hear a philosopher say that God is the unmoved mover, or a theologian
might argue that God cannot be the author of evil in the world.
But how does the brain arrive at these conclusions?
Even more important, why do assertions like these seem so compelling to us as human beings?
Why do they make sense to so many of us, and even take their place as doctrines to which
millions of people willingly subscribe?
These are the sort of questions that we'll be addressing today.
Now that we have a better understanding overall of how our thoughts and beliefs are related
to the brain's functions, we're going to look at specific religious and theological ideas
and explore both how they might arise in the brain and also why they might be so compelling
to thinking creatures like us.
Now the first thing that we should do is return to some of the definitions that we considered
in an earlier lecture and see how they may be related to specific brain functions.
First we have to realize that these definitions are in fact conceived via the processes of
the human brain.
So we can ask questions such as how has religion and spirituality been defined and described
by the human brain?
Now to some degree, whatever definitions we come to, we have to use terminology that includes
cognitive elements, things that we think abstractly, different emotions that have to
do with how we feel about our religious and spiritual ideas and beliefs, as well as the
perceptions that we have about the world.
We can also tie all of this into our neuropsychology because when we start to talk about our cognitions,
we can talk about the areas of our brain that help us to think things through, to think
abstractly and so forth.
We can talk about the limbic system and its effect on emotions and how those emotions
play out in our definitions and our ideas about religion and spirituality.
Now of course if we keep all of our focus on the human brain, one other question that
often comes up is where is the room for the soul?
Where is the room for that part of us which is spiritual that may have nothing to do specifically
with our biology?
So let us return to some of our earlier definitions.
Again, definitions can come from many different points of view and hence many different kinds
of brains.
For example, the brain of a scientist like myself may use the previously described operational
definitions.
So we may talk about spirituality as being the subjective feelings, thoughts, experiences
and behaviors that arise from a search or quest for the sacred.
Now you probably remember this definition but it speaks very specifically to some of
these brain processes and therefore the brain of a scientist likes this definition because
it can kind of help us grab hold of it in a more effective way and actually apply our
scientific techniques to trying to learn more about what spirituality is.
This on the other hand includes the criteria for spirituality and or it includes a search
for non-sacred goals.
Now if you remember the non-sacred goals include things like identity and belonging which are
also feelings and ideas that are manifested through the functions of the human brain.
Now ultimately part of what is also important in the context of religiousness is that the
means and methods are defined by a population of people.
What does that mean to define these ideas by a population of people?
That means you need an entire group of brains basically that are coming together to think
about how they define themselves, the ideas that they hold to be sacred and how they understand
that in the context of their lives.
Now again I mentioned this is a series of definitions from the brains of scientists but
what would the brain of a sociologist, a philosopher or even a theologian come to in
thinking about the definitions for spirituality or religiousness?
Would they rely on the same kinds of abstract concepts such as the concept of a search or
the concept of something sacred?
Of course the binary comparisons remember we have this binary processing in our brain
that allows us to make a distinction between that which is sacred and that which is non-sacred
or even the notion of trying to differentiate spirituality from religiousness.
In addition when we talk about religiousness and spirituality we talk about emotions and
our binary processes help us to define the difference between the positive and negative
emotions.
So given how the brain might look at definitions, now we can start to explore a little bit
more deeply as to how the brain may look at more specific religious and spiritual concepts.
So let us look at some of these specific concepts and think about the different cognitive functions
that we've talked about in previous lectures and how they would relate to these different
religious ideas.
Now as we've seen it is the very nature of the brain to try to make some kind of sense
both of the external world as well as whatever we're feeling on the inside.
So what I'd like to do next is to describe the tools and processes by which the brain
makes sense of all of our thoughts, feelings and experiences.
In other words I'd like to explore the mechanisms by which the brain turns spiritual experiences
into religious ideas.
Now the above definitions and descriptions provide a way to begin to understand spirituality
and religion but can we be more specific about how the brain actually helps us to understand
them?
The following are some of the basic ways that we've touched on throughout the course in
which our brain processes information and which bears directly on specific religious
and theological ideas.
Let's start with that causal function.
Now you may remember that the causal function is probably located in the region of the junction
between the parietal lobe which is located towards the back part of the brain and the
temporal lobe which is located along the side of the brain.
This is an area that helps us with a lot of abstract ideas and concepts and seems to be
fundamentally involved in our experience of causality.
Now causality, this causal function actually enables us to determine causes and effect
in the world.
If we apply the causal function to the physical world the result is the scientific method.
It's our ability to try to understand all the things that are going on in the material
world that we can apply science to and try to understand how different things affect
other things, how they work and so forth.
If we apply the causal function to the human world the result may be social sciences.
How do we as human beings function with each other?
How do we talk to each other?
How do we resolve conflicts among different populations of people?
All of these very intriguing issues and questions come up when we apply causality to that domain
of existence.
Now when the causal function is applied to the spiritual realm the results are probably
religious concepts related to God or ultimate reality.
To those of you who go back to remembering some of what you learned back in your college
days in terms of philosophy, Aristotle talked about causality in a very explicit way.
In fact he actually talked about four different kinds of causality, efficient causality, material
causality, formal causality and final causality.
And if you apply these different ideas about the nature of causality, how things work and
apply this to God you get some very important religious and spiritual concepts.
So what would happen if the brain did not have a causal mechanism?
How would it begin to think about God?
Could it perceive God as being able to cause the universe to come into existence or to
cause the universe to perpetually be in existence?
Well again if you didn't have this causal function in the brain, if that part was somehow
magically removed from your brain, you couldn't think about God that way.
You would have to think about God in some other way.
So perhaps your limbic system would take over and maybe you would think about God in
a more emotional way.
Maybe you would think about God as being an ultimate loving thing or being in the universe.
But God would never be able to be perceived as the cause of all things because that's
not what your brain has the capability of doing.
Now of course there's one other big problem with all of this which is that whatever our
brain thinks has no true bearing on what the reality actually is.
For example if we don't happen to believe in gravity and we jump off of a ladder we
still will fall down.
So irrespective of what we believe about God, whether God exists and if God does exist what
God is like, the idea about how our causal function or any of the functions that we'll
be talking about in this lecture, how they actually have an impact on what God is, that
is something which is still open for debate.
Now the next function I'd like to look at is the abstract function.
This is the part, this is the function of the brain that actually allows us to think
about things in an abstract way.
To some degree this is probably in the region of that temporal lobe and parietal lobe junction
that we've been talking about, probably a little bit more in the temporal lobe because
it's also very associated with language.
Now the abstract function allows us to categorize things.
So for example it's the abstract function that allows us to look at an elm, a spruce
and a maple and say these are all trees.
So it can apply a categorization to things and it can allow us to manipulate these different
ideas.
So what will happen if we apply the abstract function of the brain into the spiritual realm?
So this really enables for a discussion of a large variety of different religious concepts.
These concepts may relate to different religious practices, aspects about religious and spiritual
meaning, morals and ethics.
So it's our abstract process of the brain that allows us to bring some kind of rational
thought to whatever ideas that we have before us, whether they're religious or otherwise.
And therefore it provides a basis for how we begin to think about all of these different
religious and spiritual concepts.
To some degree this abstract process may even be responsible for our sense of thickness,
how we describe that something actually is a thing.
The reason that I say that is that by categorizing things it tells us how things are and how
things relate to each other.
So if we start to think about the religious things, God, morality, maybe even things like
angels, heaven and hell, our abstract abilities of the brain allow us to begin to understand
what these things actually are, try to apply some overall understanding to them and make
them something that we as human beings can grasp and make a part of our belief systems.
So the brain's causal and abstract functions lead to a very specific kind of concept, very
specific kinds of ideas when they are applied to this non-physical or spiritual realm.
But what about the brain's other mechanisms, the brain's other processes, how do they shape
and influence our religious ideas?
In the past we've talked a lot about the binary functioning of the brain.
Now this function is also located in the region between the temporal and the parietal lobes.
There's a lot that goes on right here.
And as we've seen in previous lectures, the binary function probably helps us to create
a comparison of opposites.
Growing up it helped us to determine synonyms and antonyms of words.
And in a religious or spiritual context, the binary process is really fundamental to developing
so many of the ideas that we hold as part of religious and spiritual traditions.
The binary process helps us to establish the concepts of good and evil, right and wrong
or heaven and hell.
And therefore when we address these particular ideas in a religious or spiritual way, that
binary process is what holds them up for us to evaluate, to determine what we think is
good and bad, what we think is right and wrong.
And of course in religion perhaps the most fundamental opposite is God versus human beings.
This is after all the most fundamental issue that all religions have to face.
If there is a God and God is this infinite omniscient being that floats around in the
universe, how do we as very finite mortal human beings have any kind of connection with God?
This is what the mythic structure actually helps us to do, which is to take these opposites
and somehow reconcile them, somehow bring them together and therefore it uses another
aspect of the brain's functions, the holistic function.
Scientifically the holistic function allows us to look at the whole rather than the parts.
I've mentioned a few times before that my current position is a doctor of integrative
medicine and in that role I always talk about the need to look at the whole person in terms
of their biological, psychological, spiritual and social domains.
For me to truly heal someone my holistic function tells me that I have to look at all of these
different domains, I need to look at everything working together as a whole.
As we previously discussed the holistic function appears to be partly related to the right
brain's functioning and it may also be particularly related to the ability of our brain to preferentially
block sensory information as it's going into the parietal lobe, that orientation part of
the brain.
Because as that area is deprived of information it begins to give us a sense where we lose
our sense of self, a sense of oneness, a sense of interconnectedness of all things.
And we've also found that this is a kind of experience and a kind of brain state that
is frequently found in practices like meditation and prayer.
So it makes sense that these practices will lead to ideas in which we experience God or
the universe as a whole and therefore our holistic process of the brain becomes very
relevant in trying to understand a holistic view of God or religion.
Now of course the sense of wholeness or oneness can vary from individual to individual.
In fact I have actually argued that there may actually be a unitary continuum of human
experience and thought.
What I mean by this is that we can experience anywhere from a very distinct and separate
sense of our self to a feeling of some connectedness maybe with our family or with a spouse to
these very powerful mystical experiences where a person feels at one with everything.
But we'll consider these kinds of experiences a little bit more later on in the course.
The holistic function also is related to the notion of the oneness of God.
Certainly in the monotheistic traditions this was the primary concept which led to their
coming into existence.
This is the fundamental idea that separates the monotheistic traditions from the religious
and spiritual ideas that came before.
The notion that there aren't lots of different gods that there's just one God and within
this oneness of God there's a oneness of all things.
So the holistic function of the brain is perhaps one of the most crucial in terms of the monotheistic
traditions and their idea about God as a unifying force of the entire universe.
Of course there's some problems that arise when you bring in this holistic process of
the brain because we also sometimes think about God as having different parts or different
characteristics.
In fact, in Christianity when we talk about the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit these
are three different parts of God that somehow the holistic function has to bring together
into one.
And therefore this sense of oneness is very fundamental to the notion of a doctrine about
what God is and how we understand that concept which is so crucial to that religious tradition.
One final aspect that I think is relevant in the context of the holistic process of
the brain is the adaptability of religions that we talked about in one of our early lectures
and how that relates to social cohesion, the notion that by having a singular belief all
the people that are part of that belief become connected and become one.
So this holistic function is very important not only in terms of the doctrinal elements
of religions but also in terms of the practical nature of what they do for the group of people.
Now the opposite of the holistic function is a reductionist function in the brain.
Now this is probably a little bit more on the left side of the brain and is in the region
of the temporal lobes and a little bit of the parietal lobe.
This reductionist process is where our brain tries to break down things into their individual
parts.
Now again if we apply this to the physical world we get back to another element of science
and interestingly science can go both holistically trying to understand the whole world as also
trying to break it down into an individual part, individual components.
And if we think about the medical paradigm we can think about the whole person but sometimes
we need to just focus on what the heart is doing or what different neurotransmitters
are doing in the brain and how they work.
Now theological development is also based on this reductionist process of the brain
by taking the overarching doctrine, the overarching goal what some people refer to as the foundational
myth of the religion and try to understand all of the things that derive from it.
So the reductionist process of the brain starts with a very basic story and breaks it down
into many individual parts and interpretations.
For example we see this as the basis of theology including books such as the Talmud and Jewish
thought.
Again here we see taking the primary sacred text of the Bible and breaking down each of
these stories in very concrete ways so that we can understand them.
For example they may take a specific phrase out of the Bible and from that deduce all
of the different rules of being kosher or all the rules about how we're supposed to
dress and therefore this reductionist process allows us to deduce all of these different
elements of what a religion is about and how people engage that religion on a very practical
level.
Now of course sometimes we run into problems because sometimes we can't reduce things
and that's where our reductionist function starts to get a little frustrated and may
even evoke an emotional response as well and so we might wind up having to bring in
other brain processes to try to rectify the problem.
We might bring in the holistic function or the binary function and therefore we can
use all of our different processes together.
Of course one of the other problems with the reductionist function is that sometimes we
can miss the big picture.
Now so far we've looked at the causal, the abstract, the binary, the holistic and the
reductionist processes of the brain.
All of these processes help us to sort through enormous amounts of data that come into our
brain from the external world and try to make some sense out of it.
We rely on these functions to be able to construct a reality that works for us as human beings.
The important thing to remember is that these same functions that we apply to the physical
world and to the human world are also applied to the religious and the spiritual realm.
These functions allow us to form concepts about God, about the soul, about the afterlife
and so on.
So let's now turn to two other brain functions that I also think are very crucial in the ways
in which we develop religious and spiritual ideas.
These are the quantitative function and the emotional function of the brain.
The quantitative function is something that ultimately helps us with developing mathematics
and science and statistics, that's so much we understand.
But because our brain feels that numbers play a very important role in how it understands
the world, numbers also wind up playing a very special role in our religious and spiritual
beliefs.
For example, we assign meaning to certain numbers and if you go back into the Bible,
for example, we find certain numbers over and over again.
We find that it rained for 40 days and 40 nights.
We find that Moses wandered through the desert with the Jews for 40 years.
So we're able to think about numbers in very powerful ways that we utilize to make our
religious and spiritual beliefs more important to us.
These numbers identify something that makes these ideas and concepts important to us,
that make our brains take notice of them.
And because of that, that's part of how we help to ingrain different religious and spiritual
ideas and concepts into our ways of thinking about ourselves and about the world.
Finally, with all these different cognitive processes that our brain can use, perhaps
the most important aspect of our brain's function that leads to religious and spiritual ideas
is the emotional system.
Remember, the emotional system is deeply tied into the limbic areas of the brain, the amygdala,
the hippocampus, the hypothalamus.
These are very central structures that enable us to feel all the different emotions that
we have throughout our day and apply these emotions to the various ideas and concepts
that we develop throughout our lives.
Now we need to organize all of our thoughts to some degree based on emotional value.
These emotions help us to establish a hierarchical ordering of thoughts and concepts.
The emotions tell us what ideas are the most important.
Think about a religious or spiritual idea.
Every religion has not just one, but often many.
And therefore, we have to decide which of those ideas are the most crucial, the most
important for that religious tradition.
How do we make that decision?
Ultimately, it seems to come down to a large extent to the emotions that we have.
In fact, some people have even argued that emotions are necessary for rational thought
because the rational thought just gives us the ideas.
It allows us to think about them, to manipulate them, but it's the emotions that actually
tell us which of these are important.
So you might think, for example, let's say you might think of the Judeo-Christian idea
of redemption.
Now here's an idea that emerges out of several different brain processes, including the binary
process, the idea of being saved or not being saved, the abstract process, understanding
what redemption is in the first place.
But ultimately, the impact of this idea on the believer is more potent and durable because
it involves an emotional component.
It's not just the idea that God saves us in the abstract form, but that somehow, concretely,
God actually redeems human beings, redeems them in terms of helping them to break out
of oppression, bondage, and create a sense of freedom.
And often, it's the emotions that are aroused by this particular idea that give it its significance
and staying power among generations of believers.
And of course, this all makes perfect sense from a neuroscientific perspective because,
as we've seen, the brain isn't designed to be purely rational.
We need to turn to our emotions to help us understand all the things that are going on
around us.
And even when we look at the myths and the rituals that people have developed that we've
talked about in prior lectures, we understand that it involves all of these different processes
put together.
Myths involve the binary function, the holistic function, brings them all together, uses rituals
to help act out the mythic elements, brings in all different kinds of sensory systems
that affect our hearing and our sight and the smells.
All of this comes together to create a sense of how we understand something.
It has an impact on our cognitive processes and, more importantly, the emotional processes
that make it so important to who we are.
But remember that all of these elements affect the development of our spiritual beliefs.
The myths, the rituals help the brain create all kinds of religious ideas.
But of all of these different things, these myths, rituals, and the doctrines that are
part of these religious traditions, have an impact on all of the various religious beliefs.
How can we begin to think about and define the ideas that arise from some of the most
powerful spiritual experiences?
Well, there are several ways in which people have described some of these truly powerful
maybe we would even describe them as mystical experiences, and while we will consider them
in more detail in a later lecture, I want to spend a few minutes introducing how these
experiences relate to brain processes and, more specifically, religious and spiritual
ideas, the kinds that we've been talking about in this particular lecture.
A scholar named Walter Stase talked about extrovertive, unitary experiences, and he
defined them as having a unifying vision where the person sees all things as one.
That should trigger in our mind the notion of the holistic process of the brain.
It also includes the concrete apprehension of the one as being something which is internal
to us, something that we feel, and think again about the parts of our brain that help us
to feel things and to feel that connectedness with things.
There is the sense of an objective reality of the experience.
It feels real to us, and we'll be talking about how the brain processes a sense of reality
in a future lecture.
There's feelings of peace, feelings of something that's sacred.
All of these are playing out on our emotional systems in the limbic areas of the brain.
Some of these powerful experiences are very paradoxical feeling.
They really wreak havoc with our binary processes because suddenly things that seem to be completely
oppositional to each other are being brought together and make sense to us.
Ultimately, many people who have these experiences say that they are ineffable, indescribable
by language.
If they are indescribable by language, then maybe those areas that help with abstract
thought and language are just not able to interact with these particular experiences.
So what happens when we are not able to process these experiences in the same way?
Well, obviously they're going to lead to very different kinds of experiences and very different
kinds of ideas than the ones that we normally think about.
In fact, Stace also talked about other types of mystical experiences that include a unitary
consciousness, a sense of pure consciousness, or pure awareness where all the person experiences
is experience itself.
And while I understand that that may sound a little strange to some of you, it's something
that nonetheless has been an important element of many of these different kinds of experiences.
Stace also talks about them as being non-spatial and non-temporal.
Well, remember, this goes back to that orientation part of the brain, that part of the brain
that helps us feel spatial and temporal relations and how we relate to the world.
So all of these different processes of the brain actually come about in these very intense
experiences and then come together where the person then has to extract from them meaning
and understanding.
And in fact, if we go back to this concept of neurotheology, the notion of how we bring
together the religious and spiritual ideas with what's going on in the brain itself,
we can find that we can address not only these very powerful mystical experiences, but all
of the different aspects that make up religious and spiritual ideas.
A lot of the ideas that we already have talked about and some that we will talk about, ideas
about worship, prayer, ritual, feelings like love, charity, altruism, all of these things
ultimately have some correlate with what's going on in the human brain.
And the more that we can learn about what's happening in the human brain, the better we
will understand how all of these different religious and spiritual beliefs come about.
So in this lecture, we've seen very broadly how religious and spiritual ideas can derive
from a variety of brain processes.
These ideas can range from the very practical or mundane things that we make a part of our
everyday life to the very esoteric or even mystical.
And it may be that this entire range, all of the religious ideas human beings are capable
of having are not only related to brain functions, but are structured and limited by what our
brain can do.
In the next lecture, we will look at how the brain may affect our understanding of two
very specific religious concepts that of revelation and salvation.
