In 2006, Baylor University's Institute for Studies of Religion released a report on what
Time magazine called the most extensive and sensitive study of religion ever conducted.
More than 1,700 people participated in Baylor's study, and each of them answered nearly 400
questions on religion and spirituality. According to the results of the survey,
the American public described four primary concepts or types of God, an authoritarian God,
a critical God, a distant God, and a benevolent God. Baylor's research team noted the complexity
of American religious beliefs. Among other things, the study concluded that gender and
income actually affect the way we perceive God. For example, women in the study tended to select
and engaged God, such as one who was either authoritarian or benevolent. And the higher
the income, the less likely the participant was to describe God as an angry God. In short,
when it comes to the question, what is God like, people have very different answers.
And these answers seem to be influenced by a variety of factors, both physiological and social.
From a brain perspective, this isn't really that surprising. When we think about how our brain
processes religious and spiritual information, we also must realize that its capabilities
and limitations have a profound impact on how we understand religion and God.
Of course, as we have also said all along, the way our brain represents the outside world to us
doesn't necessarily correspond with what is actually going on in the world itself.
And the same may be said for any kind of sense of spiritual reality. And in particular,
I would say that the same is true for the concept of God. So whether or not there
actually is a God and regardless of what attributes God might have, each of our brains
interprets this information for us. And our interpretations are constrained by the structure
and function of the brain. In other words, we make of God what our brains allow us to make of God.
Moreover, even though people do share a number of similar perspectives,
their experiences differ. And as a result, each person's interpretation of reality and of God
is bound to be, to some degree, unique. My favorite analogy is the famous story about
a whole bunch of flies buzzing around an elephant. And if you could actually ask each of the flies
what an elephant is, they would describe something very different. One might describe
an elephant as a trunk. One would actually describe it as a tail or as a tusk. And to some degree,
each of them would be right, but each of them would also be limited.
This also takes us back to the original Zen story I shared with you in lecture one,
that it is the mind that moves us through reality and interprets that reality. So the minds of these
little flies buzzing around the elephant, they all interpret the reality of the elephant in their own
way. And again, to some degree, they are all correct and it works for each of them,
but ultimately, they're limited in what they actually know about that reality.
But what's going on in our brain when we try to imagine or articulate what God is like?
Can science or neuroscience help us understand how our brain shapes our personal image of what
and who God is? Interestingly, there is a reasonable amount of research in this area.
Now, a lot of the research is actually much more subjective, since we've had to ask people
about what they think or feel about God. But remember, as we've been talking about all along
throughout the course, those different ideas, the thoughts, the feelings, and experiences
have some kind of underlying neurophysiology. So trying to understand them better helps us to
better understand that physiological process that establishes that experience for us.
Ultimately, there are many ways of approaching the concept of God.
There is obviously the religious and theological way. Religions define God in certain ways,
understand God in certain ways. Theologies help us to make sense of all the different
attributes of what God is. But there are other ways of thinking about God. There's anthropological
ways and sociological ways. How do groups of people come together to think about God?
Artists have long found ways of trying to create images of what God is and what God may
look like, feel like, and how God may interact in our world.
And of course, there is the neuroscientific approach, the approach that we're taking
in this course about how the brain actually thinks about God.
Remember the different cognitive functions of the brain that we've been talking about all along
that help us to perceive the world? Well, these are also important, not only in understanding
basic religious ideas and behaviors as we discussed in the last couple of lectures,
but also the more specific ideas about what God actually is.
So let's pause for a moment. Think about your beliefs regarding God.
Are you religious or not? And whether you are or not, whether you believe in God or not,
you have some notion in your mind about what God is.
Do you think about God in terms of a traditional religious view? Are you Christian, Jewish, or
Muslim, and look at the world and look at God in that particular context? Do you think of God
as some kind of super person, or is God more just an abstract spirit that exists somewhere in the
universe? What we can turn to our brain process is to try to understand the tremendous variety of
beliefs about God. The cognitive functions we have considered in our previous lectures
include the holistic function and its counterpart, the reductionist function,
and we've also dealt repeatedly with the causal, abstract, binary,
all these different functions of the brain. And what I'd like to do now is to look at some
of these brain functions and processes that play an especially important role in shaping
our notions specifically about God. Let's take, for example, the holistic function.
Well, as we've talked about, the holistic function is very involved
with our parietal lobes, how we begin to think about our self and its relation of the self to
the rest of the world. And we've also talked a lot about the concept of a oneness of God,
the notion of God being a unifying force in the universe. So we might consider an individual
who actually has a very strong functioning holistic process. And if we consider such an individual,
maybe they would really very strongly think about God as the whole. And they may even consider
themself to be part of God in that respect. Many people, no matter how holistically they
think about God, still envision God in a humanized form. They may think about God as a super person.
This is the famous old man with a beard in the clouds, a lot like Michelangelo's
vision of God on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel. Now, why is this? Well, it turns out that our
brain has very specialized areas for seeing and interpreting faces. In fact, we tend to see
faces in lots of different things. Think about your car, for example. If you look at it from
the front, the headlights and the grill, they kind of look like a face. So it's no surprise that we
would treat God to some extent like another person and try to create some notion of a face of God
that we can somehow interact with. By involving the brain's visual areas in the ways in which we
think about God, we are actually able to make God more accessible to us. It's easier for us to
understand and to interact with. But this process of visualization also limits what God can be for us.
So when we give God a human face, it makes it easier to understand the concept of God. And
brain scan studies actually can show us how our brain works with regard to making those visualizations.
In addition, brain scan studies have actually shown that we can actually have a conversation
with God. In fact, it's very interesting that when people have been scanned while they are engaged
in a conversational type of prayer, they find the same brain areas activating as when they are
simply speaking with another individual. So the areas of our brain that support social interactions
with other people also become involved when we interact with God in a social personal kind of way.
Frequently in this course, we've seen the importance of the emotional value function that our brain has.
Our emotions tell us what is important, and they also tell us what is not. In fact, they allow us to
communicate properly, and they ultimately shape our beliefs. As we've said all along, the more
the stronger a particular emotion is for us, the stronger whatever that emotion applies to becomes
a part of our belief system. So the emotions are critical in shaping our ideas and our concepts,
and therefore also our concepts about God. How do we think about God from an emotional perspective?
Well, in the Baylor study, emotions play a very important role, since some view God in a very
negative emotional way, and others view God in a positive emotional way.
When we think about it in this context, that notion of God as being punishing, as being angry,
as being disappointed in us, these are the negative emotional feelings that many people have about
God that the Baylor study showed us. In fact, God was divided along two different
dimensions of emotions with regard to God being either critical or God being benevolent.
And that is an emotional way of thinking about God. Now, our emotions necessary for rational thought,
again, we've spoken about how the emotions are critical for helping us to make sense of language,
helping us to determine what ideas, what concepts that we have are important to us,
and therefore we need these emotions to help us not only understand things, but to interpret
how people are saying it. If you go to a church or synagogue or a mosque and you listen to what
somebody is saying in a sermon, the emotions are a very important part that tell you what's
going on that shape and affect specific brain areas that are involved in the emotional inflections
of language. And because of that, that tells us a lot about how we understand these religious concepts.
So we've really understood the importance of emotions and subsequently the importance of language
in helping us understand our concepts about God. And that occurs through different myths, prayers,
and rituals, all of which activate these language areas of the brain, the emotional areas of the
brain and give us our ideas about God. In fact, we have to use language to understand the sacred
texts and we use the language to explain religion, to explain spirituality, and ultimately our ideas
about God. But how do we use language and how does our language limit our understanding of God?
Interestingly, while we spend a lot of time trying to describe God using language, for many,
God is indescribable. This is an interesting description, since it implies that a particular
thought, God cannot actually be relegated to any clear language. There's no way to actually try to
describe language. And in some traditions, such as Judaism, God is not a word that can be spelled,
that you can't actually access it through language. An example from one of the participants in our
online survey talked about this issue of the indescribability of God. They said,
this churning pillar of force I understood must be the same experienced for ages by the prophets
and saints of old. This was the pillar of fire described in the Old Testament.
This was the ancient of days. This was the Holy Spirit. This was the primordial shakti
by the magnificence of its sheer force and undeniable presence. I suddenly understood
what God is. This is what man calls God. It was, it was. There's little more to say in an attempt
to describe it, but I now understood why the ancient Hebrews adhered to deepest reverence
for this force by declaring its name as unpronounceable. So language is crucial for our understanding
of God, but also creates problems because God is almost impossible to describe. We can try to get
at it in some way or another as a concept, but we, our words fall short. Now another fascinating
element of different religious traditions, specifically with regard to how we act and
think about God has to do with how our relationship is formed with God. And this relates to some degree
to our frontal lobes and the notion of human will.
Our frontal lobes allow us to feel a sense of willfulness and we sometimes apply that understanding
of having a will to God. We talk about, well, it's God's will. But what does that mean exactly?
How do we understand that God has a will to do certain things in the world?
As I mentioned, willfulness actually comes from the frontal lobes. We activate our frontal lobes
whenever we do something of willful intent, but it also raises a kind of more fundamental question,
at least about how we as human beings can behave, because we have to wonder whether we have free
will and how we direct our will into thinking about God. Do we control the ways in which we
understand God or not? What do we think about God in terms of what does God want us to do
with regard to our behaviors and thought? And fundamentally, we also have to ask the question
as whether God is something that we need to surrender our wills to.
In fact, the ability to surrender our will to God may actually change the way we understand God.
Now, that may sound a little strange, but let me give you another example from a participant of
our survey. They said this as part of their, that was part of their experience. They said,
I prayed longer, another couple of days of the anguish continued. Finally, I decided I could
not withhold my ascent. I surrendered everything, including my faith and my salvation, and only
for one reason. I loved God. I gave up everything because I loved God. I assented to his request,
and in an instant, God returned everything to me, transformed. God liberated me, and from that day
forward, a new relationship existed between God and me. It is ever present. No distance, no separation,
it just is. By surrendering herself, this individual found a new understanding of God and a new
relationship to God. So thus this act of surrendering became an important way to,
for this individual to change her beliefs about God. Remember back to our study of speaking in
tongues. What happened to the frontal lobes? In contrast to the meditation and prayer practices
where the frontal lobes turned on, their frontal lobes shut down. And we might imagine that when
anyone surrenders themselves to their, to this experience of God, that frontal lobe shuts down,
and when that happens, it allows other areas of the brain to turn on. And when that happens,
we develop new ideas, new ways of thinking about things. So it's not a surprise then that this
notion of surrender may be a critical piece to how we begin to understand the concept of God.
Well, we've now reviewed several different cognitive and emotional ways in which we come
to understand the concept of God, but we still have not addressed the even more fundamental
question, does God exist? How does our brain approach this question?
How does your brain approach this question? Well, it's very interesting to me because
the one thing that we all seem to take for granted is the notion that we feel that things exist.
The brain perceives and believes that there are things that are real out there in the world.
We assign reality based upon the degree, to some extent, to which that thing feels real to us.
Now, we also have a binary operator that sets that opposition apart. There are things that
exist that are real, and there are things that don't exist that are not real. So why do some
believe that God exists and others do not? Well, we covered some of this in the earlier lecture
on believers and non-believers, but regardless of your own beliefs, it is the brain that draws
the line between a belief that God does or does not exist. We even found differences in the brain
scans of atheists contemplating God. For them, the brain was not able to activate, especially the
frontal lobes, in the same way as a religious person. In large part, because they didn't have
a clear sense of God's existence, but it remains unclear why we think anything exists at all,
and this will be a topic that we will cover in one of our concluding lectures. It's an actually
fundamentally important topic that engages religion, philosophy, and all the aspects of how we understand
who we are. So we have considered a variety of cognitive and emotional processes that directly
relate to how we perceive and experience God, and we can now turn to some specific experimental
approaches to help us explore how people actually understand God and the beliefs and ideas that
actually arise from the brain's functions. We can therefore ask a very specific question.
We can ask a question like, what does God look like? What does God feel like? And what is God's
personality? We may even ask how these attributes are related to our own, and we can explore such
questions through experimental research. So we decided to ask the question, what does God look
like? And we went to about 300 or 400 people, and we handed them a piece of paper and a pencil,
and we said, draw God, draw your image of what God is. You may even want to try that right now.
What would you draw? When we analyzed the different figures and the different pictures that people
had drawn, we realized that we could start to categorize them into several specific groups,
and they were very interesting and very relevant in telling us what people think God is.
Actually, only about 20% actually drew a face, drew an anthropomorphic version of God.
The God on the roof of the Sistine Chapel. About 60% drew either some kind of abstract image,
which may have been swirls, hearts, different shapes, or some kind of nature scene, and that 60%
was divided pretty evenly. The people who drew nature scenes usually talked about God being
nature, and they drew mountains and the sun and so forth. About 15% left the picture blank,
and we realized that as part of this entire study, we didn't want to take everybody, we didn't want to
just impose our own interpretation onto these pictures. We wanted to hear from the people
drawing them what they thought their picture represented. And in fact, it was very interesting
when we got the information back for the people who left it blank, because for the people who left
it blank, some of them were incredibly religious, and some of them were incredibly non-religious.
For the incredibly religious, they said, we left it blank because God is undrawable.
And of course, for the atheists, about half of them left it blank, they simply said, well,
there is no God, there's nothing to draw. Now, we can ask another question. What does God feel
like to us? At the beginning of this lecture, we talked about the Baylor study and found that
Americans believe in four principal types of God. And they were very clear to say that this is not
the only way people believe in God, but there are these four kind of nodal points. They talked about
God as authoritarian, as critical, as distant, and as benevolent. I actually found these four types
to be very exciting from a brain perspective because they seem to proceed along two very specific
dimensions, a spatial dimension and an emotional dimension. For the spatial dimension, we're talking
about God as being right here around us or being very distant. And therefore, we can think about
how the parietal lobe, that orientation part of the brain that helps us with our sense of space,
is involved in that experience so that for some people, they perceive God as being far away,
and other people feel that God is right around them. And the other dimension is the emotional
dimension. Our limbic system telling us, is God loving or is God hating? Do we look at God positively
or negatively? The critical God that is always looking down on us? Or the very benevolent,
compassionate God which is always there to support us? And if we think about these emotional responses,
we might also begin to ask the next question, which is, how do these emotions ultimately
affect us going forward? Do these emotions positive or negative actually change our brain?
And this is something that we'll be covering a little bit more in our next lecture.
But I also want to bring up one other idea, because our research suggests that there may
even be a fifth type, a fifth way of thinking about God, and this would be a mystical sense of God.
If you remember, when people try to understand God, they think about God in terms of this
oneness, this sense of connectedness. And if that's the case, it may seem to expand beyond
these other four dimensions of the Baylor survey, because it may or may not have the same kind of
emotional way or spatial way of relating to God when you think about God in some kind of
mystical or deeply spiritual sense. These studies also bring up one other important idea,
which is whether or not the way in which our brain thinks about God has something or even anything
to do with what the actual nature of God is. Just because we happen to think about God as
existing or not existing or being benevolent or being very negative towards us, being very critical,
that doesn't necessarily tell us anything about the actual nature of what God is.
So even though we can think about how our brains start to shape the concept of God,
we always have to think about whether or not that has any true bearing on what is actually
out there in reality. So from this research, we have learned some very important points.
We have learned that the different cognitive and emotional processes of the brain dramatically
affect our beliefs in God. We've seen how our cognitions, our causal functioning,
our binary functioning, and our emotions all have an impact on what the nature of God seems to be
for us. We have also learned that there are fascinating ways of trying to understand what
people actually think about when they think about God. And we have understood how to relate
the thoughts about God to these specific brain processes that support these ways of thinking.
So we can turn to the limbic system, we can turn to the frontal lobe, and try to understand exactly
how they're working when people have these ideas about God. But in addition to exploring how our
brain shapes our beliefs, we can begin to consider how our brain is shaped by religion,
and even perhaps how it is shaped by God. This is what we will consider in our next lecture.
