When I was a medical student, one of the most intriguing articles that I came across was
in the Journal of the American Medical Association.
There was a theoretical piece that was written by a neuroscientist who had gone to Rome and
had seen the Sistine Chapel.
When he looked up at the central part of the painting where we see God reaching his hand
out to Adam, he noticed some fascinating things.
Now, being a neuroscientist, his brain tended to look at everything from a brain point of
view.
And he actually thought that the image of God that he saw in the painting, and God was
surrounded by this kind of flowing clouds and angels, actually looked a lot like the
outline of the brain.
Interestingly, the outstretched hand of God, as it appears to be coming out towards Adam,
actually looks like it's coming out a part of the frontal lobes if we see the brain in
that image the way this neuroscientist did.
Now the author of this article actually argued several points.
One of his points was that it may not be completely far-fetched to think that Michelangelo would
actually know something about the structure of the human brain.
Apparently at the time, a lot of artists actually did do dissections so that they could better
understand the form of the human body, and therefore it wouldn't be a complete surprise
that Michelangelo would have some notion of what the brain actually looked like.
But the more relevant point from the perspective of the article and this lecture is that the
neuroscientist was arguing that the painting might actually suggest a slightly different
interpretation of the creation of man.
The neuroscientist argued that it is not, it may not have been so much the actual physical
creation of human beings that was important, but that we were subsequently endowed by God
with the brain, with our brain, and the thought processes that make us distinctly human.
In this way, God changed our brain.
We were given the ability to think, to plan, and to feel, and most importantly, we were
given the ability to think about religion and to think about God.
So what do we think when we hear the word God?
Well, if you look at all the words around us, there's very few that are quite so interesting.
There are very few that stir up so much emotion in people.
There are very few that create so much confusion.
There are few that cause such controversy.
And for better or for worse, there are very few words that cause more feelings of love
and more feelings of hatred.
But what does this word mean?
How does it have such a huge impact, and specifically, how does it have such a huge impact on the
brain?
Well, in our last lecture, we looked at how the structures and processes of the brain
influence the way we think about God, but differently, we looked at the way our brain
shapes God.
In this lecture, we're going to turn that formula around a little bit.
Today we're going to look at the way in which God and religion shape the human brain.
One of the ways that we can think about this is to try to understand how different practices
actually change our brain.
Perhaps the most effective way of assessing the way religion shapes the brain then is
to study practices like meditation and prayer, and to see how they have actually had an impact
on the brain's functioning.
To some degree, we can go back to the studies that we've been talking about throughout this
course, the studies of our Franciscan nuns in prayer, of the Pentecostals speaking in
tongues.
Ultimately, what we also need to do is to combine the information that we get from these
imaging studies with other scientific measures, and also look at the subjective experiences
that we as human beings have.
It's also important when we talk about how God changes our brain to not just look at
what happens in the moment, the moment that we are engaged in prayer, the moment that
we think about God, but what's happening to us over time?
Can we look at longitudinal effects?
What happens to our brain over time as we engage in this concept of religion in God?
We might also think about ways of studying those people who are very religious and those
people who are not, and this goes back a little bit to our discussion of believers and non-believers.
So let's get back to my first question.
Do spiritual practices affect the brain over time?
We were very intrigued by this.
There were studies which clearly showed the acute change of meditation on the brain.
We've seen changes in the frontal lobes, we've seen changes in the parietal lobes, but with
these changes last.
And so we decided several years ago to do a study of a particular type of meditation
called Kirtan Kriya.
What we decided to do was that we decided to look at older individuals, especially those
who had a little bit of memory problems, some memory loss, and we wanted to see whether
this meditation program would actually change the way their brain worked.
We made sure that people had no history of doing any kind of substantial meditation,
and we taught them the Kirtan Kriya meditation.
This meditation technique actually derives from the Kundalini yoga tradition.
It is considered to be, by some, one of the most fundamental meditation practices.
In fact, one master has actually suggested that if you have to learn only one meditation
practice, then this is the one that you should learn.
The practice actually involves two different elements to it.
The first element is certain phrases that we are supposed to say.
The phrases that are actually four of them are the following, sa, ta, na, and ma.
Now these actually derive from the Sanskrit language and actually have a very spiritual
meaning.
They actually mean birth, life, death, and rebirth.
But we decided to secularize it.
We didn't ask the people to worry so much about the spiritual implications of this.
We asked them to simply repeat these phrases.
And the way this particular meditation practice works is that over a 12-minute period, you
start by saying these phrases, sa, ta, na, ma, out loud, and you do that for two minutes.
You do it in a whisper for two minutes so it would sound like sa, ta, ta, ma.
Then you do it in silence for four minutes, in a whisper for two more minutes, and finally
out loud for two minutes.
So we kind of liked this practice because it was very short.
It only took 12 minutes to do and people could easily do it each day.
In addition to these particular sounds that you make, you are also supposed to do something
called mudras which refer to finger movements.
And when you do the finger movements, you do them to the cadence of the phrases.
You start by touching your thumb to your index finger, your middle finger, your fourth finger,
your ring finger, and then your fifth finger, your pinky finger.
So the whole practice looks a little like this.
You go sa, ta, na, ma, and you keep repeating that over and over for the 12-minute period
and as I mentioned out loud in a whisper and in silence.
So it was a very easy practice for people to learn.
We actually had a little video that they could watch.
We made sure that they were doing it properly and then we sent them home.
We say, do this every day for eight weeks.
And we were very curious to see what people would do.
In fact, one of our first subjects was kind of a funny guy.
He was actually a plumber and we were not too sure he would really embrace this concept.
But boy, he came back in eight weeks and he said he loved doing the practice.
He said he really enjoyed it and he felt like his mind was working better.
Well, it was great that he said that but wasn't.
Now, before we actually had them do the meditation for the first time and then later eight weeks
after they'd done the training, we did several things with them.
We tested their memory and we tested other neuropsychological abilities and these include
things like verbal memory.
So we maybe asked them how many fruits or how many animals they could name in a minute.
We also did another test called the trails test which is kind of like a very fancy connect
the dots but it involves letters and numbers and it's a good measure of overall cognitive
function.
And then we also asked them about their psychological and spiritual state.
What were their, what was their mood?
What did they feel like and did they have any spiritual ideas?
We also scan their brains and we scan them four different times.
When they first came in, we scan them at rest.
Then we taught them how to do the meditation practice.
We scan them again while they did the practice for the very first time.
Then we sent them home, they did the practice for eight weeks.
They came back and we scan them again when they first walked in to get another baseline
scan and then we scan them one last time when they did the meditation for the final time.
And in addition to the Kirtan Kriya group, we also used a comparison group of people
who listened to music.
So both groups were doing something but they were doing something in different ways.
And the imaging results were really fascinating.
One of the most amazing findings I thought was the comparison of the two baseline scans.
The baseline scan when they first came to us and the baseline scan after eight weeks
of meditation.
When we looked at the spec scans and remember the spec scans are looking at blood flow changes
in the brain which tell us something about the activity levels in the brain, we saw some
some really fascinating things.
One area in particular the frontal lobes was substantially increased after eight weeks
of doing this training.
So by doing this training they actually overall increased the amount of activity in their
frontal lobes.
We know that the frontal lobes are very important in helping us to focus attention and to concentrate.
So if the frontal lobes are more active maybe they're able to concentrate and focus better.
The other area that was also very different and also fascinating was the thalamus.
Remember the thalamus is this very core structure that helps to integrate a lot of our sensory
information allows different parts of the brain to connect to each other.
What we found was that when people started out usually one of their thalamus has two
sides and one side of the thalamus was a little bit more active than the other.
But after they came back eight weeks later their thalamic activity was reversed.
That means that they actually changed the way their brain function, the way their thalamus
function and the way they actually thought and perceived reality.
Cognitively people also performed better.
They actually improved by about 10 to 15 percent on the verbal memory tasks and also the trials
test.
So this suggests that this very simple meditation program changed their brain and improved their
memory.
In fact it also, it was also the case that their memory changes were correlated with
the increase of activity in the frontal lobes and the changes in the thalamus.
But perhaps the more important change was in their emotional state.
People practicing the Kirtan Kriya were found to have significant reductions by about 10
to 20 percent in their stress levels, their anxiety levels and their depression levels.
And these changes correlated with activity in the limbic system, the emotional centers
of the brain.
So I would ask you this, if a secular version of a meditation practice that people did for
only 12 minutes a day for eight weeks caused these kinds of changes, can you imagine the
changes that occur when people engage in a truly meaningful religious or spiritual practice
for years and years?
The effects should be incredibly profound.
And think about that.
Think about what goes on, what was going on with our nuns who had been doing this practice
for many, many years.
So again, what's so important is that we find changes going on not just at the moment of
the practice, but throughout having an extended effect throughout their lives.
Now we didn't quite see these types of changes in the music group.
So that actually told us that the meditation practice was something that was different
than just simply doing something else with your mind.
But we did actually do a small study of about five people doing a different kind of meditation
called ayanga yoga.
And it's kind of like regular yoga, but the ayanga part actually refers to a way of doing
it with different props that help you maintain and hold those different yoga positions.
And it also engages meditation.
We studied these people before and after a three month yoga program.
We actually found some very similar kinds of changes to what we saw in the Kirtan Kriya
group.
We found similar increases of activity in the frontal lobe regions, even at rest.
Again, this implies that there is something profound that's going on at the level of the
brain by doing these kinds of practices.
And it would certainly suggest that engaging in religious and spiritual beliefs and the
practices that are associated with them are going to cause even more profound changes in
the person's brain and the way in which that brain helps them to understand reality.
But these are not the only studies which have shown an impact of spiritual practices on
brain function.
Several studies have looked at people who have had intense religious or spiritual experiences
and show that those experiences also have a direct impact on the brain.
You may remember we talked before about a study of carmelite nuns who were asked to think
about one of their most mystical experiences.
This was done by a group of people at the University of Montreal and they saw changes
in the frontal lobe and in the thalamus and in the limbic system associated with that
experience.
And this same group said, well, we should look at other kinds of states as well.
And they asked 15 people who had near death experiences to meditate on what that experience
felt like and they did that while they were in the FMRI scanner.
These results showed increased activity in the frontal lobes, in the superior parietal
lobe, the orientation part of the brain, and the insula.
To some degree, this all makes sense.
You'll remember that these are the areas that have been involved in the carmelite nuns in
our Kirtan Kriya study and show not only the changes going on in the frontal lobe but in
these areas that are involved in our emotional systems as well.
But while I am fascinated by the findings from these studies, I do have one very important
question.
Were all of these states that we studied, that we studied and these other investigators
looked at, were they really the same as the actual experience?
And were these experiences actually the same as each other?
So we have to ask these kinds of questions to get at a better notion of how the concept
of God changes our brain because there may be many different ways that that can happen
depending on whether you are simply reflecting on an experience that you may have had, actually
engaging in a particular practice, or perhaps engaging in some other aspect of your religious
or spiritual beliefs.
Now, so far the studies that we have reviewed have evaluated what appear to be generally
positive effects of spiritual experiences.
But as wonderful and positive as religious and spiritual experiences can be, we have
also discussed throughout this course that there are many times that religion and spirituality
can lead to something negative.
Remember in the lecture on near-death experiences, we described that there were certain people
who did have a very negative near-death experience, the notion of bodies being ripped apart.
And in another lecture we talked about Monica, who was having a lot of psychological issues
and in fact her anger at God had a very negative impact on her mental health.
People can struggle with their religious beliefs.
They may not know what to believe.
They may have certain beliefs that are contrary to what everyone else they know about is believing.
And these kinds of struggles with their spiritual belief system can ultimately result in some
very negative kinds of feelings, and that ultimately can change the brain.
In fact, negative perspectives on God can be very detrimental.
In the individual, a negative view about God causes stress, causes anxiety, and can cause
depression.
When you have these feelings, it activates the brain structures that are associated with
negative emotions.
It actually activates the amygdala, and it causes our stress hormones, the hormones of
cortisol, for example, to be released into the bloodstream.
And there's been clear evidence to show that cortisol actually damages the brain.
It actually blocks or breaks down the neural connections in the brain and makes it work
in a poorer way.
We also know the whole idea about neurons that fire together, wire together, and therefore
the longer we focus on these negative ideas and negative beliefs about God, the stronger
those neural connections can become.
What happens when we strengthen these negative neural connections?
This leads to an ever-growing increase in negative feelings.
Thus, hatred leads to more hatred, and ultimately, this can result in very, very negative, outwardly
destructive behaviors.
Think about terrorism, for example.
What's going on in the terrorist mind, and what's going on in the terrorist brain?
It's interesting that most people who have studied terrorists, who have studied the suicide
bombers have found that rituals are a very crucial part in developing that brain.
Why is that?
Well, remember that rituals repeatedly bring a person back to a particular idea.
The hope is that it's a positive one, but if it's a negative one, the ritual actually
creates a very negative cycle in the brain.
It continually stimulates the amygdala, it continually stimulates those arousal mechanisms
in the body, and that leads to continued and increased feelings of hatred, anger, and the
interest in creating violent acts.
What about the actual act of violence?
Well, there are many ancient sacred texts that are full of violent conflicts, and people
can think of all different kinds of examples where people have been killed in the name
of religion.
The Inquisition is one that certainly comes to mind.
This was rooted in religious beliefs, and even in the other types of conflicts that we see
around the globe, even if they're ethnic or political, while religion may not always be
at the root cause of the conflict, those people who are fighting frequently turn to their
religious beliefs as a way of supporting them.
They want to feel that God is on their side and that it is a holy battle that they are
engaged in.
But from the neuroscience side, what is the difference between those people who are violent
and hateful and those people who are not?
Well, there is some evidence from brain scan studies to help us answer that question a
little bit.
Studies of violent criminals, for example, have actually yielded some very interesting
results.
When these individuals have had their brain scanned, we tend to see one of two basic kinds
of findings.
Either they have a reduction of activity in the frontal lobes, or they have increased
activity in their limbic system.
How might this play out in terms of violence?
Well, in the last lecture, we also talked a little bit about that balance between the
frontal lobes and the limbic system.
So let's think about that balance for a moment in light of these scans.
If the frontal lobes are not working well, their emotions can run wild, so to speak,
and therefore they respond to those emotional feelings with much greater zeal.
And therefore, if they feel angry at someone, they don't have a normal frontal lobe that
controls that anger and out they go to do something violent.
On the other hand, they may have such heightened activity in the limbic system that even though
they have a relatively normal functioning frontal lobe, it simply can't control those
powerful emotions.
Now it's also known that the hypothalamus that regulates our autonomic nervous system
also regulates our rage response, our aggressive response.
It's not so easy to look at the hypothalamus, it's a very small structure in the very center
of the brain, but we know how it works and therefore we have been able to see that it
also is likely involved when people feel anger and hatred.
Again though, the more the person continues to focus on these hateful ideas, these violent
ideas, the more they become a part of the brain's neural connections, the more that
limbic system fires, the more those connections form and all of these types of repetitive
processes like rituals continue to augment these very, very negative emotions.
But this research also should tell us something.
It tells us that we have a compassionate side and we can look at the parts of the brain
that might help us so that religion can actually foster a greater sense of compassion.
In fact, history abounds with examples of individuals whose religious beliefs move them
to perform great acts of charity and kindness.
So as a neuroscientist, it's really made me wonder.
To me one of the fundamental questions is what is the difference between someone who
is very religious and is normally compassionate on one side and someone who is very religious
and enormously hateful on the other?
It's been my hope that neuroscience can help to clarify this.
Maybe neuroscience can help us to determine which practices and which beliefs help to
foster more compassion, more social cohesion.
If the neurons that fire together, wire together really works, it works for both positive as
well as negative emotions and hence positive emotions will activate the areas of our brain
that are involved in happiness, our reward response in the limbic system in the basal
ganglia and therefore we can induce more positive emotions in people.
If that's the case, it lowers our stress response, the cortisol, that stress hormone
actually decreases and it improves our memory, our brain's functions and even our immune
system.
One of the stories that actually grows out of a spiritual tradition is one of my favorite
ones and talks about this balance between the compassionate and the hateful side of
ourselves.
There are several variations to it but I like it, it's called the Tale of the Two Wolves.
The idea is that it takes place with an American Indian, an American Indian boy who gets into
a fight with one of his friends and afterwards he runs to his grandfather and he's very upset.
He says to the grandfather, you know, I just got into a fight and I don't know what to
do.
One of me wants to go back and beat him up, I'm so hurt, I'm so angry, I want to fight
him back and I want to beat him up.
But then there's this other side of me that feels compassionate and loving, he's one
of my, you know, one of our people, I should be compassionate towards him.
I don't understand what's going on here.
And the grandfather looks at him and he says, well, you know, in each of us there are these
two wolves, there is this violent, angered kind of wolf and there is the compassionate
wolf and they're constantly fighting it out within each of us.
And the boy thinks about this for a moment and he says, well, if I have these two wolves
in me and they're fighting against each other, which one's going to win?
And the grandfather looks at him and all he says is, the one that will win is the one
that you feed.
And that's exactly what the research studies are showing, that the more we feed our positive
beliefs, our positive emotions, the more they become a part of our brain and its functions
and the more we focus on the negative side and our negative feelings and emotions, the
more that becomes the way in which we look at the world.
There are a number of research projects that have actually taken this on and attempted
to improve the compassion among people through different types of spiritual practices.
In fact, the Institute of Neuetic Sciences and a group of researchers affiliated with
Transcendental Meditation have led some very interesting and yet very controversial studies.
One of the ones that they did was to bring several thousand meditators together into
a city.
In fact, they actually did this with several cities, including Washington, D.C.
And they found something very interesting when they brought these 4,000 people together.
They found that when they looked at crime rates, the crime rate dropped by about 25%.
The crime rate was determined by the Uniform Crime Report program of the FBI.
And the violent crimes included homicide, rape, aggravated assault, and even robbery.
And when they looked at the data, they found that when they compared it to the preceding
five years, that the overall crime rate actually decreased when they brought all of these meditators
together.
So what are we to make of this kind of a study?
Well, obviously, it's very controversial.
The question is how do these meditators actually have any impact on crime rates on other people
who are not involved in actual meditation?
It certainly makes sense that if you meditate, it might have a benefit.
But how could we expect this to happen to have an effect outwardly?
And some people certainly have criticized these studies.
They talked about, well, how were these crime measurements appropriate?
Could there have been other factors that they didn't take into consideration?
Factors like the change in the weather, whether they put more police out there at that particular
time.
So we're not really sure if this study reflects an accurate finding.
But it certainly is intriguing.
And we certainly have to ask the question is, what would it tell us about how our brain
can be utilized in a compassionate way to not only affect itself, but affect the world
around us?
And if religious and spiritual traditions ask us to pray not only for ourselves, but
for others, does this kind of research actually tell us something about how that may happen?
And can we use this research to actually determine the more effective practices to help foster
compassion among people?
Maybe we can learn whether prayer, meditation, or some other practice will have the same or
even a greater effect on the brain and its emotions.
We might even conceive of creating specific practices that take advantage of this data
to create healthier, more positive experiences of religion and spirituality.
For example, you might create a practice that helps to enhance the communication between
people.
Maybe a meditation practice that involves the dialogue of two different individuals that
can help to foster intimacy.
And in fact, myself and some of my colleagues, we've actually begun to do this to find ways
of utilizing that spiritual part of ourselves to help to enhance, to change our brain and
help to enhance the ways in which we live.
So God and religion and different practices that are associated with them can clearly
change our brain.
That change may come about through spiritual practices or as the result of very long-held
beliefs or even from a particular religious experience like a near-death experience.
We might even ponder whether God, if God actually exists, actually affects our brain's
functions.
And if that's the case, we can have a brain that can actually receive and be changed by
God much like the idea in the Sistine Chapel story.
Scientific research is helping us to understand how certain beliefs and practices lead to
positive changes in the brain while others lead to negative changes.
And perhaps based on this research, we can find ways to create more positive experiences,
more positive ideas which arguably are beneficial, not only for the individual, but for our society
as a whole.
