In describing a cosmic religious feeling, one scholar said the following.
It is very difficult to explain this feeling to anyone who is entirely without it.
The individual feels the nothingness of human desires and aims and the sublimity and marvelous
order which reveal themselves both in nature and in the world of thought.
He looks upon individual existence as a sort of prison and wants to experience the universe
as a single, significant whole.
That scholar was Albert Einstein and it is fascinating to consider his description in
more detail, especially from the brain perspective.
He speaks about the feelings.
He speaks about the nothingness and the marvelous order and ultimately perceiving the universe
as a single, significant whole.
But how do these descriptors relate to the brain?
Well in our last lecture we looked at the neurophysiology of mystical experiences and
we saw that the autonomic nervous system, the limbic system and the parietal lobe are
going to be involved.
When we are talking about feelings, we are talking about what is going on in the limbic
system and how that ultimately relates to the autonomic nervous system allowing us to
feel it all the way through our entire body.
And when we are talking about a sense of oneness and wholeness, we are talking about the holistic
processes of the brain that reside in large part in the parietal lobe in which we lose
our sense of self and feel that intimate connectedness to everything around us and a sense of oneness
of everything around us.
But in addition to these basic brain functions, we can also think about how the other brain
processes such as abstract thought, perceptual feelings, perceptual ideas, the holistic process
and others play a role in these kinds of very profound experiences.
And today I would like to build on what we have learned by exploring mystical experiences
in more detail.
We will try to better understand the subjective nature of the experiences themselves, what
the person feels, what they think and what they are perceiving.
And we will see how these experiences relate to some of the universal processes of the
human brain.
I would call them universal because as we have discussed, the brain of all people appear
to have these basic processes.
And perhaps we will come to understand the universality of the experiences both in terms
of different spiritual traditions as well as the brain itself.
Now the spiritual brain is capable of a wide range of perceptions and experiences, but
of all these experiences, the mystical experience is surely the most intense.
Mystics describe an experience in which the distinction between self and other, the barriers
between the inside and outside are completely broken down.
These distinctions and barriers are replaced by a perception of the oneness and unity
of all things.
Moreover, the perception itself tends to be associated with a sense of tranquility and
peace.
As the famous Lakota Holy Man, Black Elk put it, he said, Peace comes within the souls
of men when they realize their oneness with the universe.
Here we see in this very simple statement that the most important aspect of the experience
is the experience of oneness, the holistic process of the brain.
But there is also the notion of peace.
And remember that peace is likely associated with the calming part, the parasympathetic
system that's part of the autonomic nervous system.
Black Elk's words are also echoed in the mystical writings from numerous other religious
traditions and this ultimately leads to a very important question from both a spiritual
and a neurophysiological point of view.
Are different mystical experiences truly different or are they the same and then described differently
depending on the person's prevailing belief system?
Now before addressing this question in more detail, let us look at a few other mystical
descriptions from different traditions and we're going to focus on some of the specific
similarities and differences in their descriptions as well as consider the possible brain processes
that might underlie these experiences.
For example, the Dominican theologian and mystic Meister Eckhart had this to say about
our relationship to God.
He asked the question, how then am I to love the Godhead?
Thou shalt not love him as he is, not as a God, not as a spirit, not as a person, not
as an image, but as sheer, pure one.
So how do I as a neuroscientist approach this perception?
This experience of the absolute unity of all things.
What is it about the spiritual brain that makes it capable of even conceptualizing a
notion like the oneness of the cosmos?
Well we can see his initial question is actually about love.
This is actually about an emotion and there are very interesting brain scan studies that
tell us a little bit about where love is in the brain.
Love appears to be experienced in several areas of the brain including the reward system
of the brain and this includes some of the areas that are involved with dopamine.
We spoke about dopamine before when we talked about various aspects of religious experience
and other ways in which we feel better about ourselves and that's why it's part of the
reward system.
The insula is a part of our brain that's between the limbic system and the upper parts
of the cortex and it helps us to actually perceive and think about our emotions.
And of course the social area of our brain is also relevant because it helps us to know
how we kind of connect and how we interact with others and other things around us.
In addition some studies have suggested that the parietal lobe is actually decreased when
we feel an experience of love and this may go back to our original notion of how we connect
the self with another.
Now ultimately Meister Eckhart concludes that we must love God as a oneness and this of
course takes us back to the holistic processes of the brain.
What's going on in our parietal lobe that may have made Meister Eckhart or someone else
who has a mystical experience feel that sense of connectedness and feel that profound sense
of oneness.
Now let's turn to another perspective.
Rabbi Eleazar a Jewish mystic stated, think of yourself as nothing and totally forget
yourself as you pray.
You may then enter the universe of thought, a state of consciousness which is beyond time.
Everything in this realm is the same, life and death, land and sea.
In this quote we see some very interesting references.
First of all he's talking about the act of prayer but we've already seen how prayer
affects the brain.
We know that when we studied Franciscan nuns that they activated their frontal lobes.
They were engaged in the process.
They were focusing on the notion of God or on a particular prayer and they also decreased
the activity in that orientation part of the brain, their parietal lobe.
They also activated their limbic system, the areas involved in emotions.
So when Rabbi Eleazar is talking about prayer, he's tapping into all these different ways
in which the brain actually works to engage that experience.
And since we know that prayer can affect not only our perception of self but our perception
of space and time, we can understand how this could lead to the kinds of mystical experiences
that are described by Rabbi Eleazar.
Now these two quotes suggest that the brain may not only be spiritual insofar as it can
have spiritual experiences but it may actually be mystical because we can have mystical experiences.
Now why might we consider our brain to be mystical?
Well in the first place there are very good reasons for calling the brain mystical and
I use that in quotes just by looking at the physical structure of the brain itself.
The brain works by integrating biological, psychological, social and spiritual elements
all together and all of these things together make up who we are via the brain.
Thus the brain is intensely integrated.
It is a oneness made of billions of neurons and molecules working together to provide
a generally unified view of reality.
The brain is also intensely integrated with the world around us, in fact we have trouble
truly knowing where our brain ends and the world begins.
Consciousness and subjective experience are intimately tied to the biological workings
of the brain but we have no clear way of describing how this actually happens.
And to some degree this indescribability of how a physical brain relates to a spiritual
mind is very similar to the kinds of paradoxical and ineffable descriptions that we see arising
from mystical experiences.
In addition since we are forever trapped within our own consciousness, trapped within our
own brain we may never be able to figure out how this overall relationship occurs.
It remains a fundamental mystery just like the nature and elements of mystical experiences.
Finally, and perhaps most obviously, we can call the brain mystical because the brain
clearly is capable of having mystical experiences.
Indeed people have been having mystical experiences throughout time and across a wide range of
cultures and religious and spiritual traditions.
Now there are two very interesting research examples that help to demonstrate this inherent
ability of the brain to have these kinds of mystical experiences.
A very recent study of approximately 30 patients who had traumatic brain injuries showed that
those patients who had damage to the right parietal lobe were more likely to express
feelings of unity and oneness with the universe.
Now think about this, the parietal lobe is this orientation part of the brain we keep
talking about and when people have damage to this area something interesting happens.
There seems to be a way of accessing this kind of transcendent experience especially
when this particular area of the brain is damaged.
Now the second example is from a neuroscientist named Jill Bultetailer.
She had a stroke on the left side of her brain at a very young age, she was in her 30s.
She actually started to have a very intense unitary kind of experience, a kind of mystical
experience.
She actually suggested that the effect of the stroke on the left side of her brain somehow
released the more natural mystical processes of the right side.
As a similar process occurring in the brain damage subjects as well, well clearly there
is something going on and we are trying to get at that.
We can use this information, we can combine this information with all of the previous
discussions we have had about meditation and prayer practices and their impact on the brain
and spiritual experiences to try to help us understand where these mystical experiences
come from.
It certainly seems that the brain has some very basic abilities to be spiritual and even
mystical.
Now throughout this course we have been applying science as a way of gaining new insights into
the nature of religion and spirituality and of course in this lecture mysticism.
Now if this is possible then the scientific study of the spiritual brain could have some
tremendous implications for how religious ideas and even theological ideas arise from
or are associated with these kinds of profound spiritual experiences such as the mystical
ones.
Now this is one area in which the exciting new field that we spoke about a little bit
before called neuro theology may actually contribute.
As we explore the potential links between mystical experiences and the human brain we
might be able to understand better the nature of these experiences and also how the brain
interprets and incorporates such an experience into a belief system.
After all it's not just enough that we have the experience but what do we do with it?
Now in addition such an analysis may provide a unique perspective on philosophical and theological
concepts that pertain to morality, causality, ontology and even epistemology and we'll talk
about this a little bit later in this lecture and in the last lecture.
In fact remember that experiences that we talked about before in our lecture on revelation
such as Paul's conversion on the road to Damascus, Ezekiel's revelations, Mohammed's
visions and Joseph Smith's revelations all of them led to the development of an entire
religion or at least some very critical components of the doctrines of particular religions.
So how do these experiences turn into ideas that comprise religions?
Well again in previous lectures we considered a variety of the different cognitive processes
that are associated with religious and spiritual phenomena.
These cognitive processes are involved in much of how religious and spiritual experiences
are perceived and interpreted subjectively.
But as in our discussion about beliefs these experiences are then converted along with
our memories, our sensations, emotions and even our social interactions into a set of
beliefs that we can use throughout our lives.
So let's think about this a little bit more and consider how this happens in more detail.
Remember back we talked about the causal process of the brain, our brain's way of looking
at the world, trying to understand the causal relationships of things.
Well now if someone has a mystical experience and they have this powerful notion of oneness,
how does that oneness somehow cause something to go on in the material universe?
Does it actually cause the material universe to come into existence?
And of course if the mystical experience is actually perceived as being connected to God
or as God itself, then the mystical understanding of God is that God actually causes the universe
to come into existence.
And this is now a way in which we can understand how that causal process of the brain can interpret
that experience into a doctrine, into a belief system.
Now not only is the universe experience as oneness, but the notion can become the prevailing
tenet of a particular spiritual tradition.
So if we think about the holistic process of the brain that involves our parietal lobes
that enables us to feel that sense of oneness and connectedness, maybe it's not just the
experience itself, but it becomes part of the doctrine, it becomes part of the belief
system itself.
Has this happened?
Well certainly when we look at Buddhist and Hindu philosophies, we see this notion of the
oneness of the universe and the oneness of the Buddha or enlightenment that binds all
things together.
And when that happens, that's part of what an individual who subscribes to those particular
traditions believes in, as the way in which they should act about life, understand the
world and actually engage in their particular spiritual tradition.
Now in the past we've also talked about the binary process of the brain that helps to
differentiate objects from each other and contrast objects as opposites, good and bad,
right and wrong.
Well this also helps us to differentiate the mystical reality, the mystical experience
from the experiences that we have in everyday reality.
Now of course this also requires us to somehow address these two different perspectives.
When somebody has this profound mystical experience and they now suddenly have a new realization
about how the world works, how do they relate that back to the everyday reality experience
that the rest of us have?
And we'll talk about this a little bit more in terms of our perceptions of reality, we'll
talk about this in the last lecture.
But the binary process is part of what enables us to juxtapose those two different ways of
looking at the world.
The emotions that we have that arise out of our limbic system are also of fundamental
importance to the mystical experiences.
We hear so many different ways of people describing mystical experiences as having different kinds
of emotions, sometimes very positive, sometimes very negative.
In fact if we can actually understand how all of these different emotions arise within
the context of the mystical experience, that may tell us something not only about the experience
but how we incorporate a particular emotional standpoint when we look at the world or when
we look at God.
So if somebody has a mystical experience and experiences compassion and love, then maybe
they will have a doctrinal understanding of God as being compassionate and loving.
Now let us look at several descriptions of other mystical experiences to see again how
such experiences relate to each other, how they relate to the various functions of the
brain and how they might be interpreted into the tenets of a particular spiritual tradition.
Along the way we should also focus on the similarities and the differences across these
experiences and traditions.
For example, Li Po, who was a Taoist sage, he made this statement.
He said, the birds have vanished into the sky and now the last cloud drains away.
We sit together, the mountain and me, until only the mountain remains.
What's going on here?
This is the notion of the loss of the sense of self.
He's sitting with the mountain until only the mountain is there.
He himself has gone away and this very profound sense of oneness, connectedness and the actual
loss of the sense of self is all part of the experience.
But the concept, the tenet that arises from this experience is that the goal of Taoism
is to experience a state of enlightenment in which you lose yourself completely.
And in doing so, you actually end all of your suffering.
Let's take a look at another tradition and another mystic.
In the Sufi tradition, the mystic Mansur El-Halaj from the 10th century stated the following,
I am he whom I love and he whom I love is I.
We are two spirits dwelling in one body.
If thou seeest me, thou seeest him and if thou seeest him, thou seeest us both.
Isn't it interesting that yet again we have a sense of the relationship between the self
and God and the sense of oneness, a profound sense of union and connectedness between the
self and God and for him, he believed that God was within him and that he and God had
basically become one and the same.
He argued that the ideal spiritual state was to be emptied of everything but God.
Importantly, this places an emphasis on embracing the divine presence in this life right here
rather than whatever comes after life in death.
And therefore it became part of the doctrine of Sufism, the notion of emptying your entire
self with the exception of God and finding that mystical union, that connectedness and
oneness with God.
Now, even scientists like Einstein and another very famous scientist, Erwin Schrödinger,
who was one of the founders of quantum mechanics, used their experiences in a way that guided
their lives, their beliefs and to some degree their scientific explorations.
For example, Schrödinger once said, inconceivable as it seems to ordinary reason, you and all
other conscious beings as such are all in all.
Hence this life of yours you are living is not merely a piece of the entire existence
but is in a certain sense the whole.
Thus you can throw yourself flat on the ground, stretched out upon Mother Earth with a certain
conviction that you are one with her and she with you.
Even for the scientist there is a sense of wholeness and a sense of oneness with nature,
with Earth and to some degree he felt that that was the relationship that he had to embrace
that was part of what his scientific perspective was all about.
He felt that scientists should view themselves in relationship to the world around them as
a oneness.
Everything is connected and science was a way of helping towards that connection.
In fact what is particularly interesting is the distinction that appears to arise between
the mystical version of God and the more usual religious versions of God.
The conclusion of the mystic is that God is by nature unknowable.
That is not an objective fact or an actual being, God is in fact being itself the absolute
undifferentiated oneness that is perceived to be the ground of all existence.
To some degree this is what has been described by the famous mystics including the famous
scientists who have all looked at the world as this oneness and when we understand this
concept that the mystics claim regarding God then we can understand how people can conceive
of God using the extremes of their brains functions.
When we talked about the unitary continuum, this notion of an absolute unitary state where
the parietal lobe is kind of working at some kind of extreme where we lose our sense of
self and we have this intense feeling of oneness, we can see how that experience is part of
the mystical experience that changes the way a person actually understands the world.
But interestingly the mystical experience even though it's so indescribable is for some
reason experienced as deeply connecting the individual with their notion of God even if
it's a scientist who's maybe notion of God is nature itself.
And one of the other really interesting pieces of this is that it makes the experience completely
and wholly tangible and having an incredible feeling of realness.
Now if we turn to the notion of a comforting image of a personal and knowable God, a God
that exists apart from the rest of creation is some kind of distinct individual being
then we tend to conceive of God via the standard mechanisms of the brain.
That includes our emotions, our thoughts and our behaviors.
We conceive of God, we think about how God relates to the world, how God relates to us,
we have feelings about that.
But again the mystic feels that they don't think about God but they have this intimate
union with God.
The notion that God is not around us but within us.
And as I alluded to a moment ago there is this one other very fundamentally important
aspect of these mystical experiences.
For the person who has them the mystical experience of reality is extremely real.
What do I mean by this?
When they compare that notion of reality to our everyday reality not only does it feel
real but it actually feels more real.
And because of this it changes the way they look at reality in general and it changes the
way they think about things in their life in particular the beliefs that they hold.
For the near death experiences and how they dramatically change the life of the person.
Mystical experiences are known to result as well in a profound feeling of enlightenment
which changes the entire way a person thinks, it transforms them.
Here's a quote from our survey of a particular woman who had a transformative spiritual experience.
She said, I was lost.
I had no sense of God's direction.
Everything was dark.
I cried out and there was nothing.
Finally God asked me if I would do anything he asked.
I surrendered everything including my faith and my salvation.
In an instant God returned everything to me transformed.
He liberated me and from that day forward a new relationship existed between God and
me.
But I am not attached to doctrine, dogmas or rituals.
I see God's actions all around me.
I cry easier at the joy of what I see.
I sing spontaneously and I have found myself and my beliefs continually expanding becoming
more inclusive and more universal.
Now the realness and intensity of this experience combined with the emotions that she had and
the sense of connectedness brought this individual to a very different and new way of conceiving
of herself, her relationship with what she perceived of as God and her relationship with
the rest of the world.
In this way her beliefs were dramatically changed.
And one can get a sense about how different religious or spiritual beliefs might actually
come about as the result of such an experience.
Her initial religious beliefs were of a distant and to some degree very critical God.
She talked about everything was negative, everything was dark.
But as the result of the experience God was seen as a liberator and a liberator that
connects with the person without religious doctrine or ritual in the way.
Theologically this would lead to a notion of God as directly interacting with a person's
personal life in a very loving manner rather than being very distant.
This reflects a shift in the function of that orientation part of the brain from a sense
of distance to a sense of closeness.
And for her God was also not viewed as critical but was now related to an emotion of joy.
And thus her limbic system changed.
It changed its overall emotional perspective on the world.
So the experience led her to a new set of beliefs that were related to changes in personal
orientation, her feelings of surrendering her own personal self and her emotions.
Thus understanding the brain provides new insights into how a person's beliefs and perhaps
a religious system's beliefs or doctrines may be related to the profound spiritual or
mystical experiences that people have.
In fact such insights may lead us to a new understanding of fundamental questions related
to theology, philosophy and epistemology.
Where do those ideas come from?
How do we derive them from our experiences?
And of course all of this information also tells us a lot about the human brain, a brain
which apparently is far more complex and changeable than perhaps we ever imagined.
But no matter how much the brain changes and can be transformed, the one fascinating content,
the one fascinating constant is that the brain keeps telling us that it is seeing reality
clearly.
For the individual whose story we just heard, her initial reality was that of a distant God
and now it is of a close and intimate God.
But the brain treated both of those ideas as if they were reality at the time.
So how is all of this possible?
How is it possible that a mystical experience can change one's view of reality and do it
so quickly?
How can the brain experience something that seems more real than our everyday world around
us?
Indeed how does the brain even determine what reality really is?
These are the intriguing questions that we will address in our final lecture.
I will see you then.
