Right now, you are probably sitting at a computer table, maybe in your car or on your couch,
and you have just turned on this lecture and started to hear my voice.
Your brain is responding swiftly and easily as if everything that's happening at this
moment is real and can be interacted with in a predictable kind of way.
For example, if you hit the start button on your DVD player and nothing happened, you
would be surprised and your brain would start quickly trying to explain to you why reality
is not the way that you had anticipated.
But there are some fascinating things that arise from our brain's interaction with the
world around us.
For one, we almost always think or act as if we have a very clear idea of what reality
is.
Furthermore, we almost always first assume that when reality does not work the way we
expect, that it's the fault of reality and not us, not our brain.
After all, if nothing happened when you turned the DVD or the CD player on, you would most
likely conclude that there was a problem with the player, right?
You usually wouldn't expect that your brain had misfired and somehow accidentally you
tried to turn the sofa on, for example.
Only when we have a lot of evidence that reality is really okay do we then start to think that
maybe our brain really is the problem.
A more fundamental question that arises is why do we think that something, anything is
real in the first place?
Why is it that your perception of me is treated by your brain as real?
And why do you automatically dismiss certain claims as fundamentally unreal?
For example, if I told you that my assistant during this entire lecture series was a friendly
gorilla that was standing right next to me, no matter how much I tried to convince you
and no matter how convincing I sounded, you would probably conclude fairly quickly that
there was no gorilla there and you might even begin to suspect my own mental stability.
But when it comes to judging between what is real and what is unreal, the brain is unfortunately
not as good as you might think.
In fact, the evidence suggests that your brain might actually miss an entire gorilla.
A number of years ago there was a wonderful study that was designed in which people were
asked to sit in front of a television screen and they watched about four or five different
people throwing different colored balls back and forth.
And what the person was then, the test subject was then asked to do was to count the number
of throws and catches of these different people for one of the colored balls, the white ball,
for example.
How many times do they throw the white ball back and forth to each other?
And as the person is counting it, they do this very diligently and at one point in
the midst of this video that only runs about five or ten minutes, there is a person who
walks in in a gorilla costume, walks into the center of the video, waves his arms around
for a few minutes and then walks off the video.
Now what is amazing is that a huge percentage of people never see the gorilla.
They are so focused, so concentrating on counting how many times that ball goes back and forth
that an entire gorilla goes completely out of their consciousness and out of their perceptions
of reality.
In fact, they're usually amazed when they actually see it.
I actually, I love showing this video in large lecture halls because you start to slowly
hear the laughter after a little while when people finally start to realize what's going
on.
So it appears that we can miss quite a lot that occurs in our reality.
On the other hand, sometimes our brain perceives things that are not there in the first place.
Now this is what happens to all of us when we may hear something that we really don't.
For example, have you ever been in your house at night?
It always seems to be when you're alone that you hear all kinds of noises.
A lot of them aren't even real noises and even when your brain actually does hear a noise,
it starts to interpret it and you begin to react to the possibility.
Maybe it's an intruder and then you listen for other noises and you hear little creaks
and so forth.
And even though ultimately it was probably just the wind blowing through the curtains
or maybe even nothing at all, your brain is perceiving these things.
And sometimes they are real, but sometimes they're not.
In fact, studies of viewers watching different crime scenes show how erroneous our brain's
perceptions of reality actually can be.
For example, usually if you have five different people watching a video of a crime scene,
you'll get five different descriptions of what actually happened.
But what has always been particularly fascinating to me, especially in the context of this entire
course, is how our ability to perceive reality plays out in terms of religion or God.
Why do some see God everywhere and some see God nowhere?
This was one of the questions that led me into this field in the first place.
When I talked about in my first lecture about how I used to stay up nights when I was a
kid thinking about this, this was one of those questions.
How is it possible that some can believe and others don't?
Well, remember in our discussion about believers and nonbelievers, there appear to be very
specific brain differences between the types of people who believe and those who don't.
But does that brain difference actually explain their different perceptions of reality?
And perhaps the more important question is how do we know whose reality is actually right?
Remember the study in which believers and nonbelievers looked at these kind of distorted
pictures and they were asked to see or describe the things that they saw.
And if you remember, the religious believers sometimes saw things that weren't really there
even though they usually could find the things that were there.
On the other hand, the nonbelievers almost never saw things that weren't there but sometimes
didn't see the things that were there.
So they both made mistakes about reality and they made them in different ways.
But which way was really the correct way?
Well, I think this leads us to an even more basic question.
We might wonder how do we evaluate reality in the first place?
How do we decide what actually is real?
To address these questions, let's return to the example I gave at the beginning of the
lecture.
What is it about your room or house or the CD or DVD player that makes you think they
are real?
What characteristics about them do you rely on to tell you that they actually exist and
are real and you can interact with them?
Well, from a philosophical and scientific perspective, we might argue that we use several
specific attributes to characterize something as being real.
The first way our brain probably decides if something is real is just the subjective
sense that it is real.
What's real simply feels more real than what's not.
Now, of course, this is probably a very unsatisfying and very soft standard but it may be the best
guidance that the greatest minds and brains of experts has produced.
We might look at other possibilities.
Maybe we would ask people, ask other people around us about what is real and what is not.
But remember, we talked about so many ways in which our brain and the ways in which we
think are affected by what other people tell us.
So how do we know if just because somebody else says that something is real, that we
should go along with it?
And there's even the more problematic issue that all these other people exist within our
perceptions.
And therefore, if you're schizophrenic and you hear people telling you things about reality,
how do you know you can trust them?
Another way of thinking about what is real is a characteristic we might call persistence.
Persistence over time.
For example, if you put this CD or DVD into the player and then you go away and come back
an hour later, you would expect to find the CD or DVD still in the player.
And that tells you something about its existence, that it's still there.
Now, I actually think that there may be a better, more subtle way of talking about our
perceptions of reality.
And I think that we can actually divide our perceptions of reality into some very particular
kinds of states, many of which we all have experienced at one point or another in our
lives.
Now, I like to sometimes refer to these states as primary knowing states.
And I call them that because whenever we're in one, we tend to feel that we know that
it's real.
Take the state of reality that you're in right now, listening to me give this lecture.
It feels very real to you and you have a very good sense that you know what's going on and
you know that it feels real.
There are no other experiences of reality that you're having at this time and this is
your primary knowing state.
But what happens when you go to sleep tonight?
You'll have a dream and maybe it'll be a very real feeling dream.
When I was a kid, I had a recurring dream that felt incredibly real to me.
It was actually of a dinosaur chasing me.
Now, I'm not sure why I had this dream, but the one thing that I do know is that when
I perceive that dinosaur chasing me, there was not another part of my brain that said,
ah, you know, stay calm, don't worry about the dinosaur.
This is just a dream.
In my dream, when that dinosaur came at me, I ran in my dream and I ran fast.
My reality at the moment was the dream reality.
My everyday reality was completely ignored.
So in this case, while I was in the dream, the dream became my primary knowing state.
Think about a particularly vivid dream that you may have had maybe recently, maybe a long
time ago when you were a kid.
You react in the dream as if it was the total reality.
Even when obviously, illogical things appear to be happening, the brain just keeps on going
as if that's the reality.
Maybe one minute you're at your school and the next minute you're, you know, in Antarctica,
but somehow that seems okay.
So once more, when you're in the dream, that is your primary knowing state.
Every other state of reality is relegated to an inferior experience of reality and you
deal with your dream as if it is unquestionably real in the dream itself.
Now, of course, the moment you wake up and you're back in our everyday, maybe what we
refer to as our baseline reality, your usual and immediate reaction is, oh, thank goodness,
that was just a dream.
The dream state itself is immediately relegated to an inferior experience of reality.
So how are these primary knowing states formed in the brain?
Given all the different parts of the brain that we've talked about, the different processes,
it appears to me that they're, that these knowing states are experienced along three
different dimensions that reflect three basic brain processes.
The first brain process is our perceptual process.
This enables us to perceive the world or reality.
Our perceptions lead us to see the things or objects in the world in two very distinct
ways.
The first way is to perceive lots of different things in the world, the CD player, the cars,
the sofa, the house.
These are all different things.
There are multiple objects in the world.
The second way to perceive reality is one in which there are no discrete objects.
In this way, everything in reality is perceived as a unified oneness.
This is the kind of reality that's described when we discussed the mystical mind and the
mystical experiences in our previous lecture.
So our primary knowing states appear to be able to perceive reality either as containing
lots of individual things or no individual things.
And I should add that this is probably somewhat associated with the quantitative function in
the brain that we also have talked about in the past.
This is the part of the brain that tells us there are lots of things, or maybe there's
only one.
Now the second brain process that's involved in our knowing states is our causal process.
This is the process, if you remember, that tells us how things in the world relate to
each other, that one thing causes another thing, and things can relate to each other
either in some kind of very rational or regular way, or in some kind of very illogical or
bizarre way, at least according to our causal process of the brain.
I'll expand on this in just a moment, but I want to move on to the third brain process
involved in primary knowing states, and that is our emotional process.
Broadly speaking, we have either a very positive, a very negative, or a neutral emotional view
on reality.
Where do our emotions come from?
You got to write, it's our limbic system that prompts us to have one of these different
emotional set points within which we begin to look at reality.
So if you combine these three basic processes together, there are a group of possible knowing
states that we can be in.
For example, we may have a knowing state in which we perceive reality with lots of objects
that are all logically connected to each other, and we might have an overall neutral emotional
attitude towards that reality.
On the other hand, we might perceive a reality with lots of objects, but they're illogically
related.
They're irregularly related to each other.
And maybe we have a very negative emotional attitude.
That's obviously a very different kind of knowing state, but just like the dream versus
the reality state, when you're in it, it feels real.
So let's examine these various knowing states a bit more so that we can understand them
in detail and try to think about how the brain and each of us ultimately perceives reality.
The first group of knowing states all involve the perception of reality with lots of discrete
objects.
These objects, again, like your room, house, your player, they can be related to each other
through the causal process of the brain in very regular ways.
This regularity is what allows science to work toward an understanding of what is typically
called our baseline or everyday reality.
Science would have a very sizable problem if the laws of nature were not consistent
everywhere in the universe.
We wouldn't know how to react to that universe or even study it.
Now this is the state that most of us are in most of the time and we typically perceive
this reality as having an overall neutral emotional value.
Now sure we might be happier, sad at various times in our life, but overall we see the
world as simply existing.
Now there are two other knowing states that are slightly different from what we have called
this baseline reality.
These other two states involve the same multiple objects with lots of rational logical relationships
between them, but the individual takes on either a very positive or a very negative
emotional view of this reality.
If the limbic system provides an individual with this overwhelmingly positive view of
reality the result is a perceptual state, a state of realness that is associated with
an elated sense of being.
The individual experiences joy because the universe, the reality that they are living
in is perceived as being fundamentally good.
There's a sense of purpose to all things and to humankind's place within the universe.
This purposefulness is not derived logically, they haven't come to this rationally, it is
simply intuitive because of this incredibly positive emotional state.
Now this state may have a sudden onset, it may come on slowly and it can last for years
or even for an entire person's life.
It's not a psychotic state, but it is a definite emotional state that is not a mental disorder
and reflects the same basic perceptions of reality that all of us do in our baseline
reality, they just have a different emotional understanding of this perception.
Now by contrast some people experience a knowing state in which they have the common perception
of lots of objects with regular relationships, but it's associated with a profoundly negative
emotional tone.
It is a state of exquisite sadness and futility and involves the sense of the incredible smallness
of humankind within the universe and the suffering that's inherent in the human condition and
in the world.
Now to some degree a mild form of this state may occur and a lot of people as they go through
high school, college students that are kind of dealing with the issues of growing up and
asserting their own independence in a world that frequently appears very harsh and very
capricious.
In the full blown state people often seek psychiatric help, maybe they have major depression
and they go to a psychiatrist because the extreme depression can be so overwhelming, but it's
important to realize that if they're still in this state, they're not typically denying
the reality of their knowing state when they seek treatment.
They're essentially asking to be taught to think in an illusory way so that the world
will seem to have some meaningful framework.
They're asking to be restored, they're not asking to be restored to baseline reality
per se because at that moment that's not their reality, their reality, their brain is locked
in this very negative knowing state.
But hopefully for them they will ultimately find a real way out of that state and end
up in a different knowing state that is at the very least neutral and maybe even positive.
So we have talked about three different perceptions of reality already, the experience of reality
involving multiple objects that can interact in very predictable causal ways, but it can
be perceived in a neutral, positive, or deeply negative emotional fashion.
And we can see how all of this is related to the brain processes that help us to construct
our experience of reality.
In fact it may be very accurate to say that these aren't just three different ideas of
reality or even perceptions of reality, but they are for all intents and purposes three
different realities in which the brain can live.
Now next we have the knowing states that involve the perception of multiple discrete
objects that relate to one another in irregular or bizarre ways.
Now we've already encountered one of them.
That was the dream state that we mentioned earlier.
Other states that are like this could be drug induced states.
When we talked about that in a prior lecture we could hear how there were so many weird
perceptions going on, so many different ways, but for that person that state was their state
of reality at that time.
Even diseases like schizophrenia where so many bizarre ways of relating objects to each
other come about wind up changing that person's perception of reality.
Now of course each of these states can also be associated with either a negative, positive
or neutral emotion.
For example the trip that one has with LSD or other hallucinogenic drugs can either be
incredibly elating or profoundly disturbing.
Quite literally these states can be described as either heaven or hell.
And schizophrenia again can have a lot of very bizarre relationships and can be associated
with negative, positive or neutral emotions.
For some people those hallucinations are terrifyingly frightening.
And for others they're fine and they're not so bad.
But now let's turn our attention to the knowing states that involve the perception of a unitary
reality.
A reality in which everything is regarded as a singular oneness.
When dealing with unitary reality of course we have to drop the categories of irregular
or irregular relationships.
It seems to defy the causal function of the brain.
There's only one thing there, there's only one object in this knowing state so to speak
that's everything.
So there's no relationships between lots of objects.
I also want to be clear that while there may be many other states that have a significant
feeling of unity and a significant feeling of oneness these are different from the state
in which the person experiences the totality of everything as being completely unified.
Now in the prior lecture when I talked about the unitary continuum we discussed these different
states.
So it's possible to have a variety of different spiritual states along this continuum that
ultimately doesn't attain the fullness of what I would refer to as an absolute unitary
state.
The absolute unitary state that I'm talking about now represents a state described in
many religious traditions as nirvana, absolute reality, the oneness of God, or absolute unitary
being.
In fact a very interesting person Charles Lindbergh actually appeared to describe a spontaneous
experience of this type of knowing state.
Of his solo trip across the Atlantic Lindbergh wrote, while I'm staring at the instruments
during an unearthly age of time, both conscious and asleep, there's no limit to my sight.
My skull is one great eye, seeing everywhere at once.
I'm not conscious of time's direction.
All sense of substance leaves.
There's no longer weight to my body, no longer hardness to the stick.
The feeling of flesh is gone.
I become independent of physical laws, of food, of shelter, of life.
I'm almost less tangible than air, universal as ether.
For 25 years it's been surrounded by solid walls of bone, not perceiving the limitless
expanse, the immortal existence that lies outside.
Death no longer seems the final end it used to be, but rather the entrance to a new and
free existence which includes all space, all time.
Isn't that an incredible statement?
And remember also that this kind of unitary experience has a lot to do with all the different
parts of the brain coming together as he interprets that experience.
That sense of oneness that's going on with regard to the parietal lobe, the emotions of
the limbic system.
All of these things are a part of this very intense experience that is a different state
of reality altogether.
Now of course this state does have a neurophysiological basis and therefore we can talk about how
all of these different changes in the brain relate to that particular kind of experience.
And theoretically the perception of a unitary reality in and of itself is not only perceived
from that unitary state but may actually have positive negative or even neutral emotions
associated with it.
For example the positive experience of absolute unity might be one in which the oneness is
perceived as having love and compassion.
Now this actually sounds a lot like the mystical descriptions of God.
God is an absolute oneness that is loving and compassionate.
If the emotions are neutral we might perceive the universe as just being.
In fact it might feel more like a nothingness than a oneness.
To my knowledge there's never been a report of anyone experiencing absolute unity with
a negative emotional perspective.
Maybe it's just that the experience of unity is so overwhelming that it can't be negative.
And it might be argued that if it is in fact a total unitary state then all of the emotions
as well should be unified.
Now while I'm not sure what that might feel like it may be a state that actually exists
and I have several examples from the respondents of our online survey who related both positive
and negative emotions as part of their intense mystical experiences.
They felt love and fear at the same time.
They felt terrified and calm at the same time.
Now when we talk about a knowing state that involves the perception of absolute oneness
we're clearly in the realm of the spiritual and maybe the mystical brain.
But beyond this we're also brought right up against the most important problem that we
have faced throughout this course.
Because more than any other knowing state this particular state challenges our very notion
of what is real.
And let me explain why.
The absolute unitary state has a very peculiar aspect to it.
If there is no perception of any particular objects there is no experience of the self.
It's a very strange and unusual primary knowing state indeed.
This also suggests that for the experiencer since they have no perception of the self
they have the perception of going beyond their own ego's thoughts and even going beyond
their own brain.
But such a notion seems very contrary to the position that we first started with.
The notion that the brain is what perceives our reality.
But these experiences go even one further.
I mentioned that whenever you are in one primary knowing state you perceive that state to represent
reality above all other states.
When you wake up from a dream the dream seems less real.
But this is not the case with the absolute unitary state.
When a person experiences this state not only do they perceive it to be real when they are
in it even when they are no longer in it the brain keeps telling them that that experience
represented the true reality.
In fact the experience is usually described as being more real than every other reality
experience we have.
It's not like the dream when a person wakes up from the unitary reality experience it's
not relegated to an inferior reality.
Now this is the case what are we to do with our brain our everyday reality around us and
even our science which is looking at that everyday reality.
We have this experience which seems to somehow supersede all other experiences of reality.
As a scientist what am I supposed to make of this?
Is there a way we could prove what is real?
Or if what we can know whether if we can know whether what's going on inside our brain correlates
with external reality so that we could tell if the unitary reality or the multiple discrete
object reality really represents the true reality.
What kind of study could we design what would it look like?
Think about it for some time.
If you ever figure it out let me know there are so many ways of thinking about such an
experience but I have never been able to figure it out completely.
I can't think of any experience in which for example we could somehow maybe observe the
human brain observing its own function and simultaneously be aware of its own thought
processes.
And even if we could with this lead to some kind of trailblazing insight about the seed
of human consciousness would those insights in turn be a crucial step along the path of
understanding what ultimate reality is?
Well perhaps.
But the fact of the matter is that science hasn't figured out how to do an experiment
like that.
So have we gotten to the point where we have limits to our knowledge?
Is there no way to push through this naughty problem of what reality is?
Well up to this point humanity seems to have taken one of two approaches.
On the one hand there's the scientific approach which typically tries to reduce reality to
measurable material quantities.
And on the other hand there's a spiritual approach which seems to culminate in this
mystical experience that is beyond the reach of science.
Perhaps however there's a third option.
Maybe our best shot at understanding reality indeed understanding ourselves.
And maybe this lies in taking an integrated approach to the problem.
An approach that allows the spiritual perspective to inform the scientific perspective and vice
versa.
Now it's my belief that such an integrated approach is possible and in my own research
I continue to think about how this might work.
Whether I'm right about that or not I don't know.
But we certainly have embarked on a new way of thinking about spirituality and the brain.
We have learned about the importance of keeping science rigorous, of developing good methods
and making sure that we keep religions religious and spiritual.
We have seen the importance of being analytical, skeptical but we've also been open minded
so that we can determine the many fascinating ways that religion and spirituality affect
human beings.
And in doing so I think we have achieved a richer understanding of the nature of all
of our different kinds of beliefs.
Now true in some areas we may have ended up with more questions than answers but to some
extent good science always leads us to new and better questions.
This paradox is echoed in the quote I offered a few lectures ago from the Sufi mystic Ibn
al-Arabi.
He said, God deposited within man knowledge of all things and then prevented him from
perceiving what he had deposited within him.
Or to look at the situation from a neuroscientific perspective as we have seen so often in these
24 lectures there are many limitations that are built into the human brain.
But rather than feeling despondent about this I actually find a great reason for optimism.
Recognizing limitations actually can make us more open to new ways of seeing and exploring
reality.
That's why I personally am so excited by the idea of integrating the perspectives of science
and religion.
Perhaps this would give us a new lens for looking at the world and whether you are religious
or not a scientist or not as human beings we are left with a passion for inquiry to
see if we can ask the right questions and somehow find the new paths that will lead
us toward the answers.
I hope you have enjoyed this course as much as I have enjoyed talking about these wonderful
topics.
Overall this course points to the fact that we have only begun this long and wondrous
journey towards understanding the spiritual brain.
We certainly have a very long way to go but with the information we have covered I hope
that all of you regardless of your brain's belief systems are motivated to continue in
your own personal endeavors to understand yourself and your universe always being open
to new data, new ideas and new possibilities.
And perhaps if each of us is steadfast in our own scientific and our own spiritual pursuits
we will collectively help humanity arrive at a new level of enlightenment.
