About six months ago, I was sat in my living room, in this living room, lost in the endless,
comforting embrace of tiktoks for you, Fiend.
I hadn't had the app very long at this point, and its algorithm was still trying to figure
me out.
It had tried immersing me in book talk videos, in clips of rich white guys crying on podcasts,
and in endless footage of Taylor Swift concerts.
Which that last one wasn't so bad.
But this particular afternoon, the algorithm decided that what I really needed to see was
a steady stream of AI context.
In fact, it must have been December 2022.
Because following the release of The Darling, Mid Journey and Stable Diffusion in the spring
and summer of that year, OpenAI had just unveiled its chat GPT tool, and it was lighting
up conversation across the internet.
Opinion was pretty split.
Some saw an innovation on the scale of the Gutenberg press, or Spinning Jenny.
Others questioned the ethics of training these tools on the work of artists and writers
who hadn't agreed to their ideas being used as training data.
While some fantasized about whole professions being made obsolete, others mocked Mid Journeys
their inability to draw hands, or chat GPT's tendency to just outright lie.
On tiktok, or at least my tiktok, however, there was little dissent.
Users were hyped, and there was a particular use case that they had in mind for these
tools.
There's an effortless way to use AI to make over $10,000 a month.
This may be the best way to make money with AI.
These three AI apps should be illegal, and if you use them correctly you can make a lot
of money.
That GPT doesn't really help you make money online, so here's four tools that will.
My first response was to very consciously try and swipe these videos away as quickly
as possible in an effort to teach tiktoks algorithm, but I wasn't actually all that
interested in using AI to write computer-generated posts for my slightly shady, keyword-stuffed,
affiliate-link-infested health boots blog.
This strategy had worked pretty well for stemming the flow of podcast clips after all.
But these over-enthusiastic financial freedom seekers had managed to plant something in
my brain.
Many days, weeks and months since, my online feeds have continued to be peppered with posts,
boasting about how these new AI tools can be used to make a quick buck.
Perhaps the weirdest part of this trend came when I opened up Notion, the task management
app that we use to keep track of our various projects.
When Notion began rolling out its Notion AI feature in February 2023, one feature jumped
out at me.
It was the option to highlight a piece of text and select Make Longer.
Now I've tried long and hard to think of a genuine, productive use case for such a function
and I just can't.
No piece of text, whether it be a novel, a news report or a corporate evaluation, has
ever been made better by being gratuitously padded out to increase the word count.
There's a reason that writers are instructed to kill your darlings, not force your darlings
to multiply until a single pithy sentence has become an unwieldly mass of adverbs and
adjectives.
Brevity is the soul of wit.
Long-windedness is the soul of online recipes which are trying to cram in as many keywords
for search engine optimization as possible before just telling you how to make the damn
lasagna.
Taken together, it was hard not to find all of this a bit depressing.
There are obviously plenty of ethical questions to be asked about how these AI tools are both
trained and implemented.
Nevertheless, one has to admit they're pretty impressive.
There may be plenty of flaws to be ironed out, but the fact that I can just ask chat
GPT to write a scene from a stage play in which Albert Einstein argues with Bugs Bunny
about who should get the kids after their divorce is pretty cool, right?
It was kind of depressing that.
That faced with this new technology with all kinds of possibilities for making people's
lines easier and better.
So much discursive space was being taken up by people for whom the real excitement lay
in how it could be used to further automate their low effort online grifts.
Since noticing this, I haven't been able to stop thinking about the extent to which we
increasingly seem to be surrounded by grifts.
I reckon a third of the ads that I get on YouTube are pictures for money making schemes
which sound a little too good to be believed.
There have been weeks when I've seen this woman more than members of my actual family.
Neither is a surprise anymore when a friend brings up dropshipping or foreign exchange
trading or some other questionable investments.
At the same time, there's been a big upswing in anti-grifter content.
Whether it's Mike Winnett or Dan Olson or Mooncat or Coffey Zilla, scambusting has become
its own genre.
We love to hear the juicy details of whatever scheme is currently fleecing the easily fooled.
Whether we're among those actually getting caught up in these schemes or whether we're
simply watching on voyeuristically from the sidelines then, grifts, grifters and grifting
seem to have taken over.
They are the zeitgeist.
And so, I want to explore how it is that these blow-rent, often cringe-inducing grifts gain
such a stranglehold over us.
We are going to look a little bit at how some of these schemes work but I'm mostly interested
in why.
What is it that's currently causing so many people to get caught out by the preponderance
of so-called passive income gurus and what is it that draws the rest of us in to watch?
Because while most of these schemes and the swindlers which promote them might initially
appear pretty small time and marginal, I think they're actually pretty revealing about the
world in which we live.
It's certainly the case that you can learn a lot about a historical moment from the heroes
it raises up.
The biographies of figures like Jeff Bezos, Elon Musk and Mark Zuckerberg certainly tell
us a great deal about the social and economic system which has produced them.
But one thing I've become convinced of during the four months or so that I've been working
on this project is that you can learn even more about an era through examining its grifts.
There's an effortless way to use AI to make over $10,000 a month.
How I make $1,000 a day selling on Etsy.
This is how I plan to make more money.
In order to contextualise the rise of the online grift, we first need to talk for a brief moment
about the NBC sitcom The Office, which will make sense shortly, I promise.
See The Office premiered in the spring of 2005, which in hindsight was an interesting time
to launch a show so explicitly focused on our relationship with work.
As some of you might remember, that relationship was about to change significantly.
But before we get to all of that, The Office.
The Office exists in a tradition of comedies inspired by situations which, in the hands
of a different writing team, might be framed as deeply tragic.
Viewed through the eyes of the show's audience surrogate, Jim, the strant and branch of Dunder
Mifflin, is a kind of hell.
It's not just that he's surrounded by some deeply strange colleagues, but that, on top
of this, the work itself is kind of dystopian.
When he's not getting involved in some classic comedy hijinks, Jim's job is to sell paper.
My job is to speak to clients on the phone about quantities and type of copier, paper,
whether we can supply it to them, whether they can pay for it, and I'm boring myself
just talking about this.
It's not that businesses don't need paper.
They do, and they have to buy it from somewhere, but paper is paper.
And Dunder Mifflin doesn't even manufacture the paper itself, they're just middlemen.
If Jim and Pam and Michael and Dwight were to vanish from the face of the earth, their
customers would barely even notice.
They'd find a new supplier within minutes, and the world would keep on turning.
Which, if you're Jim, has to be kind of depressing.
This kind of anxiety, that one might find oneself trapped in an unfulfilling and maybe
even objectively pointless white collar job, was pretty widespread in the mid to late 2000s.
It was best summed up a few years later by the anthropologist David Graber in an article
titled On the Phenomenon of Bullshit Jobs.
Graber wrote that it's as if someone were out there making up pointless jobs just for
the sake of keeping us all working.
Like Jim Halpert, many white collar workers viewed their stable, reasonably well compensated
office jobs through the same lens that others would view a life sentence.
It's against this backdrop, that in 2007 the businessman, blogger and future podcaster
Tim Ferriss released this book, The 4-Hour Workweek.
The 4-Hour Workweek didn't invent the online grift, whole cloth.
As Ferriss acknowledges, the book is essentially a collection of money-making tips which had
already been floating around in the so-called bloggers thing.
But it was instrumental in bringing mainstream attention to a new set of approaches to using
the internet to get filthy rich, or at least trying to.
The 4-Hour Workweek is pitched as a method for escaping the 9-5.
And in this way, it responds to many of the same cultural anxieties about work as the office.
In Tim Ferriss's eyes, there are few fates worse than being a quote, three-piece zombie,
or a high-paid coffee fetcher.
In fact, as Ferriss sees it, it's not just bureaucratic white collar work which sucks.
He writes that, for most people, somewhere between 6 and 7 billion of them, the perfect
job is the one that takes the least time.
The vast majority of people will never find a job that can be an unending source of fulfillment.
Luckily, Ferriss has a way out of this hellscape of cubicles and coffee machines.
Tim Ferriss's promise in the 4-Hour Workweek is, as the title would suggest, that he can
help you whittle your working week down from the usual 40 hours to just four.
At the same time, he suggests he can help you increase your income from, well, whatever
it is now, to $40,000 plus per month.
Or maybe $60,000 per month, or maybe $5,000 an hour.
The exact figures seem to change from chapter to chapter, but the point is that you're
going to be rich.
What's his plan for achieving this goal?
Well, I don't think it would be doing the book justice if I didn't summarize things
with the appropriate level of brunardo and obnoxiousness.
So without further ado, let me explain.
Hi, my name's Tom Nicholas, writer, video creator, entrepreneur, welcome to my no-nonsense
guide to Tim Ferriss's guide to escaping the nine to five.
Derpy is free!
Step one.
Number one.
Let's kick things off by boosting your productivity.
See, Tim Ferriss reckons that a solid 50 to 80% of your daily tasks are a complete waste
of time.
That's almost unbelievable, right?
Well, his solution is simple.
Just don't do them.
Unurgent emails from colleagues?
Don't answer them.
Clients with small orders?
No, thank you.
Disciplinary meetings about your dismissive attitude?
No messiah!
Congratulations!
You just freed up at least half your time.
And it was as simple as just not doing stuff.
Step two.
Next up, you're going to convince your boss to let you work from home.
This is probably going to be a whole bunch easier since the old rona swept through town,
am I right?
That's true.
But our goal in working from home isn't just to avoid novel zoonotic diseases.
No, no, no.
You're going to leverage your newfound productivity to finish your day job in half the time it
used to take.
And guess what?
We're going to use the rest of that time to embark on some new money-making ventures.
Inclayable!
Sure, the HR department might call this something boring like gross misconduct or a breach of
your contract.
But Tim Ferriss prefers to call it liberation, which just sounds so much cooler.
Step three.
Three, three, three, three.
It's time to start your very own business.
But not just any business.
We're going to focus in on creating a niche, product-based, direct-to-consumer sales business.
Think Casper mattresses, or all birds, or the human fuel, the niche of the better.
How about a range of pasta sauces marketed specifically at dog walks, or letter boxes
just for snowboarders?
Actually, not those.
Those were pretty good, actually.
All you've got to do is set up a website to sell your new product, place a few ads
on Google and in niche, hobbyist magazines, and wait for the sales to come rolling in.
Which they definitely will, because you're a bloody legend to whom only good things happen.
Step four.
Four.
Now get this for a stroke of genius.
With a few neat tricks, you're going to completely automate your new business, transforming it
into a magical, money-making machine.
So magnifique, you're going to use a specialist manufacturer who's able to make each order
on demand and ship it direct to your customers.
And when it comes to those mind-numbing admin tasks, boring, you're going to hire a bunch
of cheap virtual assistants in the global south.
Which is, uh, all fine, and there is no ethical questions to be asked about at all.
Please don't ask any ethical questions.
Assuming nothing goes wrong, which, why would it?
You've now got yourself a completely automated business which only takes minimal levels of
effort to maintain.
Voila.
Step five.
One, two, three, four, five.
Congratulations.
You're now a super successful businessman.
Or like, a per-person, I guess.
It's time to wave goodbye to that boring old day job.
Au revoir.
Oh, and now you're going to move to Asia.
Why you ask?
Well, yeah, this bit might seem a little random, but look, even if you follow the four-hour
workweek plan down to the letter, your business is only going to rake in a measly $480,000
a year.
Or if we adjust for inflation since the book was published, a poultry, uh, $877,000 a
year.
Which, what are you, some kind of street urchin?
You deserve the Rockstar lifestyle, my friend.
And that means moving to a low-income country where favorable exchange rates will allow
you to live like a king.
Although Ferris actually suggests that we should avoid, uh, all countries in Africa,
the Middle East, or Central and South America, except in Costa Rica and Argentina.
So I guess you better start learning Thai.
If you manage to conquer these five steps, and the many dozens of sub-steps, then congratulations.
You are now a member of the New Rich.
Do you want the beach?
Because the beers are on you.
How about the losante?
As you've probably already gathered, Tim Ferris' tendency is to present his money-making
model as entirely foolproof.
There's little acknowledgement anywhere within the book that any part of his multi-stage
plan could ever go wrong.
Even if it does, he has a pretty blasé attitude to the potential consequences.
In the section where he encourages readers to negotiate a remote working contract with
their employer, he writes that,
If you jump ship or get fired, it isn't hard to eliminate most expenses temporarily
and live on savings for a brief period.
From renting out your home to refinancing or selling it, there are options.
There are always options.
At which point I have to remind you that this book was published in 2007.
Let's talk about the speed with which we are watching this market deteriorate.
As with any business, there are, of course, all kinds of ways in which this plan might
fail.
But the biggest gap in Ferris' scheme is also the most important thing for a product-based
business to get right.
See, Ferris has the tendency to get lost in the weeds of some fairly unimportant parts
of his plan, which, you know, I can relate.
This is a book which goes into minute detail about how and when you should check your emails.
It gives you scripted suggestions for how to convince your boss to let you work from
home.
It even finds space for a series of confidence-building challenges, one of which involves randomly
lying face down in the middle of the street to, I don't know, learn how to assert dominance
or something.
But for a book which presents itself as an all-encompassing method for leveraging a
product-based business to get filthy rich, there is precious little advice on how to
conceive of the product itself.
The few ideas Ferris does suggest are absolutely terrible.
One is that you license an already existing product and put your own label on it, similar
to what supermarkets do with own brand cereal.
But this not only means entering a market which probably has a considerable amount of
competition, it likely also means sacrificing a huge chunk of your potential profit to the
licensor.
Ferris's other suggestion is that you write a book.
But don't worry if you don't really have any useful knowledge to share with the world,
you can always quote, create the content yourself, often via paraphrasing and combining points
from several books on a topic.
Or if that seems too hard for you, you can simply repurpose content that is in the public
domain and not subject to copyright protection.
So essentially selling PDFs of Moby-Tick.
In summary, the four-hour workweek might be, as its blurb suggests, a step-by-step guide
to living the life of your dreams.
But given that the most important step is to simply, you know, found hello fresh, none
of it's particularly achievable.
At risk of sounding like a McKinsey consultant or something, if you want to make nearly $900,000
a year in profit, having a half-decent product is probably kind of important.
This all might seem like a terrible oversight.
But to Tim Ferriss, not caring about the product you're selling is kind of the point.
In probably the worst paragraph of a deeply terrible book, Tim Ferriss asks, can a business
be used to change the world, like the Body Shop or Patagonia?
Yes, but that isn't our goal here.
Our goal is simple, to create an automated vehicle for generating cash without consuming
time.
That's it.
And this is the legacy of the four-hour workweek.
Reading the book in 2023, it was interesting to note how many different online subcultures
Ferriss inspired.
Every productivity guru you see on YouTube, every minimalism evangelist, every van life
lover or digital nomad owes at least something to Tim Ferriss.
It's this idea that one can build a completely hands-off, automated business that simply
deposits cash into your bank account at the end of the month that has had the most impact.
It would be entirely fair to describe Ferriss' plan as a get-rich-quick scheme, but it would
be more accurate to describe it as a get-rich-easy scheme.
The emphasis is far less on the speed with which this model will guide you to wealth
than it is on the lack of effort you'll have to put in.
If Ferriss refers to this as developing income autopilot or management-free money, the phrase
that's really taken off, however, is passive income.
In the 15 years since Ferriss released the four-hour workweek, the dream of building
so-called passive income streams is one which has spread far and wide.
For those who seek what enthusiasts call financial freedom, there are a whole range of different
schemes available and thousands upon thousands of self-appointed gurus willing to teach you
how.
Before we take a look at how some of these schemes function, however, we first need to
acknowledge the event.
On the 15th of September 2008, the New York-based investment bank Lehman Brothers filed for
bankruptcy.
After 150 years of continuous operation, a series of high-risk gambles in the subprime
mortgage market had failed spectacularly and left it fatally short of cash.
With several other major global banks experiencing similar crises during the course of that year,
things looked bleak.
The complete collapse of the global financial system was only held off through unprecedented
government action, with the US, the UK and the European Union effectively nationalising
huge chunks of their banking sectors.
Having that now-infamous footage of Lehman Brothers employees being unceremoniously deposed
from their towering glass palace in Times Square, it might initially have been tempting
to revel in the Schadenfreude.
Investment bankers don't exactly tend to attract much sympathy.
Nevertheless, as the global economy plunged into recession, job losses and layoffs became
a reality across industries and sectors.
According to the International Monetary Fund, the financial crisis pushed around 30 million
people out of their jobs.
The unemployment rate in the US peaked at 10%.
And while the recession itself was officially declared over in the US in June 2009, it took
until 2017 for unemployment rates to dip back to pre-crash levels.
As important as the sheer number of jobs, however, is how the crash affected the types
of jobs on offer?
If we stay focused on America for a moment, we find that around 60% of jobs lost during
the Great Recession were mid-wage positions, paying between $13 and $22 an hour.
These were real estate agents, office managers and higher skilled tradespeople.
When firms started hiring again, the majority of new posts on offer were both less well
remunerated and less secure.
These were jobs in retail, catering and care.
There was a whole universe of work which kind of just didn't exist anymore.
For many, even having a job was no longer enough.
With real-term wages falling year on year, some took on additional work in the burgeoning
gig economy.
Others put their skills to work by embarking on so-called side hustles.
But these dire economic circumstances also opened the door to the further popularization
of the online grift.
Some clarification might be useful here because we tend to use the terms grift and grifter
pretty loosely.
Some use them to describe full-on fraudsters such as Bernie Madoff and Sam Bankman Freed.
Others throw the term at contrarian and conspiracist political commentators who seem to court controversy
in order to shift dubious brain pills and mugs.
None of these are wrong, obviously, but I'm not the word police.
But for today's purposes, I'm interested in a particular kind of grift because blowhards
and con artists are fairly eternal.
The difference between 19th century snake oil salesman Clark Stanley and Ferenos CEO
Elizabeth Holmes is primarily one of aesthetics.
In popularizing the idea that it might be possible to create an almost completely automated
source of income, Tim Ferriss planted the seed for a new kind of grift, which was much
more of our time.
The four hour work week itself hasn't aged particularly well.
And I don't mean it's deeply sexist or anything, although there's some bits.
Ask for the phone numbers of at least two attractive members of the opposite sex on
each day.
Girls, this means you're in the game as well.
And it doesn't matter if you're over 50.
With its strong emphasis on telephone sales and earnest recommendations of tools like
Skype, it's just clearly written for a different era.
Luckily for those seeking to make their fortune, however, countless new schemes have popped
up in its wake, which similarly promised to set you up with a reliable source of passive
income.
And again, I don't think I'd really be doing them justice if I didn't introduce
them with the appropriate level of enthusiasm.
Wahaa!
Guess who's back?
The name's Tom Nicholas.
T to the N to the I.
Righta.
Video creator.
Verified hustler.
A little birdie tells me that you've been looking for more ways to make money online.
And boy, oh boy, do I have some ideas for you.
In this, my non-exhaustive list of online grits.
Money making opportunities.
Strategy one.
Drop shipping.
Drop, drop.
Drop shipping is the classic passive income stream.
It allows you to sell real, physical products to real, physical customers without any of
the hassle of ordering or storing or shipping those products yourself.
Ooh la la!
Here's how it works.
Step one.
Get yourself over to a budget online marketplace like AliExpress.
Have a little scroll around and find yourself a red hot product.
Then you reckon we'll just fly out the window given half the chance.
I've got my eye on this cute little duck necklace.
It's fun.
It's cute.
It also happens to only be 49p.
Step two.
Next up, you're going to want to create an online store showcasing this super and super
cheap bit of produce.
You want to crack out all the persuasive writing and design skills you can muster to make your
product irresistible.
I simply can't resist.
Write about how ducks are symbolic of like, love and spiritual evolution and like eggs
and stuff.
Eggs.
Step three.
This is where the fun begins.
See, you don't want the risk of having to buy and store a bunch of these cheap, I mean
unique necklaces.
Nor do you want to have to deal with shipping them to the plebs who buy them.
So you're going to set things up on the back end so that when anyone purchases anything
from your website, it simply forwards their order on to AliExpress who will take care
of all that nonsense for you.
Cheers Ali, you're my best friend.
Be sure to charge a handsome markup for all this hard work.
That thing we could call this 20 quid, don't you?
I certainly do Tom.
I certainly do.
Strategy two.
Affiliate marketing.
This one's another classic online money making model and all it requires is that you have
the ability to spit out paragraphs and paragraphs of sh- engaging pros.
Step one.
Create a blog.
You're on this blog to focus on reviewing and otherwise discussing products, preferably
medium to high ticket items such as barbecues, gas powered barbecues.
Because who doesn't love a good grill session, am I right?
Make sure to write all of your posts with search engine optimization in mind.
We're talking how-to articles.
We're talking listicles.
We're talking product comparisons.
Sign up to an affiliate marketing program.
An affiliate marketing program is a scheme in which an online store will give you a set
of custom links to products on their site.
If anyone purchases a product after following your link, then you'll get a sweet little kickback
of sometimes up to 20%.
Personally, I choose to become an affiliate of the world's biggest retailer.
Amazon.
Cheers Jeff, nice stuff.
Litter your blog with those magical affiliate links.
Any mention of a product should be a link.
Any picture of a product, also an affiliate link.
Keep going until as many words as possible are that beautiful hyperlink blue.
Drive those conversions you bloody legend.
Now all you gotta do is sit back and wait for some loser to stumble upon your blog,
click through to Amazon and buy one of these things and you can stop,
drop and start rolling in those flame grilled millions.
Strategy three.
Retail arbitrage.
Arbitrage.
Despite its fancy pants name, this one's so simple that even I understand it.
Yes!
Although unfortunately it is going to involve going outside.
Boo!
Step one, roll on down to your local out of town shopping centre or discount store.
Get your little peepers out and browse the aisles for any products which are on sale
or which look like they might be a little underpriced.
This was down to just 150 quid.
Step two, once you've got a little dealio in your sights,
you're going to want to pull out your phone and download the Amazon seller app.
You can use this app to scan the barcode of the product in front of you and in return,
it'll tell you how much that item is currently selling for on Amazon.
If the Amazon price is higher than the store price then congratulations.
Looks like you've managed to find yourself a cheeky bit of profit my friend.
I'm so proud of you.
Get loading up that trolley with as many units as it will handle.
I've got 28 of these things in my living room.
Step three, sign up as an Amazon seller and register for their fulfilled by Amazon service.
This lets you send your haul to Amazon who will store it for you and then ship it to whoever buys it.
And all for just a tiny fee.
Thanks again, Jeff.
Strategy fine.
If all else fails, why not become an expert?
What are those scare quotes doing there?
Can we get rid of those please?
The internet thrives on content.
The more words that are spaffed into this thing, the better.
And there is sweet, sweet money to be made in being a content spaffer.
Step one, pick yourself a topic to be an expert in.
Hmm. Try and think of something that people aren't just interested in but desperate to know about.
How to be productive.
How to be YouTube famous.
How to get rich.
How to get laid.
So cool.
Step two, if you already know how to get laid or whatever then you are good to go.
But if maybe you do it don't then that doesn't matter either.
Tap up your old friend, Professor Google.
Read a few blogs, watch a few videos and congratulations.
You've just got yourself a PhD from the University of Internet.
Step three, it's time to start cooking up some content.
Blocks, YouTube videos, obnoxious Twitter threads, non-exhaustive lists.
It's all good.
And if you ever get a little stuck just have a look at some high-performing posts by other experts
and plagiarise, I mean paraphrase, those.
Step four, once you've managed to lure in some underconfident teenagers,
I mean dedicated readers, now's the time to start earning some money.
Yes, I love it.
I'm talking ads on your posts.
I'm talking ebooks.
I'm talking courses.
I'm talking rephrasing all the stuff that's available for free on all your platforms
but for an upfront fee.
Fantastica.
Okay, I think that's quite enough of that.
My senses hurt.
This is but a tiny, tiny taste of the plethora of passive income schemes
which have emerged over the past decade.
As you can see, they vary pretty wildly in their approach.
Perhaps my favourite suggestion involves investing in vending machines.
You know, as if they don't cost a bunch of money and break pretty easily.
It's also funny how some of these schemes seem to just come full circle to just
inventing a normal business again.
Nevertheless, these schemes all share the same goal.
Like Ferris' formula in the four-hour work week,
they promise a path to generating a consistent income
and usually a pretty high income in return for minimal levels of effort.
Again, these are get-rich-quick schemes
but the real emphasis is on getting rich easily.
Many of these schemes exist in a kind of legal and ethical grey area.
They seem to tacitly encourage some pretty shady practices
in a way that more traditional business models just don't.
Affiliate marketers will clearly benefit from
forgetting to disclose their use of paid referral links.
A wannabe dropshipper browsing Aliexpress for products
will quickly find themselves tempted by unlicensed or counterfeit goods.
Nevertheless, breaking the law is seldom a requirement of any of these schemes.
They pretty much all can be employed in ways that are completely legit
and most of the gurus who provide advice on them
benefit from existing in this strange area of plausible deniability.
What's really interesting though is that even when they are carried out in entirely legal ways,
they still feel kind of icky.
As much as these are technically businesses like any other,
most of us would act pretty differently to a friend announcing that they were about to start
reselling air fryers on Amazon than we would if they said they were going to
start a ballet school or window cleaning company or something.
They just feel...off.
And it's this sense of ickiness which holds the key to understanding
not only why these schemes have become popular,
but why these particular schemes have become popular at this particular moment in time.
Because when we dive into these bad vibes, we actually begin to find some pretty solid links
between these low rent grifts and some much more mainstream trends within our economy.
In Chapter 5 of the 4 hour work week, Tim Ferriss introduces a concept known as the
Pareto principle. As he explains it, this is the idea that 80% of the results of a given project
or activity come from 20% of the effort and time that's put into it.
This sometimes gets called the 80-20 rule.
Largely thanks to Ferriss, the Pareto principle has become something of an
unacknowledged cliche among time management nerds.
If you scroll through the back catalogue of any wannabe productivity guru on YouTube,
you're bound to find at least one video about it in there somewhere.
Perhaps unsurprisingly, most of these gurus actually have a pretty shaky understanding
of the principle itself. As Ferriss does in the 4 hour work week, they tend to assume that it means
you can simply identify which 20% of your daily tasks lead to 80% of your desired outcomes and
then kind of bin off everything else. This however is wishful thinking.
Firstly, assuming there is some truth to this idea, it's often only possible to identify
which of your tasks constitute that vital 20% after a project is completed.
For example, I wrote several drafts of the script to this video before I got it to a place where
I was happy with it. I reckon that at least 80% of my time was technically wasted writing words
which ultimately got binned or tweaked in some way. But I didn't write those earlier drafts
knowing that they were going to be thrown out. It's only in hindsight that I can tell you
which sections made the final cut. In fact, who's to say that this section will?
I mean, it has. I'm filming it.
Secondly, just because a task isn't directly related to your core outcomes,
doesn't necessarily mean that you can simply not do it.
Every month or so I have to sit down in front of some accounting software
and categorise all the money that we've spent on costume and props and filming kit and wages and
blender assets and software and subscriptions etc etc. This task certainly isn't one of the
20% of tasks which leads to my videos getting more views or more people signing up to support
the channel on Patreon at patreon.com forward slash Tom Nicholas. Always be hustling.
Nevertheless, having all my receipts and stuff together so that I can submit my taxes at the
end of the year does keep me out of prison. Which is, you know, nice.
The Pareto principle then can certainly be a useful evaluation tool or thought experiment.
It can almost certainly help you be a bit more efficient with your time.
But it's not some all-powerful life hack which is going to upset you on the path to working
just four hours a week. I'm not only bringing this up as another excuse to dunk on Tim Ferriss,
although the sheer silliness of this book has infested my brain. I mention it instead because
the Pareto principle is named after this guy, the 19th century economist and polymath,
Vilfredo Pareto. And it's not the only concept which borrows his name. There's another idea
named for Pareto which I think offers a really useful way into unpacking why passive income
schemes are so appealing to those who attempt them and why they can feel so icky to the rest of us.
It's called Paretean Rent. Now, I'm aware that the phrase Paretean Rent sounds pretty technical
and I'll be honest with you, we are about to do a little bit of learning.
But to keep things interesting, I thought I'd borrow a trick from the Big Short
and hand over to Margot Robbie in a bathtub to explain.
You your Margot?
What do you mean you can't make it? You've got this in a diary for ages.
I've already run the bath.
Look, I'm about as happy about this as you are. So, Paretean Rent. Most of you are probably
already far too familiar with the concept of rent as we use it in everyday conversation.
You've likely handed over huge sums of money in rent payments to landlords over the course of
your life. And unless you've got a thing for being financially dominated, which to each their own,
you've probably come to resent those payments. In fact, there's something about paying rent,
which seems to hurt so much more than other essential outgoings. Over the past three years,
prices have been increasing on pretty much everything from food to electronics to fuel.
And yet, I rarely see memes comparing grocery store owners or smartphone manufacturers to leeches.
Landlords and the rent which they take attract a special kind of hatred. Of course, part of this
is that rent is expensive and only getting more so. The average private renter in the UK
spends 26% of their income on rents. In London, that figure is 40%.
Those figures are from before inflation went through the roof too, so they're probably a
little bit generous. Nevertheless, I don't think that the widespread hatred of landlords
is just down to rent being expensive. I think it's more than that. Because paying rent doesn't
only involve parting with more money than you'd like. It involves parting with more money than
you'd like to someone who doesn't seem to have done all that much to earn it. Food and phone bills
and fuel might all be more expensive than they could or should be. But at least when you're
tucking into a bowl of Weetabix crispy minis, you know that some work has gone into making them exist.
Someone had to grow the wheat and the cocoa and perform whatever magic happens in the factory
to process them into those beautiful little packs of chocolatey goodness.
When you watch the rent leave your bank account, however, it's hard to escape the feeling that
your landlord has done very, very little to earn that cash. If they've hired a letting agent to
oversee the property, there might be months when they completely forget that they own your property
at all. What might surprise you is that economists also hate rent. They might use the term in reference
to a much broader set of financial exchanges than the rest of us are used to, but it's always with
the same sense of contempt. When an economist uses the phrase economic rent or describes a person or
company as being engaged in rent seeking behavior, that is proper claws out stuff.
And the reason that economists dislike rent is for much the same reason as tenants do.
There are a handful of ways of defining economic rent, but the broadest is what's sometimes
known as perettian rent. The Penguin Dictionary of Economics describes this as
the difference between the return made by a factor of production and the return necessary to keep
the factor in its current occupation. But in slightly simpler language, it essentially refers
to excess profit or maybe more specifically unearned profit. To say that a company or a person
is in receipt of an economic rent is to say that they are receiving a level of income from a particular
economic activity which is in excess of that which is reasonable in relation to the time
and effort and resource they are putting in. Now I'm sure there's more than one person who is
currently watching this video who is cracking their knuckles and preparing to write something
along the lines of all profit is unearned, you absolute drongo. That would have sounded better
if Margo had been here to say it. She's Australian. And yes, this is broadly true. By its very
definition, making a profit involves getting more out of an economic activity than you put in. But
within the justifying logic of capitalism, some profit is viewed as necessary to motivate people
to do stuff, to start businesses, develop new products and improve upon existing ones.
From this perspective, that profit is earned by someone being willing to take the risk of that
business or product falling flat on its face. The point at which a profit margin turns into an
economic rent then is the point at which it begins to exceed the amount necessary to provide
that motivation. Say for example, I could sell these cute little duck necklaces for £10 and
in doing so would make enough profit that I would remain motivated to continue selling more.
If I were then to begin selling those necklaces for £20, I would be claiming an economic rent of
£10 on each necklace sold. Now if most of us wanted to criticise someone for charging an excess
profit, we'd probably do so on the basis of it feeling a little exploitative towards the customer.
And we'll come back to this idea in a moment. But the real beef that many economists have with
economic rents is that they're unproductive. Again, within the justifying logic of capitalism,
a quote unquote normal level of profit is productive. It promotes someone to create or sell
a product or service they otherwise might not have and therefore it has consequences for both
the economy and society. Because of that normal profit margin, a thing now exists which previously
didn't. An economic rent however has no such impact. The product or service would have been
made or performed anyway. A person or company which is in receipt of an economic rent then
is essentially getting money for nothing. Landlords are the ultimate example of this.
See, we often overlook the fact that most landlords are actually engaged in two separate
economic activities. The first is real estate speculation. They've bought a house or a flat
in the hope that it will increase in value over time and that they'll later be able to sell it on
at a profit. Outside of cases in which the landlord undertakes a major renovation,
this kind of speculation might itself be viewed as a kind of rent seeking.
This is an entirely unproductive activity. Neither the economy nor society benefits from
some boomer uncle hoarding a house for a decade. Nevertheless, the presence of economic rent is
even clearer when we look at the second activity that landlords are involved in. That of course is
the letting out of their property. The rent that a landlord receives in return for allowing a tenant
to live in their property is very clearly unproductive because this rent is not a reward for doing
anything at all. It is simply a reward for owning something. Even when a landlord can be persuaded
to do maintenance on a property to fix a leaky pipe or whatever, this isn't really a service
performed in return for your rent check. If they're repairing something that you broke, then you can
bet they're going to charge you for it. If the problem they're fixing is the result of wear and
tear, then they're really just making that repair for their own benefit, ensuring that their property
will retain its value as a speculative asset. I guess if we're being really, really generous,
we could acknowledge that landlords in some countries are required to ensure that certain
gas and electrical safety tests are up to date. And I guess that's a kind of service they're
providing. Outside of this, however, the rent that you pay to a landlord is just that economic rent.
Nothing about the process of one person owning a house and charging someone else to live in it
is economically or socially productive. Landlords do not create anything new and
many resources that they expend in maintenance are in relation to their speculative activity,
not in relation to their rental activity. Landlords are quite literally extracting
a bunch of money whilst contributing nothing in return. If we wanted to find a more friendly
phrase to replace the slightly formal sounding economic rent, then passive income wouldn't
actually be a bad shout. But that's enough from me, Margot Robbie. To help apply some of these
ideas to online grifts, I'd better pass you back to Tom. Really looking forward to filming that bit,
I think that's going to be fun, you know, to work well with a real actor for a change.
Okay, so it would be a stretch to classify all passive income schemes as pure rent-seeking
operations. Because outside of actually becoming a landlord, which does appear fairly frequently
on lists of recommended ventures, a lot of these schemes have the potential to sometimes
be at least mildly economically productive. If we wanted to be super duper generous, we could
view setting up a dropshipping store as a kind of marketing or branding. By placing a product in a
slightly more appealing context than the horror show that is Ali Express, a dropshipper potentially
facilitates a sale which otherwise wouldn't have taken place. Even something as instinctively
silly as buying a product in a shop to resell them on Amazon can be viewed as a productive process
of reallocating resources from somewhere that they're in low demand and thus on sale to somewhere
that they're in higher demand. The problem is that the tiny percentage of dropshippers or
arbitrageurs, which is a real word, who are having these kinds of meaningful impacts,
are almost certainly putting in a huge amount of time and effort. They're continuously refining
product descriptions or doing deep analysis on Amazon trends. And isn't the whole point of a
passive income scheme meant to be that it's...well...passive? A lot of passive income gurus like to
have it both ways. When either their critics or aggrieved followers question why so few people
actually end up getting rich through these methods, they'll claim that passive income
is really just a branding term. And that if you're not getting rich, it's because you're not working
hard enough. Take this guy, Mark Tilbury, a finance guru from the UK who's closing in on
two million subscribers on YouTube. In 2020, he posted a video in which he leveled with his audience
and explained that making a success of any of these passive income business models will likely
require a lot of hard work and discipline. But ease is central to the way that these same gurus
pitch their strategies to new recruits. The pinned video on Mark Tilbury's channel at
time of recording this segment opens with this lie. The biggest lie young people are told when
they're 18, 19 and 20, is money doesn't grow on trees. However much effort it takes to actually
make a success of one of these passive income schemes and whatever impact they might accidentally
end up having on the wider economy, the goal is absolutely one of rent seeking. The explicit aim
of this community is to find sneaky ways of extracting profit whilst avoiding any involvement
in any meaningful real productive activity. The ickiness which many people feel towards these
gurus and their followers then comes from the same place as that which feeds the current backlash
against landlords. On the most basic level, it's a hostility towards people whose sole goal in life
is to find loopholes which allow them to get rich whilst giving as little back to society as possible
in return. But more than this, it's an anger at people whose path to wealth often involves
actively making our economy and society less efficient and thus less pleasant places to live.
Like landlords, passive income seekers can only thrive by creating unnecessary bloat in the
online economy. Dropshippers and arbitrages have the effect of inflating the cost of goods and
services. Affiliate marketers and fake experts create a slightly different kind of bloat in which
the internet gets flooded with fake reviews and soulless filler content which make the web a
worse place to be. Of course this drive to get rich easy no matter what effect it has on others
is in some ways eternal. It's the same motivation which leads people to gamble,
to buy stocks or to join multi-level marketing schemes. Nevertheless, I think there's something
about this current wave of passive income business model which is a bit more specific to the present
day. And as my various allusions to landlordism and economic rent throughout this section perhaps
hint, it lies in the way that these seemingly marginal online grifts mirror powerful trends
which run to the very heart of our economy. Special delivery. It's more ideas, delicious
nutritious ideas. There's probably a much lazier version of this video which ends with me sagely
pontificating that the attempts of passive income seekers to make bank from very little work
mirrors the way in which capitalists worldwide live off their investments whilst everyone else
is forced to work for a living. And that isn't untrue. But the rise of passive income culture
actually mimics a much more specific trend in the corporate world. We've already acknowledged one
way in which the global financial crisis of 2008 contributed to the rise of the passive income
movement. It's really no surprise that the decade and a half of stagnant wages which followed the
crash created an eager audience for gurus trying to sell easy answers. But truly understanding
why these particular schemes have become popular at this particular moment in time necessitates
reviewing those same events from a slightly different perspective. That's of the lucky
entrepreneurs who were able to use the crisis to make their billions. See, just under a year prior
to the collapse of Lehman Brothers, a pair of flatmates in San Francisco registered the domain
airbedandbreakfast.com. The corporate legend is that their landlord had raised their rent and
in need of some extra cash they decided to set up some airbeds in their loft and let them out to
people attending business conferences in the city. The venture was a success and over the next few
years founders Brian Chetsky and Joe Gebbia gradually began to invite more and more people
to list rooms on their sites. In an era of economic downturn the website, quickly renamed Airbnb,
seemed like a pretty good deal for both guests and hosts. The former were able to travel for cheaper
whilst the latter were able to earn an extra bit of cash. In those petty early days journalists
began to write pretty warmly of what they called the sharing economy. This ban of not only encompassed
Airbnb but a plethora of other websites and apps launched in the years surrounding the financial
crisis. Tarsgrabbit, Fiverr, Just Park, Lending Club, Kickstarter, Postmates, Uber, Deliveroo.
Across their various different industries commentators celebrated the way in which these sites
seemed to facilitate a direct so-called peer-to-peer exchange between individuals in need of a service
and those with the capacity to provide it. There were two problems with this view though.
The first was that whilst these services often pitched themselves as ways for private individuals
to make an extra bit of cash on the side, most quickly became professionalised. Airbnb soon
became dominated by full-time landlords. UberDriver became a job like any other. The collaborative
mirage of the sharing economy faded away and left in its place the backbreaking realities of the gig
economy. The second problem was that the connections forged between Airbnb hosts and their guests and
Uber drivers and riders weren't really peer-to-peer because the websites and apps which made these
exchanges possible were not passive facilitators. They were private companies, often up to their
eyeballs in venture capital money and in pursuit of ways to turn their sudden popularity into profit.
To some, the new business model represented by these companies might have looked a little odd.
In 2015, Tom Goodwin wrote an article for TechCrunch in which he observed that Uber,
the world's largest taxi company, owns no vehicles. Facebook, the world's most popular
media owner, creates no content. Alibaba, the most valuable retailer, has no inventory and Airbnb,
the world's largest accommodation provider, owns no real estate. That these companies had become so
successful seemed to turn some of the most fundamental principles of capitalism on its head.
You see, in theory, the thing which elevates a company within capitalism is its ownership and
control over the means of production, by which we usually mean the physical assets and machinery
which allow a particular industry to function. But this new breed of company didn't seem all
that interested in owning the tools of their trade. Uber was quite happy for drivers to own
their own vehicles. Fiverr never felt the need to force copywriters or artists working through the
site to use Fiverr-owned laptops. In fact, these companies didn't seem to thrive in spite of their
lack of physical assets, but because of it. But I guess if we're going to introduce a new business
model, we better do it with the appropriate level of panache. Boom, boom, boom! It's your boy, Tom
Nicholas, writer, video creator, titan of industry. I'm here with another money-making scheme to
fatten up those wallets. Sure, I've got my wallet here, but I'm going to warn you.
This one's for the big-time ballers only. I call it the platform. The platform comes in
all shapes and sizes. Shops, networking, video streaming. You name it, there's a platform for
it. And if you play your cards right, running the platform can be a great way to make a shed
load of money whilst leaving the hard work to some other sucker. Sorry, suckers. Step one,
one. Have a gander for an industry that's a little too confusing or expensive for your
average consumer. Maybe it's yet to embrace the full potential of communications technology,
or maybe it's plagued by nuisances such as competition and workers' rights.
I'm talking taxis. I'm talking selling handmade crafts. I'm talking music, audiobooks, online
video sharing. Step two, two. Build yourself an app which brings some order to this chaos.
Trust me, you'll be fine. Most large children can build apps these days. Focus on making your
product as flash and trendy as possible. These ain't your grandad's hotels or taxis or TV shows.
These are hotels and taxis and TV shows for the internet generation.
Step three, three. Sign up users who want to make some extra cash through your app.
Present it as the ultimate side hustle opportunity. This isn't work. This is the sharing economy,
baby. The trick is to make sure that all the real work is gonna fall on your users.
In using their own cars and properties and filmmaking gear, they're also gonna take the
brunt of the risk too. Well, all you have to do is maintain a silly little app. Step four,
solicit some big time venture capital investment. This is gonna give you the ability to subsidize
the cost of products or services through your app. Sure, for a little while, you're gonna be
burning through cash, but it's all part of the master plan. Because by undercutting everyone else
on the market, you're gonna make yourself irresistible to potential customers and ensure
anyone who wants to make money in your industry just has to use your app. Step five,
five. Once you've reached peak popularity, that's the point in which you can start cashing in.
On the one hand, you can start easing up on the subsidies. Gradually start ratcheting up prices
on customers until you're on your way to turning a tidy profit. On the other hand,
begin reducing the amount you pay out to folks providing services through your platform. As
long as you've made yourself popular enough, both customers and service providers won't have any
choice but to stick around. And that's it. Before you know it, you'll be raking it in. Raking, raking.
And the best part is that all the real work and all the risk sits firmly on the shoulders of your
users. Now that's what I call passive income. What these new platform companies realized then
was that owning the physical assets which we traditionally think of as the means of production
isn't always the most important thing. In fact, a lot of assets can be a pain for a business to own.
Cars consistently go down in value the longer that you own them. Laptops become outdated.
In the tourism industry, even something as secure in value as property can be a nightmare.
Destinations go in and out of fashion or are only profitable during certain seasons.
Whether by accident or design, companies in industries as varied as transport, news, tourism,
gaming, TV and computer software came to realize that one could build a much more lightweight,
flexible, responsive business model by avoiding the hassle of actually providing services
in favor of simply positioning themselves as intermediaries between service providers
and their customers. The similarities between these platform companies and many of the online
grifts we've been looking at are striking. Much like dropshippers, affiliate marketers or Amazon
arbitrageurs, these companies play a pretty marginal role in their respective industries.
When we really think about it, Uber, Airbnb, Fiverr and Deliveroo are really just
digital versions of the yellow pages plus a payment feature. They play a part in the process,
but it would be ridiculous to suggest that the money that they take
is justified by what they contribute. Uber takes a 25% cut from every ride arranged through its app.
Fiverr takes 20% of both fees and tips. Postmates takes between 15% and 30% of an order's value
from restaurants and 20% of the delivery from the person delivering an order.
The idea that maintaining an app justifies a company taking such a huge slice of the pie
is ludicrous. To make matters worse, the people who provide services through these platforms
are forced to take on nearly all of the associated risk. If ridership is down one month,
then Uber is certainly going to notice, but not as much as its drivers, who are not only not earning,
but are also on the hook for insurance and upkeep and probably for car loan repayments too.
On a purely aesthetic level then, online passive income grifts might seem pretty marginal. From
their overall vibe, you'd expect them to have more in common with some guys selling fake trainers
down the market than with Silicon Valley startup culture. And yet, their underlying business models
are pretty similar. When explaining the concept of rent seeking, the economist Robert Schiller
likes to draw on the example of a feudal lord who places a chain across a river and demands a fee
from passing boats in return for lowering the chain. He writes that there is nothing productive
about the chain or the collector. The lord has made no improvements to the river and is helping
nobody in any way directly or indirectly accept himself. None of the examples that we've been
looking at are quite this bad, but they're not a million miles off. Many platform companies
increasingly function as gatekeepers, where one previously might have ordered a takeaway directly
from a restaurant, now Deliveroo or Uber Eats has installed its chain between customer and vendor
and expects to be rewarded for lowering it. A lot of online grifts seem to hope for a similar
scenario. Those that we've been looking at in particular are predicated on inserting oneself
as an additional intermediary in a sales process in order to simply siphon off some of the proceeds.
But there's one glaring difference between online grifters and the likes of Uber.
And that is that these large companies are pretty successful. If we take a look at a list of the
ten largest companies in the world by market capitalization, we find that six derive a meaningful
amount of their revenue from operating as platforms. Yeah, it seems fairly accepted,
even within the passive income community, that most people who try out the various business
models being hawked by financial freedom gurus failed spectacularly. If the business models
which these gurus offer have so much in common with those of the most successful companies in
the world, then why is it that passive income seekers struggle so hard to make it work on a
smaller scale? Greetings friends. Thank you. Thank you. I think one of the reasons the online
grifts are so intriguing to those of us outside of them is because there's usually two separate
levels of sleaze for us to unpick. The schemes themselves are usually pretty scammy. As I mentioned
before, there are certainly cases where dropshipping functions as an honest, productive branding service.
But let's be honest here, they are few and far between. I was recently trying to buy a new
belt for my wedding and as someone who's always keen to cut down on waste, I wanted to find one
that would last for as long as possible. But searching for quality leather belt on Google,
I kept finding myself ushered to websites which had all the signs of being dropshipping fronts,
generic images, random discounts and an overabundance of keyword-heavy descriptions.
These sites made big promises for the quality and value of their products, yet a quick glance at
Trustpilot revealed complaints of inconsistent goods, slow delivery times and terrible customer
service. I don't know whether they ever veered into the realms of illegality, but it was all at
least highly dishonest, all of which points us to the second level of sleaze at play here.
Which is that, despite the promises of passive income gurus on YouTube and elsewhere, the vast
majority of these schemes don't actually work. Dropshipping sounds so simple and appealing on
the surface, but what if your supplier runs out of stock? What if a product gets held up on its
very long journey from usually Asia to usually the US or Europe? What if the customer doesn't feel
that the dirt cheap product you've sent them lives up to the quality that you promised? This is
very quickly going to lead to bad reviews and to complaints. Even more worryingly, it will lead to
customers asking their credit card providers to issue charge backs which will leave you out of
pocket and likely blacklisted by payment processors. All of the schemes that we've been talking about
have similar pitfalls. Amazon retail arbitrage is just straight up against the site's terms of
service. If you want to advertise goods as new, Amazon will ask you to prove that you've sourced
them from official wholesalers as part of their efforts to stamp out fakes. And if you can, they'll
just ban your seller account. Nevertheless, it's not actually this rule-breaking which sets online
grifts apart from the platform companies we discussed in the previous section. In fact,
breaking the law is almost a rite of passage for ascendant platforms. When Uber first launched in
Australia, it did so entirely illegally with none of the required permits or licenses. As it had
done in other countries, it simply relied on creating such a buzz that by the time lawmakers
took note, they were essentially forced into retroactively legalising the company's business
model. Facebook's history has similarly been beset with scandals and fines. In 2019, it paid
$5 billion to the United States Federal Trade Commission for its lackadaisical approach to
sharing user data with third parties. And all of this is before we even begin to talk about the
more fundamental ways in which these platforms use their status as intermediaries to circumvent
labor laws. The primary difference between the online grift on one hand and the platform on the
other, however, is competition. But to explain that properly, I think it's best to hand things
back to Margot. Yeah, I just thought she might let you go at lunch or something, you know? Like,
I liked little women, okay? I thought that was good, but she just sounds difficult to work with,
that's all. Guess she's stuck with me again. Earlier on, we took a look at the concept of
economic rent. And during that section, we focused on what's sometimes called perettian rent,
which is a phrase that economists use to describe what the rest of us might call excess profits.
But this particular definition of economic rent is actually kind of controversial.
See, as you might have noticed, the perettian definition of what counts as an economic rent
is actually kind of vague. It's one thing to say that it refers to excess profit, but differentiating
between an excessive profit and one which is simply very large is often nigh on impossible.
If you ask a business owner what percentage of their profit is strictly necessary for them
to continue to do business, they're probably gonna say all of it. If we define economic rent
merely as excess profit, then it becomes a pretty subjective and therefore not all that useful term.
To counteract this vagueness, some economists are a little more selective when it comes to
accusing a business or a person of extracting an economic rent. Rather than simply using this
term to refer to the vague notion of excess profit, they would argue that a high level of profit
is only truly an economic rent in cases where the business or person claiming it is doing
so as a result of them having an unfair advantage in the form of significant market power.
We might call this definition a Ricardian definition of economic rent
after the 18th century economist David Ricardo. Under this definition, economic rent refers,
as Beth Stratford puts it, to unearned income resulting from control of scarce or monopolised
assets. Take our example of a landlord from earlier. As we discussed, the rent that a residential
landlord charges is an economic rent because it is unproductive. The landlord doesn't have to do
anything at all to claim it other than to own the property in question. But it's not simply
by chance that landlords are able to extract such extorbitant fees. The reason landlords are able
to charge such eye-watering figures is because rooms and flats and houses are an extremely scarce
resource. There are usually many, many more people looking for somewhere to rent in a given town or
city than there are properties available at any one time. In such a scenario, the whole justifying
logic of capitalism begins to break down because there isn't any real competition. That there are
always so many more people in need of somewhere to live means that even the smallest, most
damp-infested property is going to find a tenant. So why would any landlord ever reduce their asking
price? Furthermore, this is not just a scenario from which landlords passively benefit. Many
actively work to sustain the state of housing scarcity they profit from. Many landlords will
use some of the cash that they take from their tenants and donate it to lobbying groups or
directly to politicians in an effort to thwart laws which make it easier to build new homes.
These lobbying activities might require them to spend a bit of cash but it's money which is returned
many times over in their ability to push rents even higher. The economic rent extracted by landlords
is therefore more than just unproductive excess profit. It is excess profit resulting from extreme
scarcity and market conditions in which the idea of competition is a joke. Nevertheless, economic
rents of this more precise kind are not confined solely to the housing sector. They exist throughout
our economy. Wherever there is a single company or a handful of companies with a stranglehold on a
particular market or industry it is likely that they are using that power to artificially increase
prices or drive down costs and thus claim an economic rent. But that's enough from me,
Margot Robbie. To tie all this back into online grifts I'd better hand you back to Tom.
I think I'm going to need to order catering, you know? I think she'll expect catering.
Platform companies like Uber, DoorDash, Facebook and Fiverr share a great deal with online grifts.
As we've discussed, both business models are focused on the extraction of economic rents.
It's all about inserting oneself into an industry or supply chain in such a way that one is able to
siphon off as much profit as possible whilst contributing little to no real productive activity.
What allows one model to thrive whilst the other so often ends in failure is market share. In short,
the most successful platform companies are those which have managed to establish themselves
either as monopolies or at the very least as part of a small oligopoly of companies.
Some have been pretty brazen about this. When Uber fetched a valuation of $100 billion in 2019
it was partly because investors believed that the company had the potential to wipe out all
other competition, not only in the form of other ride-sharing companies but also local taxi firms.
The company heavily subsidized fares for years in the hope that once it was the only game in town
it would be able to charge whatever it saw fit. This method has allowed Uber's portion of the
ride-sharing market in the US to grow to 74% while other companies have established similar
strangleholds on their own industries. 65% of online food orders in the United States
go through DoorDash. 77% of people with access to the internet use at least one platform owned
by Meta. Amazon's market share has grown and grown to the point where the site accounted for 56.7%
of all US online retail purchases in 2021. That these companies put in vanishingly small
amounts of work for the percentages they take then doesn't really matter. They've captured the market
which makes it increasingly difficult not to use them. A restaurant owner might think that
DoorDash charging a 30% commission on every order is pretty despicable but not listing themselves
on the site would be a death warrant for their restaurant. The same goes for any newspaper
which chooses not to use Facebook or any video creator who chooses not to use YouTube.
Where most passive income seekers fail is that they simply aren't in this monopolistic position.
There might have been a period 10 years ago when it was at least possible to make decent
money through low effort dropshipping or affiliate marketing sites. But the internet is too mature
now and there's simply too much competition. Why would someone wait weeks and weeks for a product
ordered through your dropshipping store when Amazon will deliver it tomorrow? Ultimately,
as has been pointed out by others before me, the only passive income grift which actually works
is becoming a fake expert. And what better arena to become an expert in than in selling
get rich easy schemes? In fact, vanishingly few passive income gurus actually make their money
through the business models they promote. This goes as far back as Tim Ferriss. While Ferriss was a
moderately successful businessman prior to writing the four hour work week, he's fairly open about
the fact that he didn't actually implement any of the techniques he promotes in the book
until after the business was already off the ground. What's more, the success of that company
appears to have largely been a result of being in the right place at the right time.
You see, Tim Ferriss made his first million dollars selling brain pills. For a while,
this was obviously highly lucrative. But the online supplement market quickly became massively
oversaturated. Despite making lofty claims in the four hour work week about how much money the
company was making and how easy it was to run, Ferriss sold it just three years later at what
seems to have been a somewhat discounted price. Ferriss is legitimately rich. But it doesn't
seem clear that much of that wealth came from actually using any of the techniques he describes
in his book. In fact, alongside some timely investments in Uber and other startups,
a lot of Ferriss's wealth has come from sales of the four hour work week
and his subsequent career as a self-help influencer. The same is true of a lot of these figures.
Earlier on, I mentioned the British finance guru Mark Tilbury. Tilbury's YouTube channel
is packed with videos in which he tries out all kinds of passive income ideas, from dropshipping
to selling empty books through Amazon's print-on-demand service. But Tilbury didn't become
a millionaire through any of these methods. His actual business experience seems to amount
to selling remote control cars and planes in a fairly standard retail setup. Again, this is
impressive. But it has precious little in common with any of the so-called side hustles he features
on his social media channels. Furthermore, according to his latest company's house filings,
Tilbury's YouTube and TikTok channels are currently more valuable than any of the offline
businesses he leans on for legitimacy. As with Ferriss, we find that the real money
is in recommending these passive income schemes, not in actually undertaking them.
Mike Winnett sums all of this up perfectly. In the trailer to his documentary,
The Contrapignure Formula Exposed, he compares the current popularity of get-rich easy schemes
to the 1849 California Gold Rush. And he has this to say on the topic.
It was certainly possible to strike it rich in the Gold Rush,
but that required huge amounts of luck. More stable and methodical success came in the form
of companies such as Levi's, who profited from the Goldseeker's misplaced optimism by selling
them tools and gear. The most obvious modern-day equivalents to those pick, shovel and clothing
companies are the Gurus themselves. As we've seen, these figures tell their audience that there's
gold in them, their passive income schemes. But whilst their followers devour hours of
inspirational and instructional content, in order to learn how to find that gold,
it's the Gurus themselves who are making the real fortunes from
adsense, sponsorships and, in the worst cases, ludicrously expensive courses.
What gets less attention are the more mainstream companies, which have also taken it upon themselves
to prey on those who have been drawn in by this siren song of passive income.
Over the past six months or so, I've obviously spent a huge amount of time
investigating the details of various passive income schemes. And what shocked me more than
anything is the number of times that I've googled a passive income-related keyword
and found myself pointed to the website of the e-commerce platform Shopify.
Shopify is one of the world's largest e-commerce platforms. It essentially provides
companies with a means to quickly and easily add shopping capabilities to their websites.
And it's used by some pretty massive companies. To Katalon, The New York Times, Staples,
Puel, The Human Fuel. But Shopify also seems to be making a concerted effort to lure in
passive income seekers. Their official blog is packed with posts promoting these kinds of business
models. Their authors are somewhat more realistic about one's chances of making a fortune than
the gurus that we've been looking at. Nevertheless, they're still quite happy to push you to give
them a try. Shopify also runs an affiliate program which many, many of these gurus participate in.
In doing so, they help to fund content which is far more questionable than that which they would
likely be willing to host on their own site whilst retaining a level of plausible deniability
about the kinds of advice which are leading people to sign up to their service.
Shopify manages to braid together the twin threads of this video in that it is itself
a platform company. It makes its money from being an intermediary between sellers and
their customers. Whilst few would be moaned they're providing of e-commerce capabilities to
genuine businesses of various sizes, however, this aspect of the company's activity feels far more
ethically dubious. It begins to resemble the pick-and-shovel play of the gurus, encouraging
passive income seekers to take big risks whilst Shopify collects its reliable monthly fee.
In some regards then, it's no surprise that significant numbers of people are drawn to these
passive income schemes. On the one hand, the times we live in are pretty bleak. Just as jobs had
become to recover from the Great Recession, we found ourselves battling a pandemic and then
facing rampant inflation, soaring interest rates and the prospect of another economic downturn.
On the other, a huge, well-funded ecosystem has emerged which promises simple solutions
to those feeling economically anxious or otherwise under-rewarded for their labor.
The self-reinforcing recommendation systems of YouTube and TikTok further mean that one only
needs to show the slightest interest in any kind of financial advice for one to be bombarded with
this kind of content. But I want to close out this video by exploring some of the less material
ways in which these schemes draw people in. Because from what I've seen, the appeal of
this community and its practices is as much cultural and experiential as it is solely financial.
And it's in discussing this aspect of the passive income trend that we can identify not only what
keeps people around after that initial promise of getting rich easy wears thin, but also why
those of us outside of these schemes are so drawn in to watching them be debunked and derailed.
Clearly a large part of what draws people in to the passive income community
is that they genuinely believe it's going to make them rich. As with buying a lottery ticket or
starting a band, there's the tendency to think that even when we know the odds are stacked against
us, we're going to be the exceptions that are going to make it. But I think part of the attraction,
and at least what keeps people trying these schemes, even after it becomes clear that wealth
might not come so easily, is the opportunity to role play. Being part of the passive income community
is a chance for people who lack the connections and capital to ever launch a really successful
business to simulate the experience of being a startup founder. As we've seen, there are enough
similarities between these passive income business models and those behind some of the
largest companies in the world that this might be, at times, pretty convincing. I'm reminded of a
quote attributed to John Steinbeck, the author of of Mice and Men, which posits that socialism never
took root in America because the poor see themselves not as an exploited proletariat,
but as temporarily embarrassed millionaires. This is actually a bit of a misquote and it
would be more accurate today to refer to billionaires rather than millionaires. Nevertheless,
the crux of the idea is that working class people in America have historically tended to
identify far more with the super rich than with other working class people. Whether or not this
is a real phenomenon is an open question, but there is a certain logic to it. We're told that
capitalism is a meritocratic system in which good hardworking people rise to the top. If you
believe this, then you're obviously likely to have a pretty positive view of rich people.
But more than this, if you also believe yourself to be good and hardworking, as most of us do,
then you kind of have to believe that your own lack of wealth is some kind of mistake. On the one hand,
passive income schemes offer to amend this oversight. They pledge to give you the secret
knowledge that will restore you to your rightful place among the rich and famous. But when actual
wealth fails to materialize, the manner in which these schemes allow passive income seekers to
roleplay as Jeff Bezos or Mark Zuckerberg or Elon Musk at least provide some form of consolation.
Guided by their gurus, passive income seekers adopt what they believe to be the language of
the super rich, the daily routines of the super rich, the reading lists of the super rich.
In this way, they're able to keep proving to themselves and to others within this community
that whilst they might not have the bank balance or fast cars of a billionaire,
they at least have the mindset of a billionaire. They might not actually be rich, but they are the
kind of person who should be rich, were it not for their temporary embarrassments.
Passive income seekers might be a pretty obnoxious bunch. They might regularly try to take advantage
of others in ways which are neither easy nor necessary to forgive. But their attempts to
imitate the successful business models of the super rich are ultimately driven by the same
socio-economic trends which have driven the growth of other disconcerting subcultures in recent years.
All this elaborate pseudo business roleplay is simply one further way people have found to
cope with the sense that life for ordinary people in the global north is getting worse.
A lot worse. And I think these same trends fuel much of the interest in anti-grifter content too.
The videos that creators like Coffeezilla make, highlighting fraudsters and con artists,
are obviously important. But these debunkings aren't primarily made for an audience of people
who would otherwise have fallen for the scam being featured in a particular video.
They're a little bit more voyeuristic than that. The core audience is people entirely outside of
these communities who nevertheless love watching gurus and grifters being exposed for what they
are. There are no doubt several reasons why we find such videos compelling. Some of the schemes
covered in these grift-busting videos are hideous for how they prey on vulnerable and desperate
people. But I think there's also an extent to which the roleplay in which passive income gurus
and their followers indulge allows us to view them as stand-ins for the more mainstream grifters
who run the world's largest companies. The more these wannabes adopt the routines, vernacular,
and business models of the super rich, the more we can pretend that they're one and the same.
And this provides a different kind of coping mechanism. Because the CEOs and investors
behind exploitative platform companies like Uber or Amazon or Facebook profit from all kinds of
unethical and unjust practices. Many of us feel their attempts to extract economic rents every
day. But a lot of people have come to accept that those CEOs and investors are unlikely to ever
meaningfully answer for those actions. I mean, what level of fine would you have to inflict on
Jeff Bezos or Mark Zuckerberg for them to even notice? In a world where such figures seem untouchable,
anti-grifter content allows us a taste of justice. We might not be able to bring down the real rent
seekers, but we can at least watch their imitators be torn apart. Again, that's not a bad thing in
and of itself. Many of the grifters featured in these videos have taken huge sums of money
from deeply vulnerable people. But I think we have to be careful not to be lured interviewing grifts
and grifting as something which only exists on the edges of our economy. For despite their often
low rent appearances, the online grift ecosystem is heavily inspired by the practices of decidedly
mainstream companies. Increasingly large portions of our economy are predicated on rent seeking and
deception. And we do well to be careful that whilst we're laughing at videos of their small
time imitators being taken down, we're not letting these much larger and much more powerful companies
off the hook. I want to talk about one more scam. One that's sitting right beneath our noses.
Literally. I'm talking about razors. Modern cartridge razors are a classic grift.
Shaving companies lure you in with a discounted starter pack and then once you've committed
to using their system, they charge you a small fortune for replacement blades. Before you know
it, you're spending vast sums each year on these things. And that's where Henson Shaving comes in.
Henson Shaving, who are kindly sponsoring today's video and making it easier than ever
to embrace the simplicity, ease and cost effectiveness of safety razors. In place of expensive
plasticy cartridges, safety razors use much cheaper, far more environmentally friendly razor blades
like this one, which might seem a little daunting at first, but Henson makes it easy. See,
Henson was born out of a family run machine shop in Canada, which was previously building parts for
the International Space Station. There's stuff from their shop floating around in space right now,
and they've applied the same aerospace standards of precision to building their AL13 razor.
The AL13 is designed to expose just the right amount of blade at just the right angle,
whilst also providing it with consistent support for the smoothest of shapes. I've been using a
safety razor for a few years now, and the upgrade from my previous model to the Henson AL13 was
night and day. It consistently manages an even, irritation-free shave, and the quality of the
materials and manufacturing just makes it an all-round nice product to use. And of course,
this being a YouTube sponsorship, I have a little deal to offer you too. If you head to
HensonShaving.com forward slash Tom Nicholas and enter the code Tom Nicholas at checkout to let
them know that I sent you, then you can get a pack of 100 blades for free with the purchase of a razor.
And I mean, if my experience is anything to go by, those blades will last you quite some time.
That link again is HensonShaving.com forward slash Tom Nicholas.
So, happy hair removal to you all, and now, back to the video.
Thank you so, so much for making it to the end of this video. This has been a pretty epic project
to work on, as maybe apparent, and so I hope that it has been worthy of your time in watching it.
If you have got something good out of it, or interesting or useful, then I would love it if
you'd share it with a friend you think also might find it interesting in some way. All that remains
is for me to thank my top tier Patreon supporters, who are Richard, Alan Gann, Gary, Dick on Spain,
Bill Mitchell, Zed C. Reese, Alexander Blank, Neil to Buildsguard, Sophia R., Sergio Suarez,
Nicholas Jackmart, Strange Weekend, Ricardo Fernandez de Cordoba, Richard Rapun, Amit Singh
Parahar, Gabriel Koch, Demelza, Jimmy Dunn, Amit Nasa, Christopher Cowan, Lisa Yuan, and Fiasco
Linguini. If you'd like to join them in supporting what I do here, but also getting
access to sneak peeks of videos, copies of scripts, and all kind of good stuff like that,
then you can find out how to do so at patreon.com forward slash Tom Nicholas.
Thank you so so much for watching once again, and have a fantastic week.
