This is a jewel.
Until recently, Jewel was one of the world's most popular vape brands.
Propelled into the public consciousness by a slick, colorful marketing campaign, Jewel
products once accounted for 68% of all e-cigarette sales in the United States.
Fast forward to 2024, however, and the company's fortunes have taken something of a turn for
the worse.
An attempt by the US Food and Drug Administration to ban its products from sale has tied the
company up in all kinds of complex legal action.
And if that wasn't bad enough, the youth vaping market, which once appeared to be the
brand's core audience, has largely abandoned swappable pod systems like the Jewel in favour
of single-use disposable devices such as these.
The fall of Jewel and the rise of disposable vapes in its place is notable for several
reasons.
The most direct consequence has perhaps been the massive increase in e-waste, which has
resulted from users switching away from rechargeable devices and towards ones in which precious
lithium batteries are simply discarded after use.
But what if I was to tell you that the humble Elf bar here has also become embroiled in
some of the most explosive geopolitical tensions of our time?
In fact, if you want to understand the current battle for global supremacy between the US
and China, there are few better places to start than with these little things.
This video is part of a miniseries that I'm releasing over the coming months, in which
I'm exploring three ways in which disposable vapes reflects the changing face of contemporary
capitalism.
Because the story of disposable vapes is in many ways the story of our times, one of
the dictated customers trapped in coercive consumer relationships, of cash-strapped state
regulators struggling to bring rule-breaking corporations to heel, of the increasing presence
of Chinese companies in American and European markets, and, of course, of colossal, planet-killing
waste.
In today's video, we're going to look at how the meteoric rise of Chinese-made disposable
vapes reflects a broader trend of Chinese companies coming to dominate in American and
European markets, and the controversial attempts of Western governments to fight back.
The main focus of today's video is going to be the alpha, which is designed, made,
and sold by a Chinese company called Shenzhen iMiracle Technology.
But to understand the significance of these devices for global trade, we're going to
need to talk for a moment longer about the jewel.
Because at its height, jewel was almost the stereotype of a modern American company.
Much of its success, among both investors and customers, came from the decision to present
itself not as a maker of medical devices, but, like many of the US's other top companies,
as a tech startup.
An early write-up of the jewel described it as the iPhone of E6, and this was an image
the company was happy to live up to.
It wasn't only in the sleekness of its product and marketing that jewel was like Apple, though.
If you happen to have an iPad lying around, do me a favour, go and grab it, and take a
look at the back.
At the bottom, you'll find eight words which perfectly sum up the prototypical vision of
how the modern, globalised corporation is supposed to work.
Designed by Apple in California, assembled in China.
See, if we were to associate Apple with any physical place, it would undoubtedly be Silicon
Valley, the tech hub in Northern California in which the company has been based since
its founding.
While Apple's top-of-the-range Mac Pro is still made in the US, however, the majority
of the physical labour which goes into making iPhones, iPads, MacBooks and watches happens
not in California, but in the city of Shenzhen in southern China.
During the second half of the 20th century, this global division of labour came to be
viewed as a kind of platonic ideal of how contemporary capitalism is supposed to work.
An increasingly globalised economy allowed many companies in the US and other rich countries
to move their manufacturing operations to poorer countries where lower wages mean cheaper
production.
This process has not been without controversy.
Much has been made about how the rapid deindustrialisation of the global north left many towns and cities
which previously relied on industrial labour for employment both economically destitute
and spiritually directionless.
Defenders have argued that the way in which companies in rich countries exploit the world's
most vulnerable for cheap labour amounts to a form of neocolonialism.
Defenders of this dual model of globalisation, however, will often argue that the decision
of companies like Apple to manufacture their wares in countries with lower wages is simply
a logical outcome of a phenomenon that economists call comparative advantage.
Comparative advantage is a theory which holds that, under a system of free trade between
countries, each of those countries will tend to specialise in producing goods and services
in which it has certain natural or man-made advantages over the others.
Each country can then use the increased profit it is able to make from focusing on those
highly efficient industries in order to import any other goods or services from other countries.
This concept of comparative advantage was first outlined by the economist David Ricardo
in 1817.
Ricardo was interested in the patterns of trade in wine and cloth between England and
Portugal.
He calculated that, in absolute terms, Portugal could have produced both cloth and wine domestically
for cheaper than it cost to import either from England.
Nevertheless, the sheer magnitude of the country's comparative advantage in wine meant the Portuguese
entrepreneurs consistently chose wine over cloth.
This might initially seem strange.
Surely if it was possible for a Portuguese company to make cloth for less than the price
of importing it from England, somebody somewhere in the country would have set up a company
and made a small fortune by undercutting the price of the imported stuff?
Well, no.
Because the profit margins they were able to secure on wine were so high that the country
as a whole was happy to accept a slight markup on clothing in order to dedicate their time
and resources to securing the much larger profits which came from producing wine.
The dual model of contemporary globalization rests on a similar logic.
For company founders Adam Bowen and James Monsey, it simply made sense to follow in
Apple's footsteps by establishing their corporate HQ in California.
This allowed them to tap into America's comparative advantages, namely a well-educated workforce
suited to quote-unquote higher level tasks such as research, strategy and marketing,
alongside a highly developed financial services sector capable of providing funding for their
venture.
Likewise, it probably only seemed natural to manufacture the devices themselves in China.
In so doing, they were simply making use of China's comparative advantages, mostly
cheap labour, a lax approach to worker safety and a ban on independent unions, all of which
served to make manufacturing stuff in China far cheaper than elsewhere.
Of course, the result of this global division of labour was that most of the hard, dirty
work of manufacturing jewels was being farmed out to Chinese factory workers, whilst most
of the reward for the device's success were being reaped by executives and shareholders
in the US.
But it's fair to say that this isn't something that was unique to Jewel.
It was simply the default business model of modern, globalised capitalism.
When the FDA instructed Jewel to remove the majority of its product from the US market
in June 2022, however, something interesting was happening.
As this article in The Guardian noted at the time, many of the underage vapours the band
was supposed to protect had already begun to move away from Jewel and toward using single
use disposable vapes instead.
And these devices weren't designed in California and assembled in China, they were and are
Chinese from top to bottom, conceived of, built and owned by Chinese companies.
The fall of Jewel didn't just mark a shift from pod-based vapes to disposable ones then,
but from a US-owned vape market to a Chinese-owned one.
Of course, disposable vape brands like Elf Bar and Lost Mary aren't the only Chinese
companies which have become increasingly prominent in Western markets over the last few years.
Huawei, TikTok, Shien, AliExpress, T-MU, never in recent memory have Chinese companies been
so visible outside the country itself.
Again, we've long been surrounded by goods made in China, but for so many people in the
West to be buying stuff directly from Chinese firms, that's new.
This sudden inescapability of Chinese companies has sparked all kinds of anxiety among politicians
and the media.
TikTok has been accused of harvesting user data and poisoning young minds.
Shien has been criticised for promoting wasteful approaches to fashion.
Huawei Express has come under fire for facilitating the sale of knockoffs and fakes, and T-MU has
been charged with turning a blind eye to goods made with forced labour.
Discussing any of these companies and the controversies which surround them is difficult
because the core concerns are very, very genuine.
With the world on track to exceed 1.5 degrees C of global warming by 2027, the idea of a
Shien-haul horrifies me.
At the same time, legitimate critiques of immoral, unsustainable and exploitative practices on
the part of Chinese companies all too often get muddied with a much broader anti-China
sentiment, fuelled by a mixture of economic nationalism, militaristic sabre-attling and
often just outright racism.
Against this backdrop, having a sensible conversation about China's rise, which neither
descends into apologia for an oppressive state nor simply rehashes US foreign policy briefings
has become kind of tough.
Fear mongering about China was once primarily associated with the political right.
From the moment that he entered politics, Donald Trump was obsessed with the country.
This reached its rhetorical heights during the COVID-19 pandemic, which Trump repeatedly
described as the Chinese virus.
But its political high point came with his 2018 decision to impose import tariffs on
a range of products, including solar panels and washing machines.
This imposition of a 30% tariff on goods imported from China to the US aims to artificially
inflate the cost of Chinese-made goods, thereby encouraging consumers to support American
companies instead.
Many establishment liberals initially balked at these policies.
In reality, though, extreme defensive action against China's economic ascent has been
a firmly bipartisan affair.
Joe Biden not only extended some of Trump's tariffs, but enacted the 2022 Chips and Science
Act.
This introduced billions of dollars of subsidies for American semiconductor manufacturers to
help them better compete with factories in China and, quote, any other foreign country
of concern.
More recently, the European Union has been joining in on the anti-China action, too.
In September 2023, European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen announced an investigation
into the import of Chinese cars.
Her accusation is that the Chinese government is improperly subsidizing the cost of cars
being exported to the EU in order to give Chinese manufacturers an advantage over local
European companies.
The rise of Chinese-owned vape brands, such as Elf Bar, Elux and Crystal Bar then, is
a trend that we've seen repeated across industries.
And this has sent shockwaves throughout the global economy.
Presidents and prime ministers alike are terrified that the kind of complete market takeover
which has befallen the vaping industry might begin to spread to other sectors, too.
Yet, the strength of feeling around China's rise isn't only a product of how much is
at stake for those countries who are finding their dominance threatened, nor is it solely
a product of how these economic fears overlap with fears about surveillance, military domination
and human rights.
It at least partly stems from the fact that all of this was supposed to be impossible.
In fact, Western politicians thought they'd designed the laws of global trade so that
they could retain global dominance forever.
The footage you're currently watching was shot in Seattle in December 1999.
This eclectic band of punks, hippies, environmentalists and trade unionists had descended on the
city for four days of mass protest and direct action.
Before long, however, confrontations between protesters and police spilled over into a
display of mass chaos which soon became known as the Battle for Seattle.
The protesters are gathered to try and disrupt the third meeting of a body called the World
Trade Organization.
Established in 1995, the WTO is charged with attempting to bring a level of transparency
and stability to global trade.
In some respects, it operates as a kind of trade-based equivalent of the United Nations.
As two countries have a disagreement over who should be allowed to sell what within
each other's borders, the WTO provides a forum in which they can make their arguments
in front of a judge and come to a resolution.
One key way in which the World Trade Organization differs from the UN, however, is that the
UN brings together countries with vastly different political systems.
Delegates from Norway sit in the same room as delegates from North Korea and Saudi Arabia.
Membership of the WTO, however, is different because membership of the WTO requires a country
to embrace certain aspects of what's often called free trade.
In order to understand the supposed benefits of free trade, we need to return to that concept
of comparative advantage we discussed earlier.
As a recap, this is the idea that under a system of unrestricted trade between two countries,
each of those countries will tend to specialize in producing whichever goods and services
in which it is most efficient, and then it will make up for a lack of the goods and services
it's less efficient at by importing them from the other country.
But the theory of comparative advantage is more than just a fun bit of economic jargon
you can use to impress people at parties.
It is, in fact, a theory which conceals an argument.
That argument being that if we want our global economy to be as efficient as possible, we
should make it as easy to trade across borders as we can.
Over the past 70 years, the pursuit of this kind of free trade has been the explicit goal
of much international diplomacy.
Organizations like the European Union and treaties such as the North American Free Trade
Agreement have made the cost and difficulty of selling goods and services between participating
countries pretty negligible.
It's the World Trade Organization, however, which has become free trade's biggest facilitator
across the world.
In fact, it's precisely because of the free trade principles that World Trade Organization
members must adhere to that I was able to buy this Chinese-made disposable vape in a corner
shop here in the UK.
But if the World Trade Organization is the global guardian of free trade and free trade
has the ability to make the world more efficient and prosperous, why will all those people
protesting it?
Well, the theory of comparative advantage might be correct in showing us that reducing
barriers to trade makes the global economy as a whole more efficient.
The problem is that the kinds of comparative advantage which shape contemporary international
trade are often deeply unjust.
Earlier on, we looked at David Ricardo's example of Portugal having a comparative advantage
in wine production.
This advantage was, at least in part, a result of Portugal having a naturally occurring
optimum climate for growing grapes.
But when we applied this same lens to the making of chool devices, we suggested that
China's comparative advantage today was a low cost of labour.
And that's just not really the same thing, is it?
There is a massive gap between a country specialising in an industry which makes the most of its
sunny weather and a country specialising in an industry which makes the most of its citizens
being poor.
The low Chinese wages which make the dual model of globalization possible aren't some
naturally occurring phenomenon.
Neither is the presence of highly educated graduates or wealthy investors in the US.
All of these things are the product of very specific histories of war, colonialism, slavery,
climate change, migration and sometimes just downright good and bad luck.
In fact, the economist Hadjun Chang has argued that one factor which enabled today's rich
countries to become rich is that for a long time they were highly sceptical of free trade.
Rather than freely allowing foreign companies to do business within their borders, they
have all been through periods in which they were highly selective about who they traded
with in order to protect their domestic industries.
Chang raises the example of noted rapper Alexander Hamilton, who following the American War
of Independence argued vigorously for the introduction of import tariffs on foreign textiles and
iron.
At the time, these industries in America were far too young and inefficient to compete
with cheap imports from Britain.
Hamilton argued that artificially raising the price of those imports by imposing heavy
taxes on them would shield those industries from British competition and give American
textiles and iron the opportunity to become efficient enough to compete on their own terms
in the future.
And it worked.
100 years later, America was a global powerhouse, surpassing Britain in both these sectors and
more.
All of which places a question mark over the universal benefits of free trade, because
it suggests that a country's comparative advantage is not fixed.
By strategically protecting certain industries from foreign competition, post-revolution
America was able to change what its comparative advantage was, transforming itself from a
largely agrarian economy into an industrial and financial giant.
With the title of its 2003 book, Kicking Away the Ladder, would suggest, Chiang has argued
that rich countries forcing poorer countries to sign up to free trade deals, such as that
administered by the WTO, has the effect of blocking them from using similar methods to
improve their economic circumstance.
Free trade between countries at similar levels of development might be perfectly equitable,
but imposing it upon developing countries is often just asking them to accept that
low wages will be their competitive advantage forever.
The end result is an ossification of global inequality which naturalizes that dual model
of globalization, creating the illusion that America having all the fun corporate jobs
and profits, whilst poorer countries are forced to do all the hard, dirty, often dangerous
work of manufacture, is simply some kind of natural state of being.
It was this embedding of inequality, among other things, which drove those tens of thousands
of protesters to descend on Seattle in 1999, and the unrest which followed made the evening
news on channels across the world.
Their core complaint, that the world trade organization serves to exacerbate global
inequality however, was a position which slowly faded from view.
The WTO came to be viewed by many as simply a neutral arbiter of global trade, a facade
which served the rich countries who benefited from it well.
That is until China came along and began to use its power to plunge the whole entire project
into chaos.
China was pretty late to the World Trade Organization party, which is perhaps no surprise, this is
an explicitly free trade, free market institution, and China is probably not the first country
which comes to mind when you hear either of those words.
Since the 1970s however, the country has been on a journey of economic reform, in which
it's increasingly opened itself up to trade with other countries.
And in 2001, that journey resulted in it being accepted as the WTO's newest member.
It might seem odd that the leaders of the Chinese Communist Party were so keen to join
this deeply capitalist institution, but what's likely even more shocking is that the US passionately
supported their application to do so.
Then President Bill Clinton hopes that deeper integration into the global economy would
allow China's leaders to see the benefits of capitalism and democracy for themselves.
Of course, existing WTO members also had more selfish outcomes in mind.
China has the largest population of any country on earth, letting them join the club, thus
added an additional 1.2 billion people to each country's potential export market.
As important, getting China on board would allow multinational corporations in the west
to make further use of the country's cheap workforce.
For the first decade or so of China's WTO membership, things appeared to be going to
plan.
The tariffs on goods imported into China dropped from an average of 32.2% in 1992 to just 4.8%
in the early 2010s.
On the flip side, a recent study by researchers at the London School of Economics found that
cheaper consumer goods made possible by the increased use of Chinese labor almost immediately
boosted the spending power of American households by $1,500 a year.
No one benefited more from China's membership of the WTO, however, than China itself.
Prior to joining the body, more than 45% of the country's population was living in extreme
poverty.
20 years later, that figure was just 0.14%.
More troubling for the west, China ascended from being the world's sixth largest economy
to being within spitting distance of the top spot.
One of the key reasons that China has been able to break the mold and use World Trade
Organization membership to its advantage is that it didn't suddenly embrace free market
capitalism as Bill Clinton might have hoped.
Instead, it stubbornly continued to develop its own unique economic model.
As with all members of the World Trade Organization, the trade-off for China gaining access to
global markets was supposed to be that it would reform its economy and laws to be in
keeping with WTO rules surrounding free enterprise and trade.
But the opaqueness of China's economy and politics makes it hard to tell how seriously
it's taken these commitments.
One of the most persistent complaints other countries have had about China since joining
focuses on the close relationship between the Chinese government and Chinese companies
like Huawei and BikeDance.
Other countries have argued that state support and subsidies for such companies might be
giving them an unfair advantage in the global marketplace.
As contrary to the spirit of WTO rules, allowing China to change its comparative advantage
on the world stage rather than simply accepting its prior role as workshop of the world.
The more relevant grievance when it comes to the fall of Jool and the rise of Elf Bar
in its place, however, centres on intellectual property theft.
Earlier on, we discussed how the World Trade Organization's obsession with free trade
can work to naturalise the Jool model of globalization, in which all the fun corporate
jobs and profits get captured by rich countries whilst many of the horrible manufacturing
gigs get farmed out to the global south.
For this model to really work, however, companies like Jool need more than just an ability to
easily import and export goods between countries.
They also require ironclad intellectual property laws.
Robust copyright, trademark and patent laws are essential to ensure that no one in any
of the various countries in which Jool is manufacturing or selling decides to simply
steal its branding or product designs for themselves.
Establishing consistent global intellectual property rules, then, has been a central focus
of the World Trade Organization since its founding.
A document called The Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights requires
countries to change their domestic laws to ensure cast iron protections for IP holders.
Chinese manufacturers, however, have become notorious for IP theft.
This is a challenge even within the country itself.
Factories in China will freely steal designs and processes from one another.
In fact, the company that makes elf bars found counterfeiting by other Chinese factories
to be such a widespread problem that it now prints a QR code on every box which customers
can scan to ensure that their product is genuine.
The bigger concern for the World Trade Organization, however, is the theft of IP belonging to foreign
companies.
The most obvious example of this is the mountain of knockoffs which fill the pages of Aliexpress.
But it's an issue with more high-profile brands, too.
It's hard to imagine an American or European company being as bold as to release a product
like the Huawei Matebook, a line of laptops which not only borrows from Apple's MacBooks
in its design and marketing, but also in receiving pretty consistently good reviews.
This relaxed attitude to intellectual property theft isn't solely attributable to some inherent
ethical failing on the part of Chinese factory owners.
Historically, Chinese culture just hasn't tended to treat ideas as something that can
be owned in this way.
It was only as recently as the 1980s that the country began establishing a serious legal
framework for protecting IP rights.
With this novelty in mind, it's not hard to see why Chinese companies might view intellectual
property laws with some suspicion.
After all, such laws often serve to benefit the interests of large multinational corporations
on the other side of the world.
If you were running a factory which produced the majority of the world's dual devices,
you too might feel pretty miffed that while you were doing all the hard work of building
the things, most of the profits and glory were being claimed by a couple of wannabe
tech bros in San Francisco.
There have been widespread accusations from foreign onlookers that the habitual stealing
of foreign intellectual property has actually been encouraged by the Chinese government.
The problem is that such accusations are difficult to prove.
In fact, on the surface, China has been nothing if not a model participant in the WTO.
It has, like most other large companies, been involved in regular disputes, but even skeptical
observers have noted that where the country has been found to have broken WTO rules, it
swiftly complied with any recommendations.
Where China has really created friction is in the disputes that it has filed with other
countries, particularly the US.
Because for much of the life of the WTO, it has been pretty hard for developing countries
to effectively challenge the interests of the US and other rich countries.
Having a case takes time and money, which poorer countries simply don't have.
And even where they have been successful, the US has sometimes simply ignored the rulings.
For all its faults, however, China has enough resources, power and influence to actually
hold America to account.
Over time, the country has become increasingly successful at challenging US trade laws which
restrict the import of Chinese goods.
In 2018 alone, China filed five separate disputes against the US, accusing it of implementing
quotas and tariffs which contravened WTO rules.
America's response has been to have a complete and total meltdown.
In 2016, the country began a strategy of repeatedly blocking the appointment of new judges to
the appeals court of the World Trade Organization's dispute resolution system.
This has left this organization which governs global trade almost entirely powerless.
If any country, including the US, loses a dispute, all they have to do is file an appeal
and the lack of any judges to rule on that appeal means they can carry on with imposing
rule-breaking quotas or tariffs regardless, all of which is kind of ironic.
During the period in which the World Trade Organization largely served to uphold the
interests of America and American companies, the country heavily promoted it as an effective
arbiter of the global economy.
It even hoped that bringing China into the organization might open its doors to a fuller,
deregulated capitalism.
As soon as the WTO began to rule against the US, however, lawmakers decided to use their
power to tank the body entirely.
And whilst the crisis of the World Trade Organization isn't a new story which has been splashed
across front pages, its fallout is likely to have consequences for all our lives.
The fall of Jool and the rise of the Elf Bar in its place, is that an echo of a seismic
shift which is currently taking place in the global economy.
For decades, the Jool model of globalization has largely been taken for granted.
Many came to believe that it was simply right and proper that products should be designed
and marketed from fancy offices in America and Europe and then made in countries such
as China where low wages made manufacturing cheap.
Economists even used warped interpretations of comparative advantage to imply that this
was some kind of natural scenario.
Like many countries before it, however, China has recently decided that it's had enough
of simply being the workshop of the world and resolved to make itself the boardroom of the
world as well.
After all, why should its industry simply make products for companies in other countries
to profit from?
Thus, the Jool model has come under threat from the Elf Bar model of globalization in
which Chinese companies have taken back control over the goods they make and are able to view
Americans and Europeans not as corporate masters but instead simply as customer bases for exported
goods.
The response to Elf Bar and other Chinese vape brands have had to the wave of proposed
and existing bans on disposable vapes in various countries is also likely illustrative of future
trade turmoil because, at time of recording, Elf bars are officially illegal in the US.
Customs agents are under instruction to seize any incoming shipments of the devices at the
border.
But the chaos of the new normal in global trade is reflected in the fact that the company
who makes the Elf bars has managed to skirt this man by simply changing the name of its
product.
As such, Elf bars, now called EB Create, continue to be widely available.
Whether it's through lighting a bonfire under the World Trade Organization or imposing tough
new import tariffs, Western governments clearly aren't taking China's rise to economic supremacy
lying down.
And that's perhaps understandable.
But whilst the inequalities embedded in the WTO system were due some heavy, heavy criticism,
its breakdown is unlikely to immediately lead to some more just global settlement.
The collapse of the global trading system that we've come to take for granted is likely
to make it much harder to get a hold of foreign-made goods and to make those that one can get a
hold of much more expensive.
That's if all these trade wars don't lead to an actual war before then.
As I mentioned in the top of this video, this is the second installment in a series of
videos that I'm currently releasing which use disposable vapes as a jumping off point
to exploring three powerful trends which are currently reshaping the global economy.
And making this series has been risky.
For one, it's a pretty weird idea to dedicate three whole videos to.
And on top of this, making videos about nicotine, unjust manufacturing practices and geopolitical
tensions has a habit of setting off alarm bells in YouTube's monetization and gage-gating
systems.
When we launched the first episode of this series, it was going absolute gangbusters
in the algorithm, destroying all previous records for how many views my videos usually
get upon release.
Then, a couple of hours in, YouTube's automated systems falsely flagged it as breaking its
community guidelines.
My assumption is that it didn't like the fact that I mentioned tobacco even though
I mentioned it in the context of saying that it's actually pretty bad for you.
This had a devastating impact on the performance of the video and made for a terrifying few
hours, in which the video went from being recommended everywhere to being hidden behind
an age gate and a content warning.
I eventually managed to get the video freed from YouTube jail, but the whole experience
reminded me of how fragile this business of publishing videos on a massive, unaccountable
platform like YouTube can be.
Such demonetization and age-gating problems are not an issue, however, over on Nebula.
You might have heard me talk about Nebula before, it's a premium streaming service designed
and owned by a bunch of thoughtful creators, including myself.
It's a dedicated home for grown-up, intentional videos and podcasts.
On our end, we get to retain control over what we post and also who gets to see our work,
with no hair-triggered automated systems to worry about setting off.
For viewers, it provides an ad-free and sponsor-free place where you can watch engaging and enriching
videos, which leave you better informed about the world around you.
In addition to being able to watch all of my usual videos with the ads and sponsor reads
stripped out, Nebula also boasts an ever-expanding collection of exclusive original films and
series.
And these represent our ultimate goal with the platform, to enable creators like myself
to make prestige video work that is as interesting and as well produced as traditional media,
but without the same layers of exploitation and corporate meddling.
If you're fascinated by global supply chains and business models of the kind we've been
discussing in today's video, then you'll no doubt love the logistics of X.
A Nebula original series from the team behind Wendover Productions and Half is Interesting.
Each episode of The Logistics of X places a different industry under the microscope,
to explain how coal becomes electricity, how fish get from the sea to your fridge,
or how this steel rod becomes an artillery shell.
There's also a whole bunch of classes too, including my Nebula exclusive class How to
Research Like a PhD student, in which I share the research and note-taking strategies that
I use to turn loads of books and research papers and articles into fun and hopefully engaging
videos like this one.
If you want to watch my Nebula class, The Logistics of X, or simply to empower me and
creators like me to gain further independence from the uncertainties of YouTube,
then you can support the channel by signing up using my personal link go.nebula.tv forward slash
Tom Nicholas.
This gets you access to 40% off an annual subscription, meaning you can immerse yourself
in the very best creator-made, educational and informative content for just $2.50 a month.
That's far cheaper than Netflix or Disney Plus or Amazon Prime, with the added benefit of knowing
that a chunk of that subscription fee comes directly to me to support my ambition to make
more and better videos uncovering the powerful politics, economics and cultural trends which
are reshaping the world around us.
That link again is go.nebula.tv forward slash Tom Nicholas.
Now, time for some thank yous.
Thank you so, so much for watching this video, and if you'd like to catch the rest of this
vaporomics trilogy that I'm working on, then make sure that you're subscribed to my channel,
either here or over on Nebula, to get notified as soon as the next episode comes out.
Or if you'd like to keep up to date with what I'm working on next, then you can get access to
a weekly blog that I write called The Friday Update, along with copies of scripts to my videos,
early peaks at future stuff, and more by signing up to my Patreon at patreon.com forward slash
Tom Nicholas.
In doing so, you'll be joining these lovely people.
Richard, Alan Ghan, Gary, Dick on Spain, Bill Mitchell, Alice Feigart, Zed C. Reese, Zoe Alden,
Alexander Blank, Neil to BuildGuard, Sophia Arb, Sergio Suarez, Strange Weekend, Richard Rapun,
Amit Singh Paraha, Gabriel Koch, Jimmy Dunn, Christopher Cowan, Fiasco Linguini, Agent Maxwell,
Glenn Sugden, Junk Food Man, Peace Frog, Basilica Tomopoulou, and Jarrabah.
Thank you to all those lovely, lovely people for being signed up to the top tier of my Patreon,
and thank you for watching. And yeah, have a fantastic week!
