perceived. For example, consider some metaphors. During much of the Cold War, communism was talked
about as a cancer. If we understand communism as cancer, it tells us what we ought to do.
We ought to detect it early and remove it early before it gets to be fatal.
The war in Iraq has sometimes been discussed by its critics as a quagmire, and the metaphor of
quagmire suggests we're sinking deeper and deeper in, and it's going to be hard, if not impossible,
to extricate ourselves. In the last 30 years, all manner of political scandals have been referred
to with the suffix, gate. Of course, conjuring up the image of Watergate and suggesting here is an
analogy. Here is a comparison of scandals. And just a couple lectures ago, I said, think about how
the military metaphor can mislead us when we talk about attack and defense of arguments.
Figures of speech make a concept more salient. They bring it to the forefront of our consciousness.
Other figures of speech suggest a choice, as for example, antithesis. When President Kennedy
talked about not a pledge, but a request, I offer you not luxury, but sacrifice.
And metaphors can also be used to pose choices. Like the cancer metaphor, are we going to cut it out?
Or are we going to let it grow until it kills us? Figures of speech also can increase a sense of
communion between the arguer and the audience through references to common activities or
experiences. So, for example, the Quagmire metaphor in the case of Iraq, for most people over a
certain age, evokes memories of Vietnam, for which the term Quagmire was so often used.
So just like definitions and precise language, figures of speech have argumentative implications.
There's a very famous speech that illustrates a number of these ideas. It's a speech delivered
by Abraham Lincoln, when he accepted the nomination to run for the U.S. Senate against
Stephen A. Douglas. It's the House Divided Speech, in which Lincoln said a House divided
against itself cannot stand. We often misunderstand this speech. Lincoln was not predicting the
Civil War. What he was predicting was that the country would become all free or all slave,
and that it was moving in the direction of being all slave. Most people would think this
a preposterous idea. The evidence for it was flimsy. But Lincoln effectively used language
and style to support that argument. For instance, he uses the metaphor of machinery to refer to
an alleged plan to make slavery national. He says, let anyone who doubts carefully contemplate
that now almost complete legal combination, piece of machinery, so to speak, compounded of the
Nebraska doctrine and the Dred Scott decision. To suggest that this is deliberate, he refers
to the designers of this plan as its chief architects and the executors of this plan
as its chief bosses. Stephen A. Douglas's position, popular sovereignty, which Lincoln
criticizes, he talks about as scaffolding. He says, under the Dred Scott decision,
squatter sovereignty squatted out of existence, tumbled down like temporary scaffolding,
like the mold at the foundry served through one blast and fell back into loose sand.
He uses the metaphor of building a house to refer to the unfolding of the plot.
He can't prove the plot directly, so he argues it by metaphor.
When we see a lot of frame timbers, he said, different portions of which we know have been
gotten out at different times and places and by different workmen, and we see these timbers
joined together and see they exactly make the frame of a house or a mill, or if a single piece be
lacking, we see the place in the frame exactly fitted and prepared yet to bring such a piece in.
In such a case, we find it impossible not to believe that Stephen and Franklin and Roger
and James all understood one another from the beginning and all worked upon a common plan or
draft drawn up before the first blow was struck. How does he prove there's a plot?
He tells a story by metaphor and says, when you see these things happening,
it's impossible not to believe it, and the metaphor suggests these things are happening.
He uses accumulation of historical details to suggest the success of the plot so far,
and he uses a metaphor to refer to Douglas, to forestall people from defecting and voting for
Douglas. He says, a living dog is better than a dead lion. Judge Douglas, if not a dead lion for
this work, is a caged and toothless one, meaning you can't rely on Douglas if your goal is to
stop the tendency toward nationwide slavery. Well, now I've covered this speech very briefly,
but I hope you can see from these few examples how language becomes a resource in the argument,
how it helps Lincoln to develop the position that he is trying to make.
Language and style are part of the substance of the argument, not separate from it. They affect
the strategic positions and the interests of the arguers, and so our consideration of argument
strategy and tactics needs to include a focus on language and style as well.
Next time, we'll start something new.
Lecture 12 Evaluating Evidence
Hello again. For the last several lectures, our focus has been on argumentation strategies and
tactics, and we've been looking at how we take individual arguments and put them together
into larger units. We've looked at the structure of a case, and we've talked about attack and
defense. And at the end of the last lecture, I promised you that we'd now be shifting our focus
and taking up something new, and we will. Now for the next several lectures, I want us to focus on
the individual argument as our unit of analysis. This is a kind of switch, if you will, from the
macro to the micro level of analysis. And we'll talk about the parts of individual arguments
and how we determine if they're strong or if they're weak. So we'll be focusing on both argument
construction and argument appraisal. Now we've already got a head start, because if you remember
the different parts of the argument, one of them is the claim. And we've talked already about the
claim. We did so several lectures ago when we talked about types of claims and how claims get
put together and how the major claim is called the resolution. And so we'll count that as done,
and focus in this lecture on another one of the parts of the argument, which is the evidence,
the building block from which the claim is based. And to illustrate that oftentimes what arguments
depend upon is the nature of the evidence, let me just briefly remind us of some significant
controversies that took place in the early 2000s. In the fall of 2004, CBS News aired a story about
President Bush's National Guard Service and the allegation that he had been absent from duty.
And it was forced to retract this story because the story was found to be based on faulty evidence.
In the spring of 2005, Newsweek magazine published a story which it then had to retract
about the mistreatment of Muslim detainees at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba, and particularly the
allegation that the Quran had been mistreated or abused. And in the 2000 election campaign,
networks twice prematurely called the state of Florida, once for Gore and once for Bush,
in both cases before the results were conclusive, and that led to congressional investigations
and changes in the way networks report election results. Now in every one of those controversies,
the outcome of the controversy was based upon the quality of the evidence. In some cases,
the claims were never directly denied, but because the evidence was unacceptable,
the argument could not proceed. And so it's very important that we focus our attention on evidence
and that we understand what's required for evidence to be approved. Evidence, of course,
is what answers the question, how do you know or what do you have to go on when a person makes a
claim and the claim is then called into question. And just to remind ourselves of something we've
already said, the evidence needs to be agreed to by all of the participants so that it's a secure
starting point for the dispute. If it's contested, discussion of the claim stops until the adequacy
of the evidence is established. As the examples I've just cited illustrate, in each case the
controversy about the claim didn't proceed any further because acceptable evidence that people
would agree upon could not be marshaled. So settling the matter when evidence is in dispute
requires a separate argument in which the original evidence now functions as the claim to be established.
Now when we say that audiences accept the evidence as to its truth, what's required to do that?
Well, sometimes as in technical fields, like the law, there are specific rules. That is for
something to count as evidence in a court of law, it must meet certain tests. If it meets the test
we accept it as evidence, if not we exclude it. So for example, what a witness has directly observed
can be considered evidence, but what a witness has heard but not observed directly is not considered
evidence. It's hearsay and is ordinarily ruled to be inadmissible. So there are some technical
rules in particular fields, but in ordinary usage, in ordinary argument, the test is what would a
critical audience be likely to accept as true? Now when I phrase the test that way, notice what
I'm saying. An argument is delivered for a particular audience, and we may know lots of things about
that specific audience, but that's not enough. It may be that a particular audience will be swayed
by astrology or might be inclined to accept unsubstantiated claims of conspiracies and plots,
but ordinarily a critical audience would not. And so we want to set as our standard for acceptability
of evidence, what would a critical audience, an audience that's reasoning and thinking critically
be likely to accept? By the way, Speech Act philosophers have worked on this and have come
up with a very specific definition of what it means for an audience to accept evidence.
You may be interested in this if only for its specificity. Listen to this. Providing evidence
means, one, a speaker wants a hearer who does not accept a claim to do so willingly and freely.
Two, both speaker and hearer realize that there are truth conditions for this claim.
There are things that if they could be established would show the claim to be true.
Three, the speaker believes that some other statement not obvious to the hearer is such
a truth condition. Four, the speaker utters this other statement. And five, the hearer accepts it,
regards it as a truth condition for the claim, and therefore accepts the claim.
Now, you may conclude that what that establishes is that Speech Act philosophers are pretty
pedantic and focus on the obvious and maybe so. But what they've done is to spell out,
what does it mean for us to say that the evidence has got to be provided and acceptable
in order for the argument to go further? Well, let's explore this in a historical example.
And since I talked in the last lecture about Abraham Lincoln, I want to use another famous
speech of Lincoln's that is built very carefully on evidence. And that's the speech that Lincoln gave
at Cooper Union in New York in the spring of 1860. He claimed after the fact that it was this
speech that made him president. And it's certainly a very important speech. What Lincoln does in
this speech is to respond to a statement made by Stephen Douglas that the founding fathers
understood the question of slavery in the territories even better than we do now.
And so what Douglas did was to enlist popular reverence for the founding fathers and to claim
that the founding fathers really supported his position on the issue. Now, what does Lincoln do
in the Cooper Union speech? He accepts Douglas's premise that the founding fathers understood
the question better than we do. And that was a wise thing for him to do because everybody revered
the founding fathers. But then he proceeded to produce evidence that the founding fathers were
actually consistent with his position, not with Douglas's. Now, as I think I mentioned before,
this was kind of hard to do on either side because the founding fathers didn't take any position
on the question immediately at hand, one had to infer it. So what does Lincoln do in this speech?
He defines the founding fathers as the signers of the Constitution and he relies on various forms
of evidence. He uses historical documents, which are a kind of tangible object. He uses shared
historical understanding, kind of social consensus. He uses the credibility of the founders that
Douglas stipulated. He accumulates examples of specific founders and their views. And so he
cites the adoption of the Northwest Ordinance by the Articles of Confederation Congress,
the act of the first Congress under the Constitution to enforce the Northwest Ordinance.
The fact that this act was signed by George Washington, he refers to Congress's organization
of the Southwest Territory, what became Tennessee, Mississippi and Alabama,
where Congress didn't prohibit slavery, but it did regulate it. He talks about the prohibition
importing slaves into Louisiana territory. He talks about the Missouri Compromise. All of these
things illustrate congressional regulation of slavery, which Douglas said the founding fathers
opposed. So Lincoln marshals all these different kinds of evidence to add up the number of the
founding fathers and to conclude that a majority of the signers of the Constitution believed that
Congress had the power to regulate slavery, which was the position opposite to Douglas's
and opposite to Douglas's use of the founding fathers. It's a remarkable speech, remarkable
for the specificity and the range of evidence that Lincoln uses. We can get a better appreciation,
I think, for what Lincoln did if we take some time to explore the different types of evidence.
And while different theorists categorize evidence different ways, I'm going to group
evidence under the headings of examples, statistics, tangible objects, testimony,
and social consensus. So we'll have five main categories of evidence. I begin with examples.
These could include brief mention of an instance without any development of it.
It's become common in the years since President Reagan for the President of the United States,
when he delivers the State of the Union address, to have sitting in the First Lady's box one or
more special guests who will be briefly mentioned during the speech as an example of some quality
or other that the President wishes to praise. Nothing said in any detail about these people.
They are recognized, asked to stand and to receive applause and they're cited as an example.
That's a very brief mention. Or an example could be developed more elaborately as an
illustration of some point or other. Famously during the 2000 presidential debates, then Vice
President Al Gore spoke at some length about conditions in a school in Florida that was
overcrowded with the result that a student had to stand up and there weren't enough desks and
supplies and so unavailable. Now it turned out that Vice President Gore was not entirely correct
about his facts, but what he was doing is he was offering an illustration, an extended example.
And in either case, whether it's a brief mention or an extended example, what the
arguer is doing here is providing the materials from which he or she will build a generalization
to say that something is true about a category as a whole. Now one can argue about whether or
not the examples support the generalization and we'll see in the very next lecture, in fact,
how we do that. But the truth of the examples themselves has to be accepted before that argument
can take place. If the examples are not considered true, then we have to have a separate argument
to bear out their truth for them to be able to serve as evidence. So examples are one very common
type of evidence. Another type of evidence we see quite often is statistics. And there are
all sorts of kinds of statistics. And if this were a course on statistics, we'd cover them in much
more detail. But let me just highlight some of the different ways that statistics can serve as
evidence. The most simple statistics are raw numbers. There have been two father-son pairs of
U.S. presidents as of 2007, for example. Or over 1700 U.S. soldiers died in Iraq as of mid-2005.
Raw numbers that nothing has been done to. That's the simplest kind of statistic.
Percentages, ratios, index numbers are statistics that have been refined a bit by analysis.
So 55% of baby boomers are planning to retire before they reach the normal retirement age,
a percentage. The ratio of women to men in nursing schools is eight to one.
A ratio that tells us for every one of one category, we have eight of another. Or if the price of
gasoline in 1993 was 100, it would be 240 now. That's an index where numbers are placed against
a standard which is usually set to be 100. And what those all do beyond simply reporting raw
numbers is they give the numbers some meaning by putting them in context. So a percentage says
out of 100, we have this. A ratio says here's how the categories compare and so on.
Other kinds of statistics include the measures of central tendency, of which the famous ones are
the mean, the median, and the mode. So if we say the average price of a new home is $425,000,
if we mean by that the mean price, we would take all the homes in the country that were sold
and add up the sale prices, divide them by the number of homes, and we'd get that number 425,000.
If we said 425,000 was the median price, we mean that it's the one in the middle. Half of the home
sold cost more, half of the home sold cost less. And if we say it's the modal price, we mean it's
the most often cited price. So more homes sold for 425,000 than for any other price.
Another kind of statistical measure is the rate of change. The city of Las Vegas is gaining
20,000 new people per day. That's a rate of change. Our probability statements, including the outcomes
of controlled experiments and studies, these results are significant at the .05 level, meaning
that if we did this experiment over and over again, 95% of the time we would not get this result
just by chance. Now each one of these statistical forms is subject to tests for its accuracy,
because in order for statistics to function as evidence, the truth of the statistics must be
accepted. And of course it's an old adage that you can prove anything you want to with statistics
depending upon how you contextualize the statistics and what statistics you use. So they're
accuracy needs to be established for the purposes of their serving as evidence in an argument.
So we have examples and we have statistics as types of evidence. Another form of evidence
is tangible objects, actual things, or pictures of the actual things. These figure prominently
as evidence in criminal law. For example, it's very important in a murder trial to be able to
find the murder weapon. And if the murder weapon can't be discovered, then there's an important
piece that's missing in the chain of evidence that has to be established in order to make a case
for a conviction. In the mid-1990s in the O.J. Simpson murder trial, for example, one key question
was, there was a glove found on the scene. Did it fit Mr. Simpson or not? So the glove was tangible
a tangible object that functioned as evidence to support or to oppose the claim that O.J. Simpson
likely committed the act for which he had been charged. Sometimes the tangible object is important
historically, as in the discovery of particular artifacts. And they need not be ancient artifacts.
In the 1940s, in the Alger Hiss case, the case that made Richard Nixon famous, the case turned on
the existence of some microfilm papers and the microfilms were found in a hollowed out pumpkin
on a farm in Maryland, right where a key witness had said they would be. And so the availability
of those microfilms was very important as a tangible object. The significance of tangible
object is probably captured in the adage that a picture is worth a thousand words. And this may
be why, to refer back to Colin Powell's speech before the UN Security Council, Secretary Powell
showed so many photographs and videos as part of his presentation and at one point in a now
controversial move held up a vial which he claimed represented the uranium that Iraq was trying to
obtain in Africa. Sometimes, however, even words will be tangible objects, as in the example of a
historical document. So the U.S. Constitution could be cited as a specific document or legal
contracts could be cited or any kind of agreement or letters or diaries. These are tangible objects
that exist in documentary form. All right, so far then we have examples, statistics, tangible
objects. And in each case, the truth of the evidence itself has to be accepted in order for
the argument to proceed. And when I mentioned Lincoln at Cooper Union, hopefully we can see
already how Lincoln used several different kinds of evidence. He used examples. He counted up the
number of founders, a particular case of statistics, simple case of statistics, and he used tangible
objects. He used documents. Another kind of evidence, fourth kind I want to mention, is testimony
of fact or of opinion. We rely on testimony a lot because there are lots of things that for each of
us we can't know directly. And we're not qualified to have a reliable opinion. And so we rely on the
judgment of people who are in a position to know directly and who do have a reliable opinion.
We accept testimony because of the credibility of the source. Aristotle wrote about what he called
ethos, by which he meant the apparent character of a person, not necessarily the person's real
true inner character, but the judgments that someone else makes about the character of the person.
If you judge me to be a trustworthy person, whether I am or not, then my ethos is positive
as far as your concern. You've made a positive judgment about my character.
Ethos or credibility has been shown through research to be composed of judgments about
competence. Do I know what I'm talking about? Trustworthiness or goodwill. Am I positively
disposed toward you? And dynamism. Do I seem to be energetic in what I'm saying? Those are all
factors that will lead people to judge me as being a credible source. Credibility can be
established either for oneself or one could derive credibility by using credible sources.
So for instance, eyewitness access to information will make one a credible source in a courtroom.
If I saw it happen, I'll be more credible than if I didn't. Background and training
will make one a credible source. So for example, every four years when there are presidential
debates, I get called up by the news media for my opinion and I enjoy my 15 minutes of fame.
Why do I get called? Because somebody believes that I've got background and expertise in the
evaluation of arguments that would be pertinent to the presidential debates. A good track record
will make a person a credible source. So for instance, for much of the 1990s and into the
early 2000s, Alan Greenspan was regarded as a credible source on what the Federal Reserve was
up to and what the economy would do because for a long period of time, he had a good track record
of calling things right and making good judgments. All of these are things that will make a person
be perceived to be a more credible source. And so I can rely on my own credibility or I can cite
sources that have been established to be credible in offering testimony. Now we have to be careful
though because there also are factors that could call a person's credibility or ethos into doubt
and would then require a separate argument to establish the evidence. For instance,
is the person an authority on the subject about which he or she speaks? Entertainment and sports
celebrities often speak out for example on political questions. They may not have any expertise or
any special authority on those topics. Is there a clear basis on which the person reached the
conclusion? Or is he or she just mouthing off a personal preference without anything to back it up?
Does the person have a bias or vested interest? Is there a reason for the person to express a
particular opinion because it will benefit him or her to do that? We call that eager evidence if
a person stands to gain from something that he or she says. And if the person stands to lose
by making a statement and makes the statement anyway, we call that reluctant evidence and
regarded as more credible because it's in opposition to the person's own self-interest.
And a final question to ask, do credible sources disagree? Is the person whose testimony is being
quoted representative? Or is he or she the outlier among equally credible sources?
So we want to be sure. We want to be sure that we have a credible source because testimony
relies on the credibility of the source. And if we're not sure, then we raise these tests and
we have another argument to establish credibility in order that it may serve as evidence.
Those are four of the categories of evidence. The one remaining one I have called social
consensus. And by that I mean things that are so generally believed that an audience treats them
as if they were facts. Just as good as facts for that particular audience. Even though the beliefs
may turn out later not to have been well founded, at the time they function as if they were facts.
For instance, common knowledge is a type of social consensus, things that everybody believes to be
true. In the late 1990s and early 2000s, the belief that politicians manipulate budget numbers
could be called a piece of common knowledge. All of the disputes about first the budget deficit
and then the budget surplus and then the budget deficit again, which was real, what should be
done with them, it was commonly accepted that these numbers were manipulated to serve political
purposes. Or another kind of social consensus, shared value judgments. Most people and certainly
most critical audiences would place a high priority on what would be good for children,
particularly their own children. What would benefit the next generation? And so we find
public figures of all political persuasions claiming that what they want is, in a famous
slogan, to leave no child behind. And to emphasize a priority for children, valuing children as a
kind of social consensus. Shared historical understandings are another type of social
consensus. For example, in the United States, it is widely believed that the United States
won the Cold War by the late 1980s. It is widely believed that the civil rights movement made great
gains during the 1960s. And these widely shared historical understandings focus as a kind of
social consensus. Conclusions that have been established already in an argument can be considered
an item of social consensus. And they can be used as if they were facts because the audience has
already agreed to them. They've already been established as a result of a previous argument.
And then finally, in the particular discussion, things can be stipulated when we say,
let's assume for the sake of argument, that phrase for the sake of argument is saying,
we're going to stipulate for this particular discussion that something or other is true.
And then in this discussion, it will focus, it will function as an example of social consensus.
Now, if there are differences in core values or common knowledge, they'll need to be resolved
before social consensus can be accepted as evidence.
I want to clue you in on one thing. I've said in all of these examples of what counts as evidence
that our standard is what a critical audience would accept. And that's a good normative standard.
But we should note that actual audiences often have looser standards. Judgments of the quality
of the evidence are affected by whether one agrees with the claim. They're affected by a
speaker's delivery. They're affected by whether the source is familiar. Evidence is most influential
when an audience is unfamiliar with the subject matter. And when the goal is sustained attitude
change over time. Now, what do we make of the fact that there's a discrepancy between what people
accept as evidence and the standards that we suggest? It doesn't mean we should abandon our
standards because we want to improve the quality of argument. When we examine arguments and when
we construct them, we'll try to reach a higher standard. So we've talked now about claims and
about evidence. In the next lecture, we'll begin to talk about inferences and warrants.
