be multiple claims speaking to a single issue. So I want us to focus more on how these claims
get put together and what the relationship is between the claims and the resolution.
And to do that, I'd like to talk about how we build a case. There's always a broader
range of material available than can be used. We could imagine more possible claims than
we could put together to support any given resolution in any amount of time, and so we
make choices. We make two kinds of choices. We make choices of selection and choices of
arrangement. The selection choices tell us what we'll pick out from among the range of
possibilities, and the arrangement choices tell us how we'll put them together and what
sort of structure we will use. By the way, we make these choices not only with respect
to arguments that make up the case, but also with respect to evidence within individual
arguments, just as there are more claims than we could ever use to support a resolution,
so there is more potential evidence than we could ever use to support a given claim.
What governs these choices then? Well, here's where the audience comes into play. Remember,
we've said all along that one characteristic of ordinary argumentation, as opposed to formal
logic, is that it's presented in a context. There's an audience, and one of the factors
that governs the choices we make is the audience. We want to pick from those arguments that
are available the ones that will be particularly important or meaningful to the given audience
that we happen to address, and so these choices really combine creativity and constraint.
We're thinking creatively when we try to imagine all of the possibilities and see what
our range of options is, and we're constrained by the fact of the audience, by the audience
composition, the audience predispositions, the audience beliefs or values that we want
to appeal to as we put this structure of arguments together. And of course, a very important constraint
is that the case speak to all the issues so that it will be prima facie. So let's start
with that. How do we find the issues? Given a resolution, how do we really know what the
issues are? There are several different ways that we could discover the issues. For one,
we could ask questions about the text of the resolution. Take each one of the key terms
in the resolution and see what kinds of questions it poses. This is what I did in the example
of interfaith marriage when I said, what do we mean by succeed? How do we know if interfaith
marriages succeed? And so on. A second way we can find the issues is by looking at the
underlying context of the resolution. What's going on out in the world that this controversy
is dealing with? And so if we applied that method to the resolution that the United States
should develop a national missile defense system, we might find issues like, was the
Bush administration wise to abrogate the anti ballistic missile treaty? Will a national
missile defense system work? Is the technology available for national missile defense? Do
the costs exceed the benefits? And so on. Now notice that unlike the interfaith marriage
example, these questions don't come from the wording or the text of the resolution itself.
They instead come from the context. They require us to know about what's going on out in the
world that the resolution is dealing with. So that's a second way we could do it. A third
way we could do it would be to gather up a good sample of what people have said about
the resolution and then figure out out of all of that sample what they agree upon, which
we can then set aside. This is not in dispute. It can be stipulated. And then when you see
what's left, when you see what they disagree about, you could say, well, these are the
central points of disagreement. All of these methods are perfectly good. Each of them will
lead us to discover the issues that are inherent in the controversy. But they have one problem.
They can be cumbersome. They can be really time consuming. So fortunately, there's a
shortcut that we could use to discover the issues. And the shortcut works so well that
it's probably the method that's used most often of all. The shortcut reflects the fact
that certain types of issues recur with resolutions of a given type. So once we know what kind
of resolution we have, fact, definition, value, or policy, we will know what categories of
issues to look for. These categories are called topoi, a Greek word that means place. They
are places in the mind, metaphorical places, that one goes to look to find issues. So what
are the topoi? They were identified pretty well by the ancient Greeks and Romans. For
a resolution of fact, they are fairly simple. One, how will we know if the statement is
true? That is, what are our criteria? And two, are the criteria satisfied? For a resolution
of definition, such as that the fetus is a person, the topoi would be one, is the interpretation
relevant? Two, is the interpretation fair? And three, how do we choose among competing
interpretations? For a resolution of value, one, is the condition truly good or bad as
alleged? Two, has the value been properly applied to the situation at hand? And three, how do
we choose among competing values? And finally, for resolutions of policy, one, is there a
problem? Two, where is the credit or blame for the problem due? Three, will the proposal
solve the problem, will it work? And four, on balance, will things be better off with
the proposal? By the way, if your memory is good, you will notice that those four topoi
are exactly the ones that I used in the last lecture to identify the issues that Secretary
Powell addressed in his speech to the UN Security Council. So the shortcut of finding topoi
will tell us what sorts of issues come up with what kind of resolution or claim. As
we build our case, we want to be sure that we include something that speaks to each issue.
Doing that will make our case prima facie. We'll meet our initial burden of proof, and
that will require that our opponent respond to what we've said. That requirement is the
burden of rejoinder, and it will shift back and forth between us and our opponent as each
responds to the other. So we want to be sure that the case meets our burden, but now we
get to make choices about how to do it. Remember I said that there are choices of selection
and choices of arrangement. So let's take selection first. And here we want to further
divide because there are two main kinds of selection choices. One, whether the arguments
are strong enough, and two, how many arguments to include. So we select according to strength
and according to number. Well, let's look at strength. How do we decide the strength
of an argument? Now here again, remember in formal logic, arguments are either valid
or invalid. The question of degrees of strength isn't an issue. But in a probabilistic kind
of situation, a sort we argue about every day, strength is very much important. Strength
is a function, first of all, of the listener's prior adherence to the evidence in the argument.
Remember we said that disagreement is based in agreement. The evidence has to be agreed
to as to its truth or the argument is not going to work very well. So for instance, facts
or common knowledge, things that are widely shared or things that could be easily established
because of audience predispositions, all of these will work well as evidence and arguments
that contain them are likely to be strong. Secretary Powell used a lot of photographs
and objects in his speech as evidence out of a belief that pictures and objects don't
lie. They're not subject to interpretation. The other thing that governs the strength
of an argument, besides whether the audience will accept its evidence, is how relevant
is the argument to the resolution. That is to say, what happens to the resolution if
the argument succeeds? Or what happens to the resolution if the argument fails? Now we
could imagine at one extreme, the killer argument, the argument that just clinches the resolution.
So that if we're talking, for example, about whether annual testing should be performed
in elementary and secondary schools, if we could establish that annual testing disrupts
the order of the curriculum, we would have a pretty powerful argument against doing it
because it would establish pretty strongly that there's a good reason not to that something
that's more fundamental will be imperiled if we do. At the other extreme, we have arguments
that fail to meet what I call the so what test. Even if you establish that the argument
is sound, so what? What difference does it make to the resolution? So for example, whether
the PSAT, the Preliminary Scholastic Assessment Test, is given in the 11th grade or in the
10th grade, probably doesn't matter very much to the question of whether there should be
annual testing. Yes, we could disagree about when's the best place to give that test, but
it doesn't make much difference to the resolution that's at hand. So a listener's prior adherence
and the relevance of the claim to the resolution are factors that govern the strength of the
claim. Now each of these in turn is affected by a number of other considerations. For instance,
to what degree is the evidence speculative rather than certain? Audiences tend to prefer
more certain to less certain evidence. To what degree does the claim rely on short term
urgent matters that are immediately before us? And to what degree does it involve more
distant long term considerations? People get more interested in things that are immediate
and urgent. To what degree is the claim consistent with common sense, with what we already believe?
You may remember in the 1980s, the government at one point claimed that ketchup was a vegetable
for the purpose of composition of school lunches. Now most people are not inclined to believe
that ketchup is a vegetable, even if it could be shown that it is. And so an argument based
on the assumption that ketchup is a vegetable is not likely to be very strong as an argument.
So all of these elements affect whether listeners are predisposed to believe an argument and
how much good an argument does in establishing the resolution. And these are strength considerations,
the first of the choices that we make. Arguments in the 2005 debate about social
security reform illustrate the concept of strength. For example, one of the arguments
advanced is that the Social Security Trust Fund eventually may be depleted. This is a
relatively strong argument even though it's long term rather than immediate. First of
all, because it makes a big difference to the argument about social security reform
if you don't have a trust fund there. And second, audiences pretty easily can accept
that if you take out more than you put in, eventually the fund will go down. In contrast,
another argument that was advanced was that African Americans should favor private accounts
because they have a lower life expectancy and thereby would get a greater benefit from.
This I think most people would say is a relatively weak argument. First of all, because it offends
our sense of justice, we ought to be trying to improve the life expectancy of African Americans,
not conceding that it's going to be lower. And second, because it doesn't advance the
resolution very much, it says that here's a proposal that's popular with one segment
of the population, not that it's a proposal that is good or that ought to be adopted.
So if we were choosing from arguments to defend President Bush's social security proposal,
we would make more sense for us to pick the stronger argument which is the first of the
two that I described. So that's strength. Now the second selection question beyond strength
is how many arguments? What number and range of arguments to present? Why would we want
to present more arguments? Well, there are two reasons. First, since the arguments are
inconclusive, they're not certain. We hedge our bets by presenting multiple arguments.
We don't stake the resolution on one single argument or on a very small number of arguments
because each one of them is inconclusive. And so we hedge our bet by presenting more.
And second, because an audience is likely to be heterogeneous. It will be made up of
different kinds of people. Some arguments will appeal to some people, and others will appeal
to other people. And so we put arguments together for that reason and present more of them.
There is a technical term for this. It's called amplitude. Just like amplitude in physics
is extending the width of a wave, amplitude in argument is extending the range, widening
the range of the argument by presenting more arguments in support of the resolution. But
presenting more arguments, increasing amplitude, also has risks. What are those? Well, for
example, a poor argument, let's say one of the ones in our range is a relatively weak
argument, reflects badly not only on itself, but on all of the other choices as well, and
on the credibility of the arguer. Somebody tells you ketchup is a vegetable. You will
not only be unlikely to accept that ketchup is a vegetable, but you'll begin wondering
about some of the other claims that this person has made, and about what kind of a person
would make such a claim as that ketchup is a vegetable. What's more, if we pile argument
on argument on argument, it may sound like we don't have enough confidence in any of
them. We may come off seeming defensive, or even whining. And as we increase amplitude
as we present more arguments, we also increase the risk that we're going to present two
arguments that are inconsistent with each other. And one of the things we know about
inconsistency in argument is, while an inconsistency means only that both arguments can't be true,
not that they're both false, but both can't be true. In fact, psychologically, audiences
will often dismiss both. And so we increase the number of arguments we present, we run
the risk that multiple arguments will be ignored or rejected by a given audience. So, there
are dangers to presenting lots of arguments, just as there are benefits to increasing the
number of arguments. There's no recipe or formula that will tell us how many arguments
to present. We have to figure out how many to use based on the circumstances of each
specific situation and understanding what the benefits and the risks are. So, we've got
factors of strength and factors of number that will govern our selection of arguments,
and within each argument, the same factors will govern our selection of evidence. Now
let's talk about the choices regarding arrangement. The first one we talked about last time, whether
to use a series or convergent or parallel structure. We make that choice based on the subject matter
we're discussing, what we think are the relationship among our claims, and what will be the easiest
and most effective way to present those claims to an audience. By the way, there's nothing
that prevents us from combining these structures just as we saw that Colin Powell did. Sometimes
one will be stronger, sometimes another. There's in principle no reason that one of them is
stronger or weaker than another. Now if we decide that the series structure
is the one we want, then there's not a whole lot else about arrangement that we need to
decide. We choose only whether we start at the beginning of the chain and go forward,
each claim leading to the next, to the next, to the next, to the resolution, or whether
we start with the resolution and go backwards and say the resolution is true because of this
and this is true because of this and this because of this and so on back to the beginning
of the chain. That's really all we have to decide. But with a convergent structure or
a parallel structure, there are additional choices to be made. For instance, since it
doesn't make any logical difference in a convergent or parallel structure, which argument comes
first, second, third, or fourth, we take the one that we think is the strongest and where
do we put it? Well here the research is somewhat inconclusive. There's some research that says
put it first because it will capture the attention of the audience and it will color their perceptions
of all the rest of the arguments, a kind of halo effect. Other research says put it last
so that you leave the audience with a very strong impression with the strongest arguments
you could make. The first of these is called the primacy effect and the second is called
the recency effect. Some of the research favors one, some favors the other. But the thing
that they're consistent on don't put the strongest argument in the middle. Put it either at the
beginning or at the end. We saw that Secretary Powell had a parallel structure in which he
talked about biological, chemical, and nuclear weapons. He could have discussed the three
in any order. You notice he put biological weapons first, he put nuclear weapons last,
these are probably the two that pose the greatest threat worldwide. Or another kind
of choice to make. Should you up front anticipate objections and answer them and build the answers
into your structure? And here the research suggests if the audience is composed of people
who are pretty well educated or if the audience is known to be opposed to what you're arguing.
In either of those cases then yes it makes sense to build in, anticipate, and answer
objections. Why? Because a highly educated audience will be thinking along and exercising
critical judgment and they'll come up with objections anyway and so it's important that
you acknowledge them. And obviously an audience that's opposed to you will have objections
already in mind. Another choice. Should you proceed from what's most familiar to what's
least familiar? Well this would be a kind of analogical structure. You start with what
people know and you make links from what they know to what they don't. And that's been
found to make understanding of unfamiliar material more easy for an audience. On the
other hand it may sometimes be at odds with the logical connections among the parts of
the argument. Well these choices, strongest, first, strongest, last, familiar to unfamiliar,
whether to include and respond to objections, in a way these are all things that are matters
of logical indifference. If you've got a parallel structure or a convergent structure
each argument's going to work independently no matter what order you put them in. But
these are questions that are rhetorically very significant. They decide how much salience
an argument will have for listeners. They increase the ease or reduce the ease with
which listeners can process the argument so that it's understood and so that it's more
likely to succeed. Now with arguments that are logically independent, that is a convergent
or parallel structure, there are several very common organizational patterns that people
often use. Because they're patterns they make it easy for a listener to follow along and
anticipate what's coming next. One pattern is chronological, from past to present to future
or from future to present to past. One is spatial or geographical, from near to far
or from east to west or north to south. One is to place items in familiar categories,
the economic, the social, the political. One pattern is to go from cause to effect or effect
to cause or problem to solution or solution to problem. One is to compare and to contrast.
And so the one that we pick from among all these patterns will help listeners to follow
along the structure of the argument. Notice by the way that in making these choices
about selection and arrangement it isn't necessary to organize the argument by reference to the
list of the topoi. That is in a policy resolution, we don't have to talk about the problem first
and then the blame and then the cure and so on. It only matters that we be sure to address
each of the topoi effectively. Well we've talked here about a number of constraints and choices.
Let's look at how these work themselves out in a specific historical example. Of course
you could take Secretary Powell's speech that we discussed last time and see how they worked
out there. But I want to introduce another example. President Lyndon Johnson's Defense
of the Voting Rights Act in his speech of March of 1965. President Johnson is not usually
remembered as a really distinguished orator, but this speech was identified by a group
of critics as one of the top 100 American speeches of the 20th century. It was delivered
a week after the violence in Selma, Alabama and it's remembered particularly for its emotion
in which a southern president addressed the joint session of Congress and uttered the
words we shall overcome. But it's also a speech that has a fairly rich argument to it. You
can download the speech from the web, it's available at presidentialrhetoric.com and
you can see some of the choices that the president made. First of all, he speaks to the relevant
topoi. It's a problem oriented, a policy oriented speech and so he starts with a problem that
is the denial of voting rights and violence against protesters. He blames the absence
of any federal law to do anything about this as the cause. He suggests a new law to enforce
constitutional rights that should be passed without delay and he says that this will benefit
the whole nation, not just African Americans and that the right to vote secures all other
rights. So if we look across his speech, we'll see he does what he needs to do to meet the
constraint of speaking to all of the issues. Notice how he selects his arguments. He picks
arguments that the broad national audience will be likely to accept. For instance, he
emphasizes that the right to vote is protected by the constitution. It's a constitutional
imperative. So you may not like African Americans voting if you're a white southern conservative
but you respect the constitution. You honor the constitution and so the argument that
it's a constitutional right is a strong argument. As is a moral appeal. As is an appeal to a
sense of justice and the president softens the blow to the south by paying homage to
that region and talking about how important it is to the country. You notice certain arrangement
choices in that speech. The president discusses voting rights in an order so that the significance
of the issue enlarges as he goes. He says it's a turning point in history, a basic fundamental
issue. It transcends region or party. It's grounded in founding documents. He catalogs
the deprivations of voting rights. He then enlarges those from the specific bill to civil
rights and the great society more generally. He proceeds from agreement to disagreement.
This speech illustrates the choices of selection and arrangement. Now we'll assume that the
case has been put together and next time we'll start considering how to respond to it.
Hello again. Last time we explored a series of concepts that explain what a case is.
And how one is put together. Now we're about to explore how an advocate can respond to an
opposing case. The very first thing we need to know is how to determine exactly what is
in dispute. This is extremely important in order to focus the response on the true heart
of the controversy and not to be misdirected. For this purpose I have to introduce a new
term, really the only term that we're going to focus on in this lecture. That is the concept
of stasis. Stasis is a Greek term. Sometimes the pronunciation has been anglicized as stasis.
It means literally a point of rest or an equilibrium. It is a nifty concept for figuring out exactly
what's in dispute. We can think of it as a point between opposing forces. If you imagine
a simple diagram in which you've got an arrow moving in one direction and an arrow moving
in the other direction to counteract it, there'll be this point, this almost metaphysical point
in between the two forces where there's rest, where neither force can proceed because the
other force opposes it. If I can mix my metaphors we can think of that point of rest as a fulcrum
point because that's the point that the dispute turns on. Movement can't resume until that
point is somehow overcome. The movement toward a goal, in other words, has got to get past
this point of rest in order to proceed. Now what this fulcrum point tells us is precisely
what's in dispute, what it is that's blocking the movement of these two forces. And once
we know precisely what's in dispute, then the advocates are invited to respond to that
focal point. This concept of stasis originated in classical rhetoric. It was the anonymously
written Rhetorica ad herenium, in case you're interested, in which it first appeared. Cicero
did a good job to synth to refine and systematize it, as he did with many other concepts, and
it was originally designed for advocacy in courts of law, although as I think we'll see,
it has a much broader application. So let's unpack this concept, let's figure out what
it's all about. And to do so I want to consider a very simple example. Forget for the moment
that we're among friends, and suppose I come up to you and I make the statement, you stole
my car. Now what are you going to do in response? We could imagine a whole variety of things
you might do, but since we're discussing argumentation, let's assume you won't punch me in the nose.
But you could make some different responses. Suppose you say, no, I never had your car.
I was never in possession of it at all. Well now my assertion and your response establish
a focal point for this disagreement. Did you have possession of my car? Did the act take
place? And this is referred to in the literature as stasis of conjecture. The question is,
is it? Did it happen? Suppose on the other hand I say you stole my car, and you reply,
no, I only borrowed it. Now notice how this example is different from the first example.
I've made the same assertion, you stole my car, and your response, no, I only borrowed
it. Together assertion and response establish the focal point, but the focal point is not
about whether the act occurred. It's about what we should call it, or how we should
characterize it. And this is referred to as stasis of definition. What is it? So we have
so far a stasis of conjecture and a stasis of definition.
Now suppose I say, you stole my car, and your response is, yes, but it's a good thing
I did, because I used it to take to the hospital someone who had fallen on your sidewalk when
you hadn't shoveled the snow and ice off, and you would have been liable if I hadn't.
Now again we have an assertion and a response. We have these two opposed argumentative forces.
But now the dispute is over whether the act was justified, not whether it occurred, not
what it should be called, but whether it was justified. And it was justified, so you said,
by extenuating circumstances. There was some special need that made it okay for you to
do this. After all, you were not only protecting human rights, but you were protecting me from
legal liability. This is an example of the stasis of quality, which is a stasis that
refers to significance or magnitude or extenuating circumstances.
And now before we completely leave this hypothetical car theft, let's consider one more example.
I come up to you and I say, you stole my car, and you respond, hey, don't accuse me of theft
out here on the street. Theft is a criminal offense. If you've got a case prosecute, I'll
see you in court. Now what's the issue? I've made an assertion,
you stole my car, and your response essentially says, this isn't the right place to discuss
it. It's not the right forum, not the right procedure. And this invokes what we call the
stasis of place. So to recapitulate in the classical understanding
of the term stasis, we have stasis of conjecture, definition, quality, and place. Now at the
risk of stating the obvious, notice how in these four examples, the nature of your response
together with my assertion produced a very different point of clash. In one case, whether
an act occurred. In another, what to call it. In another, whether it was justified. And
in another, whether we're in the right place or the right forum in order to discuss it.
Now it makes a difference which of these we pick because subsequent arguments need to
