in the 1970s but that's a false analogy. Now I realize we haven't yet talked in any detail
about specific inferences. We'll be doing that a few lectures from now. But for now
just remember that attacking the link, attacking the inference is just a strong way to undercut
the argument as is attacking the claim or the evidence. And there's one more choice
you could make about which part of the argument to attack. Think back to that diagram that
had the evidence, the claim, and the inference. And now imagine that we enclose that entire
diagram in a box. We have a box drawn around it. And that box represents the underlying
context of the argument. The set of assumptions, the framework in which the argument is based.
And you might choose to attack that. For example, you might say, this whole argument
about airline crowding and airports and unpleasantness is based on the assumption that the convenience
of the consumer is the principal goal of the airline industry. And while obviously they're
concerned with consumers, it's far more important to focus on safety, on the preservation of
life, and on avoiding threats to national security. And if we look at the airline industry
and the situation of airports in that context, then we get a whole different light on the
matter and these concerns appear relatively trivial. So what we've done in that example
is we've responded not to the claim, the evidence, or to the inference, but to the whole framework
of assumptions that surrounds the argument. So once we've decided which arguments to
attack out of that whole case, for each one we attack, we further choose whether to go
after the evidence, the claim, the inference, or the underlying context. We could of course
choose to go after more than one if there's good reason to do so. The choice of which parts
to attack and how many parts to attack should be governed by a very simple principle. What
will get us the most effective result in bringing the argument into question with the least
expenditure of time and effort and energy? We might think of this as a mini-max kind of
principle to use a term that economists sometimes use. What with minimum effort will get the
maximum gain? That will help us choose what part of the argument to attack. So we have
which arguments to attack, what part of the argument to attack. The third choice is what
type of attack to develop. And here at the risk of seeming to split hairs, I want to make
sure that we all realize that there are lots of different ways to attack an argument. For
example, one could ask a question about an argument. You said that airports have delays.
How many airports have these delays? This is generally not a good attack strategy. And
the reason is it doesn't build up any kind of equity for you. Once the question is answered,
you have nothing left. The original argument is back there again in full. So the only time
when I would normally advise attacking an argument by asking a question is when the
question is important to the argument and is unanswerable. So for instance, suppose
that as one part of the case, somebody said the airline industry executives are meeting
together in secret and planning how to curtail their routes. And you say, where's the evidence
that they're having these secret meetings? And the person responds, well, they met last
year in Detroit and they met in New York. Wait a minute. We know about those meetings.
They're not secret. What about all these secret meetings that you're referring to? Well, of
course, by the nature of secrecy, you don't know. And so you can't answer the question
and yet the question is important to the case. With that exception, asking a question is
generally not a very good way to attack the case. But here's some other possibilities.
Identifying internal deficiencies in the argument will show how the arguer failed to meet his
or her burden of proof if you show problems with the evidence or problems with the inference
as in the examples that I mentioned before. Or a third way to attack an argument is to
identify inconsistencies in the argument that can cast doubt on the sincerity of the arguer
as well as requiring a response to the inconsistency. So for instance, let's suppose that you're
responding to an argument that refers to delays and you've suggested scheduling changes
can reduce airline delays. And then later on, you've suggested that takeoff and landing
restrictions can reduce airport congestion, two different problems that have been identified
in the case. But now wait a minute. Scheduling changes would supposedly reduce delays, but
takeoff and landing restrictions while they cut congestion would increase delays. So you
could point out here's an argument that's working at cross purposes with itself. And
as we saw in an earlier lecture, when you identify an inconsistency, logically that means only
that one of those claims must be false, but psychologically it casts doubt on the sincerity
of both and on the credibility of the arguer him or herself. So that's another way to attack
an argument. Yet another way is to label the opponent's argument strategy. Now, this
approach relies on the principle that once you identify what is the underlying strategy,
you reduce the effectiveness of that very strategy, because you've called attention
to it, you've recognized it for what it is. And so if you respond to an argument by saying
well that's loaded language, you see what you've done. You've identified the strategy
that the arguer is using, which is to load the deck by using language that is not neutral,
it's biased language, and that calls attention to it. Or you might say you're trying to create
a dilemma where there really isn't a dilemma here, we're not forced into these two undesirable
choices in the way that you thought. And so what you're doing is you're pointing out
attempts to thwart the goal of reasoning critically and resolving the underlying disagreement.
Well those are four ways you can attack an argument. Another is a touter argument. This
is a denial of the claim itself, as in the examples I illustrated above, and when you
do that, the nature of your denial will define the point of stasis, and now the listener
will have to choose between the competing claims that you and your opponent have advanced.
And finally, the sixth choice that I want to mention, you could choose to recontextualize
the argument, placing it in a broader context in which it now appears to be unsatisfactory.
And my example before when I tried to recontextualize from consumer convenience to safety and national
security is a good example of that. So just as in deciding which arguments to attack and
which parts of the argument to attack, what type of attack to develop is an important
strategic choice. Now there's one more choice that I want to mention very briefly, and that's
how many attacks to develop. Given all of the arguments in Colin Powell's case, if you
want to attack it, how many attacks should you make? And the reason that I want to cover
this so quickly is that the answer is exactly the same as it was when we discussed this
topic under case construction, how many arguments to put in the case. We can increase the amplitude
of the attack, that is, a wider range, more attacks, by hedging our bets because the individual
attacks may not be conclusive, and so we put a lot of them together and we'll convince
some people that the argument's weak for this reason and some people for this reason and
some people for this reason. And that takes advantage of the fact that the audience is
heterogeneous, different people will be appealed to by different kinds of attacks. But if we
increase the amplitude and have lots of attacks, we may weaken our credibility, it may seem
like we're just launching these scatter shot attacks here and here and here and here and
here because we don't have anything really substantial to say against the case, and we
run the risk of getting ourselves into an inconsistent position and suggesting we don't
have confidence in our own attacks. And so just as we said with respect to case construction,
we have to find the right balance between too few and too many attacks based upon the
specifics of the case and of what we want to accomplish. So these then are the four basic
choices that relate to selection when we go about attacking a case, deciding which arguments
to attack, where in the argument, what type of attack, how many attacks. Now as I've
said, arguers often make these choices instinctively and in the heat of the moment. But we want
to study them systematically so that we can understand them so that we can become aware
of the range of choices and begin to coach ourselves in how to make better judgments
and better choices. Now lest you think that this is all a hypothetical discussion and
all grounded in theory, I want to spend a few minutes with an actual example of choices
regarding selection of attacks. And for this purpose, I want to go back to the very first
presidential debates between John F. Kennedy and Richard Nixon in 1960. So much of what
we remember about presidential debates is either the mistakes or the gaffes that get
made or the visual contrast between the candidates that we focus sometimes on superficial things
and don't realize that there's actually a lot of substantial argument going on. That
was certainly true in the Kennedy Nixon debates. And so as an example, I want to pick what
was not one of the major themes of the debates by any means, but what came up during the
course of the third debate. Now you may remember that the format was that there were questions
posed by journalists and one candidate had two and a half minutes to answer and then
the other candidate had a shorter time in which to respond. Sometimes the journalists
posed open-ended questions so that the candidate's response was the case construction and the
other candidate was making the attack. But sometimes the journalists focused a question
on an argument that the opposing candidate had been making so that the candidate to whom
the question was posed was invited to attack that argument. And that's what happened in
this example when the journalist Douglas Cater asked Senator Kennedy this question.
Vice President Nixon says that he has costed the two party platforms and that yours would
run at least $10 billion a year more than his. You have denied his figures. He has called
on you to supply your figures. Would you do that? So Cater has posed Nixon's argument
and has invited Kennedy to respond to that argument. Now look at the selection choices
that Kennedy makes in what he says. In the course of his two and a half minutes, he basically
says four things. He says, yes, I have stated in both debates and state again that I believe
in a balanced budget and have supported that concept during my 14 years in the Congress.
The only two times when an unbalanced budget is warranted would be during a serious recession
or a national emergency. So the first thing that Kennedy does is to recontextualize the
argument. Not about whether his program will cost $10 billion more than Nixon's. He doesn't
want to focus on that. He wants to focus on the question whether he is fiscally responsible.
And his reasoning is most people who argue that you're spending too much really mean
to say that you're fiscally irresponsible. And so he selects a stasis in quality saying
that costing more is okay because the budget is balanced. He recontextualizes the argument.
Second thing he says, he says now, on the question of the cost of our budget, I have
stated that it's my best judgment that our agricultural program will cost a billion and
a half, possibly $2 billion less than the present. My judgment is that the vice president's
program will cost a billion dollars more than the present. Second, I believe that the high
interest rate policy that this administration has followed has added about $3 billion a
year to interest on the debt. I would hope under a different monetary policy we could
reduce that burden. Third, I think it's possible to gain $700 million to a billion dollars
through tax changes, which I believe would close up loopholes. Fourth, I have suggested
that medical care for the agent would be paid under Social Security, which by the way at
that time was off budget. It was not part of the federal budget. So what Kennedy does
is he identifies these four specific examples where he thinks his program would cost less
than Nixon's would cost. Inviting you perhaps to generalize that his program overall would
cost less, but not directly responding to the claim that his program would cost $10
billion more. So he's attacked evidence in this second case. He's attacked specific examples.
Third, he acknowledges that in some areas he will spend more than Nixon. He says in my
judgment we would spend more money on aid to education. We'd spend more money on housing.
We'd spend more money, and I hope more wisely on defense than this administration has. So
in those areas, he's granting the argument. He's choosing not to attack the argument with
respect to those examples because he's going to suggest it's a good thing to spend more
there. And finally, he accuses Nixon of misstating his figures. Mr. Nixon misstates my figures
constantly, which is of course his right, but the fact of the matter is here is where
I stand and I just want to have it on the public record. So again, he's attacking evidence.
Now these choices about what to do reflect Kennedy's application of the Minimax principle.
He thinks here is where with minimum effort he can get the best results in launching his
attack. We can see what he does and doesn't do and can evaluate his choices based on the
understanding that we've just gained about what the advocates range of choices are. Next
time we'll look at attack choices that relate to arrangement and then we'll talk about defense.
Butcher 10, attack and defense, part two.
It's good to be back. Last time we began a discussion of attack and defense, which as
I reminded us are not military operations but constructive exercises in which we try
to test arguments and reach conclusions with which we're comfortable and in which we're
confident. I talked about a number of choices regarding the selection of arguments to attack
and I said that there were also choices to be made with respect to arrangement and so
I want to pick up with that now and focus really on two major arrangement choices. The
first of them is the question, should the attacks be organized in the same way as the
arguments that are being attacked? In other words, if the person that you're responding
to presented a series of arguments one, two, three and four and you're going to attack
them, should you organize your attack the same way, one, two, three and four? Doing
so will make it easier for audiences to follow the argument. They follow the attack that's
in exactly the same sequence and the same progression as the original argument. But the danger is
that doing so may put you on the opponent's ground and you may actually be better off building
your own organizational scheme around what you think are the central points in the dispute.
Let me illustrate this with a fairly simple example. In lecture six, when I first began
talking about airlines and airports and all of that, I used as one of my organizational
examples a set of arguments in a series structure. Remember I said my luggage was misdirected,
it was mis tagged when I checked it in at the airport and so it went to the wrong city
and because it went to the wrong city, there were valuable documents that were missing
and because those were missing, I gave a presentation which was nowhere near as good as it should
have been and because my presentation wasn't very good, I got fired from my job and that
was the whole series structure. Now if you were going to attack that point by point following
the same organizational pattern that I used, you would take each one of the steps in the
sequence that I developed and if you're going to say something about it, you'd say it and
if not, you'd skip over it but you would follow my structure. But doing that focuses the argument
on my ground. What am I trying to do with that argument? I'm clearly trying to fix the
responsibility for my losing my job on a series of mishaps that were ultimately caused by
the airline. Now suppose instead you respond to this argument in a different way. Suppose
you say your termination notice was written before you ever left on this trip and that's
all you say. Now look, you haven't responded to my substructure, you haven't taken each
one of these individual steps that I went through but you have focused the dispute on
the question, is it the airline's fault? And you could well reason that that's the central
question in the dispute and if you can demonstrate that it's not the airline's fault, then you've
defeated my argument even though you haven't followed my substructure. Because if I was
effectively fired before I ever started on this unfortunate trip, then it's pretty hard
to argue that the airlines were responsible for whatever mishap befell me. So what you've
done is you've focused on what you want to accomplish which is responsibility doesn't
lie with the airline. So what I'm trying to suggest is sometimes it makes sense to follow
the organizational structure of the argument being attacked but sometimes it doesn't and
this is a choice to make and it's a choice to make based on the strategic considerations
of what you're trying to gain and what the argument looks like. Remember that in the
last lecture when I talked about the example of the Kennedy Nixon debates, Kennedy developed
his own organizational structure. He didn't follow along the lines that the question suggested
and doing that enabled him to refocus the debate on what he wanted to emphasize which was number
one that he was fiscally responsible and number two that he had good budget priorities and
he wouldn't have been able to do that as effectively if he had responded directly, you say my programs
cost ten billion dollars more, no they don't, here's the arithmetic piece by piece by piece.
So the first arrangement choice is whether to follow the opponent's structure or to follow
your own. The second of the two arrangement choices that come up when we attack arguments
is how completely to develop the attack as we present. What all do we include in the
presentation of the attack? Well let me tell you first what the ideal answer is according
to most of the textbooks on argumentation. Most of the textbooks say what you want to
do is you want to present a complete attack and a complete attack includes the following
things. First, it includes a statement of the argument that you're going to attack. Stated
in neutral language not trying to load the deck in language that the audience would agree
upon and if at all possible using the very language that your opponent used in making
the argument. Then second what you ought to do is you ought to explain what's the basis
of your attack. What is it you're going to say about this argument? And then third you
develop the attack and support the attack with evidence and explanation. And then fourth
and finally having made the attack you explain the significance of what you've accomplished
by making the attack. So you state the argument that's going to be attacked, you state what
you're going to do with it, you develop and support the attack and then you state what's
been accomplished by the attack. That's the ideal answer about how to develop the attack.
The problem is that that takes a lot of time and if done repeatedly attack after attack
it can get cumbersome and you could even come off seeming fairly pedantic. And so the question
is in any given case how much of that should you do? How fully should you develop the attack?
Well it depends upon how obvious your attack is, how clear it'll be to the audience, what's
your going after and going after a particular argument, how clear it'll be what you've accomplished
once you have done it. And these are obviously strategic judgments that need to be made case
by case. Notice that in the Kennedy Nixon debate example, Kennedy didn't go through all of
those four steps when he made each one of his attacks. He didn't restate the argument
from the questioner, he only hints at the basis of his attack and he shorthands what
has been accomplished by the attack into a very short set of phrases. Now why? Because
he's got limited time, he has only two and a half minutes, he wants to make several attacks
against this argument and he wants to establish that he's turning around and suggesting that
Nixon doesn't state his figures accurately. He needs to do all of that in about two and
a half minutes. And so Kennedy instinctively, because I'm sure he didn't sit down and map
this out, but he instinctively made the judgment that in making the attacks he could eliminate
some of those steps in the ideal presentation and he'd be okay because the audience would
be able to follow along. Well this is the kind of judgment that you need to make whenever
you're launching an attack. So the two arrangement choices are whether to follow the same organizational
structure as the argument you're responding to and how fully to develop the attack.
Now we focused between the last lecture and this on selection and arrangement choices
related to attacking arguments. Now I want to switch over and talk about defending arguments.
And the first thing we will notice is that the strategic choices available to the defense
are much more limited. It's not a good selection choice for example to ignore an attack. So once
an attack has been made you want to defend the argument, you've pretty much got to respond to
the attack. So what kinds of selection considerations come into place, how to characterize the attack
and that might determine how one goes about responding to it. For instance, you could demonstrate
that the attack is inapplicable to the case. Let's suppose that your original argument in your case
was the Social Security Trust Fund will be depleted by the year 2042. And the attack in response to
that was to say wait a minute, Social Security Trust Fund is large now and it's been growing since
the 1980s since the last time we reformed Social Security. Now if your case is that it's going
to be depleted by 2042, you could pretty easily point out that that attack is not applicable.
Your case is talking about trends that are going to take place in the future and the attack has
dealt with the past. It's simply not applicable. Or another thing you could do is to demonstrate
that the attack is trivial in its consequences. So let's go back to the example I used a few
lectures ago about mandatory standardized testing of students in school. And I said one of the
arguments that was made that we're doing too much testing cited the fact that we give the
preliminary scholastic assessment test, the PSAT, in 10th grade. And suppose the attack says no,
no, no, no. The PSAT is given in 11th grade, so we're okay as far as 10th grade is concerned.
Now, remember, the question here is, what are the effects of repeated standardized testing on an
overall educational curriculum? Does it really matter whether we give the PSAT in 10th grade
or 11th grade? And so you could dismiss this attack by saying, you know, this is of such small
consequence that even if it's corrected, really doesn't damage or imperil our position, so we're
not going to focus on which grade this test is given in. So that's another choice. Or you could
demonstrate that the attack is inadequately established. So the original argument, this time
we'll imagine a family situation. Original argument is a teenager makes a case wanting to have the
family car out past midnight, and the parents respond, you know, you are always testing limits.
Every time we set up a rule, you try to get around it, and the teenager responds, that's not so.
This is a special case. It's the only time I've made this request. Advice to the teenager, if you
want to make this argument, make sure the facts are with you on that one. But what the teenager is
trying to do is to defend the original argument by saying, the attack is not adequately established.
It's faulty. It's based on evidence that's either not there or that is mistaken.
Or you could demonstrate that the attack is simply wrong, that it's an error. The attack says that
there's an inconsistency in the way the airlines price for tickets, depending on distance that you
travel. The defense might say, no, there's no inconsistency. Most of the pricing structure is
pretty reasonable, and where there are discrepancies, there are good explanations for it. So you could
characterize the attack as inapplicable, as trivial, as inadequately established, or as in error.
And you could probably do other things too. You could probably say it doesn't outweigh the case,
and so on. But the most basic selection choice that you have is not when you respond to the attack.
It's how you present the argument in the first place that may determine what attacks can be made
against it and what cannot. Now, before I completely leave selection choices, I want to say another
thing about them. When you defend an argument, your defense really has a two-faced nature to it.
On the one hand, you're rebuilding your argument. You're rebuilding a position that's been attacked,
and that's where your choices are fairly limited. But you're also attacking the attack. And when you
think about it that way, you have a wider range of choices. We can go back to the last lecture and
talk about all the selection choices that are involved in attacks, and they can be applied here.
But the danger is that if you think about a defense only as an attack on an attack,
you'll lose sight of your original argument that after all you're trying to rebuild. So we have to
keep both aspects of the defense of arguments in mind. Still in all, the selection choices are fairly
few. And the arrangement choice in defending an argument is basically whether the structure of the
original argument or the structure of the attack will be the dominant organizational plan.
Now, each one of these has a pitfall to it. You want to be careful if you choose to make the
structure of the original argument your plan. You want to be careful that you don't just repeat
the original argument without extending it or responding to the attack. Let's suppose my original
argument was that congestion in major airports creates delays which lead to economic losses.
And suppose your response is to say, look, there's no serious problem of congestion in most of our
major airports. It's limited to a small number, and these can be addressed individually. There's
not a serious problem. And I respond, but you didn't deny that congested airports create delays
that lead to economic losses. And I just repeat my argument. Now, it's true. You didn't deny that
there's a link between congestion and economic losses. But what you did was to deny that there
was any serious congestion. You attacked the evidence even though you didn't deny the inference.
And so for me to just repeat the inference will not help me very much at all. That's the pitfall
in going back to your own organizational structure. But on the other hand, if you let the structure
of the attack govern you, the danger is that the attack will run away with the argument.
So that the attack, rather than the argument, becomes the dominant focus.
So for instance, let's imagine I've presented a case arguing that stem cell research should
be strictly limited. And you've provided a lot of different reasons that limits aren't appropriate
and broader support for stem cell research is needed. Now, suppose I come back and say,
I said that stem cell research should be seriously limited. Let's consider all the attacks that were
brought against it. The first attack was so and so. Well, let me say this about it. Second one
was so and so. Here's my response to that. The third was this one. And here's how I answer that.
And I lose track of my own position. I spent all of my time emphasizing your attacks,
not my original position in favor of limiting stem cell research. So we want to try to avoid
both of these pitfalls, both the pitfall of just repeating and the pitfall of letting the attack
run away with the argument. So we try for a middle range position in which the focus is on the
original argument, but in which we're also sensitive to the individual attacks and comment
about those. Now, I said that there wasn't as much to say about defense as about attack. We've
covered what the basic selection considerations are and what the basic arrangement considerations are.
