had a tremendous influence even into the 20th century. In fact, some people have suggested
that the very apex of this view was an early 20th century movement known as logical positivism
that was predominant in the years immediately following World War I. And while I oversimplify
what logical positivism was, I don't think it's unfair to say that it held that only
words that clearly stand for something are meaningful, and hence that a large amount
of the language that we use doesn't really have any referent and therefore doesn't have
any meaning. The rich connotations of language didn't count because they were not about
anything, just a report of our feelings. And now we come to the 20th century.
Over the course of the last century, there has been a growing awareness of what this
whole approach of Cartesianism leaves out. And I think it's fair to say that dissatisfaction
with the approach has led to rethinking the whole idea of formal reasoning as the goal
and certainty as the goal and Cartesian philosophy as the model. Because what did this approach
do? It dismissed to the realm of meaninglessness attempts to make sense of the perplexities
of modern life. For example, it regarded a statement of value. Peace is good, democracy
is good, this piece of art is beautiful, has nothing more than a report, if you will,
on the state of our glands. When I say democracy is good, what I'm saying simply is I like
it. I'm not making any claim on you because I can't. I have no way to defend the claim
with any certainty. So statements of value are meaningless. Statements about what ought
to be done are meaningless. So for example, it was suggested that one could not establish
that freedom was better than tyranny or that democracy was better than communism or the
reverse because logical positivism excluded from consideration questions of this type.
The literary critic and theorist Wayne Booth has suggested that this whole view has led
to what he termed two modern dogmas, and of course his use of the term dogma is no accident.
In a kind of ironic, if not perverse reversal, our emphasis on certainty and reasoning leads
us to accept some things as dogmatic matters of faith. One of those dogmas he called scientism,
by which he meant the belief that non-scientific claims were all of equal value because there
was no way to verify them, there was no way to deduce them, there was no way to know them
with certainty, so one's as good as another. I like democracy, you like totalitarianism,
equally good. And the other dogma, he labeled irrationalism, and that was the belief that
things that couldn't be decided with certainty could only be decided by whim or by force,
the stronger would prevail. The emphasis was on the act of will.
Now, I don't know about you, but I find these dogmas, scientism and irrationalism, unacceptable.
I'm not prepared to say that non-scientific claims are of equal value or that matters
that are uncertain can be settled only by force, and increasingly during the 20th century
people reflected on these dogmas and came to the same conclusion. But what's the alternative
to accepting them? Go back to the beginning and question the Cartesian assumption that
certainty is what we're after. Go back to the beginning and question the assumption that
invention and arrangement are matters of philosophy rather than rhetoric. Go back to the beginning
and revive a classical understanding of what argumentation is all about. And there are
several intellectual influences over the past 50 or 60 years that have done just that. And
interestingly, they've come from different parts of the world and different fields of
study. And I want without going into any detail to just mention several of these so that we
get a sense of what's happened as people began to question the idea that Cartesianism,
logical positivism and the quest for certainty were our models.
There's a contemporary English philosopher, although he's now living in America, Stephen
Tullman, who in the 1950s set out to answer this question. When people talk about ethics,
how do they reason? You see, he rejects the notion that they don't reason. He rejects
the notion that ethical discussions are nonsense or just reports of the state of our glands.
And so he starts from the ground up and he says, okay, how do people reason when they
talk about ethics? And what he ended up doing was developing a model of reasoning that we'll
say more about in the next lecture, that he believes better accounts for what we do than
does formal logic or a quest for certainty. Meanwhile, from a completely different perspective,
a Belgian philosopher of jurisprudence named Chaim Perlman asked this question, when people
talk about justice, how do they reason? You notice he again rejects the notion that they
don't reason, rejects the notion that it's meaningless. And he says, when people talk
about justice, when they talk about what courts ought to do, how do they reason? He ended
up developing a whole theory that more than anything else went all the way back to classical
rhetoric. And so the way people reason, he says, they make claims, seeking the adherence
of audiences. They speak to a particular audience, but they also have in mind a larger, ultimate
universal audience which provides the norms and standards for how they argue. He wrote
a very long book explaining how people do that and the different methods and resources
they use. In Australia, a philosopher Charles Hamblin took the idea of fallacies, which
of course comes from formal logic. Fallacies are formally incorrect arguments, at least
in their traditional understanding. And he said in effect, wait a minute, let's explore
some of these fallacies. Depending on how people use them and what the context is, they
may not be fallacious at all. They may be perfectly good arguments. And what results
in our calling them fallacies is the mistaken assumption that we ought to be guided by this
model of formal reasoning seeking certainty. In the Netherlands, two scholars, Franz von
Ameren and Roeb Grootendorst, and then a whole series of others, asked this question, when
people engage in conversation trying to resolve problems, how do the conversations proceed
and how should they? And von Ameren and Grootendorst and their colleagues have worked out a whole
logic of conversation for critical discussions, which they've called pragma dialectics. Notice
what that term pragma dialectics does. It goes back to the concept of dialectic that
we explored in the first lecture, the interchange of questions and answers. And it realizes
that this is taking place for a pragmatic purpose, resolving problems by influencing
other people as to what the outcome should be. And so what their work does within the
realm of conversational analysis is to go back to this old notion of dialectic and rhetoric
in relationship. A contemporary German scholar, Jürgen Habermas, and other theorists of society
have focused on the role of communication in making a society, and they've offered
normative standards for how argument should proceed under ideal social conditions. That
is, it shouldn't be influenced by force. Conversation shouldn't end arbitrarily. The
force of the better argument should prevail, and so on. These have become normative standards
against which Habermas and other critics have measured actual practice. And in the United
States, within several different fields of study in the social sciences and the humanities,
there's been a new emphasis on the role of discourse and interpretation in understanding,
rejecting the notion that understanding is given and self-evident. Now all these different
trends, while they come from very different routes, have worked to revive the classical
understanding of argumentation grounded in rhetoric and dialectic as well as logic, and
today it is again an exciting and vibrant field of study.
After these first four lectures, we've now completed our study of the intellectual and
historical backgrounds of argumentation. It's time now to investigate what arguments
look like, how they arise in controversies, and how controversies proceed. We'll start
there next time.
Lecture five, argument analysis and diagramming. Hello and welcome. In the first four lectures,
we've explored the nature of argumentation and some of the points of view that are implied
or assumed in studying this field. We've examined how formal and informal reasoning
differ, and we've traced the development of argumentation studies across 2,500 years
of history. Now we begin a series of lectures on argumentation strategies and tactics, and
we start off by considering where we find arguments and what they look like.
What does it take to get people to argue? Basically, five preconditions must be met,
and from the discussions we've already had, these should be fairly obvious, so let me
tick them off briefly. First, there's a disagreement between people. There's some controversy.
Second, the disagreement matters to the people who are in it. It's not neutral or trivial.
Third, the assent of the other party is desired. But fourth, assent is valued only if it's
freely given. And finally, fifth, there's no easier or less risky way to resolve the
disagreement. We can remember those things from the discussions that we've already had,
and when those five conditions are satisfied, people will argue. How does a controversy
begin? Well, let's consider some examples. Let's consider six different claims that we
might imagine somebody making. One, in August 2005, George W. Bush was President of the
United States. Two, the teaching company sells this course for $49.95. Three, the red tie
is prettier than the blue one. Four, the city government is unsatisfactory. Five, capital
punishment is murder. And finally, six, Congress ought to pass the President's budget. Now
these are somewhat different kinds of statements. Some of them, as claims, will be more likely
to produce arguments than others. Think for a minute about this question. With respect
to each of these statements, how would you know whether you should believe it? Well,
let's try. Look at statement one. In August 2005, George W. Bush was President of the
United States. That's an item of common knowledge. It's easily verified, and so we can say, well,
everybody knows that, and that would probably be the end of the matter. It's not likely,
unless we imagine the time a hundred years from now, perhaps, not likely that people
would dispute the claim that George W. Bush was President of the United States. Sometimes
we could rely, not on common knowledge, but on widely shared empirical methods. Look
at statement two. The teaching company sells this course for $49.95. There's an easy way
to find out whether you should believe that. Go to their price list. Go to the catalog
and look it up. By the way, I hope you find it sells for a lot more than $49.95 because
of course it's worth every penny. But there's an easy way to find out the answer. We probably
wouldn't argue about it at any length. Sometimes we decide whether or not to believe a claim
by regarding it simply as a matter of taste. Look at statement three. The red tie is prettier
than the blue one. How do you know? Well, I just like it better. It's probably the end
of the matter if I say that or I say red is my favorite color or I've never liked blue
or something like that. These are just matters of taste and that's probably as far as the
conversation would go. But now look at statements four, five and six. They're quite different.
With each of those statements, I could easily imagine someone making the statement and someone
else saying, what do you mean by that? How do you know? What do you have to go on or
something like that? And in cases like those, further discussion will be required. Then
the person who made the statement has got to come up with some reasons for it. Statement
four, the city government is unsatisfactory. Why do you say that? Well, they won't even
plow the streets when it snows. A reason to support the claim. Look at statement five.
Capital punishment is murder. What makes you think so? Well, it's killing people, isn't
it? Or look at statement six. Congress ought to pass the president's budget. Why? Because
it's a good budget and it has the right kind of priorities. Now look what happened with
statements four, five and six. In each case, the statement was questioned and the person
who made the statement then had to come up with some sort of reason that you ought to
believe the statement. The other person might find the reason perfectly adequate. I say,
the city government's unsatisfactory. You say, why? I say, because they can't even plow
the streets when it snows and you say, yeah, you're right about that. End of the matter.
I've come up with a reason. You've said in effect that the reason justifies the claim
that I've made. You'll reach the claim. You'll travel with me to the claim. You'll agree
to it on the basis of the reason that I have provided. But sometimes the reason won't be
deemed satisfactory. Capital punishment is murder. How do you know? Well, it's killing
people, isn't it? Yeah, but that's just a play on words. There's killing and then there's
killing. It makes a difference if it's sanctioned by the state and so on and so forth. We can
imagine that this discussion, this argument might proceed on out for a while. If the original
reasons aren't satisfactory, then the arguer will need to elaborate those reasons further
or to come up with new ones and the process continues. It continues until the parties
to the argument conclude that they have a set of reasons that justify the claims that
have been advanced. In the case of really controversial questions, this argument might
continue for quite a long time. There are arguments that have gone on for centuries. In any case,
however, the first building block of an argument is the claim, the statement that readers or
listeners are asked to accept. Most theorists of argument recognize four different types
of claims and the differences can be important because different types of claims usually have
different proof requirements. How you go about justifying the claim will depend on what kind
of claim it is. The four basic types of claims are fact, definition, value, and policy. Fact,
definition, value, and policy. Let me say just a bit about each. I start with claims
of fact. These involve description. They concern matters that, at least in theory, could be
described and verified independently of the arguers and their matters about the argument
described and verified independently of the arguers and their matters about which in theory
there would be once they're verified a high degree of consensus. Now, I say in theory
because often there's really not a way to stop the argument and verify the matter independently.
Consider this example. Al Gore received more popular votes than George W. Bush in the election
of 2000. This is a matter that, in theory, could be verified independently. You could
look it up in the Almanac. But, of course, if there's one thing we know from the election
of 2000, it's that it's not that clear. What counts as a vote? What got counted as a vote?
Where the error rates were? And if all of those things were sorted out, it would perhaps
be controversial, whether Gore or Bush received the greater number of popular votes, but that's
still a claim of fact. Now, claims of definition deal with meaning or interpretation. We might
think that those are not really matters to argue about either. After all, you want to
know the definition of a word? Look it up. But that's a simple-minded notion of definitions.
And it assumes that definitions are neutral. Think about one of the statements in our list.
Capital punishment is murder. That's a definitional claim. But murder is not a neutral term. It's
a term that, because of its connotations, will evoke disagreement about whether it's
appropriate to put capital punishment in that category. So definitional questions are often
very important for the precise reason that definitions are not neutral. They're laden
with connotations and implications that can form the basis of a dispute. So, okay, we
have got fact and definition. The third kind of claim is value, which involves judgment,
a judgment of goodness or badness, rightness or wrongness, beauty or ugliness, and so on.
A judgment represents an evaluation, an appraisal, according to some kind of standards or criteria.
Sometimes the appraisal is absolute. For example, one of the statements that we used
before, the city government is unsatisfactory. It's an absolute judgment. It's unsatisfactory.
Sometimes claims of value are comparative. Economic growth is more important than environmental
protection, for example. And claims of value can be about terminal values, that is, things
that are good and bad in themselves, or they can involve instrumental values, things that
are good or bad as they lead to something else. And then the final category of claims
is policy. These are claims that involve action. And if I had to guess, I'd guess that there
are probably more arguments that occur on policy claims than any other kind, because
they address the question, what should we do? Typically, they contain some form of the
word should or ought in their statement because these are claims about what should take place
or what ought to happen. They're characteristic of deliberative bodies like Congress or a legislature,
but they also characterize informal deliberations between friends whenever people decide what
to do. So, Congress should pass the president's budget, is a policy claim, but so many people
know is, you should change your internet service provider. They both deal with the question,
what should we do? So those are the four types of claims, fact, definition, value, and policy.
Now let's consider what happens when an advocate advances a claim. And in the process, we'll
identify the other parts of an argument, the other building blocks in addition to the claim.
An advocate makes a claim. We can imagine a very simple diagram, a box with the word
claim in it. And that's all there is, because that claim may be immediately accepted. A
person might say, for example, we are heading into a recession. And the other person would
say, well, I guess that's right. And that's the end of the matter. The claim is immediately
accepted. If that happens, there's no argument, no further discussion. But if the claim is
not immediately accepted, if the other person says, why do you say that? Or how do you know?
Or what do you have to go on? Then the original advocate has to produce evidence to support
the claim, reasons for the claim in the language that we've been using so far. And so in that
situation, let's imagine that the person who said we're heading into a recession and has
asked how do you know, replies, well, the stock market is weakening. So now we could imagine
a diagram where over on the left, we have a box with the word evidence in it. And the
evidence in this case is that the stock market is weakening. So we've got a box for the claim
and a box for the evidence, and we have an arrow drawn from the evidence box going over
to the box that was labeled claim. That arrow represents an inference, an inference that
says that the fact that the stock market is weakening should be taken as a reason for
the claim that we're heading into a recession. Now that might be the end of the matter. Once
we say the stock market is weakening, the other person will accept that the stock market
indeed is weakening, and that's a reason to think that we're heading into a recession.
It's a very simple structure of argument with evidence, claim, and an implicit inference
linking the two. But often that won't be the end of the matter. The evidence and the
inference won't be immediately accepted. And then a couple of things could happen, depending
on what comes next. If I say we're heading into a recession and you say how do you know
and I reply the stock market is weakening, you might say I really don't think so. That
doesn't match what I understand about the stock market. Show me that it's weakening.
Now what I've got to do, I've got to provide some additional evidence to back up the first
piece of evidence. You might think of it by saying I've now got to present a new argument
in what originally was evidence, namely that the stock market is weakening, now becomes
the claim. Now that's what I've got to justify. And I do so by introducing some new evidence.
That is, I cite the Dow Jones industrial average going down, the NASDAQ index going down, and
so on. We could represent this in a diagram by taking the last one we had with evidence
leading to a claim. And now it's the evidence we've got to support. So below the evidence
we've got another box that I'll call evidence one, and this is the Dow Jones and the NASDAQ
figures with an inference leading up to the original evidence box. In other words, I'm
inferring that the Dow Jones index and the NASDAQ index are authoritative grounds for
believing that the stock market is weakening. And because the stock market is weakening,
I infer that we're heading into a recession. So I've shored up my original evidence by
providing additional evidence. And if you didn't accept that evidence, I'd need still
more. But now suppose that what's in dispute is not whether the stock market is weakening,
but whether there's any connection between the stock market weakening and a recession.
In that case, what you're doing is you're challenging not the truth of my evidence,
but the link between my evidence and the claim that I've made. You're challenging that arrow
that went from evidence to claim. And in that situation, what I've got to do, I've got to
defend that it's okay to make that inference. I've got to defend that we can travel along
that arrow from evidence to claim. And that may require me to shore up or to buttress that
arrow. And so now we could represent that by a chart that looks like the second one
with the evidence box leading to the claim, except under the arrow, holding up the arrow,
if you will, will draw a line to another box that we will label warrant. Because what I've
got to do, if you say why does the stock market weakening show that we're heading into a recession,
what I've got to do is I've got to give you some warrant for making that inference. Some
warrant that says it's okay to go from here to here. And what I might do is I might say,
well look, weakening in the stock market is generally a sign of an impending recession.
I'm telling you in other words that I'm making an inference from sign, that one thing can
be taken as a sign or as a predictor of the other. So now what I've done, if what you
question was the link between my evidence and my claim, is I've given you some basis
for accepting that link. I've given you a warrant for it. Now, what if you question
the warrant? What if you say, I don't understand why we should take weakening of the stock
market as a sign of recession? What reason do you have to think that? Then what I've
got to do is I've got to back up the warrant. You might think of it as establishing a new
argument in which the original warrant is now the claim, which I have to establish.
I've got to show you it's okay to regard a weakening stock market as a sign of a recession.
So we can take the diagram that we just looked at where there's evidence leading to claim
and then a warrant box under the link, and we've got to back up this warrant. So we'll
draw another box underneath it. I'll call that one warrant one that links to the original
warrant. What's warrant one? Well, I might appeal to historical evidence and say over
time, most of the time when the stock market drops, historically it's been a good predictor
of a recession. Therefore, we're justified in saying that weakening of the stock market
is a sign of an impending recession. So I've reestablished my warrant, and with that warrant
I've justified the link that says we could take the weakening of the stock market as
a reason to conclude that the economy is heading into a recession. Now, this process
that I've been describing of making claims, offering evidence, having an inference, providing
warrants, shoring up the evidence if necessary, shoring up the warrants if necessary, continues.
It continues until the argument reaches its termination, the arguers reach agreement,
or the dispute is resolved by a third party. What we've seen in the course of working
with these simple diagrams that I've been explaining so far is what the basic parts
of an argument are. There are four, the claim, the evidence for the claim, the inference
that links evidence and claim, and the warrant which authorizes or legitimizes are making
that inference, claim, evidence, inference, and warrant. Now, I want to emphasize that
these parts are not always explicit. In fact, it's hard for me to imagine listening to
a conversation or reading a newspaper editorial or seeing the text of a speech and seeing
advocates who explicitly say, my claim is, my evidence is, the inference I'm making
here is, the warrant for it is, I back up this warrant by saying so and so or anything
like that. Arguers often leave out the identification of the parts. They may even omit some of the
parts because they figure that an audience will assume them and so they don't need to
be mentioned. It doesn't necessarily weaken the argument if some elements are left unstated,
but when we analyze arguments, we reconstruct them, filling in what was implicit as well
as acknowledging what was said explicitly, then we can study the argument and assess
its quality. Now, what we've done here is to develop a working model of argument, identifying
the components and sketching their relationships. This model is adapted from the work of the
contemporary philosopher, Stephen Toolman, and as I've already suggested, it describes
ordinary argument better than does the formal syllogism. The claim is the statement that
we want the listener to believe and act upon. The evidence represents the grounds for making
the claim. It's what answers the question, what do you have to go on? The inference is
the main proof line that links the evidence to the claim and the warrant is a license
to make the inference. Now, notice that both the evidence and the warrant ultimately have
to be agreed to and accepted by the audience or by the other party if you're in a dispute
in an informal setting. It's got to be agreed to, and if not, then there's additional backing
provided for it until it is agreed to. This is a graphic demonstration of something that
I said in another context in an earlier lecture when I said that argumentation is cooperative
and there's agreement underlying every disagreement. If the parties don't agree to the truth of
the evidence and they don't agree to the warrant, then they can't discuss what's the relationship
between these things and the claim. Sometimes, the warrant is not so clear. There may be
exceptions to it. It's a general rule, but there are exceptions, and when that happens,
then the claim has to be qualified or modified, and these exceptions or modifiers also are
incorporated into the model. Let's see how the model works with the argument that we've
been discussing. I'm now referring to a chart that looks very much like the one with the
evidence, the claim, the warrant and the inference, but this time I filled in some content so
that we can relate it to this argument. The claim we're making is the economy is entering
a recession, and what's the evidence that we might offer? First, that the stock market
is declining. Second, if we want more evidence, the unemployment rate is going up. Third,
if we want more evidence, ratings of consumer confidence are dropping, so these are the
reasons that we have for saying the economy is entering a recession. They are the evidence,
and we see the arrow that links the evidence to the claim. On the basis of the stock market
declining, unemployment rising, consumer confidence dropping, we say the economy is entering
