using that occasion, in order to make arguments that will be read by another audience, that
is, the people back home whom he or she is trying to influence. Now, saying that arguments
are dependent on an audience is sometimes misunderstood as saying, whatever an audience
believes is fine, one argument's as good as another if you can find somebody who will
accept it. Now, this is not right. We're not talking about just telling an audience what
they want to hear. In fact, as we see as we'll go along in the series of lectures, there
are all sorts of other standards that we try to meet, but it is the case that the argument
must take the audience into account if it's going to have a chance to prevail. So the first
assumption then is arguments depend upon audiences. The second key assumption, argumentation takes
place under conditions of uncertainty, takes place under conditions of uncertainty. We
don't argue about things that are certain. Let me digress for just a second to point
out that even the notion of certainty is audience dependent. If you ask, is it a certainty
that it's too early in the morning to have class at eight o'clock, you ask undergraduate
students and they'll say, oh yes indeed, but you ask people who are accustomed to going
to work at seven or seven thirty or eight, they won't understand. So even certainty is
somehow dependent on an audience. Some people believe that the statement two plus two equals
four is objectively true, and some people believe it's true only because it commands
universal agreement. This is a very significant philosophical problem, but fortunately it's
not one that we need to resolve. Whatever the source of certainty, whether it's objective
truth or unanimous agreement, whatever the source of certainty, we don't argue about
things that are certain. They're much easier ways to settle disagreements or to resolve
them. But things that are uncertain are potentially controversial. They could be otherwise, and
we don't know for sure. Take for example the question, when does life begin? Now people
may have fervent beliefs about that subject. They may feel intensely about it, but we
don't know. It's not given to us to know with certainty when life begins. If we could
know it for sure, then the whole dispute about abortion would take a very different course
from the one it's taken. We argue about things that we don't know for sure. Let's again consider
our historical examples. One of the subjects taken up in the Federalist Papers is the question,
is a small republic or a large republic more likely to control factions? Everybody wants
to control factions, the questions, what's the best way to do it? We don't know for sure.
And so the anti-Federalists that argued, if you look at history, it's small republics
that control factions. And the authors of the Federalist Papers argue the opposite, actually
a large republic will better control faction. Or take the Lincoln-Douglas debates. One of
the questions talked about in those debates is, was the Kansas-Nebraska Act part of a plot
to spread slavery all over the country? Now by the very nature of that question, you'll
see that we can't know for sure. It's a speculative question. And so Lincoln argues that if you
put this and this piece of evidence together, you'll have reasons to think that it is. And
Douglas argues that that's a preposterous notion, that it's part of a plot. So these
are controversial. They're uncertain. Controversies involve genuine differences of opinion that
matter to the participants and which they want to see resolved. Now there are lots of
ways we could look at controversy. Controversies may be explicit, that is, they're recognized
as such by the people in them. Or they may be implicit. It may be that only a third party,
an analyst of the argument, can see the controversy. For example, in the Lincoln-Douglas debates
there's an explicit controversy about whether or not the candidates support the Dred Scott
decision. But it's not made explicit that there's also disagreement between them about
what the Dred Scott decision says. That's an implicit controversy that a third party
could look at their debate and see. Controversies may be what's called unmixed, meaning that
only one of the arduers maintains a position and the other one just challenges it. Or they
may be mixed, meaning that each arduer maintains a position. So for example, in 2005 when President
Bush proposed to create individual retirement accounts as part of Social Security, the Democrats
in the Senate said, we are not going to discuss Social Security reform until you take that
off the table. Only one of the arduers developed and maintained a position. On the other hand,
also in 2005, following the resignation of Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O'Connor,
some people argued the President ought to nominate a true conservative to that seat, and others
argued the President ought to nominate a moderate to that seat, and both sets of arduers maintained
and defended a position. So we could have unmixed or mixed controversies. And controversies
may be single, that is they relate only to one claim at a time, or they may be multiple
relating to more than one claim. As for example, when the parent says to the teenager, you
shouldn't stay out past midnight, and the teenager says to the parent, you don't trust
me. There are two different claims now, both at issue, one about what the teenager ought
to do, and one about whether or not the parent trusts the child. In any event, however, however
we look at controversies, the uncertainty implies that the outcome is not known for sure.
There's an inferential leap in the argument from the known to the unknown, and the audience
based on their judgment is asked to accept this leap. We can't wait for things to become
certain because they never will, and yet we have to reach some decision. So the first
assumption of argumentation is that it's audience dependent, the second is that it's grounded
in uncertainty. The third is that it involves justification for claims. Argueers offer a
rationale for accepting an uncertain claim, and what this rationale is is the reasons
for making the inferential leap from what we know to what we're not sure about. Those
reasons are considered to be acceptable if they would convince a reasonable person who's
exercising critical judgment, and if that happens we say that the claim is justified. We get
that judgment by giving reasons that a critical listener would accept, and the participants
in an argument assume this role of critical listener for the other. So if I'm arguing
with you, what I want to do is I want to give reasons that you as a critical listener would
regard as acceptable, justifiable reasons, and the thing that will best strengthen my
argument is your critical abilities being brought to bear on what I have to say, and likewise
I will serve as the critical listener for you. The adherence of the critical listener
is the substitute for the certainty that we cannot possibly achieve, and it's the criticalness
of the critical listener that gives us confidence in reaching our judgments even though they
are matters only of probability and not certainty. The arguers in fact who are engaged in this
testing of ideas through critical judgment and questioning can be seen as performing
an analogous role to the scientist in the laboratory whose rigorously testing claims
about the empirical world, the arguers are doing it about things that we can't see or
know directly or certainly. The competing narratives in the Lincoln
Douglas debates provide a good example of how this takes place. One of the questions
in those debates is what did the founding fathers believe about the question of slavery
in the territories? This was an important question because everybody venerated the founding
fathers, but there was no way to know because the founding fathers had not been confronted
with precisely this question, and so what did the advocates do? Douglas tried to justify
his position by saying, look, many of the founding fathers were slave owners, they certainly
would not have believed that slavery was immoral and continued to hold slaves, therefore he
says that's a justification for my belief that the founding fathers would have left
this question up to each state and territory to decide for itself. Lincoln on the other
hand said, look at what the founding fathers wrote, they wrote the constitution, and you
noticed they never mentioned the word slavery in the constitution. Why not? Well it must
be because they disapproved of it and expected it to die out. Now what each man is doing
in this contest is trying to offer a justification for the position that he is taking in the
contest. Now justification is not the same thing as proof in a strict sense, it's subjective,
it's dependent upon a particular audience, it doesn't say that something is true, it
says you should believe it, you should accept it and be prepared to act on that acceptance.
It implies that people are willing to be convinced and yet are skeptical enough not just to
take statements on faith, it's always provisional and subject to change in the light of new
information or new arguments, and it has degrees of strength. There can be plausible justifications
all the way up to highly probable justifications. So the third assumption then is that arguers
try to justify beliefs for themselves and for others. The fourth of the underlying assumptions
that we need to understand is that despite its seemingly adversarial character, argumentation
is fundamentally a cooperative enterprise. Now that sounds odd, we think of argument
as adversarial, but let's think again. Arguers share a common goal of reaching the best possible
decision under the circumstances, otherwise they wouldn't engage in argument, one would
walk away or one would impose his or her will by force. How do we account for the adversarial
elements of argument, their means toward the achievement of this common goal? They improve
the rigor of the procedure. They reduce the likelihood that critical details will be omitted
or that the arguers will jump to conclusions and they increase confidence in the result.
To achieve this common goal, as we've seen, arguers also cooperate in being critical listeners
for one another. Beyond the common goal and common roles, there are still more respects
in which the activity of argumentation is cooperative. All of the parties in the dispute
share some level of agreement. That may seem odd when we're talking about disagreement
and controversy, but disagreements are always founded on some level of agreement. So for
example, take the case of social security reform. Participants in this controversy share the
goal of keeping social security solvent, even as they disagree about what will make it sub.
If there weren't this bedrock agreement, they couldn't have a meaningful argument. Another
thing arguers share, sounds trivial, but it's really not, they share a common language.
And by that I don't mean just that they speak English or French or German. I'm not talking
about that. I mean they share an understanding of what we mean, for example, by solvent in
the social security example. And if we think about unproductive arguments for a minute,
arguments where the two parties are talking past each other, never really engage each
other's positions, it's often because they're not really sharing the same language. They
don't mean the same things even if they use the same terms. Liberals and conservatives
both say that they want courts to interpret the law justly, but they may mean very different
things, for example. Without a common language and set of meanings, the argumentation will
not succeed. The Federalist Papers again offers a historical example of the importance of
these kinds of agreement. There was a shared belief by both Federalists and Anti-Federalists
that power corrupts. There was a shared commitment to holding the union together, a shared understanding
of what virtue meant, and a shared commitment to checks and balances. And the disagreements
between Federalists and Anti-Federalists took place within the context of these bedrock
agreements. What's more, arguers also share a posture which I think can best be described
as restrained partisanship. On the one hand, they're partisan. They really believe what
they say, but they're restrained in their partisanship because they don't want to overpower
the other person. They share a modesty that stems from the recognition that they could
be wrong. They share respect for the audience or for the other person because they value
that person, and they recognize the importance of free ascent that's voluntarily given,
that's not the result of bludgeoning or coercion of any kind. And as audiences, they share
a willingness to listen and a willingness to risk being convinced. Person who comes
to an argument saying, you can say whatever you want, but my mind is made up, isn't really
participating in an argument. That's a shadow of argument. It's going through the motions.
People who engage in argumentation risk that they may be convinced just as they seek to
convince other people. And that leads directly to the fifth underlying assumption that I
want to discuss. Argumentation entails risks. One is the risk of being shown to be wrong.
You know, I start off believing something. I make a claim to you, and in the process
of our interaction, you show that I'm wrong. Now, of course, our ideal is a person who's
shown to be wrong immediately acknowledges that he or she is wrong, picks up and goes
right on from there. But we know that being shown to be wrong can be unsettling. It can
lead to loss of face. It can diminish one's own self-worth. It can diminish one's esteem
in the conversation or in the community or in the society. And so when one engages in
an argument, one is taking on that risk of being shown to be wrong. One's also taking
on the risk of having to alter one's system of beliefs, to take into account something
new, to add something to the storehouse of beliefs that we have, to eliminate some belief,
to modify or change some belief, all those things can be psychologically disturbing.
It's cognitively disturbing, particularly if it suggests that we've got beliefs that
are not fully consistent with one another or that aren't carefully enough worked out.
Now, when people engage in arguing, they mutually assume those risks. If a person knew for sure
that he or she was right, that person might not have an incentive to engage in argument.
And indeed, there are some people who on some topics will not engage in argument. For example,
some scholars will not engage in argument with those who seek to deny historical facts,
such as the existence of the Holocaust, for example.
Others will not engage in argument with those who cast doubt on generally accepted scientific
theories. Much of the dispute between evolution and intelligent design is actually about avoiding
a dispute by trying to deny the legitimacy of one or the other position. So there is
a direct relationship between risk and uncertainty. When we don't know for sure, when matters
are uncertain, and yet we're willing to talk about, to discuss them, to engage in them,
it indicates that we're willing to run some risks. The decision to engage in argument
suggests a willingness to run the risks. Let's go back to the Lincoln-Douglas debates,
for example. Stephen Douglas was the front runner. He was by far the better known of
the two individuals. He was the incumbent U.S. Senator seeking a third term, one of the
most powerful Democrats in the country. He had no political reason to agree to the challenge
that Abraham Lincoln offered to debate him, except for the fact that there was this norm
out on the frontier, that if somebody challenged you to debate and you declined, it suggested
that you had something to hide. That's probably the only reason we could think of for Douglas
is accepting the challenge, but he did. And in accepting the challenge, he recognized
that the outcome of the debates could help his position, or could injure his position.
It could support his commitment to popular sovereignty, or it could bring that commitment
into serious challenge and cause it to be questioned. And so in his agreement to debate against
Abraham Lincoln, he voluntarily assumed those risks. Likewise, Lincoln, in his agreement
who had been traveling around the state following Douglas, Douglas would give a speech and then
Lincoln would give a speech that same night and try to capture the crowd. Lincoln was
taking on a risk. As long as he was following around and giving answers to Douglas when
Douglas wasn't there to respond directly, he might not get as large an audience or as
much attention, but his positions wouldn't be challenged directly. By offering the challenge
to debate Douglas and by seeking that opportunity, Lincoln also took the risk that his positions
would be challenged in such a way that he would be forced to acknowledge that there
were errors or things that needed to be revised. Why do people run those risks? They run them
because they don't know for sure that they are right. And even if somehow they did know
for sure that they were right, they run the risk because they don't want to overpower
the adversary or to bludgeon the adversary or to coerce the adversary. That kind of victory
is meaningless to them. What they want is they want to convince the adversary by the
arguments that they advance, the claims that they make and the structure of reasons that
they offer in behalf of those claims. People run these risks usually because they don't
know for sure that they're right and even if they did, because they value the judgment
of their adversaries and they want assent only if assent is freely given. Now there's
an interesting aspect of this. If we value our adversary and we want our adversaries
assent only if freely given, we could say that what we're doing by making those statements
is we are bestowing a kind of respect of personhood on the person with whom we're engaged in argument.
We may intensely disagree and yet we value that person as a person so that we want a
voluntary assent, the kind of judgment that comes freely and without coercion. And in valuing
the personhood of our opponent, our adversary, the arguer of course claims the same value
for him or herself. We can too easily be misled by the fact that argumentation does have adversarial
elements so that we think of it as a zero sum gain in which I must lose in order for
you to win or in which I somehow suffer as a result of what you have achieved. And it's
important for us to realize when we look at a controversy and the participants in it that
while there are adversarial elements in their behavior, they're basically showing their
respect for each other by taking on these risks, the risk of being wrong and the risk
of needing to alter their beliefs. So we have our five key assumptions. Argumentation is
audience dependent. It deals with uncertainty. It involves justification for claims, not proof.
It is fundamentally cooperative and it entails risks. This view of argumentation makes it
very different from reasoning in formal logic or mathematics. And we'll explore those
differences more fully in the next lecture.
Lecture 3 Formal and Informal Argumentation
Welcome back. In the last lecture, we surveyed the basic assumptions underlying argumentation
theory and practice. I've mentioned several times already that argumentation deals with
the uncertain. And that doesn't sound at all like the certainty we associate with formal
logic. As you may have guessed, one of my central themes is that we can't regard formal
reasoning as the model for all the kinds of reasoning in which we engage in argumentation.
And the time has come now to explore that claim more carefully, to see what formal reasoning
is and why it's not a suitable model for everyday argument. We need to know enough about it
in order to know both of these things. And so in this lecture, what I hope to do without
becoming too technical or too long is to explore the properties of formal reasoning, typical
patterns of formal reasoning, and then to see what the limitations of formal reasoning are
as a model for argumentation. The basic property of formal reasoning is that it is deductive
in nature. Now often back in school, we learned that deductive and inductive reasoning were
different according to the following. That deductive reasoning proceeded from general
to specific, and inductive reasoning from specific to general. The only problem with
that is that it's wrong. Either one could do either. Deductive reasoning is reasoning
that has two basic characteristics. First, the conclusion follows necessarily automatically
from the premises. If the premises are true, the conclusion has to be true. Now notice
I'm not saying that the premises are true. We don't care whether they're true or not.
But if they are, then the conclusion must be true. To have true premises and a false
conclusion in deductive reasoning would be an impossibility. The second feature of deductive
reasoning is that the conclusion contains no new information. Nothing in the conclusion
that's not present at least implicitly in the premises. The conclusion tells us nothing
new, nothing that we didn't already know from the premises. So those are the two features
of deduction. If the premises are true, the conclusion must be true, and the conclusion
gives us no new information. Now from these two features, we can derive two other corollaries,
two other ways to describe deductive reasoning. First of all, we can say that deductive reasoning
is analytic in nature, by which I mean it doesn't require any reference to the external
world or to any actually existing things. We could use symbols, and we often do when
we engage in deductive reasoning. All A is B, all B is C, therefore all A is C. It doesn't
make any difference what A, B and C are, and it doesn't make any difference whether any
of those statements is true. Deductive reasoning then requires no reference to the external
world, and it can even be counterfactual. My favorite example that I often use to illustrate
this, consider the following. All heavenly bodies are made of green cheese. The moon is
a heavenly body, therefore the moon is made of green cheese. It's absolutely good deductive
reasoning. Even though it's counterfactual, so far as we know the moon's not made of
green cheese or anything like it, but the form of the argument is perfect. So deduction
is analytic. It doesn't require any reference to the external world, and it can even be
counterfactual. The other corollary is, deductive reasoning doesn't add anything to our store
of knowledge. It merely rearranges what we already know. If we already knew that all
heavenly bodies were made of green cheese, and that the moon is a heavenly body, then
even though we didn't know it explicitly, we would know that the moon was made of green
cheese. All deductive reasoning does is to rearrange what we know by making explicit
what may have been implicit knowledge, by bringing to the foreground what may have been
background knowledge. That's a quick overview, then, of deduction. Formal reasoning is deductive.
The conclusion follows necessarily from the premises, and it contains no new information.
Now what are the basic patterns of deductive or formal reason? Well, the basic unit is
the syllogism. You've probably heard the term syllogism. All it means is a structure consisting
of at least two premises, and then a conclusion that's drawn from them. If we were exploring
formal reasoning more extensively, if that were the focus of our whole course, we would
quickly see that there are different kinds of syllogisms, and I want just to highlight
the basic differences. The first kind is the categorical syllogism, and it's composed
of categorical statements. These are statements that relate categories of things to other
categories of things, hence the name categorical. The categorical statements could be either
universal or partial. Let's consider a simple example. The categories of politicians and
compromisers. We could say all politicians are compromisers. It's a universal statement,
takes all of one category, and puts it into another category. Or we could say no politicians
are compromisers, takes all of one category, and keeps it out of the other category. These
are universal statements. Or we could say some politicians are compromisers, or some
politicians are not compromisers. These are only partial statements. So categorical statements
could be either universal, applying to a whole category, or partial, applying to only a part
of it. Likewise, if you think about these same four examples, some of them are inclusive.
They take all or some of one category, and put it into the other category, included in
the other category. Some of the statements are exclusive. They take all or some of one
category, and keep it out of the other category. Notice something else about those four statements.
The only terms that we could use to measure or to quantify are all, none, and some. Some
there's no allowing for degrees between all and none. It's all encompassed by the term
some, and that's as far as we can go with measuring categorical statements. What does
a categorical syllogism do? It takes these categorical statements and puts them together
in premise and conclusion structures. Consider a simple example. All politicians are compromisers,
all compromisers are immoral, therefore all politicians are immoral. Now remember, once
again, we're not concerned with whether the statements are true. I hope they're not. But
if all politicians are compromisers, and if all compromisers are immoral, then it must
be the case that all politicians are immoral. We could easily see why that's a sound argument,
a valid argument, if you imagine how we might diagram it. We might draw one circle that represents
politicians. We'd put that inside another circle representing compromisers, because
all of the politicians fall within the category of compromisers. And then we'd put the term
compromisers into a larger circle representing immoral, because we said all compromisers are
immoral. And you'd immediately see, once we put the compromisers circle into the immoral
circle, we've put all the politicians there, because they were all inside the compromisers
circle in the first place. You can draw diagrams like that to see whether the argument is a
sound argument or not. Or there are elaborate rules that can be applied to determine its
soundness. If we were studying formal logic for the whole course, we would go into those.
What becomes a little harder to work out, though, is a categorical syllogism like this one.
All politicians are compromisers. Some compromisers are immoral. Now, what about the conclusion?
Can we conclude that some politicians are immoral? Must that conclusion be true if
the premises are true? No. And we can see why. Imagine our circles again. We take all
the politicians, draw a circle for politicians, and we put that inside the circle for compromisers
just like we did before. But now we've said only some compromisers are immoral, which means
there'd be some overlap between the circle for compromisers and the circle for that which
is immoral. Now, the circle for immoral, when we're drawing that, we don't know whether
it overlaps the part of the compromisers circle that includes the politicians or whether it
doesn't. So we can't say with certainty either that some politicians are immoral or that
no politicians are immoral or that all politicians are immoral or that some politicians are not
immoral. We don't know. We can't conclude with certainty. Somebody who tried to would
not be making a valid argument. That's the categorical syllogism. It takes statements
that relate categories and puts them together in premise and conclusion structures. Now,
a second kind of syllogism is called conditional, sometimes hypothetical. This is a kind of
syllogism that instead of relating categories, starts off with an if-then statement. Consider
this suitably nonpartisan example. If a republicrat is elected, prices will rise. We have an
