be addressed to the focal point of controversy. If the focal point of controversy is what
we call it, we don't want to spend our time arguing about whether it occurred.
What's most important in determining stasis, the point of clash, is not the original assertion,
but the response that's made to it. After all, my assertion you stole my car was the
same in each case. What determined the different stasis was how you responded to my assertion.
Now you had choices in how you could reply. Some replies will be stronger, some replies
will be weaker, but it's the reply to the assertion that has a lot to do with determining
where the stasis is. Does this mean that I as the original advocate have nothing to
say about where the focal point of the controversy will be? No. Because the original arguer in
determining what argument to advance in the first place should realize different response
possibilities. And if the arguer wants the stasis to be at one place or at another place,
he or she ought to try to frame the original assertion to produce that result. But it's
the response more than the original assertion that determines the focal point of the controversy.
That's one thing to notice. Second thing to notice is that generally speaking,
with one exception that I'll mention later, generally speaking, stasis is progressive.
What I mean by that is, if we choose to have the dispute center on definition, we are implicitly
conceding conjecture. If we choose to focus on quality, we are implicitly conceding both
conjecture and definition. Go back to my example. When you reply, no, I borrowed your car,
I didn't steal it, you're implicitly conceding that you had possession of it. And so the
question of whether you had possession or not, conjecture, has been waved from the dispute.
It's been effectively stipulated. When you say it's a good thing, because I used the
car to take someone to the hospital, you're implicitly conceding both that you had it
and that you stole it. You're saying that you stole it for good reason, but you stole
it and if you stole it, you had it. So stasis is progressive. Definition implicitly concedes
conjecture, quality implicitly concedes both conjecture and definition. So, what does
that mean? It means that if you're replying to my assertion, as a general rule, you want
to reply that would take a stasis as close to the beginning of the chain as you can carry.
So if, for example, you can carry the response that you never had my car at all, that ought
to be what you say. Now, suppose there were 10 eyewitnesses who saw you in possession
of my car, then it's pointless to say, well, I never had your car. Not only is that an
assertion that will quickly be shown to be false, but when it's shown to be false, it'll
cast doubt on your overall credibility. If you make one false claim, you might well make
others. So the idea is not necessarily to pick the first stasis. It's to pick the first
stasis that you are pretty confident you can sustain, because as you pick higher levels
of stasis, you're implicitly conceding what came before. Now, sometimes you can combine
the stasis. What if you said, I never had your car, but if I had stolen it, it would
have been for a good cause? Well, there you're combining conjecture and quality, and sometimes
that can work effectively. You've made one response contingent on the other. You've said,
I never had your car. That's the first response, but if I took it, it would have been for a
good cause. On the other hand, sometimes the combination of stasis can suggest that you're
being evasive, that you're not really confident of your position. What if you said, hey, I
never had it, and if I had it, I would have borrowed it, and if I'd stolen it, it would
have been for a good cause. You're putting a number of these together, and the natural
kind of psychological response is, me thinks you doth protest too much, and your whole
credibility is called into question. All right, so far we've seen that the response
to the assertion largely governs the stasis, and that stasis generally is progressive.
I said there was one exception to that, and that is that stasis in place is usually preemptive
of everything else. Now, what do I mean when I say that? If we're not in the right place
to discuss this question, if we're not employing the right procedure or the right forum, then
the substance of the dispute, whether this happened or not, what we call it, whether
it was justified, that really doesn't matter until we get ourselves in the right forum.
So that when you reply to me, don't bring this accusation on the street, I'll see you
in court. What you're saying in effect is, don't even begin talking about conjecture
or definition or quality until we get into the right place. So stasis in place tends
to be preemptive. And by the way, this is why we often will find arguments about process
or procedure used in situations to trump arguments about the substance of the case.
Now, that's the basic idea of stasis. I think we can see almost intuitively why it's such
a useful tool, because it reminds us that there are multiple possible points of controversy,
multiple points of stasis, multiple focal points, determined by the joining of an assertion
and the response to the assertion. And in order for the controversy to proceed, we need to
identify the precise point of clash and then to invite the advocates to do so. And then
to respond to it. So far I've used a simple example and we have a simple understanding
of stasis. You may have noticed I used a legal example, because I said the concept originally
developed for purposes of application to the law courts. But it has a broader application,
a broader focus than that. It can be applied to disputes of other kinds as well, although
we have to complicate our understanding a little bit in order to do so. I want to do
that by talking about how stasis applies to resolutions of policy, because these are probably
the most complex resolutions. And so if we can see it there, then of course we can see
it anywhere. So let's look at how stasis applies on resolutions of policy. Here's why they're
more complicated than legal questions, because multiple issues will be at play and each issue
will have its own stasis. We saw this when we talked about Colin Powell's speech, where
many issues were discussed at the same time. We said that the kinds of issues, the topoi,
that policy resolutions address are things like, is there a problem, where is credit
or blame due? Will the proposal solve the problem? On balance is the proposal going
to leave us better off. Now all of those issues will be discussed. For example, let's go back
to the case of national missile defense systems. One of the issues is, is there anything wrong
with our current defense policy? In the course of discussing national missile defense, I
might say, we've left ourselves vulnerable to terrorist threats. And you might respond,
the threat of terrorism by this means is minimal. Now when you do that, you've invoked the stasis
of quality. You see, you've not denied that the problem exists. You've not denied that
it ought to be called a threat, but you said it's minimal. It's not that serious. It's
not serious enough to really worry about. And so on the issue of, is there a problem,
this dispute might center on the stasis of quality. But I said another issue was, can
the proposal solve the problem? And on this one, you might say, hey, this is fantasy land.
The technology for national missile defense doesn't even exist. So what you're saying
is on that issue, there is no solution. So the stasis would focus on conjecture. You
say no solution exists. Never mind whether we really call it national missile defense
or how much of the problem is solved. It's not even there. So the stasis is in conjecture.
At the same time, we're discussing both of those issues. Another issue is, do the costs
succeed the benefits? And on this one, you might say it costs too much. And I might reply,
but you know, those aren't real costs because you've got to compare them to the cost of
doing nothing. And so net, they're not real costs of building this system. And on this
one, you see, the stasis is in definition. We're not disputing what the costs are. We're
disputing should they really be called costs. So we've got this one controversy about should
we build a national missile defense system. And in talking about that, here we are facing
multiple issues with different points of stasis all at the same time. So we can quickly see
I think why a policy resolution is more complicated than a legal question. Multiple issues are
at play, each with its own stasis. However, stasis in place is usually not applicable
to policy resolutions because policy resolutions are subjects for general deliberation about
what we should do. Pretty much whatever forum we use to talk about what we should do is
okay. It's just as appropriate for you and me to talk about national missile defense
as it is for members of Congress or for scientists or for members of the national administration.
So usually in a policy controversy, stasis in place is pretty much irrelevant. But what
does that leave us with? It leaves us with the four topoi. Is there a problem who's to
blame? Will the proposal work on balance? Are we better off? Each of which could have
a stasis of conjecture or definition or quality. For those of you who are into matrix analysis,
you can see that what this gives us is a four by three matrix. Where down one side you can
imagine the topoi, and across the top you can imagine the possible points of stasis.
Let's do that as an exercise for just a minute. For convenience sake, I'm going to shorthand
the topoi, the issue categories, as ill, blame, cure and cost. Ill of course is, is there
a problem? Blame, where's the responsibility? Cure, is there a solution? Cost on balance,
are we better off? So we've got ill, blame, cure and cost, and then we've got conjecture,
definition and quality. Now let's see how this might work. I'm going to consider a new
example that the federal government should establish a patience bill of rights to regulate
medical care. Now let's take the topoi and see how we could have different possible stasis.
First of all, ill. Do the practices of health maintenance organizations, HMOs, leave patients
unsatisfied? That's a question of conjecture. Should this dissatisfaction be considered
a violation of their rights? Definition. Is the violation great enough that something
should be done about it as a matter of public policy? Quality. Now just on this question
is there a problem? You can see how picking one stasis or another will make a huge difference
to the way the controversy proceeds. If you say in response to my assertion there's no
serious problem with HMOs, patients are satisfied with the care they receive, then we talk about
one set of questions, conjectural questions. If you say, well patients might be satisfied
or dissatisfied just like customers in any case are satisfied or dissatisfied, but a
dissatisfied person doesn't mean that rights have been violated, now we're talking about
what we call this dissatisfaction. And if you reply, well you know there may be some
infringements on rights here and there, no system is perfect, but it's not great enough
that we should invoke the federal government and public policy to do something about it,
then we're talking about matters of significance. Not about whether there's a problem, not about
what to call it, but how great the problem is. So you see on this issue of ill, we've
got all these possibilities opened up. And of course, if I imagine one stasis and you
imagine a different one, we're going to have a mismatched argument. Now let's look at
the question of blame, the second issue category. Do HMOs make the key medical decisions? Question
of conjecture. Is there discretion abused? Question of definition. Should we consider
any aggravating or mitigating circumstances? Quality. Just like in the You Stole My Car
example where we said there were mitigating circumstances. So here at this level too, there
are different ways to focus the argument. Look at the category of cure. This is the issue
category that asks will the proposal solve the problem? Can a bill of rights be devised?
Can we imagine a solution? Conjecture. Will it work? Will it correct for the violation
of rights? Definition. How much of the abuse of HMOs will it really address? And how much
will be left? Quality that deals with significance or degree. So here again on this issue, we
have multiple possible points of stasis. Finally, look at the topos, that's the singular
of topoi. Look at the issue category of cost. What will a bill of rights cost patients?
How much will it increase their medical care expense? A question of conjecture. Are they
real costs compared to the costs of doing nothing? Definition. Are the costs worth
it? Is it worth it for us to bring about this result? Do the benefits outweigh the costs?
A question of quality. Now look what we did in this relatively
simple example. We took this imaginary 4 by 3 matrix and we said okay, if we're going
to discuss the question of a patient's bill of rights, we could have as many as 12 different
points of stasis in that controversy because we had 4 categories of issues and on each
issue we had 3 possible stasis. Now you wonder why the discussion of topics like a patient's
bill of rights or national missile defense or educational policy, you wonder why discussion
of policy resolutions is so complicated? It's because multiple stasis are at play at
the same time and the participants in the argumentative exchanges may not be on the
same wavelength. They may not be addressing the same stasis at the same time.
Now let me be very clear. I'm not suggesting that an advocate ought to raise all 12 of
these points of clash in talking about a matter of public policy. Indeed the effect of doing
that would be about the same as the effect of my saying hey, I didn't have your car and
if I had I would have borrowed it and if I stole it it would have been a good thing.
And by the way, don't speak about it here. It would suggest evasiveness. It would suggest
not coming to grips with the issue. The purpose of talking about the whole matrix
is not for us to pick all 12 points. We generally pick no more than one on any given issue.
But it's to make us aware of the range of choices that exist about what shape a controversy
could take based upon how you respond to the assertions that I might make.
Now what I've tried to suggest here is that this concept that was originally developed
for law courts where it's relatively easy to apply because there are formal rules in
a law court that determine the procedure, that determine what's relevant and not relevant,
that this concept actually can be taken and applied more broadly to disputes about policy.
And if it can be applied to disputes about policy, I hope we can see with a little bit
of imagination how it can also be applied to disputes about value, disputes about definition
and disputes about fact. Now, since you've borne with me as I've explained the concept,
let me address the question of why this is such an important concept. And to do it, let's
imagine the negative. What happens when the advocates in a controversy fail to agree on
the point of stasis? What happens when they don't address the same point? Well, sometimes
it can result in the loss of the argument. Many of you are familiar with the very famous
Scopes trial that took place in 1925 that came about when a biology teacher named John Scopes
taught the theory of evolution in violation of a Tennessee state law that made it a crime
to do so. In the course of the trial of Mr. Scopes, the defense represented by Clarence
Darrow argued that the theory of evolution was true, and therefore it was okay for Scopes
to teach it. The prosecution argued that the teaching of evolution was unlawful, therefore
Scopes violated the law. Now, let's think about the stasis categories. Neither side
is disputing conjecture. There's no question that this happened. The prosecution is arguing
definition. This act was unlawful, while the defense is arguing quality. It's okay because
the theory is true. The prosecution replies, we don't care whether the theory is true,
the state has a right to prohibit this teaching, and therefore Scopes broke the law. Now remember,
we said that stasis is progressive. Quality concedes definition and conjecture. So according
to this analysis, the defense, by picking stasis in quality, has implicitly conceded
all the prosecution needed to prove in order to win the case. And so the argument is that
faulty choice of stasis doomed the case. Now there is a competing analysis, by the way,
that says that the defense wasn't trying to win the case, they were trying to build
a record on appeal, but that's another matter. Sometimes failing to agree on the stasis can
hijack the argument and change understanding of what it is. For example, in the dispute
in 2005 about social security reform, some advocates picked as their stasis point, will
private retirement accounts solve the problem? They didn't get very far in the public dialogue
because the public was focused on the question, is there a problem? And so it was a faulty
analysis of stasis. And sometimes it can produce a stalemate. As in the abortion dispute, when
one side is arguing that abortion is wrong and the other side is arguing, the question
is who can decide whether or not to have this procedure in a particular circumstance? There
is no agreement on stasis and hence no clash. Developing clash that is meaningful, productive
and responsive to the argument depends first of all upon selecting the appropriate stasis.
How else it occurs is what we will focus on in the next lecture.
Hello again, it's good to be back. Two lectures ago, when we were talking about case construction,
I used the term prima facie, meaning on first face. And I said one of the things that we
want to do when we put a case together is to have it be prima facie, meaning that upon
first hearing it, it will seem reasonable and plausible to have it be prima facie.
And I said one of the things that we want to do when we put a case together is to have
it be prima facie, meaning that upon first hearing it, it will seem reasonable and plausible
and it will support the resolution that we're trying to advance. Now assuming that somebody
has done that, then the other arguer is in a position where he or she either needs to
accept the case or respond to it. And coming up with a response to the case is called meeting
the burden of rejoinder. Now last time we talked about how one begins to meet that burden
of rejoinder by identifying the stasis, the focal point of the case, so that we can know
exactly what's in controversy and then we can either respond to that point or if we
want to relocate the controversy we can do that, but at least we can understand where
it centers. And so that brings us to a study of the dynamics of controversy, what happens
after the case has been presented and somebody is ready to respond to it. Doing this, meeting
the burden of rejoinder, is accomplished through the interrelated processes of attack and
defense, which together are known as refutation. Refutation is sometimes defined as planning
and execution of attacks and defenses as part of the testing and evaluation of arguments.
And the next two lectures will be devoted to attack and defense, to refutation. Now there
are two problems that I want to address right off the bat before we get into the heart of
this material. One is that for some people talking about attack and defense is difficult
because it sounds like it's a military metaphor and it sounds like what we're trying to do
is overwhelm or vanquish or utterly defeat an opponent. But remember what we've said
throughout these lectures. That's not what argumentation is all about. The goal of arriving
at a sound judgment is a goal that the arguers share. They're in this together. And the purpose
of mobilizing a strong attack and coming up with a strong defense is to give arguments
a rigorous test so that we'll have confidence in the results. Indeed, if they're well conducted
attack and defense are constructive exercises and both parties should benefit from the exchange.
But if there is an aspect of the military metaphor that's appropriate, it's the notion
of strategic planning, careful analysis, concern for choice and for making those choices carefully.
And hopefully we'll see how that's done in these next two lectures. The other problem
I want to speak to briefly is we're going to talk about in a highly systematic way things
that in an actual argument are often done instinctively almost intuitively. We're going
to lay out a series of steps and questions that in most cases in an actual argument arguers
don't stop, hold everything and ask themselves. And you might wonder why we're going to subject
this process to such scrutiny. And the answer is simple. We're trying to learn a series
of skills. These are skills which if we understand them we can practice them and we can refine
them and get ourselves into a position where when we engage in arguments we'll be more
likely to do it naturally and instinctively but we have to start off understanding what
it is that we're doing. I also want to alert you that there is far more to say about attack
than about defense and so the two lectures won't be evenly divided. As we'll see many
of the options of the defense are constrained by the nature of the attack. So let's begin
with attacks. When we want to respond to a case, to attack a case, there's a series
of strategic choices that we have to make and they involve both selection and arrangement
just as case construction involves both selection and arrangement choices. And I want to begin
now with selection choices and I want to focus most of our time in this lecture on four
of these choices. The first one is which arguments to attack. Now remember back in lecture number
six when we talked about Colin Powell at the UN Security Council and we had a fairly elaborate
diagram of his case and there were lots of different arguments in it at varying levels.
We don't need if we're going to attack his case to attack every single argument. In fact
if we did we would get so bogged down in the attacks that we might lose track of what the
case was all about. Moreover if we try to attack every argument in a case we can find ourselves
unknowingly in an inconsistent position where the other person can respond and knock out
some of our attacks. For example also in lecture six we talked about a set of arguments involving
airline travel and at one point I said it was really difficult to understand airline
pricing. At another point I said the ticket agents and reservation agents are not terribly
helpful. Now suppose you wanted to attack both of those arguments. You might say well
first of all airline pricing is really pretty simple so there aren't all of these difficulties
and complexities so I don't know what you're even talking about advancing the argument.
Then you get to the one about ticket agents and you say you know these ticket agents and
reservation clerks are really helpful and they work out all the difficulties in the
pricing. But wait. First attack says there aren't any difficulties in pricing. Second
attack says they work out the difficulties. Person who makes the original argument could
respond to these two attacks by saying these attacks work at cross purposes throw them
both out. So we want to think carefully about which arguments to attack. Besides some arguments
might not even need attacking. They may not matter that much. Even if you give them up
you haven't lost much and if you attack and defeat them you haven't gained much. So for
example suppose someone says that airports have become much more crowded in the years
since September 11th 2001 and you respond by saying they're less crowded in 2005 than
they were in 2004. Suppose you're right. What if you gained. You haven't defeated the argument
that crowding has increased since 2001. And suppose you let it go. What difference does
it make if you have other arguments that are going to deal with the causes of crowding
or are going to present ways to relieve crowd. So not every argument that needs to be attacked
and if it's not attacked it can either be ignored or it can be acknowledged and granted
often with a flourish in which you say this is an argument that does us no damage it doesn't
make any difference. Now deciding which arguments to attack helps to narrow down the potential
issues in the case to the actual issues. How do you decide which arguments to attack?
You use exactly the same criteria that you used when deciding what arguments to put in
the case. Are they strong which means will the audience be likely to believe the evidence
that the attack is based on and is the relevance of the attack to defeating the argument high.
These are the same criteria that ought to govern making that decision. So the first
decision is which arguments to attack. Second key decision. Which part of the argument
to attack? Now I want to refer you back to lecture number five where we had a diagram
of a simple argument that had a claim, it had evidence and it had an inference linking
the two. One could choose to attack the argument once you've decided which argument to attack
at any one of those points or at more of those points than one. So one option is to attack
the claim by denying it outright or by offering some sort of counter claim. So the claim in
the argument is airline delays have increased. We might deny that outright and attack it
by saying no airline delays have not increased. We've denied the claim and if you remember
from our stasis discussion that focuses stasis in conjecture. Has it happened? Have delays
increased? Or we might counter the claim not by denying it outright but by saying for
instance increased delays are really a minor problem. In which case we focused stasis on
definition is it a problem? Or increased delays are justified by safety considerations. In
which case we focused stasis in quality. So one option then is deny the claim outright
or counter it. But that's not the only option. It may not be the claim that we want to attack.
Another way to attack an argument is to attack the evidence on which the claim is based.
So we might say you've talked about airport crowding but you've really examined a limited
sample of airports. You've only talked about Chicago O'Hare and L.A. International and
Washington Dulles. And we know that those happen to be three of the most crowded airports
in the country. And so your evidence really doesn't establish that airport crowding is
a significant problem overall. Or we might say your evidence comes from an unqualified
or a biased source. You quoted an occasional tourist. A tourist doesn't have enough experience
with airports to really evaluate whether they're crowded or not. Or you quoted a known critic
of the airline industry. Of course that person is going to find faults with every aspect
of the industry that he or she could. It's an unqualified source or a biased source. Any
of these examples illustrate attacking the evidence. And remember since we said the evidence
has to be agreed to for the argument to get anywhere, you've attacked the argument by
attacking that part of it. Or you might choose to attack the inference. To attack the link
between the evidence and the claim. You're not attacking either one directly but you're
attacking the vital connection between the two. For example, you might say, well the
relationship between crowded airplanes and rude passengers is only a correlation. You
haven't shown that one causes the other. Or you might say, you've said that the planes
are crowded. That just means that they're not flying enough planes. If they increase
the schedule, why it would solve that problem. What's true of one plane wouldn't be true
of all. Or you might say, you've drawn an analogy to what happened after airline deregulation
