These lectures are part of the Great Courses series, they are produced by The Teaching
Company. The Great Courses cover a broad array of university level disciplines. The lectures
in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long. By listening for less than an hour a
day you can finish even the longest course in just weeks. Browse our catalogue or website
and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just 30 minutes a day for the next year
in the best college classrooms in the world. The lecturers are university professors carefully
selected by The Teaching Company and its customers for intellectual distinction and teaching
excellence. These lectures are titled, Argumentation,
The Study of Effective Reasoning, Part 1. The lecturer is Professor David Zarevsky.
Professor Zarevsky is the Owen L. Kuhn Professor of Argumentation and Debate and Professor of
Communication Studies at Northwestern University where he has taught for over 30 years. He received
as Bachelor of Science, Master's and PhD from Northwestern University. From 1988 through
2000 he served as the Dean of the School of Speech. A nationally recognized authority
on Rhetoric and Forensics, Professor Zarevsky is a past president of the National Communication
Association and recipient of the Distinguished Scholar Award and the Distinguished Service
Award. On no fewer than 12 occasions his outstanding lecturing skills have been recognized by the
inclusion of his name on Northwestern's Associated Student Government Honorable for Teaching.
Dr. Zarevsky has authored five books, edited three more and has published over 50 scholarly
articles and reviews. He received the 1986 National Communication Association's Wynnins
Wilchens Award for Distinguished Scholarship in Rhetoric and Public Address for his book
President Johnson's War on Poverty, Rhetoric and History and the same award again in 1991
for Lincoln, Douglas and Slavery in the Crucible of Public Debate.
Professor Zarevsky prepared the course guide that comes with these lectures. The course
guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a glossary, biographical notes and
a bibliography. To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to follow along
with the outlines or review them before or after each lecture.
Lecture 1 Introducing Argumentation and Rhetoric
Thank you. It's a pleasure to welcome you to a series of 24 lectures on argumentation
in which we'll explore the study of effective reasoning. If we've met in a previous course,
it's good to be back with you. If not, let me say hello at this time and in either case,
I hope that you will enjoy this experience. Courses in this subject are offered sometimes
in English departments, sometimes in philosophy departments, sometimes as in my case in communication
studies departments where I've taught at Northwestern University for almost 40 years.
But often when I mention that I teach argumentation, people will ask, you mean you actually teach
that? Why would anybody want to study that? And that reflects the fact that in contemporary
English usage, the terms argue and argument have often unfavorable connotations. When
a parent says to a child, don't argue with me about that, arguing is not something that's
thought of as very pleasant. Or when a superior and a subordinate in a business relationship
engage in an argument that's seen sometimes as destructive. We often think of arguing
as unpleasant or quarrelsome. We sometimes see disagreement as unhealthy. We sometimes
talk about it in military terms as though our goal were to conquer an opponent or to
vanquish an adversary. And when we express disagreement, it's sometimes seen as rankerous
or bitter, somehow destructive of the self-worth of another person. Now please rest assured,
neither I nor the teaching company seek to promote such a view, which is after all a
perversion of what argumentation really is. So let's set that aside at the outset and
explore argumentation as the study of effective reasoning. Arguing is reason giving. Now what
do I mean by reason giving? When people speak to one another or with an audience in mind,
they make claims. They make statements that they believe and that they would like for
their listeners or their readers to believe as well. We make claims about matters that
are uncertain, that we cannot establish absolutely or definitely. For example, we might say it's
better to build a missile defense system than to rely on an anti-ballistic missile treaty
or vice versa. We might say energy shortages can be overcome through conservation alone
or not. We might say that in the long run, children learn to read better if they're taught
by phonics rather than by whole language or the reverse. We might say that changes in
gender roles over the past generation on balance have been beneficial or harmful. Each of these
is a claim. It's a statement that we assert as our belief and that we want another person
to believe as well. Reasons are the justifications that we give for those claims. Now they're
not absolute proofs because each of these matters is somehow inherently uncertain. It
depends upon a value judgment or it relates to the future or it's so large that it can't
be seen directly. And so we try to justify our claims by giving reasons for them. Hence,
we could say that arguing is the practice of justifying claims and that's certainly
one way to look at what it is that we will be studying. If we think about it for a minute,
what's the alternative to reason giving? It's to accept or reject claims in knee-jerk
fashion based on whim or caprice or on the command of an authority figure. And if we
do that, then we are dismissing to the realm of chance or accident or happenstance or coercion
some very important aspects of human affairs. When we make judgments, when we make predictions,
when we make large global kinds of claims, we don't want to do that. We don't want to
dismiss all of these areas to the realm of the accidental. Indeed, when we think about
it, what makes us rational is the ability to engage in reason giving, to connect the
claims that we make to the justifications for them. And so we could say argumentation
is the study of effective reasoning. Now, once I stick in this term effective, we have
to ask effective for whom? And this implies a concern for an audience. We don't offer claims
or reasons in a vacuum. We offer them with a reader or a listener or a large public in
mind. Indeed, the success of the arguments ultimately depends upon the ascent of the
audience. Now, what do I mean when I talk about the ascent of an audience? Again, I don't
mean a knee jerk agreement or an instantaneous rejection or a reaction that says in effect,
wow, that agrees with my prejudice. What I mean by ascent is adherence to the claim based
on the reasons for it. So when I talk about an audience adhering or giving its ascent
to an argument, I'm suggesting that the audience accepts the reason. It accepts the grounds
that are given, the justifications that are given, and the connection that's made between
these justifications and the claim. Argumentation is then one of the ways that we seek to persuade
others. And while I focus on persuading others, it's also possible to have an argument with
oneself, to ask questions and raise challenges to one's own view so that we will be forced
to justify it. So what I've suggested so far is that we cast aside a notion of arguing
as quarrelsome or rancorous and disagreeable and instead think of it as the practice of
giving reasons to justify claims seeking the adherence of an audience. Now if we think
about it that way, we'll realize that argumentation is something that we engage in all the time.
We talk with another person any time we write, any time we seek to influence what another
person or group of people thinks or believes or does. And that presents us in a way with
a second problem in understanding what argumentation is all about. If we do it all the time, if
it's a natural human activity, why do we need to study it? Why do we need to teach it? It's
just something we do naturally. Now I am assuming that you don't share this view because if
you did, you probably wouldn't have bought this course. So there's a sense in which I'm
preaching to the converted. Argumentation is a skill we can understand and improve.
Skillful argumentation indeed is an imperiled activity. In June of 2005, an op-ed editorial
in the New York Times suggested that argumentation may be a lost art. It said people increasingly
interact only with those who already agree with them. Differences of opinion are treated
as unbridgeable and the result is to weaken opportunities for compromise, deliberation
and mutual understanding. Well, understanding and practicing argumentation is the antidote
to these destructive behaviors. The difference between arguments that are productive, arguments
in which people give claims, make claims, give reasons, exchange reasons, the difference
between arguments that are productive and arguments that are not that invoke all these
negative stereotypes of bickering and quarreling, the difference between them often is the understanding
of the principles that underlie this common human activity. These lectures will enable
us to understand the underlying principles and theories. Now, argumentation is both a
product and a process and we use the same term to refer to both. When we engage in argumentation,
we make arguments and we have arguments and these are two different perspectives about
what's going on. They reflect the fact that argumentation involves the production and
exchange of messages in interaction with other people. Sometimes we want to study the
message, the product of argumentation. Messages sometimes take the form of formal texts, a
speech, a newspaper editorial, the transcript of a presidential debate or a congressional
hearing, but sometimes the texts are much less formal. If we have a conversation with
someone else, the text of the conversation is the message even though we typically don't
write it down. Sometimes the argument is not explicitly verbal. The message could be a
shrug of the shoulders that conveys the claim that we want to make. This isn't really that
important or I don't really care that much about it or it doesn't make that much difference.
Nonverbal cues may imply arguments. Sometimes there'll be a text that's explicit and yet
there will be all sorts of unstated assumptions that are also parts of the argument. So the
message is both explicit and implicit. It's verbal, sometimes nonverbal, but it's capable
at least of being cast into language so that we can examine it as a structure of claims
and justifications. So one view of argument focuses on the product, the message, and in
several of the lectures in this series, that's what we will be doing. But it's also possible
to focus on the interaction with other people. When we focus on that, we're stressing not
the product, not the outcome of the argument, but the process of arguing itself. And when
we look at it this way, what we see is a kind of interaction in which people maintain what
they think are mutually exclusive propositions. What I mean by that simply is the participants
in an argument hold views that they think can't be reconciled. If they could be reconciled
easily, that's what they would do and that would be the end of the matter. They believe
that they can't be reconciled, but they also want to resolve this disagreement. They may
or may not succeed, but they want to. They don't regard it as a trivial matter. They
don't simply say, well, you know, I believe this and you believe that, and that's fine.
They want somehow to come to some common understanding. They seek to convince each other by giving
reasons to justify their views. And at the same time they do that, they're open to the
possibility of being influenced themselves. And so from this perspective, we study how
people go about doing this and how their efforts might be made more productive. So arguing
has this two-faced character. Argument is a product and argument is a process. Sometimes
we'll be talking about the products, the texts, and sometimes about the process, the interaction
between people. As a field of study, argumentation draws on three root disciplines, each of
which itself is often misunderstood, rhetoric, logic, and dialectic. From rhetoric, we derive
our concern with the audience. Unfortunately, just as argument in popular culture has negative
connotations, so does rhetoric. It's sometimes associated with bombast, with emptiness, with
phrases that don't mean anything, with ornate and flowery language, or worst of all, freshman
composition, that dread course, rhetoric 101. And so we're talking about the process of
rhetoric. Once again, these are misconceptions of what rhetoric is about. We need to restore
a conception of rhetoric that goes all the way back to the classical period to ancient
Greece. We'll explore the origins of rhetoric much more in lecture four, but we can say
some things about it right off the bat. Rhetoric focuses on how speakers, or writers, and listeners,
or readers, develop and communicate knowledge. Now by knowledge, I don't mean what's timeless
and eternally true, but what the listeners, what the interactants, what the participants
regard as true, and accept as true, and are willing to believe and to act upon. So, rhetoric
studies how people together create, develop, and communicate knowledge. It's the study
of how messages influence people. We can immediately see from this definition that argumentation
is a subset of that, exploring how people are influenced by reason-giving. Obviously
messages influence people in all sorts of other ways as well, by their style, their presentation,
their emotional appeals, and so on. But argumentation focuses on reason-giving. It was Aristotle
who defined rhetoric as the faculty or skill of discovering the available means of persuasion
in a given case. Faculty or skill of discovering the available means of persuasion in a given
case. In this sense, it is an analytical skill. It's an art of figuring out in a situation
in which we find ourselves what are the resources that we could draw upon to make claims that
would influence other people through the process of reasoning. Until fairly recently, rhetoric
was not regarded as pejorative at all. It was seen as a noble activity. Rhetoric was
one of the seven original liberal arts. We're going to restore that conception of rhetoric
for the purpose of this series of lectures, and when we do that, we will be thinking rhetorically
about arguments. When we think rhetorically, we're in a certain frame of mind that says
we're paying attention to an audience. We would need to know what the audience predispositions
are because we reason from them. It means that we have to recognize the role of choices
on the part of speakers and listeners, and we have to recognize that the influence of
listeners is non-coercive. We don't bludgeon people into submission. We influence them
when we do by making claims and giving reasons that they will find justifiable and acceptable
to which they will want to give their adherence. So argumentation takes from rhetoric a concern
with the audience. There are two other fields of study to which argumentation is related.
One of these is logic, another term that we sometimes misconstrue. Particularly in the
past couple of centuries, logic has been associated with formal symbolic logic or mathematical
reason. When people study logic in school these days, it's often as not studied in a mathematics
class with P's and Q's and truth tables, and if this, then certainly that, and that
is indeed one branch of reason. But in fact, logic is concerned with all structures of
reasoning, whether they are formal or not. And within the second half of the 20th century
in particular, we've seen the development of a whole subfield of study known as informal
logic. That is, reasoning that doesn't have certainty, that isn't mathematical, that's
not divorced from the content of the statements being made. And as we can probably see right
away, informal logic is a close cousin of argumentation, because what after all are
we doing when we engage in argument? We're creating and using structures of reasoning,
structures that connect reasons and claims that are not formal in nature and that don't
have the certainty that's associated with mathematics. So we have rhetoric and logic.
The other field that I want to mention is dialectic. Here's another one that we sometimes
misunderstand. When we think of dialectic, we often think almost in the sense that Karl
Marx wrote about as the grand sweep of opposing historical forces, such as that between capitalism
and communism, that will be a thesis and an antithesis in which there would be a resolution
of grand new synthesis. Well, yes, that's one sense of what dialectic means. But the
term again is much broader than that. And it refers most generally to the process of
discovering and testing knowledge through questions and answers. And of course in this
understanding, the very model of dialectic is the dialogues of Plato, in which the Platonic
Socrates encounters one interlocutor or another. The person states a view, Plato has Socrates
ask a series of questions, and through the exchange of questions and answers, the view
is tested or elaborated or clarified. We often think of the courtroom as another
place where this kind of dialectical procedure takes place through the act of cross-examination,
a series of questions and answers to try to figure out what's ultimately the truth of
the case. For that matter, any conversation that's a critical discussion in which people
are thinking critically and carefully will qualify as employing dialectic as a kind of
testing through question and answer. So, from rhetoric, argumentation derives its concern
with the audience. From logic, it derives the concern with structures of reason. And
from dialectic, it derives a process of testing knowledge through question and answer in an
iterative way. We might say that argumentation is the field of study where logic, dialectic
and rhetoric all meet. And so we've got this family of four terms, argumentation,
rhetoric, logic, dialectic, each of them often subject to misunderstanding. But if we understand
them correctly, they'll point the way to a very important field of study and a very
important human endeavor as well. Now this is the field of study upon which these lectures
will focus. There's another term that we need to examine, and that's the term ethics. Any
attempt to influence other people necessarily raises some ethical questions. After all,
if I try to get you to do something or to believe something, it's a limitation on your
freedom of choice. I'm not leaving you alone to do whatever you want, I'm trying to induce
you to do what I want. And what's more, it's the application of superior to inferior force,
even if the force is intellectual and persuasive rather than physical. And so an attempt to
limit other people's freedom of choice and to impose superior on inferior force automatically
raises questions about whether it's ethical to do. Again, please rest assured, neither
the teaching company nor I knowingly promote unethical activity. In fact, argumentation
seeks to achieve ethical influence. What is it that makes it ethical? Well, for starters,
it does not influence other people against their will. It seeks their free ascent. It
seeks their agreement to a claim on the basis that they have come to accept the reasons
for the claim and the connection between the reasons and the claim. So it seeks free ascent.
Moreover, what's the alternative? If there were no attempts to influence people, then
the conditions of society and community are not possible. Everyone would go his or her
own separate way with no sense of social cohesion, no bonds with others. What is it that creates
the bonds with others on which communities and societies are built? It's the interaction
between people in which we relate to and try to influence others. So it won't do to say
that any attempt to influence other people is to be questioned because we can't avoid
influencing other people. And the issue is how we go about it. It's my belief that the
most ethical way to go about influencing other people is through argumentation which
respects their individuality and respects their freedom and seeks their free ascent.
Argumentation respects listeners and it respects that they have different ways of thinking
and reason. So I hope and I trust that this study on which we are about to embark is indeed
an ethical as well as a noble activity. Now before I conclude this first lecture, let
me talk specifically about what you can expect to accomplish from this course and how we
will go about it. I sometimes get calls or emails from people saying, could you please
teach me how to win more arguments with my spouse? The answer is no. I'm not going to
do that. What I hope is that as a result of the material that we'll be considering, you
and your spouse, if you have one, will both be able to have more productive and more constructive
arguments and turn them into win-win situations where you both come together and you both
come out ahead. But this is not a course in how to overpower your spouse or your significant
other or your friend. Sometimes I get calls saying, would you please tell me how to prove
to an atheist that God exists or how to prove to a religious person that there is no God?
Again, the answer is no. I'm not going to do that. What we will see as we go through
these lectures is that arguments depend at a very basic level on common frames of reference.
And if we have a situation in which there is such disparity in the frame of reference
that there's nothing in common as between an atheist and a religious person about whether
there is a God, there's nothing really for argument to do about that. So we're not going
to do those sorts of things. What are we going to do and what can you get from it? There
are five specific goals that I hope you'll achieve through this series of lectures. First,
we'll learn to recognize arguments when we see them. We'll learn a vocabulary that helps
us to describe argumentation, not in order to give us a whole lot of jargon, but to enable
us to understand and talk about what it is that people do when they argue. So the first
thing we'll do is we'll learn how to recognize arguments, how to find them in conversations
and newspaper editorials and speeches and controversies of any kind, and how to know
them when we see them. Second, we'll become aware of how people when they argue will
make choices. Every time people engage in argumentation, they could go about it in lots of different
ways and they make choices. They may make them knowingly and deliberately or not, but
they make choices. So hopefully we will become aware of how arguing reflects choice and we'll
broaden our understanding of the choices that arguers can make, that you can make when you
build and construct arguments. So that's the second goal. Third, we'll learn something
about how to appraise arguments, how to evaluate them. We talk about good arguments, bad arguments,
strong arguments, weak arguments, better arguments, worse arguments, and so part of what we'll
do is discuss how we make those judgments, how we evaluate arguments, what kinds of standards
govern our assessment. We do that not simply to sit and pass judgment on others, but to
get a good understanding of what can make our own arguments better, as well as to see
weaknesses in arguments that we object to. Four, in attempting all of these arguments
and all of these tasks, we're going to examine as examples a variety of historical and contemporary
arguments. And so one of the things we'll do is we'll learn more about some significant
controversies by looking at them from the perspective of argument. And finally, as a
result of all of these things, we should sensitize ourselves to argumentation theories and as
a result, you should be able to improve your ability both as an analyst and as a maker
of arguments. Here's the plan for doing this. The first four lectures, including this one,
will review the assumptions underlying argumentation and the development of the field. Then, in
lectures 5 through 11, we'll explore the strategies and tactics of argument construction, attack
and defense. In the next seven lectures, we'll consider the components of argument in more
detail and how they work. We'll take two lectures to investigate the concept of validity and
fallacies, and finally, we'll investigate how argumentation functions in society. I
am certainly looking forward to this series of lectures. I hope that you are as well.
Lecture 2 Underlying Assumptions of Argumentation Hello again. In the first lecture, we introduced
ourselves to argumentation, opening up a field of study that is often closed off by
fundamental misunderstandings. We related argumentation to a family of other terms, rhetoric, logic
and dialectic. Now, in this lecture, I want to focus on a series of assumptions that we
make when we use argumentation as a means of decision making. There are five key assumptions,
and I want to spend a little bit of time talking with you about each. The first is that argumentation
takes place with an audience in mind, and the audience is the ultimate judge of the
success or failure of arguments. So the first assumption then is argumentation is audience
dependent. This means, of course, that it is different from statements like 2 plus 2 equals
4, which really don't depend on an audience for their truth or for their acceptability.
Before I explain how argumentation is audience dependent, let's look briefly at a couple
of historical examples that help to make it clear, and I'm going to use these same two
examples throughout the lecture. First, the Federalist Papers. We think of the Federalist
Papers often as exhibiting a philosophical perspective on American government and politics,
but in fact, the Federalist Papers were written for the very specific purpose of influencing
delegates in New York State in the ratifying convention to vote to ratify the proposed
Constitution, which meant that the Federalist Papers had to be written with an eye to what
was on the mind of the prospective voters in New York, and what would be likely to sway
those voters in favor of the new government, so they were constructed with an audience
in mind. Second example is the Lincoln-Douglas debates. We often think of those debates as
eloquent articulations of the competing views of Lincoln and Douglas about slavery, but
in fact, they were tailored to a very specific audience, to the swing voters in Central Illinois,
who were both opposed to slavery and opposed to immediate abolition, and so what Lincoln
and Douglas were doing in those debates, each was trying to portray the other as an extremist.
Douglas portraying Lincoln as really an abolitionist, Lincoln portraying Douglas as really wanting
to spread slavery everywhere in order to appeal to the predispositions of the particular audience
for whom they were both especially concerned. Now, what these examples tell us is that the
claims that are being advanced in arguments are not universal, timeless truths. They are
claims that are subject to the acceptance of actual listeners. An arguer who wants to
succeed with an audience must take that audience into account, and the particulars of the audience's
situation will affect its values, its priorities, and its methods of judgment. Now, who is the
audience? In one sense, it's the people who are physically present to hear an argument,
or the people who actually read an argument, but it's often broader than that. An audience's
all of the people whom the arguer seeks to affect. So if we're talking about informal
arguments between friends or spouses, for example, the arguments are fairly private, the audience
is the people who are participating in the interaction itself. But if we imagine arguments
in a more public setting, let's say on the floor of the United States Senate, a US Senator
is making arguments, not primarily for the benefit of the two or three or four or five
other senators on the floor who are physically present. He's using that occasion, or she's
