into a recession. But remember we said that the evidence might be questioned, and if so,
that it would need to be backed up with additional evidence. So just in case I've put below the
evidence box, where I had before evidence one, that we refer to specific polls and surveys
that back up the evidence about the stock market, the unemployment rate, and consumer
confidence. Now what licenses us to make that inference is the warrant, these things are
signs of an impending recession. Stock market drop, the unemployment rate, consumer confidence
are signs. They're predictors of an impending recession. That's what holds up the inference.
But remember I said that the warrant might be questioned too, and so underneath the warrant
box I've referred to the additional warrant that we might provide, warrant one, which
is accumulated historical experience, that over time these things, a drop in the stock
market and so on, usually have preceded a recession. But then remember I said this is
a general rule, there could be exceptions. And so off to the side of the warrant box
I've put some possible exceptions. Unless there are other explanations for the stock
market declining or unemployment rising, such as the stock market is declining because
stocks were overpriced as a result of speculation and now the bubble is burst. Unemployment
is rising because it's seasonal and more people are coming into the labor force. Consumer
confidence is dropping because people are worried about some extraneous things that
are going on. These might be exceptions or there might be countervailing factors that
would lead us to say, well yes, these things are signs of an impending recession generally
but not always. And since we might be in one of these exceptional circumstances, although
we don't think so, since we might be in one of these exceptional circumstances, we've
got to qualify our claim. And so I've drawn an arrow up from these exceptions to the word
probably that I've inserted before the claim. Probably the economy is entering a recession.
And the word probably also reminds us that we're not dealing with matters that we can
establish with certainty. We're not dealing with matters that we can deduce or with conclusions
that follow absolutely. When we say the economy is probably entering a recession, we're saying
we have enough reason to believe this, that we ought to take action based on it, whether
as individual consumers or from the standpoint of public policy as the case may be. So what
this version of the diagram does is it fills in the content of a specific argument so we
can see in the example that we're working with what each of these parts of the argument
really is. So what I think we've illustrated with this example is how this model, this
layout captures the essential components of the argument that the economy is heading
into a recession. Now I should tell you that while we've covered a lot of ground in this
lecture, we basically have a model of a very simple argument, only one claim at a time
and a limited range of evidence and warrants. What happens when arguments are more complex?
Find out next time.
Lecture 6, Complex Structures of Argument. It's good to be back with you again. As I
warned at the end of the last lecture, the model that we had developed at that point
was of a very simple argument. There was only one single claim and the argument was developing
sequentially as if in a conversation. Only one point was at issue at a time. But many
arguments aren't like that. They're much more complex. There may be multiple claims, all
at issue at one time, some of them supporting other claims. And the argument may have to
be developed all at once without knowing exactly how an opponent or an audience would respond
to it. This would happen in a formal speech, for example, or in a written essay where there's
not the back and forth interaction and the speaker or writer has to anticipate all of
the possible responses and build them into the original argument. These are arguments
that are more complex in nature. And that's the focus of this lecture. In a complex argument,
there is one main claim, the one that captures the substance of the controversy and we call
it the resolution. Any controversy could be seen as one of the most complex arguments
posing a major question. When two friends get together and talk about interfaith marriages,
the underlying question in the controversy is, do interfaith marriages generally succeed?
When in a policymaking context, people talk about whether or not the United States should
develop a national missile defense system, the underlying question that controversy
is trying to address is something like, how should the United States deal with the threats
of terrorism? Now, if we imagine an answer to the question that poses the controversy,
that answer is what we mean by the resolution. It's the position that one of the advocates
in the controversy will defend. It's the ultimate claim on which judgment is being sought.
It may be explicitly stated or it may be implicit in the discourse of the participants, but
it should be capable at least of being captured in a single declarative sentence. And like
any other kind of claim, there are four different types of resolutions, fact, definition, value,
and policy. Implicit in the controversy are certain issues
that an advocate will need to defend in order to uphold the resolution. And the subordinate
claims that the advocate advances will be answers to those issues. Let me say a bit
about issues. The word issue is used very loosely in ordinary discourse. Sometimes it's
used to mean any disagreement, as when one person says to another, don't make an issue
of it, meaning let's not discuss it. But we have a more precise meaning for the term
issue. Issues are the questions that are inherent in a controversy and vital to the
success of the resolution. The key terms obviously are inherent and vital. When I say that issues
are inherent in a controversy, I mean they grow naturally from it. If we were to ask
the question, do interfaith marriages succeed, we would be led naturally to a series of
other questions. What counts as an interfaith marriage? What do we mean by success? How
will we know whether or not it succeeds? And so on. Those are inherent in the larger controversy.
And if we had a resolution that interfaith marriages generally fail, in order to sustain
that resolution, we would have to be able to speak to and answer those issues. They're
vital to it. If we can't answer the issue satisfactorily, then we can't sustain the
resolution. So, issues are inherent in the controversy and they're vital to the success
of the resolution. Now at this point, let me take just a moment and put together the relationship
among controversies, issues, resolutions and claims. If you're following on video, you
might want to look at this chart that I'm going to describe, where we can imagine one
box that I have at the upper left labeled controversy and then an arrow pointing to
another box at the upper right that's labeled resolution. This tells us that from the controversy
we derive the resolution. The controversy poses the question, the resolution is an answer
to the question that one of the advocates will seek to defend. Then, going down from
the controversy, there is an arrow that leads to a series of boxes each of which I've labeled
issue. Each one of these boxes is a question that's inherent in the controversy. It grows
out of the controversy. And the answer to those questions, to the right of each of those
issue boxes, you could draw an arrow to a box and label it claim. And that would be
a statement that would be made to answer the issue. The claims respond to the issues, the
issues grow out of the controversy. And those claims taken together lead back up by an arrow
pointing up on the right side of the chart to the resolution. So, the issues grow out
of the controversy, they're answered with statements or claims that are vital to the
success of the resolution. That then is the relationship among these four key terms, controversy
resolution, issue, and claim. Of course, not every issue will be contested. Some may not
be in dispute, the parties might agree to them. And so we can say that potential issues
minus the uncontested issues will yield the actual issues in the dispute. Let's consider
an example to see how the issues work. In February of 2003, then Secretary of State Colin Powell
addressed the United Nations Security Council seeking approval for military action against
Iraq. He was defending a policy resolution, which we might state as the Security Council
should authorize the use of force in Iraq. His speech was long, 16 pages long in print,
but if we read it carefully, we'll see that he's addressing a controversy, does Iraq pose
a threat to world peace? The resolution answers the controversy and we'll see that he examines
the following four issues. First, is there a problem? His answer is yes, and the claim
he advances is Iraq is developing weapons of mass destruction which it might put into
the hands of terrorists. A second issue he examines is what is to blame? And his answer
in the form of a claim, Saddam Hussein has violated United Nations resolutions and the
UN has not enforced them. Third issue he takes up, although only briefly, will the proposal
solve the problem? He says yes, it will either destroy the weapons or remove the government.
Finally, number four, on balance, will the proposal be better? And Secretary Powell's
claim is yes, because it will remove a threat to peace in the region and it will bolster
the credibility of the UN. Now I should make clear, Secretary Powell does not label these
issues in the way that I have just done, but if you read his speech and examine what he's
saying, you will see that in that speech he develops responses to these issues, the issues
grow naturally out of the question of the controversy, does Iraq pose a threat to world
peace? And these are issues that he's got to answer successfully in order to sustain
the resolution that the United Nations should authorize the use of force. Now we'll consider
later how Powell developed his arguments and how well he defended them. But for now, notice
how he applied the theory that we've been describing. The controversy gives rise to
a series of questions. These are the issues to which Powell responds with claims that
taken together support the resolution. Now let's consider how complex arguments like
Secretary Powell's are organized. The organization of complex arguments is also complex, but
there are three basic patterns. I'll describe each and show you a model of what each looks
like. The models highlight the relationship between individual claims and the resolution.
Of course, each box in these models containing a claim is also part of an argument for which
there is evidence and inference and a warrant as we discussed last time. But these diagrams
would get far too complicated if we put in all of those elements again. So let's just
remember that each one of the boxes we're about to see could be blown up into the model
that we discussed last time. So what are the three basic patterns? First, complex arguments
can be arranged in a series structure, sometimes called by writers a subordinate structure.
This is like a series circuit in physics, and that's where the analogy comes from, or
like the old-fashioned Christmas tree lights, where if one of the light bulbs goes out,
the whole string of them goes out because the current passes through each one successively.
Each one depends upon all the others, and that's a characteristic of the series structure
of argument. Each claim leads to another in a chain, and each one depends upon all the
others if the claim is going to be established. For instance, let's suppose that the resolution
that we want to defend is the claim, airline mistakes cost me my job. And we ask how we're
going to defend this resolution? Well, here are our subordinate claims. First, my luggage
was mis-tagged when I went on a business trip. Because it was mis-tagged, it was sent to
the wrong city. Because it was sent to the wrong city, I did not have valuable documents
and papers that I had packed in my luggage. Because I was missing those documents and
papers, I gave a poor presentation in the city where I was being sent by my company,
and since I gave a poor presentation, I was fired from my job. Now you see here how we
have a classic series structure. Every step depends upon everything that's happened before
it. If we could break one of the links in the chain, we'd break the whole chain of argument.
So each claim leads to another, each depends upon the others, and all of the arguments
must be carried in order to carry the resolution. You might think therefore that this is a poor
way to organize arguments. But consider this. The series structure also creates a chain
of momentum where each one of the steps pushes you forward toward the next step, so that
if you think you can carry the series, you get some extra force from the cumulative kind
of momentum that the series structure generates. But that's one way that we could organize
a complex argument in a series pattern. A second pattern, we could organize our argument
in a convergent structure, sometimes called a co-ordinative structure. Now here's the
difference between convergent and series. Remember in series, we said each argument
depends upon the others. In a convergent structure, each argument is independent of the other
arguments. Each claim stands on its own, but like the series circuit, it's the totality
of the arguments that converge to establish the resolution. That's why the structure is
called convergent. The arguments don't depend on each other, but we need their cumulative
weight to support the resolution. Let's consider this resolution. Airline travel is becoming
more unpleasant. That's the main claim that we want to establish, and we've got a structure
of subordinate claims that will establish it. For instance, we have one claim that says
flights are often delayed. Another one says planes are really overcrowded. Third one says
the airlines don't serve food anymore. Fourth one says airport security after September
11th is really obtrusive. Another one says airports have become tense places where you
really can't relax anymore. Another one says more passengers are rude these days. Another
one says people are always using their cell phones and you have to overhear their conversations.
And all of these things work together to support the claim that airline travel is becoming
more unpleasant, the resolution that we're trying to defend. Now one of those supporting
claims by itself might not be all that significant. We might dismiss any one of those things as
a minor nuisance, not really a signal of unpleasantness. But if you put them all together, if you
have delayed flights and crowded planes and no food and tense airports, you have all those
things together, their convergence supports the resolution that airline travel is becoming
more unpleasant. And then third, arguments may be arranged in a parallel structure, sometimes
called a multiple structure. Again, the analogy is to physics. A parallel circuit is one in
which the current passes through and if one light goes out, the rest of them stay lit,
each stands on its own. Each argument is independent of the others, just like in the convergence
structure. But unlike the convergence structure, each one by itself is sufficient to carry
the resolution. So this time we might imagine a diagram where we've got a group of boxes,
each representing an individual claim, we've got a resolution over here, and each one of
the boxes independently has an arrow going from it to the resolution because each one
by itself would show that the resolution is probably true. Consider this example, still
about airlines. Here are our different claims. Airline prices don't make sense. Airline schedules
are inconvenient. Connections are often missed. To obtain discount fares, you have to buy
tickets way in advance before knowing the details of your plans. Websites and online
reservations are confusing. Reservation agents don't respond well to questions. Those would
all be claims. Supporting the resolution, airline travel is difficult to plan. Now in
this example, each one of the claims by itself establishes that travel is difficult to plan.
If prices don't make sense, it's hard to plan. If the schedules are inconvenient, it's hard
to plan. If you can't make your connections, it's hard to plan. If you have to buy your
ticket too early, it's hard to plan, and so on. Each one separately and independently
helps to establish the resolution. So we have the three basic organizational plans for complex
arguments, series, convergent, and parallel. Now let's go back to Colin Powell's 2003
speech and see how he organized his arguments. I warn you, this is a complex argument, and
so it has a complex structure. If you're on video, you might follow this diagram. If
you're in your car, please don't stop now to look at the outline, check it later.
First off, if you notice across the top of the chart, the main argument that Secretary
Powell is making is developed in a series structure. The resolution he's defending
is at the upper right, the Security Council should authorize the use of force in Iraq.
How does he get there? Well, follow his argument. He says, Iraq was required by the UN to disarm.
Then Iraq cannot prove that it's done so. Then this creates a dangerous situation, and
then the UN has an obligation to enforce its resolutions. Therefore, the Security Council
should authorize the use of force. It's a series structure because each one of the steps
depends upon the ones that have come before it. It wouldn't matter whether Iraq could
prove that it's disarmed its weapons of mass destruction if the UN hadn't required it to
do so. We wouldn't be in a dangerous situation if we weren't unsure about whether Iraq had
given up its weapons. The Security Council wouldn't need to authorize the use of force
if there weren't a UN obligation. There wouldn't be a UN obligation if the situation weren't
dangerous. It's arranged in a series. And if you thought before that a series is an inherently
weak structure, think again, because what this series does is it creates the sense of
momentum for Secretary Powell's argument. But now notice something interesting. As he
develops each one of the steps in that chain, several of them are developed with a parallel
structure. For instance, look at the second step up at the top. Iraq cannot prove that
it's disarmed its weapons of mass destruction. Secretary Powell gives you two separate arguments
independent of each other, but both supporting that. First, that Iraq's weapons of mass
destruction programs are continuing. And second, that Iraqi denials can't be trusted. Each
one of those, by itself, is a reason to conclude that Iraq cannot prove that it has disarmed
its weapons of mass destruction. And now for added measure, each one of those two is independently
supported by three arguments in another parallel structure. So how do we know that the weapons
of mass destruction programs are continuing? Well, Secretary argues, biological weapons
are continuing. Chemical weapons programs are continuing. Nuclear weapons programs are
continuing. Each one of those, by itself, separately would prove that Iraq is continuing
its WMD programs. And Iraqi denials cannot be trusted is supported by three separate
independent arguments. Iraq hides things from the inspectors. Iraq submits useless documents
to mislead the UN. And Iraq won't permit interviews of scientists outside the country. Each one
separately and by itself is a reason to conclude that Iraqi denials can't be trusted.
So this argument that Iraq can't prove it's disarmed is supported by parallel structures,
which in turn are supported by other parallel structures. Now look across the top line at
the next step. This creates a dangerous situation. Secretary Powell has another parallel structure.
Two separate reasons why it's a dangerous situation. Because it flouts, it defies the
international authority of the UN. And because weapons of mass destruction could be given
to terrorists. Each one of those is a reason for concluding the situation is dangerous,
if the UN's authority is questioned or if terrorists obtain weapons of mass destruction.
Look at the next step across the top. The UN has an obligation to enforce its resolutions,
another parallel structure. It's got an obligation, first of all, to preserve its own credibility,
its own relevance, as Secretary Powell said. And second, it's got an obligation because
the risk will only grow. And if it doesn't act now, the threat to peace will be even
more serious in the future when terrorists may get access to the weapons of mass destruction.
So look what we've seen so far about Secretary Powell's argument. His main line argument
is developed in series structure, but almost every one of the steps is in turn developed
in a parallel structure. Now notice one more thing. Let's go back to the weapons of mass
destruction programs, biological, chemical, and nuclear. Every one of those claims that
Iraq's developing biological weapons, chemical weapons, nuclear weapons, every one of those
claims is supported by a convergent structure. Look at biological, for example. Secretary
Powell says Iraq has been producing biological weapons in the past, it can't account for
their destruction and it lies about what it's doing. Now those three arguments are independent
of one another, but they work together, they converge to establish that Iraq is producing
biological weapons. The fact that Iraq has done so in the past wouldn't be enough by
itself. The fact that you can't prove that old weapons have been destroyed wouldn't be
enough by itself. The fact that Iraq is deceiving the inspectors wouldn't be enough by itself.
But put together, they converge to establish that Iraq is developing biological weapons.
The very same arguments, the very same convergent structure are used to show that Iraq is developing
chemical weapons, and with respect to nuclear weapons, there's again a convergent structure.
Iraq has some parts already, is trying to get missing parts, and is developing the weapons
systems to deliver the weapons. So notice what we see in Secretary Powell's speech. We
see a complex argument that uses all of the organizational patterns and combines them
in ways to create a map of the argument that I've represented in this diagram. Now again
I hasten to point out, Secretary Powell doesn't have a chart like this, he doesn't proceed
in exactly this order, and he doesn't label his arguments. But we can, and when we do,
we can understand what he's doing in this argument and how it gets put together. Of
course what we've done with Secretary Powell's speech, you could do with any newspaper editorial
op-ed column or any other example of an argument. We identified the resolution, we figured out
the issues, we diagrammed the structure of the argument, and then if we wanted to we
could go back to the last lecture and within individual arguments we could show the evidence
and the inference and the warrant as well as the claim. Now why should we do that? Why
should you practice this kind of argument diagramming? Well it enables you to understand
what's going on in the argument. Most of us who didn't read Secretary Powell's speech
and didn't diagram it out have only a sound bite or two to go on to figure out what he
really said. We could actually diagram it and structure the argument out. Also understanding
what Secretary Powell did is the first step to enable us to appraise the quality of his
argument. Now Secretary Powell's speech has been criticized in the aftermath of the failure
to find weapons of mass destruction. Did Secretary Powell make a mistake because in fact the weapons
didn't turn up? Was his argument poor or was his argument good and reasonable? Even though
the weapons didn't turn up. Well to answer that question we have to be able to know what
he argued and how he went about it and that's what we gain by diagramming the argument.
We also are able to start thinking about alternatives. What if Secretary Powell had not separated out
biological chemical nuclear weapons? What if he had not used a parallel structure for
why the UN has an obligation to enforce its resolutions? What if he had not grounded the
main line of his argument in a series structure? And we could go on and on and on with each
one of the steps of the argument. We could imagine alternatives, other ways to do it.
And then for practice we could figure out what each of us might do confronted with the
particular situation of the argument that we are examining. Now I know few of us are
ever going to have the opportunity to address the UN Security Council. But if you do this
with a letter to the editor or an editorial in the local newspaper or a conversation that
you've had in your family, the same process works just as well and we can get some real
insight into the nature of the arguments. In other words I'm suggesting that being able
to model and diagram complex as well as simple arguments is highly useful for pedagogical
purposes as a way to teach ourselves about argument. You should know that there are some
theorists who object to this whole process of diagramming arguments. They say that it
gives the arguments a mistaken linear quality, that there's really not this clear progression.
And indeed if you go back and read Powell's speech he doesn't progress clearly in the way
that I've described. And so they say it's misleading to try to diagram the argument
this way. They say that diagramming is an analytical exercise only and it shouldn't
be confused with actually building the arguments. Well, well and good. Well and good. We can
accept that there are limitations to the diagrams. But there's a great value that they serve
and I think we've seen how they serve the value in the example that we have described.
In addition to enabling us to analyze arguments, these tools are also useful when we build
our own arguments and we'll take up that topic next time.
Lecture 7 Case Construction Requirements and Options
Welcome back. We talked last time about the structure of complex arguments in which several
claims are organized so that they support or oppose a main claim called the resolution.
There is a word for this set of arguments and that word is a case, the subject of this
lecture. The particular set of arguments that we put together to support a resolution or
to oppose a resolution for a particular audience is what we mean by the term case. Now in order
to introduce this concept, I'd like to remind us of a diagram that we talked about last
time when we talked about the relationship among controversies, resolutions, issues and
claims. You may recall that I said that a controversy gives rise to a resolution. Underlying
that controversy, inherent in it and vital to the success of the resolution are a series
of issues, questions that are answered by claims and the claims together support the
resolution. Now if you look again at the right hand part of that diagram in which the claims
come together to support the resolution, that's what the case consists of, the grouping or
the arrangement of those claims. Taken together, the claims must speak to the issues, they
must answer all of the issues that are salient in the given controversy, otherwise the case
won't be plausible on its face. The technical term for that, by the way, is prima facia
on first face. If you don't have a case that really speaks to the issues, then just upon
hearing it, it won't seem plausible. It won't seem like it answers the question. But having
said that, I have to tell you this diagram we looked at before is a bit oversimplified.
Not all of the issues will come up in an actual controversy. Some will be stipulated, some
issues will be combined, one claim may speak to multiple issues, and sometimes there'll
