if-then statement with two parts, an if clause, which is called the antecedent, and a then
clause, which is called the consequent. And then the syllogism proceeds either to affirm
or to deny either the if or the then clause. So we might say, looking at the if clause,
if a republicrat is elected, we might say, if a republicrat is elected, prices will rise.
A republicrat is elected. Therefore, prices will rise. We've affirmed the antecedent.
And again, the conclusion would be absolutely necessarily true, given that the premises
are true. If it's the case that if a republicrat's elected prices will rise, and if a republicrat
is elected, then prices will rise. However, suppose we deny the antecedent. If a republicrat's
elected prices will rise, a republicrat is not elected. Can we say anything about prices?
No. They might rise anyway. We haven't said what would happen under those circumstances.
They might or might not rise. So if we affirm the antecedent, we've got a sound or a valid
argument, but if we deny the antecedent, we don't. Now what about the consequent, the
then part of the if then statement? If a republicrat is elected, prices will rise. Prices will
rise. Therefore, can we conclude a republicrat is elected? No. Because again, prices could
rise anyway, whether or not a republicrat is elected. So while affirming the antecedent,
the if part is a valid form of argument, affirming the consequent is not a valid form of argument.
Indeed, it's a very common fallacious form of argument to affirm the consequent. But
what if we deny the consequent? If a republicrat is elected, prices will rise. Prices won't
rise. Therefore, can we conclude that a republicrat is not elected? Yes, we can. Because we said
that if one were elected, prices would rise. Prices don't rise, so it must be the case
there was not a republicrat elected. So with this kind of syllogism, affirming the antecedent,
the if clause, and denying the consequent, the then clause, become acceptable forms of
reason. But affirming the consequent, or denying the antecedent, are not. One more time, affirming
the antecedent, saying that the if clause is true, and denying the consequent, saying
that the then clause is not true, produce valid arguments, valid forms of reasoning. But
affirming the consequent, saying that the then clause is true, or denying the antecedent,
that the if clause is not true, those don't produce valid arguments. And we see why in
the example, the effect could happen anyway. Alright, so we've got categorical syllogisms
and conditional syllogisms. The third category of syllogisms is called disjunctive, sometimes
alternative. And these are syllogisms that begin with the form either or, either this
or that. Imagine a husband and wife trying to decide how to spend a leisurely evening.
Either we will play cards tonight, or we will go to the movies. Then the syllogism proceeds
to accept or reject one alternative, and then to draw some conclusion about the other. Either
we'll play cards tonight, or we'll go to the movies, we won't play cards. Therefore,
we will go to the movies. Is that a sound argument? Sure it is. Because we said we'd
do one or the other, we've eliminated one of the options, so there's only one left.
We could say the same thing in reverse. We won't go to the movies. Therefore, we will
play cards. Rejecting either alternative automatically leads to accepting the other.
Now here's the tricky part. What if we accept one of the alternatives? Either we'll play
cards tonight, or we'll go to the movies. We'll play cards. Therefore, we won't go to
the movies. Can we be sure of that? Maybe. Here's where we get into a tricky area. The
phrase either or has two different meanings. One of them is exclusive. Either A or B, but
not both. And one is non-exclusive. Either A or B, or both. Could we both play cards
and go to the movies? You might say, well, if the night's long enough, if the movie's
short enough, if the card game doesn't go on forever, maybe we could. In that case,
it would not be valid to accept one option and conclude that we have to reject the other.
But sometimes we're talking about alternatives where we can't do both. Either I'll drive
to work Monday morning or I will walk. Now, I suppose we could contort the meaning of
that sentence and imagine, well, you know, we could drive and then we go back home and
then we come back and walk again. But as we use the terms, we would say, all right, I'm
going to work Monday morning. I'll either drive or walk. So if I drive, I know that
I won't walk. Likewise, if I walk, I won't drive. Now, if either or is used in this
exclusive sense, then we can accept one option and confidently reject the other. If it's
used in the non-exclusive sense, we can't automatically reject one just because we accept
the other. If it's used in the non-exclusive sense, we don't know. But we always know if
we reject one, we accept the other. These then are the three patterns of syllogism,
the three common patterns of formal reasoning. One relates categories to other categories,
one deals with if then statements and one deals with either or. Now, in the past 20 minutes,
what we've done is we have encapsulated a whole course in formal logic. I think we understand
enough about formal logic to know that it's deductive in nature and to realize what that
means. If the premises are true, the conclusion must be and the conclusion gives us no new
information. Until fairly recently, as I said in the first lecture, this was regarded as
the prototype for all forms of reasoning. It was seen as the model case. What other reasoning
ought to do is it ought to aspire to the standards of formal reasoning. This view has come under
increasingly strong challenge and the challenges take several forms. One of them is to suggest
that very seldom, very seldom, does one actually reason in syllogistic form. Let's consider
a couple of things about it. Remember I said it requires no reference to reality, could
be done entirely in symbols, all A is B, all B is C. How often is it the case that when
we talk about things, when we make claims, that we can abstract from reality and it makes
no difference what we're talking about? Very seldom. In fact, most of the time, precisely
what we want to talk about is the category of some specific subject matter. Consider another
feature of syllogistic reason, of formal logic. Remember I said if we want to measure our
categories are all none and some and some admits of no degrees, makes no difference whether
it's 1%, 99% or anywhere in between. How often is that the case? Again, not very often.
Most of the time when we're not dealing with universals, it's very important to know matters
of degree, whether something's highly probable or whether it's just an unlikely possibility,
for example. So one criticism would say, look, we've picked a model that doesn't in any
way describe the reasoning in which we actually engage. Another and somewhat related criticism
is to suggest that most argumentation, most reasoning, is not represented well by a form
in which the conclusion contains no new information. What we want to do most of the time when we
reason is precisely to get from something we already know to something that we don't.
We want new information. We want to move from premises that we're fairly confident of and
see if they can lead us to a new conclusion in which we can have confidence. And this
movement involves a leap of faith, which an arguer tries to justify for us and say, you
ought to make that leap. You ought to make that inference. You ought to derive that conclusion
on the basis of those premises. So what these critiques have suggested is that if we think
about mathematical logic or symbolic logic or formal logic as a model for reasoning in
general, we're going to be led down the wrong path. The model doesn't represent the kind
of reasoning, the kind of arguing in which we customarily engage. Well, if formal reasoning
is not the model, then what is it? From this point of view, it's a highly specialized application
of what are much broader general principles of reasoning. And the trick that we've played
on ourselves for 300 years, this critique would suggest, is to take a highly specialized
example as though it were the model case. Why then should we study formal reason? Why
do I devote a lecture to it? Partly to understand how it is used in the areas to which it does
apply. And partly because some of the thought patterns of formal logic and some of the errors
in formal reasoning are also found in everyday argumentation, as we will see in later lectures.
But what I am really saying here is, let's recontextualize formal reasoning. Let's recontextualize
it as a specialized case, case that's appropriate to mathematics and certain symbolic realms,
but let's quit thinking about it as a generalizable model. Where do we find our generalizable
model then? Increasingly, scholars have said we ought to look not to formal reasoning,
but to informal reasoning, which deals with structures that are not and do not aspire
to be certain. Now in informal reasoning, the argument cannot be extracted from the
language in which it is cast. This is both a blessing and a curse. It means that the
study of informal reasoning is messier than the study of formal reason. But consider a
claim like this one. If we allow stem cell research, we are playing God. We could go
on and affirm or deny the antecedent or the consequent. Now if you took a statement like
that and put it into the if-then structure of formal logic, you could do it. But you would
lose so much of what the content of this argument is about. Playing God is not just the equivalent
of a P or a Q or an A or a B or any symbol because it has connotations, value judgments
of what's permissible and not permissible, and these are bound up in the language itself.
We wouldn't reach a conclusion that says we approve of playing God. As we use the language,
we'd see that as an inconsistent possibility. Playing God is not something that's given
to human beings to do. And to say that one is trying to do that is a powerful accusation.
That's not a neutral statement. Likewise, the verb allow if we allow stem cell research.
I could have said endorse. I could have said encourage. I could have said permit. I could
have said condone. I could have used any of a number of other verbs and they'd all mean
something different because the language itself contains levels of meaning and connotation
that are also part of the argument. So unlike formal reasoning, we can't extract the argument
from the language. Furthermore, in informal reasoning, the conclusion does contain new
information, not present in the premises. As I've said, we reason precisely in order
to get to a new place from the place where we start out. So for example, if we reach
the conclusion that we ought to allow stem cell research, we would reach it from premises
that deal with science and medicine, that deal with morality, that deal with judgments
about the nature of the stem cell. And from these premises, often perhaps through a long
and tortured process of reasoning, we might get to the conclusion that we ought to allow
stem cell research or conversely that we ought not to. We get to a conclusion that contains
new information. It's not where we started out. And the purpose of our reasoning is
precisely to get there. Now as a result, this conclusion doesn't follow with certainty.
Our premises about morality might be right. Our premises about science might be right.
And it still might be the case that we ought not to allow stem cell research or conversely
that we should, depending on which way we were making the argument. The conclusion follows
only with some degree of probability. And it's important to have some sense of how great
that probability is. We're not satisfied with just saying some. We want to know whether
there's an offhand chance that we could be right. Whether it's a medium range probability
or whether it's highly likely that we would be right. So now to recapitulate, informal
reasoning can't be extracted from language. The conclusion does contain new information.
And the conclusion follows not with certainty, but only with some degree of probability.
Now we might ask ourselves, why should we accept a conclusion that relies on probability?
Why should we accept a conclusion that might be wrong? Well the answer in brief is that
if the reasoning follows accepted conventions, if it follows a pattern that's been used repeatedly
over time and has led to generally good results, we can be fairly confident that it's right.
Accumulated experience has borne out that it'll usually be right. Not always. Not always,
but it'll usually be right. Now what those conventions of informal reasoning are, we'll
see in more detail several lectures down the road. But if the question is why should we
accept the conclusion based on probability, we should do it because of accumulated experience
and because absolute certainty is not possible. Formal reasoning has its place. But informal
reasoning is at the center of argumentation. This approach to reasoning has a long and
rich history going back about 2,500 years as we will see in the next lecture.
Lecture 4, History of Argumentation Studies
It's good to be back with you again. In the last lecture we attempted to distinguish
argumentation in general, which is our concern, from formal reasoning which is a specialized
application of it. I suggested that general argumentation grounded in informal reasoning
had a very long history. Now I want with all immodesty to survey 25 centuries of history
and explore how this field of study developed and how it came to take the shape that it
has today. We start off in ancient Greece in the 5th century before the common era.
This is usually regarded as the period of time in which the study of rhetoric and argumentation
began. The immediate impulse for it was frankly political. There had been a tyrant named Thrasybulus
of Syracuse who had been overthrown and a democratic regime was established. This created
a very practical political need. During the period of tyrannical rule, private property
had been seized, been expropriated, and citizens now needed to go to court and to make arguments
on their behalf with regard to their title to their property. They needed to know how
to do it. There weren't professional lawyers then. Citizens represented themselves in court.
They needed to know how to justify the claim that a piece of property that they said was
theirs really was. In response to this need, there developed a class of people, we'd call
them professionals today, who were teachers. They went around from place to place. They
were itinerant teachers who lectured in Athens and in the surrounding area to teach people
the skills to do this, to argue their claims in court. These teachers were called Sophists.
Now again, this is a term that today has negative connotations. Sophistry is talked about as
empty appeals that don't really have any significant substance to them, but at that time the Sophists
were highly respected. One of the earliest of the Sophists was a man named Protagoras,
whom we remember as the father of debate because Protagoras taught that there were always two
sides, at least two sides, to every question, and hence the outcome of the question was not
given or self-evident, but was relative to the arguments that were advanced for it.
So Protagoras introduced the very kind of mindset that we talked about in the last lecture.
Among the other leading Sophists were Gorgias, who focused on different styles of language
in argument, and Isocrates, not to be confused with Socrates. Isocrates, who emphasized the
role of probabilities, and who by the way was one of the leading opponents of Plato.
Isocrates and Plato sort of represent the two poles of antiquity, Plato defending philosophy,
Isocrates defending rhetoric, Plato seeking certainty, Isocrates emphasizing probability,
Plato the man of contemplation and reflection, Isocrates the man of action, and so on.
The Sophists introduced the notion that there were, if you will, storehouses in the mind
or common places to which one could go to find the themes or the appeals to use in the
arguments to be made in court, and they suggested that there was a finite number of these places
in the mind. So if you could learn these common places, you would have a storehouse of resources
to use in making the claims that you would need to make.
There's one other thing, by the way, that the Sophists did that I've always admired
them for. They introduced the principle that teachers should be paid. But they came to
be criticized, and they were criticized by no one as vigorously as by Plato. The essence
of Plato's criticism of the Sophists was that they regarded winning the case as an end in
itself, regardless of one's purpose, regardless of the soundness of one's position, just as
we sometimes stereotype argumentation today. The charge that would be made against the
Sophists is that they made the weaker appear to be the stronger case. They made the worse
appear to be the better case. And how did they do that? The charge went, they did it
by being so concerned with technique as an end in itself, apart from the substance of
the matter, and apart from what was right, so that they would teach people with weak
positions how to make them seem stronger than they really were.
Now of course, the assumption underlying this charge by Plato against the Sophists was that
there was a priori, some notion of what was right and what was wrong, what was worse and
what was better, what was weaker and what was stronger, that you could determine these
features of a case apart from making the arguments for it. Assume that all of these things could
be known and applied. Plato thought that the excessive concern of the Sophists for technique
was inherent in the subject of rhetoric and argument itself, and so he derided the study
and practice of argumentation. Indeed, there's an interpretation of one of Plato's most famous
dialogues, The Fedrus, which suggests that what Plato does in that dialogue is to establish
the requirements for good rhetoric, for good argument, such that they could not possibly
be met. In order to practice good rhetoric, one must know the nature of the soul, and
all the different kinds of souls, and so on and so forth. These would be requirements
that couldn't possibly be met, and so by this interpretation, The Fedrus is in large part
an attack on rhetoric, and it suggests that if you employ rhetoric, if you employ argument,
if you believe, as Protagoras did, that there are two sides to every question and that the
outcome is relative to argument, well, this is just focusing on appearances, not realities.
It's focusing on what is fleeting and ephemeral, not on what's enduring and timeless, and
of course, Plato was concerned with the latter. And so we have all the way back in antiquity,
this opposition between rhetoric and philosophy, appearance and reality, probability and truth,
democracies and Plato. It fell to Aristotle to try to develop a
synthesis of these positions. Aristotle argued that rhetoric and argument were neither moral
nor immoral instruments. They were instruments. They could be used for good, they could be
used for evil, but argumentation was a skill, it was a practical art. And Aristotle wrote
a book called The Rhetoric, which is still studied widely today, in which he tried to
set out this view. It's in that book that he offered the definition that I mentioned
a few lectures back when he said that rhetoric was the faculty or skill of discovering the
available means of persuasion in the given case. And that view led Aristotle to an emphasis
on audience analysis, to a view on the kinds of appeals that one could use, and the circumstances
under which they would be appropriate or inappropriate.
Aristotle's rhetoric is sometimes thought of almost as a recipe book because it suggests
all these different possibilities that an orator could use. But the larger purpose that
Aristotle had in mind was to try to resolve this split between Isocrates and Plato, to
suggest that the study of rhetoric was legitimate. It was worth knowing about, and argumentation
was the foundation of it. And so it was a skill that ought to be taught so that it could
be put to good and useful purpose. And Aristotle really represents the synthesis of classic
Greek approaches to argumentation and rhetoric. Now this synthesis with only minor adjustments
continued to dominate the study of rhetoric, not only through the rest of classical Greece,
but through the Roman era and into the medieval period as well.
What the Romans did was to take the theories of rhetoric developed by the Greeks, particularly
by Aristotle, and to adapt them largely for pedagogical purposes. So the Romans saw rhetoric
as a means of instruction. And if you will, argument and rhetoric became a sort of early
theory of teaching. How do we teach? How do we instruct students? And how do people learn?
And what the Romans did was to take the concepts that Aristotle especially had articulated,
and they systematized them. And they did that by dividing the study of rhetoric into five
parts, which they called canons. The canons were invention, arrangement, style, and the
memory, and delivery. Invention was the process of discovery, of finding what could be used
in an argument, and selecting what would be used. Invention was the process of going
through the storehouses of the mind, identifying the available resources, and then choosing
from among them. Arrangement, as its name suggests, refers to organization, and indeed
the earliest work on patterns of organization came from the Romans. They talked about the
different parts of a speech, and what should be done in each part, and how the parts should
work together for persuasive purposes. Style focused on the use of language, and how different
kinds of language could suggest a different level or tone, and how particular words and
phrases could be chosen. Memory referred to the process of keeping in mind what one was
about to say, and it led ultimately to the discovery and study of all sorts of mnemonic
devices, devices to aid the memory. It didn't necessarily mean memorization, but it referred
to keeping in one's mind the elements of the appeal. And delivery referred to the physical
presentation, the use of the voice, the use of the body, gesture, and so on. So rhetoric
was neatly divided up into these five parts, and as you can imagine, the first two of them,
invention and arrangement, were most closely linked to argumentation. Argumentation became
the process of identifying the appeals that one could use, and figuring out how to put
them together in an order or structure. It was also the Romans, as you probably remember,
who organized whole fields of study, and developed the original seven liberal arts. Rhetoric
was one of these. It was put together with logic and grammar, and the three, logic, grammar,
and rhetoric, were called the trivium, not to be confused with trivial, and the trivium
were the fields that were seen as essential to the training of the good citizen orator.
The ultimate objective of the Roman educational system was to train people to be, in Quintillion's
words, the good person speaking well, because that's what the job of the citizen was seen
as being, being able to speak effectively, and to influence others through argument.
This view, by the way, held through much of the medieval period as well. The cannons
that are associated with the Romans, and especially with Cicero, were maintained. The one significant
change was that if education was the dominant influence of the Romans' use of rhetoric, for
much of the medieval era, it was religion. Religion was the dominant social institution,
and so rhetoric and argument came to be seen as a theory of preaching. And this theory
once again relied on the same cannons that the Romans had developed, and that in turn
was a systematization of a whole way of thought that went back to classical Greece.
Now I want to jump all the way to the 16th century or so, the early Renaissance, and
it was then that some significant changes occurred in the way that people thought about
the study of rhetoric and argumentation. There was an otherwise relatively obscure philosopher
by the name of Peter Ramos, who took the five cannons of the Romans and split them into
two groups, invention and arrangement on the one hand, style, memory, and delivery on the
other. Ramos took invention and arrangement, and he lifted them from rhetoric and assigned
them to philosophy, because these were seen as part of the discovery process of figuring
out what was true. Rhetoric was left with style, memory, and delivery, which some people would
regard as the least intellectual elements of the subject, and certainly the least relevant
to argumentation. But notice what Ramos's division implied. It implied that the process
of discovering what was true was separate from the process of presenting it after it
had been discovered. Remember Aristotle had linked the two together. He regarded all of
this subject matter as interrelated. But under the influence of Ramos, discovery of truth
was distinguished from the presentation of truth. And rhetoric was seen not as a matter
of making and justifying claims with an audience in mind, it was not seen as argumentation,
but as a way of giving effective presentation to what philosophy had already determined
to be correct. This was a view that would have a profound influence over the study of
rhetoric for the next couple hundred years, removing it further and further from the kinds
of concerns that we've been talking about and focusing it much more on mechanics. What
did scholars of rhetoric do during this time? They developed elaborate manuals, lists, category
systems of figures of speech, ways of gesture, ways to move the head and to position the
body. There were whole books published with hundreds of diagrams of different gestures
suggesting different kinds of things, how to use the body during delivery of a speech.
That's what rhetoric was, while philosophy took over invention and arrangement. But then
something significant happened within the field of philosophy, particularly under the
influence of Rene Descartes. We remember Descartes probably most of all for his statement, I
think, therefore I am. What we forget is that what that statement is an answer to is the
question, what can you know? Descartes believed that we ought to systematically doubt everything
and we ought to accept as true only what could be shown to be self-evident. What was self-evident
if I think, therefore I exist? The Cartesian revolution in philosophy, as it is sometimes
been called, was marked by this quest for certainty, for self-evidence. Well, guess what happens
to invention and arrangement, those borrowed canons from rhetoric. Once philosophy takes
on a concern with certainty and self-evidence, they wither away. And indeed, for much of
the 17th, 18th and into the 19th century, there is little further advance in the understanding
of these important canons, and hence little advance of argumentation. Reasoning becomes
identified with the study of formal logic alone because it yields certainty. This is when
formal logic began to be seen as the model of all reason. That what is not formal should
aspire to the standards of formal logic. It should be taken as the goal. And within specialized
fields of study, practitioners developed models of reasoning that were claimed to be deductive
or certain, or at least to approach that goal. And what was argumentation? Very simply, it
was the demonstration of self-evident truth. What would be the model case of argumentation
in such a view? Geometrical proofs. You probably remember studying geometry, where you make
a statement and then you make a reason for it on a table of statements and reasons until
you end up with a certain conclusion. Well, that's what argumentation was thought to be
under the influence of Descartes, a demonstration of self-evident truth. And this point of view
