So let's look at an example. Let's go back to the same example we talked about last time,
the Kennedy Nixon debates of 1960. And I want to pick up where I left off then.
Remember that the original argument presented by Douglas Cater, the panelist, was that Kennedy's
platform would cost $10 billion more than Nixon's. And that Kennedy attacked this argument by
recontextualizing it, by providing counter examples, by admitting some increases, and by
challenging the accuracy of Nixon's figures. Now it's Nixon's turn to rebuild to defend his
original argument. And let's look at the choices that Nixon makes and see how they relate to what
we've been discussing. Here is Nixon's response. Senator Kennedy has indicated on several occasions
in this program tonight that I have been misstating his record and his figures. I will issue a white
paper after this broadcast quoting exactly what he has said on compulsory arbitration,
for example, and the record will show that I have been correct. That's the first part of Nixon's
response. Now notice what he did. He picked up on the very last thing that Kennedy said,
you've been misstating your figures. Of course, his honor is being attacked, so he feels the need
to defend himself, but he doesn't really talk about the figures on the budget. He talks about
another argument in which Kennedy says his position has been misrepresented on compulsory
arbitration. That's the very first thing Nixon does to try to defend himself, is he responds to
this charge of misstating figures, but doesn't respond to it directly. Then Nixon talks about
Kennedy's counter examples, and he says this, now as far as his figures are concerned here tonight,
he again is engaging in this what I would call mirror game of here it is and here it isn't.
Look what Nixon's doing there. He's labeling Kennedy's argument strategy. Remember we said
in the last lecture that labeling the argument strategy is a way to call attention to the
strategy and to defeat its effectiveness. And then he talks about some of the specific
counter examples, and he tries to suggest that they are illusory, that they're not real counter
examples. On the one hand, for example, he suggests that as far as his medical care program is
concerned, that really isn't a problem because it's from social security. But social security is
a tax. The people pay it. It comes right out of your paycheck. This doesn't mean that the people
aren't going to be paying the bill. Remember Kennedy had used social security as an example
because it's off budget. So it's not going to add to the cost of his program to the federal budget.
Nixon's point is this is an illusory saving because people are still going to pay the tax.
He also indicates that as far as his agricultural program is concerned that he feels it will cost
less than ours. Well, all that I can suggest is that all the experts who've studied the program
indicate that it is the most fantastic program, the worst program in so far as its effect on the
farmers that America has ever had foisted upon it in an election year or any other time. Well,
Nixon certainly riled up, but you notice he doesn't respond to Kennedy's claim that the agricultural
program will cost less. Although he then introduces a new argument saying that part of the cost of
the program that Kennedy left out is a 25% rise in food prices that people would have to pay.
That's not documented, but what he's suggesting is that's a hidden cost. Then he goes on to
say that he's going to change the interest rate situation and that we're going to get some money
that way. Well, what he is saying there in effect, we're going to have inflation. We're going to go
right back to what we had under Mr. Truman when he had political control of the Federal Reserve Board.
I don't believe we ought to pay our bills through inflation through a phony interest rate.
Of course, what Kennedy had been talking about was by cutting the budget deficit,
you'd be able to reduce the interest rates and what Nixon is saying is you're going to have
inflation and that's not a good thing. Now, notice that one of Kennedy's counter examples,
closing loopholes, gets no response from Nixon. Notice that Nixon never draws together what he's
accomplished by responding to these counter examples. They're pretty scattershot responses.
He attacks this one for this reason and this one for this reason and this one for another reason.
Notice also that Nixon doesn't respond to Kennedy's argument that increased spending
in certain areas is a good thing and there's no response at all to the main point that Kennedy
had made, which was that he was fiscally responsible and was going to achieve a balanced budget.
If we think about Nixon's response, notice he doesn't go back to the original argument,
which is Kennedy's program will cost more than his, nor does he focus on the structure of
Kennedy's attacks, suggesting that item by item the attacks fall short. He does a little bit of
this and a little bit of that, picking and choosing in ways that probably are strategically
not the best for him. Now, Nixon was an accomplished debater. I don't mean to question his ability at
all, but in this example, we can see what he's done is made choices about selection and arrangement
of his defense that were probably not the best strategic choices. And the reason that we're
focusing so systematically in these two lectures on the choices that people can make is so that we
can get a sense of them so that when we're in actual arguments, we will put into practice what
we're exploring, and over time will become instinctively more skillful in making the strategic
choices that do us the most good. Well, now what we've seen here is we've seen the deployment
of the defense choices on the part of Nixon in the Kennedy-Nixon debates, and we've seen earlier
the deployment of the attack choices on the part of Senator Kennedy. So we've talked about both attack
and defense, and now I want to discuss some general approaches to refutation that can be used in both
attack and defense, general strategies that can be used not only to attack an argument,
but also to rebuild it once it has been attacked. And there are a number of these. One of them
goes by the Latin term reductio ad absurdum, reducing to absurdity, and this is a device to suggest
that the other arguer's position, whether you're the attacker or the defender, that the other arguer's
position should be rejected because it leads to unacceptable implications. It's not absurd in the
sense that you'd laugh at it. It's absurd in the sense that it leads to a result that nobody would
accept. So for instance, you say ketchup is a vegetable, and some people did during the 1980s.
Well, if ketchup is a vegetable, then salt and pepper or carbohydrates relish is a fruit,
mustard is a protein, and we can have a balanced diet consisting of nothing but condiments. An
obviously unacceptable result, and since what leads us to that unacceptable result
is the standard that says ketchup is a vegetable, we reject that position. That's reductio ad absurdum.
Another one of these general devices of refutation is called turning the tables,
and this means showing how a position that is claimed by one arguer actually benefits the
other arguer. So let's talk about airline safety one more time. Let's imagine that
you're making an argument, you want to improve airline safety, and you say the way to do that
is to build more airports in order to reduce congestion at the existing major airports,
and let's imagine I'm responding to you, and I say you want to improve airline safety.
What will really improve airline safety is not to build more airports, which will just boost
demand. What will really improve airline safety is more careful scheduling controls, improved
safety procedures for the airlines taking off and landing, in other words, more regulation,
not more freedom. So if safety is the goal, safety doesn't work to your advantage as a
reason to build more airports, it works to my advantage as a reason to increase regulation.
So I've turned the tables on you, I've taken your value and used it for my purposes.
Another general means of refutation is to pose a dilemma, to suggest that the opposing arguer
must choose between unattractive alternatives. So a critic of the George W. Bush administration
might say, you want to overcome the economic slump and to improve the rate of job creation,
there are only two ways to do that. We've got to reduce the federal budget deficit,
either by reducing the expense on the war in Iraq or by increasing taxes. You don't want to do
either one, but those are the only two things that are going to make enough difference to the budget
to get us out of the economic slump and pick up the pace of job creation. So the dilemma poses
unattractive alternatives and suggests that those are the only alternatives. And so if you're right
that they're the only alternatives, the dilemma can be a very potent means of refutation.
Another one, in addition to reductio ad absurdum turning the tables, posing dilemmas,
the argument from residues, which dictates what position your opponent can be in by eliminating
all of the other possibilities. This was a favorite form of argument by President Lyndon
Johnson during the Vietnam War, when he would defend his position against his critics by saying,
look, we have only three alternatives. We can turn tail and run, which is the way he characterized
withdrawal, not exactly in neutral language. We can pour it on, bomb them back to the stone age
in risk World War Three, or we can persevere in the course that we're in. So what he's doing is
he's responding to attacks by saying, there's only this one choice. Then there's the argument
afforsiori. This is an argument of comparison that suggests that what's true of the lesser
is true of the greater or vice versa. If it's important to count the votes accurately in an
uncontested race, all the more should we count them accurately in a closely contested race.
And final general means of refutation, I've suggested this before, to identify contradictions
or inconsistencies in the opponent's argument that eliminate at least one of the other arguer's
positions, as well as questioning the other arguer's general credibility. These then are
approaches that are available to both attack and defense. The processes of attack and defense
together help to move the argument forward by identifying and focusing on what is in dispute.
And so as we've said, they are constructive and very important processes. Next time we'll talk
about another aspect of putting arguments together, and that's the language and style in which they're
cast.
Lecture 11, Language and Style in Argument
Welcome back. For the past several lectures, we've been talking about aspects of argumentation
strategy and tactics, being able to recognize and diagram both simple and complex arguments,
case construction, stasis, attack and defense of arguments. There's one more major topic that I
want to take up under this general heading, and that's the way that language and style work in
argumentation. And this lecture is really built around a fairly obvious claim that has implications
that are not quite so obvious, and that is that arguments are cast in language. The sorts of
arguments that we have every day are not reducible to the symbols of mathematics or formal logic.
All A is B, all B is C, if P, then Q, and so on. And the language in which our arguments are cast
is not simply addressing or covering that we put onto the substance of the argument itself.
It's very much bound up with the argument itself, and the way in which arguments are cast in
language has some profound effects for understanding the nature of the argument. What's more,
arguers make choices about language, just as they make choices about case construction and attack
and defense, and these choices serve as a strategic resource. As with other choices,
they often make them unthinkingly, but we want to be systematic in our ability to understand
and talk about them. So recognizing that we can't separate substance and language or substance and
style that they're bound up together, let's look if we can at some of the ways in which language
and style figure into argumentation. Let me begin with definitions. There's a dry subject you might
think, and yet definitions are a really important strategic resource for an arguer. Let's remind
ourselves, first of all, of the different purposes that definitions serve. The most obvious one is
to characterize common usage, to talk about how people ordinarily use a term, what they mean by it,
and those are the definitions that we find in a dictionary. Sometimes definitions are used to make
vague terms more precise. You may have noticed that in these lectures there have been a number
of technical terms, hopefully not too many, but when I've introduced technical terms,
I've done so in order to give us a precise meaning, a clear meaning or clear understanding
for a concept that might otherwise be vague. And definitions are also used to invent or to
characterize new usage. In the past 10 or 15 years, we've seen loads of examples of this
related to information technology, terms like boot up, surf the net, download, and Google as a
verb, for example, are all terms that characterize usage that didn't exist prior to the personal
computer age. So those are all purposes that definitions serve. But there's another purpose
that is particularly important for the use of definitions in argumentation. And that is the
persuasive definition, or a definition that conceals an argument within it. That's almost an
invitation to have an argument. This is a form in which definitions are used to gain an argumentative
advantage for one person or another. They alter the meaning of a term by associating that term
with either positively valued terms or negatively valued terms in the hope that the positive or
negative value will transfer from the other terms to the one for which we use the persuasive definition.
That's the theory. Persuasive definition transfers emotional meaning from one term to another.
Now, let's try to understand this theory a little bit more with a simple example.
One of the things that I occasionally encounter as a college professor is I'll receive from a student
a paper that has been found to be copied from another student or from a printed source or
increasingly from the internet. It's been plagiarized. Now, what do I call the act that
has taken place? Do I call it carelessness or sloppiness? These are terms that would suggest
unintentional error, calling for a classic teachable moment in which I explain to the student
how to be more careful, how to make sure that he or she uses sources that are his or her own.
Certainly a mistake, but nothing malicious about it, nothing intended to deceive.
But what if I call it fraud or theft of another person's ideas? Now, I've put it in an entirely
different context. I've suggested intent and motive and maliciousness. So in one case,
I've defined this act as carelessness. And in another case, I've defined the act as fraud.
And the definitions are persuasive because there are connotations bound up in those terms,
like carelessness or fraud. And obviously, it makes a difference in how I'm going to respond
to this behavior based on what I think of the act and how I'm going to evaluate the student
who was involved in it. In other words, these are not neutral or trivial choices of language
to define the act one way or another. When we do this in an argument, our definitions affect
the perception of the argument and of how to respond to the argument. There are many contemporary
examples of just this kind of a use of persuasive definition. For example, the estate tax has been
referred to by its opponents as the death tax. Now, the connotations that are involved in calling
it the death tax are pretty obvious. The suggestion that death should somehow be a taxable event,
as if the tax were on the person who died rather than on the person that inherits this windfall
estate, makes the tax objectionable and helps the cause for elimination of the tax.
The Democrats in the Senate, who were concerned that the rules might be changed to eliminate
filibusters on judicial candidates, referred to this rule change as the nuclear option.
And of course, the connotation of nuclear option is that this would just be a devastating blow
to the civility and the procedures of the Senate almost like dropping a nuclear bomb.
This would not be a minor change in the rules or a different way in counting up the votes.
Or a particularly obvious example in the early years of the 21st century, a particular medical
procedure that has the name intact dilation and extraction has been called by its opponents
partial birth abortion. And of course, calling this procedure partial birth abortion
is not neutral at all. It's a way to mobilize objection to this particular procedure
by suggesting that it is especially gruesome and inhumane. Now notice in all of these examples,
the argument is tasked in a particular language. The language is an attempt to define some key
terms, but the definition is not neutral. The definition affects the way in which the argument
is perceived and is dealt with. Now, how are definitions used? One of the ways that they're
used in argument is to widen or narrow the scope of the conflict, to widen or narrow what the
dispute is about, and consequently who might be in a position to have something to say about the
dispute. And it happens in two ways. One, definitions can be used to widen the scope of argument.
The person who stands to lose the argument if it's confined to a narrow scope may seek to
widen the scope. For example, what happens if we refer to budget deficits as immoral?
Once we enlarge the scope of the argument to refer not just to technical economics,
but to morality, we have broadened the circle of people who have something legitimately to say
about the argument. It's not just economists. It's not just a professional dispute. It's not just a
technical matter. It's a matter that raises questions of principles and morals about which
anybody is qualified to be involved or to have something to say. So if you stand to lose by
having the argument be construed narrowly, you define it in such a way as to broaden the scope.
It can also work the other way around. Definitions can be used to restrict the scope of argument
by excluding otherwise interested parties. There's a famous speech in which President
Kennedy said that the management of a modern economy is increasingly technical in nature.
Well, this is an attempt to do the opposite of my first example, to say if it's technical in nature,
then the people who are qualified to say something about it are those with technical
expertise and training, not ordinary citizens. Or when in discussing missile defense,
some advocates said the concept of throw weight and how it's measured is an increasingly technical
kind of problem. It's to suggest, hey, for people who don't have this kind of technical training,
stay out of the argument because you're not qualified to say anything about it.
So definitions can be used to alter not only the connotations of a term,
but the scope of the dispute of the controversy itself.
Now, however they're used, as a general rule, definitions ought to be clear enough
that they avoid some common errors in meaning. And I want to talk briefly about some of those
errors and it'll be pretty obvious why there are things we generally try to avoid.
One of them is equivocation. Equivocation is the use of a term in two different senses
in the same argument so that the meaning subtly changes and if we're not careful,
we'll lose track of the original argument. So for example, the parent who says to a teenager,
I trust you, I have always trusted you, and therefore I trust you will be home by midnight.
Well, the term trust means something different in that last statement. It means I expect you
to be home by midnight. It's not referring to trusting one's judgment or placing one's trust
in another person as it is in the beginning of the argument. My favorite example of equivocation,
by the way, is an argument that's set up almost like a syllogism. It goes, I love you,
therefore I am a lover, all the world loves a lover, you are all the world to me,
therefore you love me. Now, you might want to try this and see if it has any benefit for you,
but it should be pretty obvious that several of the terms change meaning during the course of
that argument. What love means, what a lover is, what all the world is, and so on. So that's
equivocation. Second thing we want to avoid as we use definitions is ambiguity. Most of the
time we want to avoid ambiguity, and that's a situation in which a word has multiple meanings
and we can't tell from the argument which meaning is intended. Take the simple statement,
the cardinals are in town. Do we mean birds? Do we mean a baseball team? Or do we mean officials
of the Roman Catholic Church? We can't tell simply from the statement. It's ambiguous.
A close cousin of ambiguity is amphiboli, amphiboli. This is a less known term, but what it refers to
is where a phrase, not a single word, but a phrase has multiple meanings and you can't tell just
from the statement which one is intended. My favorite example of this is something that I
always threaten to do, but honest I've never actually done it. I'm asked often to write letters
of recommendation for students, and some of those I'm very happy to do. Some are much more difficult
to write, and so I've thought about writing a letter of recommendation that says I can't recommend
this student highly enough. No one would be better for the position that you advertise.
Now, think about it. Does that statement mean there are no superlatives that I could use that
would capture the student? Or does it mean students not very good? I can't recommend them enough
to be supporting them positively. You can't tell simply from the statement itself. That's
amphiboli. So we have equivocation, ambiguity, amphiboli. Vagueness is another problem with
definitions, and vagueness is a situation in which a term or concept is indeterminate as to what it
means. There's no way to pin it down. I'm sometimes asked how old someone is, and I used to say,
well, he's middle-aged. What does middle-aged mean? At one point in my life, I thought it was anybody
over 25, and then as I've aged, why my understanding of middle-aged has changed proportionately. I
now think 85 and up is a pretty good definition of middle-aged, but the point is there's no way
to pin it down. It's an inherently vague term, and as a general rule, we want to try to avoid vagueness.
Then there are a pair of problems that are related. They're the mirror image of each other,
and they go by the name the heap and the slippery slope, and they both involve using language
that refers to making distinctions that it's hard to make precisely and so suggesting that they
can't be made at all. So for example, let's talk about the heap. If you're watching this on video,
you can tell the color of my beard. If you're stuck with the audio version, I'll tell you that it's
gray or white depending on your point of view, but 35 years ago, when I grew it, it was very dark.
Now at some point, there was a gray hair, but that didn't change the overall color of my beard.
We still referred to it as dark. Then there was another gray hair. One more hair didn't make a
difference. Another one didn't make a difference. No one hair made any difference in the color of my
beard. Therefore, how could the color have changed? That's the heap. Because we can't identify the
point of change, we say there's no change. This, by the way, was an argument strategy that was
used during the Vietnam War, when with each escalation in the number of troops, there were
official pronouncements that this is not a widening of the war or a change in our basic mission,
but somehow as we got from 16,000 to 500,000 troops, it became an American war. That's the
heap. And the slippery slope is just the opposite. It's setting off a chain of events
that you assume can't ever be stopped, a chain of consequences. And so I have students who come to
me and say, please let me into your class because if I can't get into your class, I can't fulfill
the requirements, and then I can't have this major. And if I don't have this major, I can't
graduate. And if I can't graduate, I'll have to turn down this job that's been offered to me.
And if I turn down this job, I'm going to seriously weaken my long-term income possibilities. And if I
weaken my income possibilities, it will hurt my mental health. And if I hurt my mental health,
I'm going to be more likely to be suicidal. So let me into your course or I will commit suicide.
Now that's a slippery slope. It's a set of events that is alleged to be unstoppable,
and it leads to a result that is far fetched from the point at which it starts off.
This was also widely used in official U.S. government rhetoric during much of the Cold War
under the heading of the Domino Theory. One of the sections I didn't talk about from the
Kennedy-Nixon debates involved the islands of Kimoy and Matsu off the coast of mainland China.
And the argument was that if they fell to the communists, Formosa would be next. And if Formosa
fell, then Japan. And if Japan, then the Philippines. If the Philippines, then Thailand. If Thailand,
then Malaya. And all of a sudden from the loss of these islands that were the size of postage
stamps, we would have communism surging across the Pacific Ocean and threatening all of the world.
That's the slippery slope. Now all of these errors, equivocation, ambiguity, amphiboly,
vagueness, heaps, slippery slopes, they come about from the inexactness of language,
which is a condition that's peculiar to informal argument. Language is messy.
And you might think therefore that what we ought to do is we ought to make our language at least
as precise as we can. And that's a good general rule. But not always. Sometimes imprecise language
is desirable. Why is it that diplomatic statements are often rendered in ambiguous language
to leave options open for later consideration? Why else might things be rendered ambiguously
or imprecisely to allow parties with different interests to agree on something even though
they have different reasons and different points of view? So for example, the Congress of the United
States passed a resolution apologizing for slavery prior to the Civil War. And the apology was fairly
vague because some people believed that they were personally responsible and some didn't.
Some believed that reparations should be paid and some didn't. Some believed that slavery was a
continuing blight on our landscape. Some believed that we should get over it. But they could come
together around fairly general language to express this statement of apology. So sometimes we want
language to be less precise. And when that happens, there are ways to do it. One is the euphemism,
a term that cloaks meaning in a fairly general kind of statement. If you study the history of
the American Civil War, you'll know that in the years immediately after the war, different terms
were used to refer to it. Sometimes it was called the War of Southern Rebellion, or conversely the
War of Northern Aggression by people who wanted to rub raw the wounds. But for people who wanted
to heal, it was sometimes called the War Between the States, or my favorite, the Late Unpleasantness.
Now that's an imprecise term if ever there was one, and it's deliberately chosen in order to not
reopen the controversy. Ambiguity, equivocation, vagueness, the very things I just talked about
as errors, sometimes can be used deliberately to make language less precise. So for example,
in the 1970s, when President Richard Nixon went to China, there was a communique that was issued
in Shanghai that said, everybody agrees that there is but one China, and Taiwan is part of China.
Seemingly clear, and yet ambiguous. Did that mean that mainland China would eventually encompass
Taiwan, or that the nationalist Chinese on Taiwan would eventually reconquer mainland China? Deliberately
an unanswered question. On the other hand, most of the time we want to make language more precise,
and we can do that sometimes by stipulative definitions. So a parent and child who disagree
on what it means for the child to clean up his room, the parent says, now by a clean room, I mean.
No clothes on the floor, all the things put away on the shelves, and so on. You stipulate
the operations to be performed, and you thereby make the definition more precise. Drawing analogies
to other arguments can make language more precise. So if we want to understand gender discrimination,
we say this is just like racial discrimination that we presumably understand more clearly.
Are we name or label the argument? President George H. W. Bush referred to the vision thing,
and sometimes people who wanted to criticize him talked about the vision thing argument,
referring to general goals or objectives. Okay, so we have definitions, and we have precise or
imprecise language. Figures of speech, which we think of if we studied them in English class
as ornamentation, also have argumentative implications. They affect the way an argument is
