They won't resort to force if they don't get their way.
To freedom of speech, the others free to say whatever he or she wants.
And to intellectual pluralism, by which I mean there's no one right answer.
What's to be arrived at is the best possible solution as the participants themselves see it.
Now these terms characterize ideal problem-solving discussions between equals.
Remember that in the last lecture, I said that Van Ameren and Grootendorst had formulated a set of principles to identify what kinds of behavior in an argument would be procedurally correct
if the goal is to resolve disagreement, as in a critical discussion it is.
Let's look at a few of those principles now, as I promised we would.
First, a party who advances a standpoint who makes a claim is obliged to defend it if asked by the other party to do so.
That sounds simple enough.
Where does this obligation come from?
It comes from the purpose of the interaction.
If that weren't done, disagreement couldn't be resolved.
Second principle, a party's attack on a standpoint must relate to the standpoint that has indeed been advanced.
If I'm going to attack your argument, I've got to respond to what really is the argument that you made,
not to some other argument that you didn't make that I'd rather answer or not to a misrepresentation of what you said.
Why?
Because if I don't respond to your actual argument, then our interaction is not going to proceed very far toward the resolution of our disagreement.
Third example, a party may not falsely present a premise as an accepted starting point,
nor deny a premise representing an accepted starting point.
Why?
Because disagreements are based ultimately in agreement.
In an interaction, one person can't misrepresent that because if the parties don't understand what their agreements are,
they can't resolve their disagreements.
Four, a failed defense of a standpoint must result in the party that put forward the standpoint retracting it.
You take a position I respond effectively, you have nothing more to say,
you have an obligation to retract your original position and say,
no, you convinced me that I was mistaken.
Conversely, a conclusive defense of the standpoint must regard in my retracting doubt about it.
Now, Van Ameren and Grootendorst go on with five or six more examples of principles like that, but you get the idea.
The kind of argument that takes place when these assumptions are met has been called coalescent argument.
And I want to distinguish that from the kind of adversarial, combative, zero-sum notions that we sometimes mistakenly equate with all argument.
Coalescent argument recognizes that everybody in the interaction has goals and it tries to find a way to meet as many of these goals as possible
so that all the participants feel that they're better off and have accomplished something from the argumentative exchange.
It emphasizes commonality and agreement, but it recognizes that each party has goals and each party wants to prevail at least on the goals that are most important.
So it doesn't favor agreement just for the sake of agreement to get the easiest or quickest agreement that one can.
Nor does it favor holding out for every last goal that a person might have, no matter unreasonable some of them may come to seem,
no matter how much the parties might be unwilling to compromise.
Now, if you think back to one of the very first lectures, you'll recognize that this kind of two-dimensional nature of coalescent argument
is just what I was talking about when I said that the arguers are in a posture of restrained partisanship.
They are partisan, they want to prevail, they want to influence the other party,
but they're restrained by their respect for the other party and the conditions under which they want the argument to take place,
the very normative conditions that I have mentioned.
The procedure of coalescent argumentation is just another way of articulating how a critical discussion takes place.
First, the positions of the dispute partners are identified. It's clear what they each believe.
Second, the points of commonality between their positions are identified and removed from further dispute.
In other words, the disagreement is narrowed. The stasis of the dispute is made clear.
And then, from what's remaining, people will have different goals. Some of them will not be in conflict, so those can be set aside.
And then finally, the question is finding means to satisfy those that are in conflict to the degree that is reasonable.
This means not coming up necessarily with what either party will regard as the very best solution from his or her point of view,
but to find a solution that reasonably meets the needs and the interests of both parties.
Now, I've been talking for quite a while here about normative standards and the ideal argument in the personal sphere,
saying that it ought to be like a critical discussion and it ought to employ coalescent argumentation.
It should come as no surprise that in practice, argumentation in the personal sphere often falls short, sometimes very short, of this ideal standard.
If we were to describe actual arguments that take place between close friends or between marital partners' arguments in the personal sphere,
we would observe that utterances in context, not formal claims, are the basic units of discourse.
So there are a lot of incomplete sentences. There's a lot of filling in the other person's thought.
There's a lot of reliance on what we think the other parties know, whether they really do or not.
And all of these factors make it possible to introduce slippage or mistakes or errors or misunderstandings or confusion into the argument to make it fall short of the ideal.
We would also see that the interaction is often devoted not to resolving disagreements in the sense that a critical discussion does, but simply to ending them.
Compliance, rather than resolution, is often the goal.
And in order to get compliance, non-argumentative means are often used, psychological pressure perhaps being the most obvious example.
And that, of course, falls short of the ideal.
We'd also quickly observe that people usually are not disinterested in the outcome.
That is, they're not willing to resolve the dispute just on the merits of the dispute.
They have a heavy investment in one result or another.
The very fact that people are in the personal sphere in close relationships means that they also evoke strong emotions and that prevailing in the dispute may be important to their own ego, their own self-identity.
People also bring baggage to the argument that should be extraneous, but really affects the course of the controversy.
They bring the residue of previous disagreements.
They bring unvoiced resentments and frustrations, magnified over time.
They bring their own anxieties about the personal relationship, and these seep out into the argument as straw men and red herrings.
But try telling that to an emotionally involved participant in the heat of a controversy.
People also often tend to universalize their claims to make statements like,
You always put me down. You never let me finish without interrupting, and so on.
And these universal statements that people don't really mean universally, but they say them anyway, raise the stakes of the disagreement and divert the subject matter of the discussion from the specific issue at hand.
We'd also find in actual argument that people often treat certain beliefs as so fundamental, so sacrosanct, that they cannot be challenged.
They simply will not brook disagreement.
And of course, that means that there are things beyond the pale of examination through an argumentative encounter, and that falls short of the ideal.
We'd find that the arguments are often incompletely developed.
They don't satisfy Grice's cooperative principle, and they'd have to be read between the lines.
And we'd find that there often are inequalities in skill, social power, and resources of knowledge, of control over the outcome that are available to the disputants.
This is not news.
As a consequence of all of these factors, argumentation between friends, argumentation between spouses, is often dysfunctional.
It's not too far off from the stereotype in the comic routine.
I get as a gift a red tie and a blue tie.
I wear the blue tie.
I get the question, you mean you don't like the red?
Okay, I'll go wear the red tie.
So now you don't like the blue either?
You're always setting me up.
You never like my gifts.
And we can quickly see how such a dispute would escalate out of control.
The question then is, why formulate normative standards and talk about ideal argument when actual argument is so far from it?
And the answer is, the study of argumentation enables people to bring their practice more in line with the ideal.
We ought to try to get closer to it and approximate it as much as we can.
And so we take actual arguments, flesh them out, reconstruct them so they can be analyzed,
and the analysis can be used to identify violations of norms to assess their seriousness and to point the way to improve practice
so that the goal becomes not to win over the other person, but how to conduct a different and better type of exchange.
Now next time, we will focus on the technical sphere.
Lecture 22, Arguments Among Experts
Welcome back.
In the last lecture, we introduced the concept of spheres of argument, different realms of human activity in which argumentation takes place.
And I spoke at some length about the personal sphere of argument in both an ideal sense and an actual practice.
And I talked about how we want to try to make actual practice resemble more the ideal.
This time, I'd like to look at the second of the three spheres of argument that we've identified, and that is the technical sphere.
It's in the technical sphere that argumentation takes place within specialized fields.
Now, I realize I'm mixing metaphors here talking about fields within spheres, but those are the terms that the theorists and the literature have given us.
So what is a field?
Well, the same contemporary philosopher, Stephen Tullman, who gave us the idea of a new argument diagram to replace the syllogism, as we saw much earlier,
has also written about argument fields, and while he's defined them a little bit differently from one work to another,
the basic idea is that a field is a kind of intellectual enterprise that has its own conventions about discourse.
Sometimes fields have been defined by their subject matter, as in the case of academic disciplines.
So we have the field of economics, the field of medicine, the field of psychology, for example.
And sometimes fields have been identified by their general orientation or worldview.
So we have the field of behaviorism, or the field of postmodernism, or the field of Marxism, for example.
But either way, whether we focus on academic disciplines or on general orientations and worldviews, each field will have its own norms and conventions of argument,
shared by the people who inhabit that field, and often somewhat inaccessible to others.
Others may be able to read the results of the dispute, but not to participate in, not being privy to the norms and conventions that help to define the field and shape the context.
So if we ask, is this a legal or a medical issue, as often happens, for example, when there are personal injury cases in courts of law,
whether it's a legal or a medical controversy will profoundly affect the norms for conducting it and who will be qualified to do so.
Deciding whether some question is an empirical matter or an interpretive issue would do the same.
I think we can see very clearly how fields work and how they differ if we look at a number of examples.
And I'd like to do that in this lecture. I want to begin, however, with the disclaimer that I am not speaking as an expert or as a member of any of the subject area fields that I'm going to describe,
but simply as somebody who tries to look at argument and to characterize discourse within a given field.
So let's begin with a fairly obvious case, and that is legal argument as an example of an argument field.
Much of legal argument is about what we have talked about earlier as reasoning with rules. What does one do?
One determines what are the facts in a given situation. That's the role of the trial. One then applies the relevant rule to the facts.
And where do the rules come from? They come from the accumulated body of statutory and case law.
So one determines the facts, applies a rule to the facts, and then one will derive a conclusion as to what should govern the case at hand.
It almost seems deductive, even mechanical. But as we saw in lecture 18, it doesn't work like that.
There are matters of interpretation and judgment at every level and claims that therefore must be warranted.
First off, what are the facts? What the facts are is influenced by our own perception and our own judgment.
That is to say, the facts do not have a completely independent existence apart from our perception of them.
And so different people will look at a situation and see different facts in the same set of conditions.
As for the rule, there may be multiple relevant rules that could be applied, or there may be a situation where there's no applicable rule and we have to formulate one.
Or the rule itself may require subjective interpretation and it may be capable of multiple interpretations.
So legal argument requires careful reasoning, interpretation, judgment, and justification.
For example, rules that specify zero tolerance for various sorts of unacceptable behavior require interpretation as to what really fits under the heading of the acceptable behavior for purpose of the rule.
And zero tolerance may not literally mean zero tolerance, depending on how one interprets the rule.
So the simple model of find the facts, apply the rule, draw a conclusion is at best normative and maybe not even that.
And it's most likely not an accurate description of how legal argument proceeds.
It requires exercising and defending judgments.
If we were to look at accumulated cases of legal argument, we would find that there are certain patterns of reasoning that are emphasized.
For instance, there usually are clearly defined standards for what counts as evidence that are specific to the field of law.
So a person who has eyewitness knowledge, who has seen something take place, that eyewitness knowledge or direct observation would count as evidence.
But what one heard from another person here say would not count as evidence.
That's an example of a specific rule or standard.
Another pattern, literal analogy is used quite often in legal reasoning because it's literal analogy that enables us to say that the case that we're confronted with, the set of facts that we're dealing with is basically like a set of facts that were envisioned when the rule was formulated.
That one case is like another case.
And so the rule that governed the particular case ought to govern the case now at hand.
Literal analogy is used to establish precedent, and precedent is very important in reasoning in law.
Cause, as a warrant, is used particularly to structure stories of what happened.
This led to this, to this, to this.
And it's also used to establish responsibility for actions.
That is, the view of cause as human action that answers the question, who's to blame?
Why did something happen?
This is used heavily, both in civil procedure to establish where liability lies and in criminal procedure to establish where guilt lies.
Jurors and jury deliberations have been studied by lots of scholars.
Jurors particularly tend to reason narratively, to reason in a story form where there is a causal sequence of events that takes place.
Authority is used heavily to defend warrants.
If a warrant is questioned and we need to provide additional support for the warrant,
that support typically takes the form of authority.
And the authority is found in legal statutes and in the previous rulings of higher courts.
Stasis in place plays a very important role in legal argument.
You remember when we discussed stasis?
We said that the stasis in place asks, is this the right forum, the right place in which to discuss the situation?
And I said, this characterizes legal argument and it pretty much drops out from general argument.
But in legal argument, it does play a very important role to determine first off whether the controversy even belongs in the legal system.
If you remember the Supreme Court ruling that ultimately settled the presidential election of 2000,
one of the reasons that that ruling was controversial was that those who disagreed with it tended to feel that there wasn't a legal case that had been presented.
There was no violation of law.
It didn't properly belong in the courts.
It was just a political matter.
The majority of the Supreme Court held otherwise.
They said that there was an equal protection question that was at issue.
And that was a legal standard that made it the responsibility of the courts to enforce.
Well, that whole dispute was a dispute about stasis in place.
Does the controversy even belong in the legal system?
Likewise, there are questions about whether the participants in a particular legal controversy have standing.
That's the legal term, whether they have standing to bring the case.
Have they been injured?
Are they entitled to seek a remedy?
If not, the dispute is in the wrong place.
Final example, stipulations of presumption and burden of proof.
Such as the presumption of innocence in a criminal trial and the stipulations about what has to be proved in order to find a defendant guilty.
These are all specific stipulations that characterize legal argument.
Well, all of these patterns that we've been talking about, the use of literal analogy, the use of cause, the accumulation of precedence and authority, stasis in place, stipulations,
these are all patterns that we find in legal argument that we don't necessarily find in other fields.
And of course, another feature of legal argument is that specialized knowledge is required.
One needs to know how to determine the relevant rules.
That's a good part of what legal education is about.
One needs to know the special meanings in the law for such general terms as persuasion, burden, and prima facia case and presumption.
And some of the other terms we've talked about in a more general setting.
Many of them have precise meanings in legal argument and one needs to know those.
And of course, one needs to know the procedures for making inferences from the rules.
Now let's look at a different case.
Let's look at scientific argument.
It's another obvious example of an argument field.
The goal of science is often said to be to describe, to explain, and to predict important aspects of experience.
And this is done in order to account for individual phenomena.
What can we say about those things?
But it's also done in order to develop theory which enables us to predict and make reliable statements about things we have not yet observed.
Now just as law could be thought of in a simplistic way with a deductive model,
classically science was also viewed that way.
The data, the facts, were seen as constant, unchanging, and undeniable.
The facts were compelling.
And the job of the scientist was to observe, to describe, to explain, to account for the facts.
But if the facts are unchanging and undeniable, then the observations of a scientist could be right or wrong,
but there's no space for legitimate disagreement between scientists.
This view no more accurately describes how science actually is done than the stereotypical simplistic view of law describes how law is actually done.
Challenges to this view emerged fairly quickly.
It became obvious that scientific generalizations are inductive.
They're not deductive.
They're probability driven.
So they can be wrong.
And moreover, that statements that scientists make about empirical phenomena are themselves cast in language,
so that reports about observation are already theory-laden.
This is very clear if one thinks for a minute about how the terms are used in the controversy between evolution and intelligent design.
Casting them in language affects the nature of the positions themselves.
Philosophers of science have described how scientific discourse actually takes place.
And again, it's quite different from the very simple formal model.
I want particularly to mention the work of a philosopher of science named Thomas Kuhn,
who distinguished between normal and revolutionary science.
He said, if you want to think about how scientists actually conduct their discourse, there are two different kinds of science.
Normal science goes on most of the time.
It applies and refines theory.
It takes a given theory that's been established as its warrant,
and it expands the reach of theory by showing that it covers new situations and explains anomalous cases.
How do scientists do this? By hypothesis testing.
They state a hypothesis driven by existing theory.
They predict what will happen if the hypothesis is true.
They test it out, and they see what actually does happen.
They observe the results.
If the results are consistent with their prediction, they count them as support for the hypothesis.
If they're not, they count them as weakening the hypothesis.
Now, remember when we talked about fallacies?
We said that could be the fallacy of affirming the consequence.
If the hypothesis is true, it'll give us results X.
We get results X.
Therefore, the hypothesis is true.
But we know we could have gotten X for entirely different reasons.
Now, what does this tell us right off the bat?
It tells us that hypothesis testing is a form of reasoning that while it looks like deduction is not.
It's what we call a quasi-logical argument.
And in fact, there are judgments that are being made in order to decide
whether we ought to consider a given set of results as confirming or weakening a hypothesis.
And the judgments often depend upon whether the scientist has controlled
for all the alternatives as much as possible.
The claims in normal science are factual statements about what we're observing.
The evidence is factual statements about the theory, what the theory actually says.
And the warrants are the regularities that are implicit in the theory.
The warrant gives us the theory, and what the argument is doing is using that warrant
to cover additional phenomena extending the reach of the theory.
In contrast to normal science, revolutionary science occurs when a fundamental theory
or a paradigm, a way of thinking, is itself called into question and can no longer be assumed.
Rather than using an existing warrant, what scientists are doing when they argue
in revolutionary science is trying to establish a new warrant.
The most obvious examples, of course, in the natural world would be things like the Copernican Revolution
or like the experience of Galileo when a whole way of seeing the world
and thinking about things is called into question because somehow it doesn't seem to fit anymore
the facts that it tries to describe.
Some have said that the Information Technology Revolution is another example.
There are anomalies that develop, things that an established theory can't adequately explain,
and the anomalies increase, they pile up, and eventually there are enough anomalies there
that people begin to say, wait a minute, maybe the theory's not right in the first place
and we ought to change the way we think about it.
This occurs not only in the natural world but in the human and social world as well.
