Now I have to complicate matters, because recent scholarship suggests that many of these fallacies are not always fallacies.
They may sometimes be perfectly reasonable arguments.
So simply spotting them or labeling them is not enough to conclude that an argument is fallacious.
And this can be seen most clearly if I go back to deficiencies in relevance.
Let's consider the argument from ignorance.
We said that appeals to ignorance are a fallacy if we make decisions based on ignorance.
And yet there are lots of times when we have to make a decision without knowing everything that we really need to know.
And so we create a presumption that says, in the face of uncertainty, the decision ought to be weighted one way or another.
When we're engaged in environmental impact statements, we are saying we don't exactly know, but there is a danger of this kind of harm to the environment.
Therefore we should take precautions against it.
We're making an argument from ignorance.
We're saying because we don't know X, we should do Y.
And yet I suspect that very few people would be inclined to regard that as a fallacious argument, whether they agree with it or not.
The use of the argument from ignorance in a reasonable or valid way is even clearer with respect to the effect of terrorism.
By its nature, terrorists operate in secret.
There is much that we don't know about their capabilities, intentions or plans.
This became evident in 2002 and 2003 in considering whether or not the Iraqi regime under Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction.
Then National Security Advisor Condoleezza Rice in 2002 said, we're not sure but we don't want the smoking gun to be a mushroom cloud.
Suggesting, because of the great risk of being wrong and thinking that Saddam Hussein did not have nuclear weapons when in fact he did, we ought to act preemptively.
In an earlier lecture we looked in some detail at then Secretary of State Colin Powell's speech to the United Nations Security Council in which Secretary Powell argued,
we don't know that Iraq has destroyed the weapons of mass destruction that it once had.
Therefore we should conclude that it still has them.
Again an argument from ignorance.
These are reasonable positions given the magnitude of the risk that is involved.
I don't mean to suggest that Condoleezza Rice or Colin Powell was right or that there weren't other problems in their arguments.
Indeed there were, but the fact that they were arguing from ignorance did not by itself make their arguments fallacious.
What we saw with the argument from ignorance can also be seen with the argument ad hominem, the attack on a person's character.
Is this always fallacious?
No.
A contemporary Canadian scholar of informal logic Douglas Walton has devoted extensive study to the ad hominem argument and he identified several different types of this argument.
Let me mention three of them to illustrate his point.
There is the bad character type of ad hominem that asserts that the person is an untrustworthy source for the claim.
A simple form of this argument.
Smith is a communist so don't believe anything he says.
But there's a very different kind of personal attack that is called the circumstantial ad hominem.
This is an argument that asserts that a person's own conduct or a person's own beliefs and commitments are at odds with the claim that he or she asserts.
The classic case of the circumstantial ad hominem occurs when a parent who is a smoker tries to convince his or her teenage child not to start smoking and talks about how dangerous smoking is and how harmful it can be to your health.
And the child responds, but you smoke two packs a day.
And of course the implication of the child's response is you must not take your own argument very seriously because your circumstances contradict what you have said the argument works against you.
Circumstantial ad hominem was used by opponents of the Supreme Court decision that settled the presidential election of 2000.
That decision overrode state regulations.
And yet the court that made that decision was one that was traditionally very deferential to state legislatures and state courts and state decisions.
And so some opponents said, well it clearly reflects their partisan desires because their own rulings on federalism would contradict what they've said in this case.
And there's a third kind of ad hominem argument, the bias type.
This is an argument that says that a person has a particular prejudice or vested interest in an outcome.
And for that reason what he or she says ought not to be taken seriously.
If the secretary of defense holds stock in companies that do business with the defense department, he or she could have an unconscious motive to favor those companies in awarding defense contracts.
Well if the argument were made, you're favoring this company because you hold stock in it, that's an attack that's different from the bad character type and different from the circumstantial type.
It says there's a particular reason, a prejudice, a bias, a vested interest that prevents that person from making an impartial judgment or being an impartial source.
A lawyer who says we ought to create new courts to take care of the court backlog, fully understanding that if new courts are created he's likely to be appointed one of the new judges.
Would likewise be said to have a vested interest or bias.
Now if we think about it, we can imagine circumstances in which each one of these forms of the ad hominem, far from being a fallacy, is a perfectly legitimate and reasonable argument.
If a claim depends upon the judgment of a source, for example, then questioning the source's trustworthiness may be highly relevant.
Not just saying well Smith's a communist therefore don't trust him, but a personal attack that says this is not a trustworthy source to make a claim that depends upon that source's judgment.
Maybe perfectly appropriate.
Likewise, if one's sincerity is in doubt, or if one takes an inconsistent position, as in the case of a candidate who says he supports a policy that he previously has voted against, then the confidence that somebody gives to that position will and should be reduced.
And while I certainly don't endorse just issuing epithets, establishing that a source is biased or prejudicial or has a vested interest may discredit a claim that is based upon the testimony of that source.
Now what is true of the argument from ignorance and the ad hominem argument is true of most of the deficiencies of relevance and for that matter many of the other fallacies as well.
They might be fallacious or they might be valid depending on the context in which they are used.
One of the things that Douglas Walton has done is he's taken these fallacies almost one by one and unpacked what is encompassed by the fallacy and tried to suggest lots of situations in which the argument's not fallacious at all.
Now what that says to us is that if we really want to appraise correctly arguments as they are used in ordinary discourse, we can't simply have this list of 15 or 16 or 20 names of fallacies stick a label on an argument and say now the argument's clearly fallacious and it ought to be rejected.
We've got to do something beyond that.
And another contemporary approach to validity and fallacies suggests what we may need to do.
There's another approach that appraises arguments by focusing on the function that the argument serves, how it contributes to a particular process or procedure.
A common assumption of this line of thought is that arguments take place in an interaction whose goal is resolving disagreement.
That is people engage in arguments when they disagree with each other, when the disagreement matters to them, when they want the other party to agree with them.
So their goal is resolving the disagreement.
Although this doesn't mean that all disagreements actually get settled or that an argument's necessarily unsuccessful if it doesn't.
But according to this view, a valid argument is one that contributes to the goal of resolving disagreement and a fallacious argument is one that detracts from the goal.
This way of thinking changes how we look at fallacies.
For example, before the Civil War, many Southerners believed that states' rights were sacrosanct and took precedence over federal authority.
But when slavery was threatened, they argued that the federal government should override the objections of the northern states and act affirmatively to protect slavery in the western territories.
Now on the view of argument that I'm now discussing, the problem here is not the inconsistency of these positions per se, but the fact that the inconsistency wanted the goal of resolving disagreement about what were the powers of the federal government and the powers of the states.
Of course, one could say that really wasn't the goal of the Southerners, but if we assume that they were engaged in an attempt to resolve disagreement, then the problem with the inconsistency is that it thwarts that goal.
Also, according to this view, some of what we normally call fallacies would be acceptable arguments because they do contribute to the goal of resolving disagreement.
For instance, let's suppose you and I are engaged in a dispute and you say, fixing the problems with Social Security will just introduce new problems, and suppose my response is, does the sun come up in the morning?
Now logically, one would say this is a non sequitur. It doesn't follow. There's no connection between the two. But if we think about this argument within the context of our interaction, we can see that what I'm saying is, of course there will be new problems.
We have to expect that there will be new problems, just like we'd expect that the sun comes up in the morning, and therefore we shouldn't be deterred from fixing Social Security.
Or suppose you say, fixing Social Security will create new problems, and I reply in the words of a television commercial from many years ago, why trade a headache for an upset stomach?
Again, this rhetorical question on the face of it doesn't have anything to do with the matter at hand. But conversationally, it does.
When I'm saying why trade a headache for an upset stomach, I'm saying, why should we take an action that will solve this set of problems if all it does is create this new set over here?
These examples illustrate that if we look at argument in interaction and appraise it in its relation to the goal of resolving disagreement, we've got a different standard for argument appraisal.
And if we think of fallacies in this way, we would say that our fallacies are errors of procedure, not errors in form.
One could then formulate principles that would identify what sorts of behavior in an argument would be procedurally correct and what would constitute violations.
This has been done in the work of two contemporary Dutch philosophers, Franz von Ameren and the late Roeb Grootendorst.
We'll consider the specifics of their principles in the next lecture in a different context.
But if we don't want to remember the individual principles, there's a general idea that I want to extract from them here.
And that is, the question to ask of any argument to determine whether it's sound or fallacious is, does it serve the purpose of helping to resolve disagreement?
Does it help take the conversation further along to make it more likely that the disagreement between the participants in the interaction will get resolved satisfactorily?
If so, we regard it as a reasonable or valid argument, if not as a fallacious or invalid argument.
Well, let's look then at some examples of fallacious arguments if we think of fallacies as procedural violations.
Here's one example. Declaring a standpoint sacrosanct removes the necessity to defend it and is thus fallacious.
We can't resolve a disagreement if I don't have any obligation to defend my claims once you've questioned them.
If I declare them to be sacred, to be beyond the pale of questioning, or in the language that we typically find parents and very young children engaged in, why?
Because I said so. I've declared the standpoint out of bounds for questioning or challenge, and that would make it a fallacious kind of argument if we assume that we're in an interaction where our purpose is to resolve disagreement.
Of course, in interactions between parents and young children, we realize that isn't always the purpose.
Second example of a fallacious argument. If I put pressure on you to come up with an answer quickly, or to make some decision because you know it will offend me if you do otherwise,
or in some other way I put pressure on you, I may stifle an objection that you would have to my claim that would require me to present evidence for it and warrants for it and so on.
And so pressuring the opponent may be a fallacious form of argument because it subverts the purpose of the critical discussion.
It subverts the purpose of resolving a disagreement. It simply induces or coerces a certain sort of response from the opponent.
Suppose I introduce irrelevant matters. This would be a fallacy, not because we could say, hey, that's a straw man, but because we could say, I have caused the discussion to lose focus on the standpoint on the disagreement that we were really trying to consider.
Suppose I present as if it were self-evident what is in reality a controversial premise.
Well, doing that, I've made it appear that this premise is not really open to challenge at all, when in fact it is.
And so I prevented the possibility of challenge and thereby undermined the purpose of the critical discussion of resolving disagreement.
Suppose I exploit your prejudice. I know that you have some particular value that you believe in very strongly.
And so I develop an argument that panders to that value because I know it's your prejudice, and I know that you'll be quick to agree if I appeal to your prejudice.
Well then, what I've done is I've diverted the discussion from the standpoint at issue and from its careful examination, and I've diverted it instead to your prejudice.
And I have thereby violated the procedural norm of a critical discussion that we should act to resolve our real disagreements.
And if I use language to confuse matters, to obfuscate, I want to make something ambiguous, something hard to figure out.
I've violated the rule to be clear so that you can understand my argument as I intended to be presented, and so we can thereby resolve the disagreement.
You notice that what these examples have in common is that they're fallacious not because of the inherent form of the argument,
nor even because of accumulated experience with an argument pattern, but because they violate procedural rules.
They frustrate the goal of resolving disagreement, which it's assumed to be the goal underlying a critical discussion between arguers.
So what Van Ameren and Grootendorst are suggesting is a different way to think about what makes an argument reasonable or unreasonable, or why a fallacy really is fallacious.
Now before we leave this topic of argument appraisal, I want to just add one other thing.
Arguments are appraised both by analysts of argument and by the arguers themselves.
An impartial analyst can reconstruct the dispute and examine arguments in relation to the principles of critical discussion or in relation to any other principles.
But the arguers also can be careful as they construct arguments to appraise their own arguments, to be critics of their own position,
and to make it less likely that they will present weak arguments and to be open to the charge of fallacy.
They won't just pander to prejudice and emotion, but they'll pick arguments that audiences will accept freely and dissent to convincingly.
And with that we conclude our discussion of the appraisal of arguments.
Next time we will take up a new topic.
Lecture 21, Arguments Between Friends
Hello again, I'm glad to be with you.
Having considered the structure of simple and complex arguments, case construction, attack, defense, and the analysis and appraisal of individual arguments,
I want now to turn to the different settings in society in which argumentation takes place and the ways in which those settings affect the content and the practice of argumentation.
Now this as you probably realize is not a matter in which formal logic has any interest at all.
It's unconcerned with content.
We could just as easily substitute symbols like X and Y, P and Q for any specific content.
And it's unconcerned with context because validity is purely a matter of form.
But as you know, our focus all along in these lectures has been on everyday informal argumentation, and that argumentation does take place within different spheres of activity.
A contemporary scholar of argumentation, Professor Thomas Goodnight, who for many years was one of my colleagues at Northwestern, has written about the spheres of argument.
And what he's suggesting is that because we have no universal standards of argument, because argument is dependent upon context, we need to recognize that there are different sorts of context because we live our lives in different spheres of activity.
What the spheres do is they identify accumulated expectations that we bring from our experience and that provide the specific context for arguing.
Goodnight distinguished among three different spheres of argument, and they can be arranged along a private to public continuum.
We start with the personal sphere.
An argument in the personal sphere is of concern only to the people who are actually involved in it.
These are the sorts of arguments that take place informally between friends or between marital partners, for example.
It has no broader implications, and the people who are involved in the argument are also the people who resolve it and evaluate it.
The arguers and the judges are essentially the same people.
Then there is what Goodnight called the technical sphere.
And in this sphere argument is conditioned by background and training and expertise in a particular subject matter area.
And the argument is accessible to people who have that background training and expertise.
It often takes place within a specialized language, sometimes with specialized rules and conventions.
So we have the personal sphere and the technical sphere, and then there's the public sphere.
An argument in the public sphere is concerned with matters that affect people very generally in their role as citizens.
And it's accessible to anybody.
It doesn't require special expertise, background, training, standing, or anything like that in order to participate.
So we have the personal, the technical, and the public spheres of argument.
Now what makes all this interesting for me is that it's often not clear cut in which sphere a given case of argument might fall.
And indeed, migration of arguments across spheres is a fairly common condition.
Let me mention a number of examples.
And I think even before we look at the spheres in detail, we can see how it makes a difference in which sphere we place a given subject or a given case of argumentation.
First example, there are a number of matters that, until fairly recently, were regarded as residing in the personal sphere.
For example, child care, spousal and child abuse, sexual harassment.
Until the last 20 or 30 years, these were not regarded as matters that concern people beyond those who were directly involved.
But more recently, they have become public issues.
It's no longer the case that sexual harassment is a private matter.
We've enacted laws to deal with it.
It's no longer the case that spousal abuse or child abuse is of no concern to anybody except those directly involved.
So the migration of this kind of argument from the personal sphere to the public sphere has changed considerably how the discussion takes place and indeed our level of awareness and attention.
Another example.
There are some matters of economic and defense policy.
Just to pick a couple of examples that have been widely suggested to be technical concerns that need not engage a broader public and indeed that a broader public may not be competent to evaluate even though they affect public policy.
Whether it's measuring throw weights or determining how much interest rates should be allowed to rise or fall, we've been inclined to defer to experts and place a good deal of confidence in their judgment about these matters that we see in the technical rather than in the public sphere.
Another example.
The proposal for school vouchers really represents an attempt to redirect an argument from the technical sphere to the personal sphere.
Who should make decisions about education policy?
Well, traditionally, those have been regarded as matters for education professionals and experts.
But out of a concern that confidence in the quality of those decisions and confidence in public education have dropped, the proposal for school vouchers essentially says let's move this question of educational policy out of the technical sphere from decision making by education experts
to the personal sphere decision making by individual families, by individual parents who will vote with their children's feet, and the vouchers make it possible for them to do that.
One of the reasons that vouchers is such a controversial proposal is that it's proposing to shift the sphere in which this argument takes place.
Or a final example, a very controversial one.
One of the most hotly contested social policy issues over the past generation has been the issue of abortion.
And the very heart of this dispute in my judgment is whether this subject belongs in the public sphere or whether it belongs in the personal sphere.
Advocates who regard themselves as pro-choice are not saying that abortion is a good thing as a matter of policy.
What they're arguing is that the decision properly belongs not to the public, but to the choice of the individual woman.
And those who label themselves pro-life advocates are arguing that the issue has broad public dimensions because it relates to concerns about how society sets moral standards and so it involves everyone.
And of course how we look at the controversy is very different if we see it as a personal or if we see it as a public issue.
So, one of the things that makes controversy so interesting, it's not always clear in what sphere a controversy falls.
And they migrate from one to another.
And that more than anything else should make us aware of how important it is to examine spheres of argument.
So that's what I want to do.
I'm going to proceed in the order that we described and start in this lecture with the personal sphere.
This sphere has several dominant characteristics that it's worth briefly mentioning.
First off, the focus is on how people conduct and resolve disagreements that concern themselves.
They're not standing in for any larger group of people or anything like that.
And the people who are arguing are also the people who are trying to settle or to resolve the disagreement.
A second characteristic of the personal sphere is that the contents of it, the messages that we would identify to examine, consist of naturally occurring talk.
That is to say, their conversation with all of the informality that we associate with conversation.
The messages are not formal speeches prepared in advance.
A third characteristic, it's naturally occurring talk in which opposition is present.
Anybody playing the part of an observer could listen to or look at an exchange that's taking place and recognize that people disagree.
The people who are involved in the conversation maintain what they take to be incompatible claims.
And yet the disagreement matters to them.
They don't just walk away from it.
Each person is seeking to influence the other to accept his or her position.
Now, if this is taking place in conversation, we could say that the dominant mode of discourse is dialogue.
And scholars have studied dialogue.
They've actually recorded lots of conversations and analyzed them, laying out the moves that are taking place and identifying the strategic choices.
And one of the things we know is that dialogue follows a number of conventions that are learned through the socialization beginning of children.
One of the most obvious of these conventions is taking turns.
People don't try to speak at the same time, usually.
One doesn't try to monopolize the conversation.
When one has said his or her piece, the assumption is the other person has an opportunity to say something.
These are conventions that are implicit.
They're never formally stated, but they're applied instinctively.
Dialogue is socially conditioned from early childhood.
Now, the relationship between people in a dialogue, how intimate it is, how long-standing the relationship is,
how confident each person is that he or she understands the relationship,
that will all influence what must be said, what must be left unsaid, what can't be probed too far, what can be explored openly, and so on.
So the content of the dialogue is intimately bound up with the personal relationship of the individuals.
And the exchange is private and ephemeral.
There are levels of understanding between the participants that are not accessible to others.
Even though I said a minute ago that there are scholars who record conversations, most conversations never get recorded.
It's not like the text of a speech or a debate that we could go back and examine later.
The content pretty much disappears when the dialogue is over.
And any outcome, any agreement, any result is preserved only in the memory of the participants.
And of course, we know that memories are such that different people can recall differently the same interaction.
But the outcome of the dialogue is preserved only in their memory.
And finally, we would say about the personal sphere of argument that its materials are drawn from what readily comes to mind, in the mind of the participants.
And that, of course, is shaped by their own experience and by the history of their relationship.
There's no advanced preparation.
Lawyers will sit down and develop briefs for a legal argument, as we'll see in the next lecture, but there are no briefs for argument in the personal sphere.
These arguments occur spontaneously.
These then would be the key characteristics of the personal sphere of argument.
Now let me ask this question.
What should argument in the personal sphere be like?
What should it be like?
And let me point out the obvious fact this is a normative question.
I'm going to be focusing on ideal notions of argument in the personal sphere.
I'm not claiming that most arguments actually measure up to this ideal.
In fact, I'll say the opposite.
But let me answer my question.
Ideally, argument in the personal sphere should be like a critical discussion.
Now you remember I used this phrase critical discussion in the last lecture.
It comes from the contemporary Dutch philosophers Frans van Ameren and the late Roob Grootendorst.
What they've said is that a critical discussion is a problem-solving discussion in which the participants mutually desire to resolve the disagreement that they face.
So a critical discussion would proceed in pretty clearly identifiable stages.
First, the disagreement is identified.
That is, the participants agree about what they're disagreeing about.
And of course, that's intended to prevent the situation where their comments just go past each other and they're talking about completely different things.
Then the second step would be to agree on how the disagreement is to be resolved, to develop criteria for what would be a solution.
Then third, the positions that each of the parties advocate would be presented and explored and attacked and defended, extended, reviewed in as much detail as necessary so that they're clear and comprehensive to everybody.
And then finally, the disagreement is resolved by one or the other of the positions becoming mutually acceptable or by the parties thinking outside the box and coming up with some new position or some synthesis of their positions
or some different way of looking at the matter, or the parties conclude that no agreement is attainable and hence they agree to disagree and take it from there.
Now those would be the stages that a critical discussion would go through.
To enter into this kind of discussion also implies a number of normative standards.
First off, it's assumed that both parties wish to resolve not merely to settle the disagreement.
That is, they don't just want the other party to capitulate.
They don't want just to win.
What they want is an outcome that will satisfy them both.
People feel that way because they value their friendship.
Second, it's assumed that each party has an equal opportunity to influence the other party so that in a friendship variables like power and prestige don't influence the argument.
It's not a superior to subordinate conversation like those in the workplace when the superior says I want your opinion and everybody understands that the superior really doesn't want the subordinate's opinion but wants the subordinate's agreement.
Each party in a critical discussion has an equal opportunity to influence the other.
Third assumption is that each party is willing to resolve the dispute on its merits without reference to other considerations.
So claims like if you really loved me then you would agree with my position.
Or you owe me one so go along with this are out of bounds.
Each party is willing to resolve the dispute on its merits.
It's also assumed that there are no artificial constraints like time limits.
The dispute doesn't take place under crisis conditions or conditions of urgency.
It's also assumed that the participants share a group of values which the Speech Act philosopher H.P. Grice has summarized by calling them the cooperative principle.
These are the values of sincerity, the assumption that we mean what we say, efficiency that will be direct rather than indirect in saying what we mean, relevance.
We assume the comments that we make are germane to the subject matter, clarity meaning that the comments can be easily interpreted and understood.
These things come together and the cooperative principle means simply the parties assume that they're bound by this desire to cooperate.
And finally, the participants share commitments to nonviolence.
