Those who favored repealing the estate tax referred to it as the death tax and said death shouldn't be a taxable event.
If they can succeed in having the term death tax characterize this proposal in the public sphere,
it's as if they had made a whole substructure of argument that would itself be rather controversial.
Another thing that happens in presentation is that policy proposals are linked to ultimate terms.
That is, terms that are highly charged with positive or negative valuation that represent the hierarchy of values of a society.
In the 1950s, we could say that the ultimate positive term was progress or something like it and the ultimate negative term was communist.
It's not so clear in the early 21st century what the ultimate terms are, perhaps freedom as the positive and terrorism as the negative.
And yet we can see frequently in public argument linking policy proposals to terms that have a strongly positive or negative valuation.
For instance, when former President Clinton referred to stem cell research as a pro-life policy,
what he was trying to do was to identify a controversial proposal for the federal government to spend research money on stem cells
with a value that not only was strongly positive pro-life, but it was particularly positive for people who thought they opposed funding of stem cell research.
Because they said it involved the destruction of embryos.
What President Clinton is saying is it ultimately promotes life by giving us the opportunity to develop means to treat and cure a variety of diseases.
Or another example, it was fairly common in the 1980s and 90s to hear policy proposals referred to as promoting family values.
Family values was a term that was originally coined on the conservative side of the political spectrum.
But by the 1990s liberals were talking about daycare and the Family Leave Act and measures to control child abuse as promoting family values.
So the idea here is that the term family is a very positive term.
And so if one links one's proposal with this very positive term, one will enhance the chances of its being acceptable to a broader public.
Now why do we find condensation symbols, persuasive definitions, and linkages to ultimate terms playing such a large role?
Precisely because the public is so diverse and heterogeneous.
These become, if you will, tactical means, stratagems, approaches to deal with these problems of diversity and heterogeneity,
and to prevent it from creating an impasse that makes it impossible for arguments to proceed.
Well now, just as with the personal and the technical spheres, we've not talked about every single aspect of the public sphere.
But it seems to me that talking about warrants and their origin in common places,
and about the heterogeneity of the audience, the need to appeal to both liberal and conservative presumptions,
and talking about presentational choices gives us a pretty good sense of how argument in the public sphere differs from argument in the technical sphere,
and argument in the personal sphere as well.
Now I must tell you that my interest in the public sphere is not just an interest in describing the argument that takes place there.
The public sphere has normative dimensions, just as the other spheres do.
A robust public sphere is vital to democratic life.
It encourages citizens to participate.
It encourages civic deliberation.
It encourages people to make discerning judgments about matters of general importance.
And it should come as no surprise that there are grounds for real concern about the state of the contemporary public sphere and public argument.
Surveys show increasing numbers of people who claim to have little interest in public affairs.
They simply separate themselves from them.
Many are put off by the complexity, the difficulty of important public issues.
Others are satisfied with simplistic slogans.
Large numbers of people think that they're powerless to bring about any kind of change, or that it makes no difference what they do.
And there's growing distrust of politicians and other public figures.
Now these are signs of a weakening public sphere.
The picture's not all bleak, however.
There are some encouraging signs.
Many of the same people who show disdain for traditional politics are involved actively in their own communities on issues that affect the local good.
New forums for discussion are emerging at the local level, as well as in non-governmental organizations.
The internet can also strengthen the public sphere by promoting dialogue and deliberation.
It may be that rather than disappearing, the public sphere is becoming more localized and more diverse,
and that what it means to be a citizen may be changing but not eroding.
These may be signs of hope.
I hope so, and I hope so because of the vital importance of the public sphere to active democratic civic life.
Now in the next lecture, we'll reflect on what all of this adds up to and what the ultimate purposes and ends of argumentation are.
Lecture 24, The Ends of Argumentation
Hello again. This is the 24th and last of a series of lectures on argumentation.
In the most recent group of lectures, we've been looking at the different spheres of argumentation,
the different aspects of human activity in which argument takes place,
and we've looked at the personal, the technical, and the public sphere.
But in this last lecture, I want to raise an even more general question.
What are the ends of argumentation?
And I'll use the term ends in several different senses.
To start with the simplest, we've considered in lecture five how controversies begin,
and throughout the series we've talked about how arguments are conducted, but how do controversies end?
Sometimes they end because the participants in them reach a common understanding or judgment,
as in diplomatic negotiations, when the people who are arguing directly with each other come up with a conclusion.
This is the ideal for a critical discussion or for arguments that occur between friends.
Sometimes controversies end because time runs out and a third party renders a judgment that the arguers have agreed to accept.
This is what happens in an election campaign.
The issues in an election could be argued about indefinitely, but the controversy ends by virtue of the calendar.
Or a judge or jury renders a verdict that the parties have agreed they will accept.
Or binding arbitration.
All these are examples of how a third party or a time limit can end the controversy.
Sometimes the controversy is overtaken by events that render it moot.
It's just no longer important.
In the years immediately before World War II, for example,
there was a great controversy about whether the United States should be involved in the affairs of other nations in the world
or whether it should take an isolationist position.
Pearl Harbor rendered that controversy moot and isolationism was not seriously discussed thereafter.
The end of the Cold War likewise has rendered some argument positions moot.
Sometimes controversies end because there's a conceptual breakthrough that results in looking at the situation in a whole different way,
such as whether or not a tax cut is a good thing or a bad thing as economic conditions change.
But sometimes the controversy will continue for a long time, particularly if previously accepted assumptions are challenged.
This occurred, for example, in this country when we changed how we thought about the relationship between the races.
Between much of the 19th century and the late 20th century, it took a long time to make that change.
Sometimes it will take a long time simply because there are some controversies that are timeless,
like the one between states' rights and the federal government or whether human beings act with free will or whether their actions are determined.
Concepts like these are said to be essentially contested.
They gain meaning only in relation to their opposites.
In that case, the controversy is perpetual.
Incidentally, just because some controversies go on for a long time, that's not necessarily a bad thing.
Controversies, after all, open up alternative possibilities.
They remind us that things that we think are true could be otherwise, and they open up new ways of thinking.
They make clear the implications of taking one choice or of taking a different choice,
so that when we reach conclusions, we don't hold them too rigidly and we're open to new information.
So those are some quick thoughts about when, how, and even whether arguments end.
For most of our remaining time, though, I want to consider a different sense of end.
What are the purposes that argumentation serves? What's it all about?
And I'm going to try to develop an answer to that question along three different lines.
Let me begin by noting that, most obviously, argumentation is a means of collective judgment and decision making.
Here, let me simply remind us of some of the implications we've explored throughout this series of lectures.
First of all, that much of human affairs is uncertain and contingent.
We can't reach conclusions with the certainty or the precision that we would associate with deductive or formal reasoning, and yet decisions are required.
So argumentation is a means of justifying decisions under conditions of uncertainty.
It does so by subjecting ideas to rigorous testing.
One tests ideas through an adversarial process, a seemingly adversarial process, by asking another party to bear the strongest doubts or the strongest grounds for objection that one can imagine.
But contrary to some misconceptions, the purpose of this seemingly adversarial process is not cutthroat competition.
The goal is to find the best possible outcome.
Rigor is the means to do that, so the goal is shared, and the activity is fundamentally cooperative.
The result of that activity is to ground our decisions in good reasons.
By good reasons, I mean reasons that withstand the scrutiny of careful and critical listeners.
We realize also that the tests that we make of claims through argument are successive, not final.
When we say that something is true, we don't mean with a capital T finally and for all time.
We can always revisit, we can always reevaluate the conclusions that we reach.
But the outcomes of argumentation are commitments that people are willing to make and defend, even though they're also willing to revise them as circumstances change.
So we can say that argumentation is a means of collective judgment and decision making.
I hope that one outcome of these lectures is that we have a clearer awareness of what the skills are that enable us to test claims carefully and rigorously,
and of how one develops those claims, and that you have the motivation to practice doing so.
That's one purpose of argumentation, probably the most obvious.
Another purpose of argumentation, another end that it serves, is that it is a way of knowing.
The late 19th century pragmatist philosopher Charles Perse asked, how do we know what we know?
And he identified four different ways of knowing.
He talked about tenacity, which is really the method of chance.
You just stick to the first beliefs you get, the first impressions that you form.
And there are aspects of human life in which we do this.
There's authority in which we come to know things by uncritically accepting the judgment of a prominent person, accepting his or her beliefs.
There is a priori correspondence.
That is, we come to know things because they correspond with other beliefs that we've already held, a priori.
We can deduce what we know from beliefs that to us at least have been self-evident.
So Perse discussed tenacity, authority, and a priori correspondence.
And against these, he mentioned the fourth method, the method of verification, which of course is the method of science.
We come to know things by verifying them through what we can observe and test.
Verification has some obvious advantages over the other three methods that Perse identified.
It's open to public inspection.
It can be replicated by other people.
It's not a secret or chance event.
The results are obtained by design, not by accident, as the outcome of a particular procedure.
These benefits, of course, explain why society has placed such emphasis on science and given such a high priority to verification as a means of knowing.
This priority was captured very well in a famous anecdote.
The semanticist Wendell Johnson, in the early part of the 20th century, noting that one of the great medieval disputes was over the question how many angels can dance on the head of a pin,
answered it by saying, bring me the pin, and bring me the angels, and we'll see.
Now, what he was suggesting, of course, was that if there isn't a way to actually verify, to observe, and test out an answer, then the answer is not as good, not as acceptable as if there were.
But here's the problem.
As we've seen throughout these lectures, if verification were the only acceptable path to knowledge, then we would be unable to know anything about some of the topics that concern us the most.
There would be no way to know about values, because we can't verify values.
We can't measure beauty or goodness or righteousness, for example.
There would be no way to know about probabilities.
We'd be in exactly the same position as the formal logicians who had only the terms all, some, and none to deal with it, and all of the gradations that are encompassed within that term some would be lost to us.
There would be no way to know about predictions, about the future.
There would be no way to know about recommendations for action, about what we ought to do.
In brief, there would be no legitimate space between what was necessary, that is certain, and what was arbitrary, that is totally dependent upon chance, caprice, and whim.
And most of us, I think it's safe to say, would find that an unacceptable state of affairs.
I know that I would.
So what's the alternative?
The alternative is to look for analogs to verification.
That is, methods of knowing that achieve many of the same purposes that verification achieves, and yet apply to the topics about which verification is not applicable.
Now if we think about it, these lectures have implied what I now want to state explicitly, and that is that argumentation is such an analog.
It's a means of coming to know about things that are inherently uncertain with many of the same protections and benefits that we associate with verification.
Now why do I say that?
I say it because in argumentation there is mutual agreement on the procedures to be followed.
We know how to look at an argument, what it consists of, how an argumentative discussion takes place.
There's a common mission and a common set of norms.
The goal is reflective judgment, not just compliance.
We know that in an argumentative exchange, our views may be challenged.
The other party may argue against them, may seek to discredit them.
And when we formulate our views in the first place, the very knowledge that they may be challenged creates an incentive for us to search for the very highest quality of claims that we can make.
And it's in this sense too that the adversarial or competitive aspect of argument has a higher constructive purpose.
What is that higher constructive purpose?
To provide for argument, the rigor, the care, the replicability that we associate with verification with the method of science.
So we could say that argumentation is a way of knowing.
It's a way of coming to an understanding of what we believe and what we accept is true with regard to matters that are inherently uncertain, inherently contingent.
Now this view has a couple of important corollaries.
It means that within the realm of argument, truth is relative to the argument that is advanced for it.
When I say that truth is relative to argument, I don't mean a vicious kind of relativism in which anything that anybody believes, however he or she believes it, is true for that person.
It simply means that within the realm of the uncertain, we decide what we'll accept as true on the basis of the argument that's made for it.
And a second corollary of this view, if we ask the question, how do we know what we know?
And we answer it by saying we know through interaction with other people, through the kind of interaction that we call argumentation.
Then we're saying that we form our judgments of truth and knowledge in connection with other people.
Now if one's self is seen as a composite of what one knows, if our self is defined by all the things we know, then our sense of self is developed through argumentation with others.
And these are corollaries of saying that argumentation is a way of knowing which is a second purpose that it serves.
But there's yet a third objective that argumentation serves. It's a means of governing.
Argumentation achieves the goals of a democratic society.
It was Aristotle, as it often is, who was among the earliest of thinkers to identify the social function of argumentation to address the question of what does argumentation do for society?
And here was his answer. He said, first, it prevents the triumph of fraud and injustice because people are able to see through them and counter them.
Two, it's a means to instruct audiences when scientific instruction is of no avail. That should sound quite modern.
Third, it makes us argue out both sides of a case, thereby discovering the strength of each position.
And finally, Aristotle said argumentation is a means of self-defense.
He said if it would be a disgrace not to be able to defend oneself bodily, all the more so if one's not able to defend oneself with good reasons when one's beliefs or opinions are challenged.
Well, that's probably the earliest answer we can find to the question, what's the social function of argumentation?
Today, argumentation is often described as a necessary instrument of a free society by cultivating a vital public sphere.
Unfortunately, that statement, like other statements, can have the character of a platitude. It sounds good.
We can agree to it without necessarily understanding or thinking about it.
So I want to take a little time to unpack this statement that argumentation is a necessary instrument of a free society.
I'm going to engage in a very quick historical summary of the U.S. experience in order to make clear what I think that statement means.
We know that the United States was created in the late 18th century under the influence of the philosophy of the Enlightenment.
And Enlightenment philosophy valorized reason.
People commonly thought at that time that the mind was divided up into different faculties, almost like different compartments of the mind.
There was the reason, there was the imagination, there were the passions, and there was the will.
And the idea was reason governed critical thinking.
Imagination governed our ability to be creative.
Passions were the seat of our emotions.
And the will is ultimately what led us to act.
The Enlightenment philosophy accepted this idea of faculty psychology with the mind divided up in these different faculties,
but exalted reason as the dominant faculty.
Reason was the one that controlled the other faculties and that ultimately guided the individual.
Now if you believe that reason is the dominant faculty, then expressions of opinion are a very good thing.
They're the path to truth for the individual and for the society, as some of the Enlightenment thinkers argued.
Now what was not so obvious at that time, but has certainly been realized since,
is that the public sphere of the Enlightenment project, the people who exercised their reason,
it was a highly limited public sphere.
Lots and lots of people were simply dealt out from consideration on the basis of race,
on the basis of gender, on the basis of wealth.
So that the people that talked about public matters could be seen as propertyed white males and not even all of them.
What took place during the 19th century was a gradual enlargement of the relevant group of people who composed the public.
The opening up, if you will, of American society as a result of a whole series of movements.
The Jacksonian movement that brought the lower class laborers together with the farmers.
The Transcendentalist movement that held that anybody could have transcendent experience and knowledge of the divine.
The Populist movement that focused on orienting policy toward average working people.
Each one of these movements essentially widened the bounds of the relevant public in American society.
And they did it in three ways.
They gradually removed restrictions on voting so that more and more categories of people were eligible to exercise the franchise.
They widened access to education so that it was brought to the people generally.
And they increased the stress on grassroots democracy, on active citizens at the local level.
We know that the 18th century founders of the country distrusted the judgment of the common people.
They recognized it as an ultimate basis for government, but they were careful to filter it through the judgment of people that they regarded as more like themselves.
That is more discerning, more capable to think clearly and carefully.
And that's why they devised representative, not direct democracy, and why they devised instruments like the Electoral College.
But over the course of the 19th century, there was growing emphasis on removing those filters, on grassroots democracy, and active participation at the local level.
But while this was happening, the same exultation of reason that characterized the 18th century enlightenment by and large continued.
There are exceptions, of course, but I'm painting this in a very broad brush.
As the boundaries of the people who were capable of governing were enlarged, the earlier commitment to the power of reason was maintained.
Until the late 19th and early 20th century, when the power of reason underwent a series of shocks that shattered trust in reason as the dominant faculty.
Just to mention a few examples.
The social sciences were developed really in the late 19th century, before that they had been subdivisions of moral philosophy.
And the social sciences dealt more with empirical realities than with normative claims.
They dealt more with how people actually behave than with how philosophers had said they should.
And as we know, social science discovered that there were great differences between the normative and the empirical.
Freudian psychology, developed during these same years, emphasized the role of unconscious motivation and suggested that in large areas of our lives, we really were not guided by reason or by rational principle.
That much of our motivation was unconscious and we sometimes couldn't even make it explicit.
Crowd psychology, which developed during this same time, focused on how people behave differently when they're grouped together from the way they do individually.
And the conclusion of most of the crowd psychology work was that somehow a crowd releases inhibitions that lead to civility.
So that in a crowd, people exercise more animalistic instincts than they do individually.
They are less guided by reason.
And the national disillusionment that set in following World War I, which did not turn out to be a war to make the world safe for democracy.
This disillusionment fueled awareness in the 1920s and into the 1930s of the power of propaganda, of the ability of emotional, non-rational appeals to sway a public and to influence people.
Social sciences, Freudian psychology, crowd psychology, national disillusionment, all of these things were real shocks to the assumption that people were by nature reasonable, that reason was the dominant faculty and the basis for good decision making.
And indeed during the 1920s it became fashionable to argue against the competence of most people to make good judgments about matters of public concern.
As an example I'd cite the well-known journalist Walter Lipman, who wrote two significant books during the 20s, Public Opinion in 1922 and The Phantom Public in 1925.
I oversimplify Lipman's argument, but basically he suggested that public opinion has been disastrously wrong at the critical junctures of history.
He asked why and his answer was the false ideal of the competent citizen who could exercise reason about public matters.
This he said was a false assumption and a commitment to that false assumption is what led public opinion over and over again at the critical junctures to be wrong.
He suggested that in trying to achieve this ideal of the competent citizen, what actually resulted was a kind of Gresham's law in which bad arguments drove good arguments out of the marketplace of public discussion.
And so he and others ended up concluding that we should abandon the ideal of the competent citizen, we should abandon the project of enlarging the public sphere and defer matters of public judgment instead to the expertise of specialists in the fields that were directly involved.
Now the pendulum swings over time and expertise itself came to be distrusted and in recent years scholars and journalists including Lipman by the way in the 1950s have suggested that it's possible to revitalize the public sphere by cultivating a public philosophy that emphasizes the place of effective reasoning about matters that are uncertain and contingent
but where decisions are required.
The public philosophy requires an awareness of the principles of public life that we submit to as conditions for living together.
Our shared interests and values, our aspirations, our systems of thought, truths that have been expressed in philosophy, politics, literature, the accumulated wisdom of our past, all of these things that shape the beliefs that we accept is true.
So the public philosophy requires knowledge of that. It requires advocates who are able to stand in for the public and speak on its behalf drawing on this social knowledge. It requires making claims in behalf of the public.
The advocate has to make strong claims and defend them ably.
And the assumption is that training in argumentation helps one to present strong claims and to prevent weak ones from triumphing over them so that argumentation legitimizes freedom of speech and makes it work to a constructive purpose.
It prevents it from leading to a Gresham's law where bad arguments drive out good and it thereby permits a free society to function. And that certainly is a very important purpose.
So to recap, argumentation serves three basic ends. It is a way of justifying decisions under conditions of uncertainty. It is a way of knowing. And it is a way of governing a necessary instrument for a free society, noble purposes indeed.
There's one more sense of the term end, I want to mention, and that is that our time together is rapidly coming to an end. So a couple of concluding observations are in order.
First, even the most mundane activities of argumentation will achieve these lofty purposes I've been describing to greater or lesser degree. It's an activity in which we can all participate.
Understood in this light, a culture of argumentation is something to be embraced rather than despised. Rather than condemning the argument culture as bickering and quarrelsome, we should cultivate the skills and attitudes that enhance argumentation.
And that's what this series of lectures has attempted to do. We focused on argumentation to emphasize the kind of thinking and acting in which we engage every day, and therefore this is, as I said at the beginning, the systematic study of common sense.
Hopefully, these lectures will help you to develop skills, values and attitudes that will all increasingly practice and that lead to improvement in the realm of everyday public discourse so that we can reaffirm that argumentation is the study of effective reasoning.
We genuinely hope you've enjoyed these lectures from our Great Courses series. Our courses are available to order online. Visit our website at www.teach12.com or call our customer care representatives at 1-800-TEACH-12. That's 1-800-TEACH-12. Thank you very much.
