And the judicial analogy, as we talked about when we looked at analogies, is then employed to say that like cases should be treated alike.
So what we've got when we reason with rules is a combination of the use of commonplaces and the use of analogies.
By the way, we could also note that since a rule is a general statement, we could say that it's applying a general statement to a particular case, and that's a particular example of reasoning from whole to part.
So we could say there's a three-way combination going on here.
Now, let's look and see how this theory works itself out, how reasoning with rules is used. Famous court cases could be cited to illustrate this hybrid inference pattern. Let me mention some.
The landmark case of Brown versus Board of Education in 1954, which established that segregated schools were unconstitution.
The rule that was being used was, if a practice violates equal protection of the laws, it must be changed, because after all, equal protection of the laws is a constitutional guarantee in the 14th Amendment.
The facts of the case were that schools in a number of states in the Union were legally segregated on the basis of race.
The claim that was advanced by the Supreme Court in its decision was, segregated schools are unconstitutional.
And the warrant is that segregated schools have conditions like the conditions that the 14th Amendment was intended to prevent, and thus segregated schools are inherently unequal and must be outlawed.
So you see what Brown versus Board of Education does. It involves an analogy between the facts of this case and the facts preceding the 14th Amendment, and it involves a rule if a practice violates equal protection, it must be changed.
The case of Roe versus Wade in 1973, which established the right to abortion, also involves reasoning with rules.
The rule in this case is, there is a right to privacy in communications between doctors and patients that must be protected.
So the rule could be stated, if doctors and patients are engaged in a relationship, that relationship is protected by privacy.
The facts of the case were that Texas law outlawed abortions.
The claim was that the Texas law was unconstitutional, and the warrant was that restrictions on abortion, in most cases, infringed the privacy of the doctor-patient relationship.
Now, anyone who has studied this decision knows that it's a very complex decision. The court did not put that forward as an absolute rule.
In fact, they said it's a rule that has greater force early in the pregnancy than late in the pregnancy.
Our purpose is not to go into the details of the decision's substance, but just to observe that it follows the pattern of reasoning with rules.
And a final example, the case of Bush versus Gore in 2000 that decided the 2000 presidential election.
The rule, once again, was equal protection. If a practice violates equal protection of the laws, it must be changed.
The facts of the case were that there were different standards for conducting manual recounts of the vote in different counties in Florida.
The claim was that the Florida county's recounts should be stopped, and the reason the warrant was disparate standards violate equal protection.
They are like the conditions that were envisioned when the equal protection phrase in the Constitution was established.
So, each one of these court cases illustrates this hybrid pattern of reasoning with rules that combines commonplace and analogy.
Now, the application of the rule to the facts of the case seems to be automatic, mechanical, even deductive.
But it's not. There are a number of judgment calls involved, so determining whether rule-based reasoning is valid involves certain tests that we have to ask.
Do the factual conditions of a given case satisfy all the requirements of the rule? Is the case like that of the rule?
Remember when we discussed analogy, we said analogies can never be deductive, because we're talking only about things that are similar, not identical.
Second test have all relevant aspects of the situation and context been considered.
Do the essential similarities outweigh the essential differences, for example.
And a third test, is the rule being applied unthinkingly or with a kind of misplaced literalism?
Have we exalted the letter over the spirit? I can tell you a personal story here.
I used to run a summer program for high school students in which there were several rules, one of which established for insurance purposes was
students who ride in motorized vehicles may be sent home, because there wasn't insurance coverage for them.
There was a particularly obnoxious student who one of my staff members one day found riding the escalator in one of the buildings and said,
Aha! Student is riding a motorized vehicle. Now that certainly is misplaced literalism exalting the letter of the rule over the spirit.
No reasonable person would invoke the rule in such a case.
Now sometimes the rule itself is contested, in which case it has to be justified by some greater rule or antecedent rule with a similar hybrid kind of reasoning pattern.
So what I've established here is that reasoning with rules, which by the way is a common pattern in law and in ethics, among other fields.
It's a hybrid that combines common places, analogy and reasoning from whole to part. That's one hybrid.
Another hybrid pattern of inference is arguing about values. Now arguing about values is difficult.
They can be highly personal. They can be intense, basic to our worldview.
But not being able to argue about values is also dangerous, because it leaves us no way to resolve value conflicts except to say,
Well, it doesn't make any difference. You have your values. I have my values. Or to say,
Well, the difference between these values has to be resolved by whoever has greater force.
Arguments about values frequently involve conflicts between values or value hierarchies rather than disagreement about whether something is good or bad.
We don't ask, should we be honest? Instead we ask, is honesty more important than friendship, for example?
So what happens when values are contested? Well, there are several different ways they can be defended.
One value might be argued to subsume the other, permitting us to enjoy both, so we could say protecting life also protects the quality of life.
One value might be argued to give us a greater benefit than another, or to be more important than another.
Justice is more important than happiness, for example, or vice versa.
One value might be preferred because forgoing it is irreparable. We can't go back and correct the situation.
Begrating the environment can't be repaired, we might argue.
One value might better promote some other value that both argueers share.
Both argueers believe that teenagers should be helped to become mature adults, and one says autonomy for teenagers better achieves this value than does distrust.
One value might be argued to be better supported by authoritative texts.
So, for instance, acceptance of the gay lifestyle or discouragement of the gay lifestyle is more in keeping with the Bible.
One value might be argued to be better supported by respected people.
The morality or the immorality of U.S. military intervention is supported by more Nobel Prize winners than the opposite.
One value might be argued to lead to more desirable consequences than the other. This is called the pragmatic argument.
So, we might say infringing on people's privacy will enable us better to protect against terrorism.
Safeguarding people's privacy will enable us to enhance civil liberties.
And protecting against terrorism is more important than enhancing civil liberties or vice versa,
preferring one value to the other on the basis of consequences.
Well, these are all different ways that we conventionally argue about values when the values are in conflict.
Now, how is this a hybrid inference pattern?
Well, it employs inferences from form, mathematical-like relationships, for instance, in seeking to compare values.
And it employs causal argument in a discussion of what adopting one or the other value will lead to.
So, it combines inferences from form and inferences from cause.
A couple of contemporary moral issues illustrate this hybrid inference pattern.
So, consider, for example, the controversy over stem cell research.
One claim might be stem cell research has the potential for eradicating disease.
And the competing claim stem cell research destroys, depending on your point of view, potential or actual human life.
The value conflict results from matching the causal claims with regard to the effects of stem cell research.
And the inference from form comes about through comparing the consequences in order to decide which is best.
Likewise, the controversy over end-of-life decision-making and maintaining life support for terminally ill patients illustrates arguing about values.
One claim might be removing life support risks hastening a person's death.
And the competing claim might be maintaining life support risks sustaining an unacceptable quality of life.
Again, there are causal claims that are set in juxtaposition to each other.
And the comparison is made in order to decide which consequence is better.
So, as both of these examples illustrate, we argue about values we combine inferences from form and inferences from cause.
Now, I don't mean to suggest that all arguments about values can be resolved.
Because in order to resolve them, we have to use one of the six or seven methods that I described, all of which ultimately appeal to something on which the arguers agree.
But sometimes there isn't any bedrock base of agreement to which the arguers can appeal.
Not all value disputes can be resolved.
In those cases, the argument functions for each participant as a way to clarify and better understand his or her own values, even though it's not settled.
But I would suggest that the conclusion that there is no basis for agreement ought to be the last resort of the arguers, not the first resort.
They shouldn't start out being unwilling to argue about values because they then get into the problem I discussed before.
There's no way to settle a dispute.
So, even when value disagreements can't be resolved, the discussion of the value conflicts is still useful.
So far, we've discussed reasoning from rules and arguing about values as hybrid patterns of inference.
The third one I want to discuss, and I promised you there would only be three, is called dissociation.
And this time, if you'll indulge me, before I explain what dissociation is or talk about any of the theory, I want to talk about an example that I think will help make it clear.
I want to talk about how, in a famous speech at Howard University in 1965, President Lyndon Johnson introduced the idea of affirmative action into public discourse.
What Johnson did was he took what traditionally had been regarded as racial equality, namely the absence of legal discrimination.
And he said that it was only the appearance of equality.
He described his own vision, equal results, as true equality.
And he made a distinction. He said we should have equality not just as a right and a theory, but equality as a fact and a result.
And he defended his description by a figurative analogy to a foot race.
He said, you do not take a man who has been hobbled by chains, bring him up to the starting line of a race, say you are free to compete with all the others and think that you have been completely fair.
The unstated point of the analogy, of course, a legacy of past discrimination requires offsetting compensatory action.
This was the beginning of the discussion of affirmative action.
Now the case of President Johnson should show how this inference is a hybrid.
He took an analogy. Remember we said analogies compare what's familiar to what's unfamiliar.
He took the familiar part, that is the person in the foot race, and accepted that as a commonplace, that it wouldn't be fair to take a person who had been hobbled by chains and say you're free to compete with all the others.
So he employed analogical reasoning. The man in the foot race is like African Americans in the contemporary U.S.
The argument also contains a sign inference. One thing, that is results, is claimed to be a better sign of equality than another thing, which is professions in the law.
So his inference combined analogy and sign.
Now let's examine what Johnson was doing and we'll see what dissociation is and how it works.
Dissociation involves two analytical steps.
First, a previously unambiguous concept with a single commonly accepted meaning, such as equality, is divided into two concepts.
The absence of legal discrimination and equal outcomes.
One of which is valued more positively than the other. Equal outcomes in this case.
That's the first analytical move to take a previously simple, commonly understood term and divide it into.
The second analytical step is to identify one's adversaries position with the less valued concept and one's own position with the more valued concept.
So Johnson identified the position of unnamed adversaries with absence of legal discrimination and his own position that he was trying to urge upon the American people with equal results.
How does one do this? How did Johnson do it?
Well, the division is accomplished by applying a pair of terms that are opposed to each other to the previously unitary term.
So he took terms like right and right versus fact and theory versus result.
The philosophical pair, the pair of terms, two contrasting concepts, one preferred over the other.
Fact preferred over right. Result preferred over theory. Other common examples, reality preferred over appearance.
Spirit preferred over letter. Truth preferred over opinion.
That's what a dissociation is.
Now let me take another example. Although I'll do this one probably more briefly, another famous one.
Lincoln and his views about slavery and equality.
Lincoln believed that all men are created equal as stated in the Declaration of Independence.
But he also believed that the two races could not coexist peaceably under conditions of political and social equality.
So he did not favor permitting African Americans to serve on juries.
He didn't favor permitting them to vote until the very end of his life.
He didn't favor permitting them to hold office.
He didn't favor permitting them to intermarry with whites and so on.
Now this seems on the face of it like a contradiction.
How could you believe that all men are created equal and not believe in any of those other things?
Lincoln resolved this tension in his beliefs by taking the concept of equality and dividing it up.
Performing a dissociation.
He dissociated equality into, on the one hand, economic equality and on the other, social and political equality.
He would say, I don't believe in perfect equality between the races.
Perfect equality by the way was a euphemism for intermarriage.
But he went on to say, in the right to eat the bread that his own hand earns, blacks are every bit the equal of whites.
So he took one aspect of equality, privileged it over the other aspect of equality and identified the privileged aspect with his own position.
So what the cases of both Johnson and Lincoln illustrate is dissociation at work.
Now in public discourse, there usually are clues to suggest that a dissociation has been employed.
The use of opposing adjectives, such as apparent versus real.
That's one clue.
And apparent tautology, when we say boys will be boys, what we're cluing is there are different aspects of being a boy.
An apparent paradox, as in the case of Lincoln.
How could you believe in the Declaration of Independence and not believe in social or political equality?
The use of terms such as pseudo, so-called and quasi, which suggests that the term isn't really being used in the way one might think it's being used.
Or the use of quotation marks around the term, suggesting that the user doesn't really mean the term in the way that it's commonly understood.
These are all clues that what's going on here is a dissociation.
Now we've talked for a long time about dissociations, you might ask, why are they used so often?
And the answer is, a dissociation can advance a controversy by changing perceptions of the argument, reframing the issue, putting the issue in a new light.
So for example, what Johnson was doing with his dissociation of the term equality was he was trying to say, we can't just be satisfied with law.
We have to also look at actual behavior and actual performance.
And so in order to get from a purely legalistic perspective to a policy-oriented perspective, he dissociated the meaning of the term.
Lincoln did the same thing in order to get beyond the popular racial prejudice of the 19th century, some of which frankly he shared.
And to focus on what he thought was the most essential aspect of human freedom, namely the right to upward mobility, he performed a dissociation and reframed the issue from a social and political issue to an economic issue.
It puts the issue in a new light in order to get beyond a seeming impasse.
Now, we as analysts of argument have to ask ourselves, is a particular dissociation a reasonable inference?
Like any of the inferences we've been discussing, it doesn't follow automatically.
And so we ask ourselves certain things.
Are the two parts of the concept, the two sides of equality, for example, really different?
Are the opposing terms like appearance, reality, letter, spirit, are they in the correct relationship?
Is the right one being preferred?
Or should we perhaps invert the relationship?
And does the dissociation really reframe the controversy?
Does it really change the perspective and get us to see things in a different way?
So what I have suggested in this lecture is that reasoning with rules, arguing about values, and dissociations are all examples of hybrid inference patterns.
They combine two or more of the basic patterns that we've been describing.
They're valuable to understand in their own right, and they also illustrate how many sophisticated argument patterns can be designed with combinations of the six basic schemes.
Now it's time to recapitulate our study of inference patterns that has occupied us for the past six lectures.
Inferences from example relate parts to holds. Inferences from analogy involve comparisons.
Inferences from sign establish correlations. Inferences from cause trace influence.
Inferences from common places apply social knowledge.
Inferences from form rely on an argument's structure.
And there are also hybrid inference patterns like the ones we've been discussing in this lecture.
For each of these inference patterns, there are questions to raise and test to employ in order to determine whether the argument is valid.
This matter of validity, a key concept to determine whether an argument's good, will now be our principal focus starting in the next lecture.
Lecture 19, Validity and Fallacies, Part 1
It's good to be back with you again. For the past several lectures we've been engaged in argument analysis, as we've talked about types of claims, categories of evidence, and patterns of inference and warrants.
Argument analysis enables us to take an argument that we might see or hear in a political speech, newspaper editorial, perhaps even in a conversation, and understand what's going on, what are the internal workings of the argument.
And it also enables us to construct arguments with confidence that they're complete even if we don't make all the parts explicit.
But argumentation deals not only with analysis, but also with appraisal.
We evaluate arguments as good or bad, strong or weak.
And we do that because we want to know not just what does convince people, but what should convince people.
Or to put it another way, what would convince people if they were exercising their critical judgment in reasonable fashion.
So there's an inherently normative component to argumentation as well. This is called argument appraisal.
And the next two lectures will deal with that.
The central question is what makes a good argument? And the answer is two-fold.
One, the evidence or the premises, true. This is a fairly straightforward matter.
It can be determined by empirical methods or by authoritative consensus.
Second answer to what makes an argument good is validity, the relationship between the evidence and the claim.
The question is whether the claim is warranted on the basis of the evidence.
Now, validity is a concept derived from formal logic. It is a matter of form, not content.
It has nothing to do with the truth of any of the statements, but rather with the relationship and the structure among them.
Simply put, an argument is valid if, when the evidence is true, the claim must be true.
To have true evidence and a false claim would be a contradiction.
So if all heavenly bodies are made of green cheese and the moon is a heavenly body, then the moon must be made of green cheese.
Now, in formal logic, we can say that an argument is valid if it follows the rules for a particular pattern of inference.
And it's invalid or fallacious if it fails to follow the rules for that particular pattern.
Well, what are those rules? Let's go back to the three kinds of syllogisms in formal logic that we discussed in lecture three.
Begin with the categorical syllogism. Remember, this is the kind of argument that takes things from one category and puts them into another.
There are elaborate rules to evaluate categorical syllogisms, which we don't have time to develop here, but fortunately there's a shortcut.
When we draw diagrams, like those that I described in lecture three, do we know for sure where to put all the parts?
Consider a simple case. All doctors are courteous. All lawyers are courteous.
Therefore, all doctors are lawyers.
Now, we instinctively reject that conclusion because we know, in fact, that all doctors aren't lawyers.
But that deals with truth. Here we're talking about validity. What's wrong with that argument as a matter of form?
Well, we draw a circle representing all the lawyers, and we put that in a larger circle representing the category of people who are courteous.
Now we want to draw a circle representing doctors and put that in the category of people who are courteous.
We'll quickly see we don't know whether there's any overlap between the category of lawyers and the category of doctors.
So we would say that that categorical syllogism is not valid. We don't know where to put all the parts in the diagram.
In the conditional syllogism, the if-then syllogism, we said that an argument is valid if it affirms the antecedent or if it denies the consequent.
It's invalid if it affirms the consequent or denies the antecedent. Simple enough.
And in the disjunctive syllogism, an argument is valid if it rejects one alternative and accepts the other.
It's invalid if it accepts one alternative and rejects the other if the term or is being used in the non-exclusive sense,
so that it could mean either one thing or the other thing or both.
Now, those are the rules. We follow the rules, we've got a valid argument. We fail to follow the rules, we have an invalid argument.
And in formal logic, the terms invalid and fallacious are essentially synonymous.
A fallacy is a deficiency in the form of an argument that's not immediately apparent.
The problem, however, is when we apply the concept of validity beyond formal argument to the kinds of argument we've been talking about in every lecture except number three,
it's tricky because the claim doesn't follow from the evidence with certainty,
so we can never say that if the evidence is true, the claim must be true.
So strictly speaking, validity as formal logicians understand it is not possible in everyday ordinary arguments.
But we need something to do the same work as the concept of validity.
We need a middle ground between rejecting all informal arguments as unacceptable, we've already seen why we can't do that,
and accepting that whatever happens to persuade anybody is a good argument.
We also can't do that, or we have no normative standard at all.
So ordinary informal argument tries to achieve the function that is served by validity, not by focusing on form, but by focusing on experience.
And instead of saying that an argument is valid, we sometimes say that it is reasonable, we use the term synonymously.
Accumulated experience with a reasoning pattern yields standards that are generally accepted as guidelines of reasonableness.
Of course, the application of these guidelines is subjective, though not whimsical.
So sometimes opposing arguments can both be reasonable.
So what are the guidelines?
In this and the next lecture, I want to discuss four categories of guidelines.
First, there are standards that correspond to each specific pattern of inference.
And in many cases we talked about these without calling them standards of reasonableness when we examined the inference patterns.
So let's follow the same order we did the first time around.
Starting with inferences from example.
Valid arguments that employ inferences from example are those which avoid certain key pitfalls.
They will avoid hasty generalization, reaching a conclusion from too few examples.
They will avoid unrepresentative samples, like that we talked about in the case of the literary digest poll that surveyed only subscribers and telephone owners.
Valid arguments will avoid the fallacy of composition, assuming that what's true of the part is automatically true of the whole.
And they'll avoid the fallacy of division, assuming that what's true of the whole is automatically true of the part.
So what makes a valid inference from example?
It's an inference that steers clear of these problems.
For arguments relying on inferences from analogy, there is really one very simple standard of validity.
Valid analogies are those in which the essential similarities outweigh the essential differences.
And invalid arguments are those in which they don't.
Now for inferences from sign, how do we determine whether an argument is valid?
The sign and the thing that it signifies generally occur together.
There are not obvious counter signs.
The same sign doesn't herald opposite things.
The relationship is not mere coincidence like we saw about the years ending in zero and presidents dying in office.
And again, sign is not confused with cause.
For inferences from cause, valid arguments avoid the errors that we saw associated with that pattern.
They too will avoid confusing sign with cause.
They will avoid failing to identify a common cause when there really is one that produces both of the things that we might mistakenly think to be cause and effect.
They'll avoid confusing temporality with causality or to say the same thing another way they will not commit the post hoc fallacy.
They'll avoid confusing cause with effect and they will not ignore multiple causes or multiple effects which might limit the force of the causal claim.
What this means is that they won't over claim causality.
They won't over claim what they'll do about solving a particular problem if the problem has multiple causes.
And they won't under claim.
They won't under claim what the consequences will be including unintended perhaps as well as intended consequences.
Valid inferences from common places will show that the common place applies to the specific situation at hand more than do any competing common places.
And finally for inferences from form, valid arguments are those which recognize the difference between the appearance of deductive certainty and the reality that the claim follows only with some degree of probability.
