These lectures are part of the Great Courses series they are produced by the teaching company.
These lectures are titled, Argumentation, The Study of Effective Reasoning, Part 2.
Lecture 13, Reasoning from Parts to Whole.
Welcome back. In the last lecture we began to consider the composition of individual arguments
so that we can both improve our ability to build arguments
and improve our ability to appraise them when we see them.
We spent the last lecture talking in detail about evidence, one lecture on that.
Earlier we had spent less than a lecture talking about claims
and now I'm going to slow down the pace and for the next several lectures
we'll be looking at specific types of inferences and the warrants that support them.
We're going to spend so much time on this topic because it's particularly important.
Arguments are often characterized according to their patterns of inference and warrant
and it's the inference and warrant that sometimes control the nature of the argument.
In fact there are some textbooks that instead of calling them warrants
call them argument schemes because they're really schemes for the whole layout of the argument
and for its function.
So we'll be able to explore the major forms of inference and warrant.
Remember that inferences show that the evidence is a basis for the claim.
They link the evidence to the claim and they do so because they're justified by a warrant.
But the link is almost never established with certainty only with some degree of probability.
Consequently when we study warrants we need to examine two aspects of every warrant.
We need to know first of all in any given argument what the warrant is and how it works
and then second we need to know some of the tests to determine whether in the particular instance
it's a strong warrant whether it gives us good reason to draw the conclusion on the basis of the evidence.
Now just a quick word on the terms inference and warrant.
They're sometimes used almost interchangeably.
In any given argument the inference is you can go from here to here.
On the basis of the evidence you can make the claim.
What distinguishes inferences is the warrant that supports them.
The reason that we can go from here to here.
And so sometimes we use the word warrant to refer to both the warrant and the inference
and sometimes we use the terms separately.
We will examine six major inferential patterns.
Six major types of warrants.
Example, analogy, sign, cause, common places and form.
And we'll also consider some hybrid patterns that combine some of these.
And I want to begin in this lecture with inferences and warrants from example.
Now last time we talked about example as a kind of evidence, a specific instance of something.
But example is also a type of warrant supporting a particular type of inference.
And these are inferences that link parts and holes.
So that's the subject of this lecture, reasoning from parts to holes and from holes to parts.
Before I get into the details of the analysis.
Let's consider a very famous historical example in which this kind of reasoning was used.
It's an unusual example because it's not primarily an argument.
It's primarily a ceremonial speech that was delivered by President Franklin Roosevelt
to a joint session of Congress seeking a declaration of war against Japan following the attack on Pearl Harbor.
As I said, there's not too much argument in there.
And yet in the middle of the speech, there's a very clear example of the warrant from example.
President Roosevelt said,
The attack yesterday on the Hawaiian islands has caused severe damage to American naval and military forces.
In addition, American ships have been reported torpedoed on the high seas between San Francisco and Hawaii.
Yesterday, the Japanese government also launched an attack against Malaya.
Last night, Japanese forces attacked Hong Kong.
Last night, Japanese forces attacked Guam.
Last night, Japanese forces attacked the Philippine islands.
Last night, the Japanese attacked Wake Island.
And this morning, the Japanese attacked Midway Island.
Japan has therefore undertaken a surprise offensive extending throughout the Pacific area.
Now look what's going on in this fairly simple example.
The evidence is a listing of the many cases of Japan's simultaneous attacks on different nations or their possessions.
The claim that the President is advancing is that Japan has undertaken a surprise offensive throughout the Pacific area.
The inference is that what's true of the part, what's true of the Philippine islands and Wake Islands and Guam and Malaya,
what's true of the part is true of the whole.
And the underlying warrant is that the examples are representative of Japan's intentions for war.
And so by putting together this string of examples,
what the President is able to argue is that the attack on Pearl Harbor is not isolated, it's not accidental,
it's part of an overall concerted strategy.
So there's a very clear case where we can see a reasoning process that goes from part to whole.
The warrant that undergirds this inference in President Roosevelt's example is that the part is basically like the whole.
Sometimes the warrant is that the whole is basically like the part.
So depending on which way we're going, what the warrant is telling us is either one,
we can accept what's true about the part as probably true about the whole,
so that we can move from a specific statement in the evidence to a general claim,
or two, we can accept what's true about the whole as being also true about the part.
This enables us to move from a general piece of evidence to a very specific claim,
so we can proceed either from general to specific or from specific to general.
Now if you remember back in lecture three, I said that people often think that the difference between deduction and induction
is whether we move from general to specific or specific to general.
I said most people believe that, but it's not right.
I said either movement could be deductive or inductive, and I promised later on that I would show you why.
Well this is the lecture in which the time has come.
Let's explore these patterns of inference and see how either movement from specific to general or general to specific
could be either inductive or deductive, both of these movements are inferences from example.
So let's start with the pattern that goes from specific to general.
This is the pattern that we call generalization.
It uses the inference from example to derive a general statement from specific cases,
and the warrant is that what's true of the part is probably true of the whole.
Let's take an actual situation to work with here.
I suspect you can relate to it and it's actually happened to me.
I've occasionally received emails or letters from people who've watched or listened to lectures in a series that I've done with the teaching company.
When I received one of these emails I said, you know, the person who sent me this email is asking a really intelligent question.
Then I got another one a few days later.
I said this person asked a really good question too.
Same thing happened a few days later.
So I concluded that customers of the teaching company ask intelligent questions.
Now remember we're not focused at the moment on the truth of these statements although I'm sure they're true, but notice what I did.
I had about three or four instances in which I received a response that asked an intelligent question,
and I moved from those specifics, from person A, person B, person C, person D,
to a general claim, customers of the teaching company ask intelligent questions.
I went from specific to general and my warrant was that what was true of the part was probably true of the whole.
What's true of the four people who sent me emails is probably true of customers of the teaching company generally.
Now that's a good example of a generalization.
Now let's look at the kind of inference I made in doing that.
I told you that I went from four specific examples to a claim that applied to thousands and thousands of people to all of the customers out there.
Now suppose for a minute that I had done something differently.
Suppose I had received an email from each and every customer, from all of them.
I said this one asked a very intelligent question, and this one did, and this one did,
and so on through the thousands of emails, every single customer.
Then I conclude customers of the teaching company ask intelligent questions.
Now in that case, has my conclusion added any new information?
No, because if I covered each and every one individually, then when I say they're all asking intelligent questions, I'm not saying anything new.
And what's more, my conclusion, my claim is certainly true.
If every one of my evidence statements is true, there's no way the claim could be false.
Well guess what? That's the definition of deduction.
The conclusion follows with certainty, and it adds no new information, even though it went from specific to general.
But of course, that's a highly unrealistic scenario.
It's unlikely that every one of the thousands of customers would send me an email or that I could read them all.
And usually, when we make generalizations, it's unrealistic to assume that every member of the category has been covered.
Why? Because the categories often are very large.
Thousands of customers, millions of taxpayers, billions of pieces of paper, and so on.
So what we customarily do is we incompletely enumerate members of the category, as I did earlier when I had only four examples.
I have four people who sent me emails, and I draw a conclusion about people who didn't send me emails.
The enumeration is incomplete.
Well now, the conclusion does have new information.
It suggests that the people who didn't send me emails are basically like the people who did.
It's not restricted to the four people who wrote to me.
As a result, it doesn't follow automatically anymore.
And that's the definition of induction.
The conclusion contains new information, and it follows not automatically, but only with some degree of probability.
So look what we've seen.
If the enumeration of the specific cases is complete, then the conclusion follows deductively.
But that's unlikely.
Usually, the enumeration is incomplete, and the conclusion follows inductively, only with some degree of probability.
And what enables us to reach the conclusion is the warrant that the part is like the whole.
Now this is a very common reasoning pattern.
I buy three cars of the same make, and I have trouble with all of them, and I conclude cars of that make are lemons.
Or you might see a few of your children's teenage friends with poor posture, and conclude teenagers today just don't have good posture.
Or I might have the experience of looping around four badly designed voicemail systems in which I can never get my question answered and get back to the main menu,
and I conclude voicemail technology is impersonal and ineffective.
These are all examples of reasoning from part to whole, from a specific case to a general statement.
These generalizations usually follow one or the other of two patterns.
One is a statistical generalization, and the other is an anecdotal generalization.
When we say, for example, 52% of a sample of a thousand people say they'll vote for a particular candidate,
and then claim that 52% of the voters in the country will probably vote for that candidate, we've made a statistical generalization.
We've said that the same ratio, the same percentage that's true of a defined sample is probably true of a larger universe.
We make an anecdotal generalization when we cite several specific instances, and then we draw a conclusion about the entire category.
So we say in one school district there are not enough textbooks, in another one there aren't enough desks for people to sit down in class,
and in another one there's a big teacher shortage, and we conclude there's significant underfunding of education in the country.
We've taken some specific instances and then drawn a conclusion about a broader category.
So we've got statistical generalizations and anecdotal generalizations.
Now since these do not follow with certainty, they're subject to specific tests.
For the statistical generalization, we want to know that the sample was big enough, that it was appropriately selected,
and that it's representative of the larger population, so that we can confidently say that what's true of the part is probably true of the whole.
And for the anecdotal generalization, we want to know that there are enough examples, that there's a diverse enough range,
that there aren't significant counter examples, and again that the examples are representative of the total population.
Now when I say representative in both of these cases, I mean simply, is the sample like the larger population in all essential respects?
There's a very famous story of what happened in the case of an unrepresentative sample.
It occurred in the 1936 presidential election when the literary digest, then a very popular magazine, did a telephone and mail-in survey of its subscribers,
and concluded that Governor Alfred Landon of Kansas would overwhelmingly defeat President Franklin D. Roosevelt in his bid for reelection.
Of course, as you remember from your history, Alfred Landon carried Maine and Vermont, and that was it.
Where did the literary digest go wrong?
Well, it turned out that literary digest subscribers were far more affluent than the general population,
and in the middle of the Depression, people who had telephones were more affluent than the general population,
and people who were more affluent were much more likely to vote Republican.
So it turned out that the literary digest had an unrepresentative sample. It was a heavily Republican sample.
By the way, the damage that this did to the literary digest reputation eventually caused the magazine to fold,
so using an unrepresentative sample can have serious consequences.
In addition to sample size and representativeness, there's one more test of a generalization,
and that is it should be tested for what's called the fallacy of composition.
The fallacy of composition consists in assuming that what is true of each of the parts individually
is necessarily true of all of the parts collectively when they make up a whole.
Consider the following.
Take any country you want. For a given country, it might have a strong motive to try to develop chemical and biological weapons.
Why? Because if that country did so, then it would have a potent weapon,
and the threat to use that weapon could give it a dominant position in world politics.
But what if every country tried to develop chemical and biological weapons?
Now the odds are far greater that the world would be destroyed than that any given country could be dominant.
That's, I presume, why we have treaties to regulate or limit or outlaw chemical and biological weapons.
What is true of the part the development of these weapons would lead to domination of world politics is not true of the whole.
What's true if one country did it is not true if every country did it.
So we wouldn't want to argue that every country ought to do what anyone individually might want to do.
You'd be surprised how often generalizations run into precisely this problem, the fallacy of composition.
Those then are generalizations, cases where we reason from the part to the whole.
Sometimes we go in the other direction. We reason from the whole to the part.
We start with a general principle and we derive a specific application, and these are called classifications.
The warrant is that what is true of the whole is probably true of the part.
Now if the general principle were itself the result of a complete enumeration,
then the reasoning from general to specific would be deductive.
The conclusion would follow with certainty.
Let's go back to my example of the teaching company customers.
If my statement, teaching company customers ask intelligent questions, was derived by surveying each and every customer,
then my conclusion, customer X asks intelligent questions would follow automatically.
Because after all, customer X is included in my general statement that would function as the evidence.
So it would follow automatically and it would tell me nothing new because I knew that to start with.
All teaching company customers ask intelligent questions, so of course I would know that customer X asks intelligent questions.
So it would be deductive, it would follow automatically.
But as I said before, that is seldom the case.
And because it's seldom the case, the warrant, as with generalization, is that the examples are representative of the whole,
so that the whole is basically like the part.
Suppose that my evidence is the result of an incomplete enumeration.
Teaching company customers generally ask intelligent questions.
Now I've gone beyond the evidence when I talk about customer X.
Because customer X wasn't necessarily included in the sample from which I drew that generalization.
Customer X may or may not have been, I don't know.
So I'm taking something that applies to people in general, not necessarily to each and every person, but to people in general.
And I'm applying that statement to a particular person, customer X.
Well, you know, it might be that customer X is your highly atypical exceptional teaching company customer who doesn't ask intelligent questions.
So my claim about customer X could be false, even though my evidence, a general statement about teaching company customers, is true.
Well now look, we went from general to specific.
But we have an inductive inference, because the conclusion doesn't follow automatically, and it contains new information.
So just as we saw a few minutes ago, that specific to general could be either inductive or deductive, now we see that general to specific also could be either one.
And in fact, general to specific is often inductive, and it's inductive for precisely the same reason that we saw before.
It's very difficult to establish the general statement that we start with with any degree of certainty, because the categories that we're talking about typically are very large.
And so what we do when we use classifications is, we take a statement that applies in general to most of the category that we're talking about, and we infer that it probably applies to the particular case about which we want to reach a conclusion.
Now why is it worth exploring, as we've done, how either one of these could be either deductive or inductive?
Let me explain.
If we think that inferences from general to specific are always deductive, we won't test those inferences very carefully.
We'll assume that they follow with certainty, and we won't ask the questions about representativeness, sample size, whether the person is in the right category, and so on, that we really need to know in order to know whether we're misusing the particular general statement or using it properly.
Conversely, if we have a complete enumeration, even though we go from specific to general, we'll have a deductive inference, and we might not need to subject it to the tests that we would appropriately apply if the inferences were inductive.
So that's why it's important to realize that either one could go either way.
Now back to classifications, back to these movements from general to specific.
The effect of classification is to make an abstract or general statement more concrete, to make a statement that applies overall to a category and apply it to a particular concrete example of that category.
And doing that makes it more salient, more important to the person for whom we're making the statement. It brings it, if you will, to the forefront of consciousness.
That's just the reverse of generalization, which takes local examples that are probably much more familiar to the person, and then abstracts from those local examples to make a general statement.
Classification makes an abstract or general statement more complete.
A general statement that most people's retirement financing is uncertain, for example, is made much more salient to an audience, particularly if I'm a financial planner and the audience is a group of people approaching retirement age.
If I infer from most people's retirement planning is uncertain to, you may think you're all set up for retirement, but your retirement financing is probably uncertain.
I've taken the general statement and I've given it much more force, much more salience, much more compellingness by applying it to the particular case.
If I say most people's retirement financing is uncertain, so yours probably is, I'm likely to get your attention and get you to focus on the argument that I am trying to develop.
Like generalizations, classifications are subject to tests, and we employ these tests in order to find out whether we've got a really strong warrant or an inference or not.
And here are the tests.
First of all, does the particular member really belong in the general class?
Is the person that I'm applying this generalization to really a member of the category that's covered by the argument?
Is person X really a customer of the teaching company so that person X would be covered by a statement about customers in general?
Second, is there a reason to think that the particular member is an exceptional case, an atypical case?
Is there a reason to think that customer X might be that atypical exceptional customer who doesn't ask especially intelligent questions so that the general principle, even though it's true in general, might not apply to the particular case?
So those are two of the tests that we employ for classification.
And then there's a third, and it's the flip side of the fallacy of composition.
Remember I said just a few minutes ago, the fallacy of composition assumes that what's true of each of the parts individually is true of all of the parts collectively.
Well, the fallacy of division is just the reverse.
It's assuming that what's true of all of the parts collectively is necessarily true of each of the parts individually.
Let's imagine that I have a friend who owns a piece of property that's a quarter of a city block, and he wants to find out what his property is worth but he doesn't want to pay to have it appraised.
Well, as it happens, a grocery store chain comes in and offers to buy up the entire city block for $2 million.
Well, one of the owners doesn't sell so the whole deal falls through.
But my friend says, guess what?
I found out what my property is worth.
The city block is worth $2 million.
That's what the grocery store would pay for it.
I own a quarter of it, so my property is worth half a million dollars and I didn't have to get it appraised.
But hold on.
That city block may be worth $2 million if but only if you could get the whole block.
Because then you could put up the grocery store having zoned it commercial and you could make a profit.
Just because the whole is worth $2 million, it doesn't follow automatically that each of the parts is worth a proportionate share of that.
What's true of all of the parts collectively is not necessarily true of each part individually.
That's the fallacy of division.
So let's review what we've said about inferences and warrants from example.
It's based on a warrant that relates parts and holes.
It can go either way.
The warrant can be the part is like the whole, generalization, or the whole is like the part.
Classification.
Either could be deductive or inductive, but usually both are inductive and thus subject to tests about sample size and appropriateness,
representativeness, the fallacy of composition, and the fallacy of division.
In the next lecture, we'll look at another common pattern of inferences and warrants that involves analogies and comparisons.
Lecture 14, Reasoning with Comparisons
Hello again.
We're continuing our discussion of individual patterns of inferences and warrants,
and we're doing so because these dictate the argument schemes that enable us to organize many informal arguments.
