For example, race was seen for a long, long time as primarily a biological variable
and determinative of personality and individual experience.
Anomalies developed and piled up and that whole paradigm, that whole way of thinking about race
was eventually brought into question and the argument was developed
that no race is instead primarily a cultural phenomenon.
Well, you see in this example what takes place in revolutionary science.
There's a kind of meta-argument, if you will.
The argument is about the theories, at least as much as about the underlying phenomena.
And the claim is, Theory X should replace Theory Y.
What's the evidence?
The evidence is a demonstration that the proposed new theory, Theory X,
can account for the phenomena that are being examined better than can the current one, Theory Y.
And the warrant is the value of theory itself, such as the importance of explanatory power,
of predictive strength, of simplicity.
These are the values of theory itself that are used to say Theory X ought to replace Theory Y.
Now this kind of dispute is not primarily about facts.
It's primarily about paradigms, about interpretations of facts.
And so ultimately, it gets settled by means other than a strict appeal to facts,
even though science is supposedly about studying the facts.
One paradigm over time may be shown to subsume the other, to incorporate it,
or one paradigm might be shown to fulfill common values better than the other.
It may be seen as simpler, more elegant, less dependent upon unobservable constructs.
Or one paradigm may be defeated by exposing its self-contradictory nature.
That is, if you accept the paradigm, it leads you to conclusions that you would be unprepared to accept.
This is what we saw as the circumstantial ad hominem.
That's what happened, for example, in the discourse about race,
where a strictly biological view of race led to conclusions that original supporters of that view would not be comfortable with.
And paradigm disputes often take place over extended periods of time that may go on sometimes for years and years,
as is happening in the conflict between evolution and intelligent design.
As with legal argument, we can see from this very quick survey that specialized knowledge is required for scientific argument.
One has to be familiar with relevant theories and their specifications and how to test each of them.
This is meant by the shorthand that one really has to keep up with the field in science.
One has to read the newest literatures, stay abreast of the journals, and so on.
One must understand the design of experiments and the procedures for testing hypotheses.
Just as scientists will not automatically be comfortable in legal argumentation,
legal experts will not automatically be comfortable in scientific argumentation.
In each case, the field depends upon expertise and conventions that are not accessible in any kind of direct way to outsiders.
Now let me talk about a couple of other examples of argument fields, and I'm going to do these much more briefly,
because I think we've made the point that fields differ in their conventions and their assumptions.
Managerial argument is an example of a field.
In management, choices have to be made under severe constraints on information and time.
So what managers do when they argue is they employ a number of simplifying devices
to make the process more manageable, if you'll pardon my pun.
One of these is incrementalism.
So in their discussions, they'll look at a small number of systems and their consequences.
And they'll look at systems that differ to only small degrees from where they're starting from.
And they'll make successive limited comparisons.
They'll compare this one to one that's close to it, and that one that's close to it, and so on.
And they want agreement on what to do, not necessarily on the reasons that favor this one over that one.
So they employ cost-benefit analysis as a simplifying device.
We talked earlier about cost-benefit analysis as a way to assign values to things that may not be inherently quantifiable,
and then to use a numerical calculation to figure out what approach gives the greatest excess of benefits over costs.
And they also use a simplifying device that has been called satisficing.
That's an artificial term, satisficing.
And what it means is taking the first solution that will minimally satisfy the participants.
So the object is not to find the most optimal ideal solution, but instead to set minimum standards that a solution must meet,
and then to accept the first solution that comes across that meets them.
I've sometimes thought of satisficing as a way to ask the question, can you live with this result?
Not necessarily is it the best possible, but can you live with it?
And the first one comes across that the opposing participants will say they can live with, that's the one that's used.
And in management, arguments are usually about means to achieve the stated objectives of the organization.
The mission statement will define the objectives, these are usually not in dispute.
The argument is about the best means to achieve those objectives.
So it will be a causal argument of the kind that we label the pragmatic argument that relates means to ends.
The means ends relationship doesn't characterize science or law to anywhere near the degree that it characterizes argument in management.
Or a final example, ethical and religious argument.
Here it's a field of a very different kind.
The assumption is that what's right should be done, and the controversy focuses on what's right.
And these controversies are typically conflicts between values and between hierarchies of values.
And so we ask questions like, should one tell the truth even if that will destroy the self-worth and the self-esteem of another valued person?
Or should one prefer another person's self-worth over telling the truth?
Should one focus more on social justice than on ritual observance within a religious context, or vice versa?
And what is just from the standpoint of social justice?
And how does the standard of justice get derived?
Should one conduct scientific research to answer questions about the unknown, even if it tramples on some of our values about the sanctity of life and the preservation of even potential life?
Or should our values about the sanctity of life take precedence over our desire to find out about the unknown?
These are examples of the sorts of questions that predominate in ethical and religious argument.
So how does one attack or defend the value judgment in the same ways we saw in lecture 18,
some of which are in terms of other values, or by reference to sacred texts that are accepted as authoritative, or authoritative decisions, or teachings?
The values are not defended solely, or even primarily, by reference to their consequences.
Because the ultimate question is not about consequences, it's about what would we regard as right, as morally right, or as ethically right?
And rather than being limited in time as in the case of management, the time horizon is eternity.
The focus of the controversy, though, while it's ultimately about these values and value hierarchies,
may seem to be how we describe a given situation, because the ethical or religious principles may be implicit in the very description of the situation.
And so we go back to our emphasis on definitions.
Once we call capital punishment state-sponsored murder, we've already brought to the fore ethical principles and religious principles that govern how we talk about it.
That would be very different from those that would govern it if we described it in a different way.
Well now we've quickly surveyed law, science, management, ethics, and religion, not in order to probe in any depth,
but just to see how the conventions of argument are different in each field,
and how each field requires some specialized knowledge and background that may not be available to outsiders.
Now what happens when it's not apparent to what field a controversy belongs?
Is nuclear defense strategy a scientific issue, or is it a moral issue?
Is abortion a religious question, or a question of civil liberties?
Is foreign policy a strategic matter, or a humanitarian issue?
These questions raise issues of how a controversy should proceed and who is qualified to argue in it.
If we're going to get anywhere, we have to figure out some way to talk about inner field disputes.
One option is what's been called inner field borrowing, so law borrows a concept or convention of science,
and the issue is discussed under the same set of conventions or vice versa.
The other option is to transform the controversy out of the technical sphere and into the larger public sphere,
and the larger public sphere will be the focus of the next lecture.
Lecture 23 Public Argument and Democratic Life
It's good to be back with you.
In the last lecture, we were talking about argumentation in the technical sphere that occurs within specialized fields.
And at the very end, I alluded to the problem of inner field disputes when it's not clear what field a matter is in,
or it could be in more than one.
And I said one possibility for dealing with that was to transcend the question of fields by taking the argument from the technical to the public sphere.
And although that's not the only use of the public sphere, it immediately raises the question of what the public sphere is,
what are its characteristics, and that's what I want to focus on in this lecture.
Arguments in the public sphere have two principal features.
The first is that they're addressed to and offered on behalf of a general audience, so they're accessible to anybody.
They're accessible to all citizens.
They're addressed to a general audience, not a specialized one, and they're offered in behalf of that audience.
The second feature is that they affect the community at large.
Remember in the personal sphere, we said the arguments are limited in their effect to the people who are actually participating.
Well, the clear opposite of that is the public sphere, where the arguments affect the entire community, even those who are not involved in the dispute.
Arguments that have these two features, that are offered in behalf of and addressed to a general audience and affect the whole community,
typically concern the future.
They typically involve deliberation.
They're action-oriented, and they raise the key question, what shall we do?
So public argument is most typically about resolutions of policy and the issues concern choices to make.
The controversy starting in the late 1990s and renewed in 2005 over the future of social security is a good example of an argument in the public sphere.
It's addressed to everybody, to all potential social security recipients, not just to experts.
And the issues are discussed in terms that permit a general understanding, such as the bankruptcy of social security.
The issues affect everybody.
They're concerned with policy and with the future.
Now where does public argument take place?
Traditionally, these arguments were addressed to people in classical Greece in large assemblies.
People would come to a place known as the Forum, where discussions of public issues occurred.
The idea of the public forum is modeled by the New England town meeting, where deliberation takes place in a meeting,
and all the citizens of the town come together and decide important policy questions.
But to really understand the public forum, I'd like for us to think of it not as a physical place,
but as a metaphorical place, an imagined space that exists whenever people have the freedom to exchange ideas and when certain conditions are met.
What are those conditions?
Well first, the problem being discussed involves people collectively, as well as individually.
Second, cooperative action is needed in order to resolve the problem.
Third, information is incomplete, and there's no self-evidence solution, so people have to exercise judgment.
Fourth, however, a decision nevertheless is required. We simply can't evade the issue.
Now let's talk about a couple of obvious examples of argumentation that fit within this model of the public forum.
One is deciding what to do about health care.
Health care emerged in the latter part of the 20th century as an important public policy issue, because first it's been recognized that health is not just a matter for individuals.
There are external effects of one's health or sickness, their cost to the economy, harms to other people, losses in productivity, and so forth.
So it's got general collective as well as individual significance.
The problem in public health can't be addressed by any one person or any number of people acting individually.
There's a need cooperatively to make decisions.
We don't know everything that we conceivably might or would want to about what would best promote public health and what are the consequences of different choices, and yet we have to do something about it.
Another obvious example is how to respond to acts of terrorism.
These affect people not individually but collectively.
They're directed against a large collective audience.
People can't solve them one by one.
Cooperative action is required.
There's no way to know, particularly since terrorism is usually the result of secrecy, all of the possible information, either on problems or on possible remedies.
And yet one simply can't sit by, one must do something.
These are characteristics then of public arguments.
They take place in such obvious venues as legislative bodies, whether local, state, or national, and political campaigns.
But they also take place in locations as diverse as the PTA, city council meeting, television talk shows, certain discussion groups on the internet, and letters to the editor, among others.
These are places where people engage in the kind of argument that affects everybody, is directed to everybody, and involves matters of collective judgment.
Our project for this lecture then is to see what we can say about the public sphere of argument, just as we did with the personal and the technical spheres.
I want to look at some of its key characteristics.
And I want to start this time by asking the question, where do the warrants in public argument come from?
And what I'm really asking when I say that is, what is it that authorizes the kinds of inferences that people make when they engage in argument in the public sphere?
The warrants come from the social and political beliefs of the audience, of the general public, rather than from technical understandings or documents or specific observations.
They are common places, as we describe that term in lecture 17, and it's easy to see why.
Arguments addressed to the general public best justify their claims by appealing to beliefs or values that are widely shared by that public.
These are the most likely to engender the agreements on which resolving disagreements depends.
So what kinds of common places serve as warrants in the public sphere?
For one example, widely shared beliefs and values.
For instance, in the contemporary American culture, we all want what's best for our children.
There's a commonly accepted belief or value.
It seldom requires explicit statement.
It could generally be assumed in just about any kind of discussion.
Or, the market mechanism generally works.
Not that it's perfect, of course, but that the market essentially is an appropriate and good means to allocate costs and benefits, goods and services.
A higher power governs our destiny is a belief that in contemporary America is generally, not universally, but generally held and is sometimes appealed to explicitly, sometimes taken for granted.
So this kind of social knowledge can serve as the warrants for arguments about particular policies or particular actions affecting the general public.
Besides widely shared beliefs, another kind of warrant is that we all engage in what I'll describe as naive theories of attribution.
That is, how we assign or attribute responsibility for things.
There's a fairly general tendency, if things go right, to attribute it to one's own efforts.
If I do well in my job, it's because I'm good at it.
For example, and to interpret unfavorable outcomes to factors beyond one's control.
If I got fired, it's because the economy went sour, or it's because the boss didn't appreciate me, or was misguided in judgment, or some such thing as that.
So favorable outcomes we tend to attribute to our own efforts, unfavorable outcomes we tend to attribute to factors beyond our control.
Well, the result of that kind of attribution theory is that arguments can reinforce our personal efficacy, our personal sense of worth, or accomplishment.
And that personal sense of accomplishment or worth becomes one of the warrants that arguments about public matters are often intended to appeal to.
So take fiscal policy or tax policy, and an argument that says, you earn the money, it's yours, you ought to have control over it, is not just an ideological argument about individualism versus collectivism.
It's partly that, but it's also an argument about personal attribution for favorable outcomes, the money belongs to you, and that becomes a warrant.
A third example of a commonplace, another kind of naive theory that people carry around with them in their heads, naive theories of motivation, why people do things.
We generally assume that people do things for reasons, that is, events are not random or chaotic, and we develop theories of motivation explaining why people do things.
One of the clearest examples of such a theory is a conspiracy theory.
Now by a conspiracy theory, I don't necessarily mean that people imagine dark and evil and sinister forces, sometimes they do, but rather that people assume that others have a plan, that they've planned out what's going to take place and then events unfold accordingly.
So for instance, at the height of the Cold War, there was a widespread assumption that there was an international communist conspiracy centered in Moscow and with a specific plan for world domination.
Now what's especially interesting about a conspiracy theory is it explains events, even those that would seemingly disprove the conspiracy's existence.
So a country goes communist. What does it prove? It proves that there is this international conspiracy out there working to bring it about.
A country resists communism. What does it prove? It proves that the conspirators are so conniving that they'll let a few victories sneak away from them in order to delude people into thinking that they're weak
and lull people into complacency and then the communists will come in for the kill.
You see the idea here is that if you believe in a conspiracy, you can imagine a plan that would encompass events that seem to support it and events that seem to refute it.
So it would make the argument self-sealing and non-falsifiable.
But the power of conspiracy arguments is that we find ambiguity and uncertainty disconcerting, uncomfortable.
And the conspiracy theory provides a neat package in which to explain what's going on, to predict what will happen next so that one is in the know.
And if an opponent makes an argument that might seem like it weighs in against you, you could dismiss it as being tainted by the conspiracy so that the motive for the argument is not pure.
Now if you think about these examples, widely shared beliefs, naive attributional theories, motivational theories, you realize that these are warrants that don't always follow the rules, the norms, and the standards that we establish when we spent several lectures talking about each of the different warrants.
They may violate normative standards for strong arguments, and yet they're very common in discourse in the public sphere.
So the answer to where warrants come from, they come from the audience's social and political beliefs.
Now another thing we can say about argument in the public sphere is that it has to deal with the fact that the public is heterogeneous.
It's highly diverse.
Whether by socioeconomic or demographic variables or political beliefs or ideology or cultural experience, the very idea of a public forum is that it brings together people with diverse backgrounds and from diverse communities.
Now let me talk about just one example of how this heterogeneity affects arguments in the public sphere.
The public will contain elements of both liberal and conservative presumptions.
Professor Thomas Goodnight, whom I referred to in an earlier lecture, has also written about liberal and conservative presumptions.
Of course the terms liberal and conservative mean something different than the early 21st century from what they meant in the 19th century, but let's leave that for another time.
The liberal presumption in a contemporary context regards change as inevitable and believes that it should be guided, regards human nature as basically good,
venerates reason and is willing to use government to promote the common good.
In contrast, the conservative presumption favors maintenance of existing social relations and practices, it venerates tradition rather than change,
it believes that human nature is not necessarily good or selfless, and it regards reform as often short-sighted and misguided, so it's much more cautious about change than is the liberal presumption.
Now these beliefs, these different presumptions, will coexist within the public.
Indeed, they'll sometimes coexist within the same person.
It's not uncommon, for instance, to have a person say something like, well, I'm a fiscal conservative, but a social policy liberal.
Meaning, I'm cautious about approving the spending of money, but I recognize a responsibility to a larger society and to other people and to do something to ameliorate various social problems.
How else might people combine a liberal and a conservative presumption?
Well, many people generally oppose government programs, but support those that benefit them personally.
Or they're an individualist on civil liberties questions and a collectivist on matters of social or economic policy.
Or they object to government power when they don't like the outcome for which the power is used, but support it when they do.
And if people individually could combine these presumptions, certainly when we imagine the whole general public, we're imagining a situation in which an audience is composed of people with very different political presumptions.
What does this mean for argument?
It means that successful public argument will typically find a way to draw on both the liberal and the conservative presumption to find ways to mix together the elements of both.
For instance, public argument may describe innovations as returns to tradition, so that change will be described as restoration of bringing back conditions that existed at some time in the past.
The best example I can think of is the New Deal during the administration of President Franklin Roosevelt, which as we know significantly expanded the size and the scope and the reach of federal government and public policy.
But the New Deal was described as a return to the conditions that existed under Jeffersonian liberalism in the early 19th century, in which there was an equilibrium between people and government.
And what Roosevelt and the New Dealers argued was that the development of big business and big labor required big government as a counterweight in order to protect the individual and to restore a much older equilibrium.
It's not at all uncommon to find innovations being talked about as returns.
Or another example.
Mild and moderate actions are sometimes described in excessive rhetoric, so that putting more policemen on the street becomes a bold new initiative against crime.
The mild action is intended to appeal to the conservative presumption.
The rhetoric in which it's all cast is intended to appeal to the liberal presumption.
This is one of the reasons, for instance, that the war metaphor has figured so prominently in public policy discussions about domestic matters, so that we have a war on crime, a war on drugs, a war on poverty, and now a war on terror.
Well, the war metaphor suggests a total mobilization, bringing all the resources together and having government coordinate, and that appeals to the liberal presumption.
Relatively small expenditures, limited actions, and limited interference with people's daily lives appeal to the conservative presumption.
Sometimes this is a highly successful mix, and sometimes it blows up in our face.
When the liberal becomes dissatisfied with the pace of change and the conservative becomes overly frightened by the bold rhetoric, so it doesn't always work, but sometimes it's a strong combination.
Or another thing that happens to appeal to both presumptions is to package arguments in such a way that the proposals contain appeals to both.
So, for example, what are we going to do in an economic slowdown?
Well, we will both lower the capital gains tax, and we will increase spending on social programs.
Lowering the capital gains tax in the short run will bring in more revenue, and we'll dedicate that revenue towards meeting social purposes.
And so the reduction in the capital gains tax appeals to the conservative presumption, the increased domestic spending appeals to the liberal.
There are other possible ways to combine them as well. These are just illustrative.
But in contrast, a validly ideological argumentation rarely succeeds in the public sphere.
The ideologue represents a small minority, usually at odds with pragmatism, and will not be able to appeal successfully to these competing presumptions.
That's why, incidentally, political campaigns usually play to the middle, not just because they're trying to appeal to undecided voters,
but because the middle, in terms of liberalism and conservatism, is where most people feel that they are.
Well, we've talked about warrants. We've talked about audiences.
Let me also describe some of the ways that arguments in the public sphere are presented.
First, there's often a use of what have been called condensation symbols.
These are symbols which condense, hence the name.
They condense a whole range of different emotions and reactions into veneration of or opposition to a common symbol.
One of the best examples may be the American flag. People support the flag for all kinds of different reasons.
It doesn't make any difference what the reasons are as long as they converge or condense in the ultimate result.
And the condensation symbol achieves strategic ambiguity. It represents a show of unity in the face of diversity.
This is a case when ambiguity is not a fallacy.
Another thing that happens in presenting public arguments is that persuasive definitions play a significant role.
We talked about persuasive definitions in an earlier lecture.
I suggested they are definitions that conceal arguments.
They involve the use of terms that have a whole substructure of argument that it never is made explicit.
Now, in a public controversy, if one can get a term to be accepted generally, that's a persuasive definition,
then it's as if one had made the whole underlying argument.
For example, those opposed to abortion have talked about late term abortions as partial birth abortions.
Now, if the term partial birth abortions generally prevails, then people are predisposed to view late term abortions in a particular light
that would regard them as unacceptable because birth is something that comes beyond, obviously, the fetal state.
Or when it was proposed to repeal the estate tax.
