In the last lecture, we focused on warrants and inferences from example,
the kind that link parts and holes together,
and we showed that we can either reason from part to hole or hole to part,
and that either could be inductive or deductive.
Now I want to turn our attention to warrants and inferences that are based in analogies,
and these involve comparisons and resemblances.
Things are understood to be similar in certain respects, that's the evidence,
and they're predicted, therefore, to be similar in other respects, that's the claim,
and the inference that links the two is supported by a warrant that says that things that are basically alike
will probably be alike in the respect that's under discussion.
Now for this inference to be deductive, for the conclusion to follow certainly,
the items being compared would need to be exactly the same, but they aren't.
No two things are exactly the same.
The items that are being compared are not identical, they're similar.
They may be highly similar, but they're similar, not identical.
Therefore there's always an inferential leap when we say that things that are alike in this respect
will be alike in that respect, and so the inference that's involved is always inductive.
It follows with a certain degree of probability, and we want to test carefully to see if it follows in a given case
and it contains new information.
When we talk about analogies, there are basically two types of analogies, literal and figurative,
and I think probably the easiest way for us to talk about them is in that order.
So literal analogies are direct comparisons of objects, events, situations, places, and so on.
The items that are being compared are in the same sphere of reality,
by which I mean simply we think about them as being in the same general category,
and the inference is that the items are like each other in some particular respect.
The warrant says if they're alike in most basic respects, then they will be alike in the respect that's under discussion.
So for instance, we might compare the cities of Houston and Phoenix,
and we'd say these cities are basically alike in a lot of important respects.
They're both Sunbelt cities. They both grew dramatically in population over the last 50 years.
They're both geographically spread out. They both depend heavily upon the automobile
with very little use of mass transportation.
They both have a culturally diverse population with a significant number of recent immigrants and non-English speakers.
So they're alike in a lot of respects.
And now we say in Phoenix there was a particular approach to public education that worked successfully
and resulted in increased student achievement, particularly by minority students.
And so we say if this program were tried in Houston, it would probably work there too.
Because after all, Houston and Phoenix are basically alike and it worked in Phoenix.
See what we've done in this example?
We've taken two things that are in the same sphere of reality, in this case two large cities,
and we've said that these cities are basically alike in lots of different respects,
and we've concluded therefore that they're probably alike in the respect with which we're concerned,
namely programs that work in public education to improve student achievement, especially minority students.
That's an example of a literal analogy.
It compares two things that are in the same basic category.
It says they're alike in a lot of respects, so they'll probably be alike in this respect.
Now we use literal analogies all the time.
We use them to suggest that one case is parallel to another case.
We use them to set precedents.
We say we've got a situation where something has worked and so it'll probably work in this new situation.
We use them not only in public speeches or formal occasions, but we often use them informally as well.
A lot of arguments that take place within families, for example, will employ literal analogies.
A teenager wants a certain privilege and says,
well my friend Susie is able to do so and so, whatever it happens to be.
And the assumption the teenager is making is that she and Susie are basically alike in lots of different respects.
They have similar life experiences.
They reflect the same culture.
They come from similar kinds of families, similar upbringing, so they ought to be alike in this particular respect.
And if Susie has this particular privilege, whatever it is, then I should have it too.
That's a literal analogy, fairly straightforward and easy to grasp.
They're often used to reason from presumably similar historical situations.
So that we use literal analogies to take guidance from the past.
And there are lots and lots of cases that we could come up with with very little difficulty.
At the very beginning of United States partisan politics in the 1790s,
there was intense dispute about whether the United States ought to develop basically like England or basically like France.
And the advocates of the then competing factions would each point to one or the other of those countries
as the precedent, the kind of model that the new United States government ought to follow.
In 1861, the southern states that seceded from the Union believed that they were doing exactly the same thing
that the 13 colonies had done in 1776 when they declared their independence from Britain.
And what they said was, this situation is basically like that one, just as the colonies in effect seceded from Britain,
so the disaffected southern states will secede from the United States.
And of course, the counter argument was to suggest that these were not like situations at all.
But the point is the advocates for secession were invoking this literal analogy,
saying one historical moment is like another historical moment.
More recently, in the last 50, 60 years, we found this kind of literal analogy used very often
so that critics of the war in Iraq in the early 2000s frequently compared that war to Vietnam.
They referred to it as Vietnam revisited.
And their argument was that just as the United States got bogged down in Vietnam
and ultimately had to leave without seeing a victorious result,
the same thing is going to happen in Iraq because Iraq is basically like Vietnam.
At the time of the Vietnam War, supporters of that war suggested that Vietnam was like Berlin in 1948,
that just as communist forces had threatened Berlin until the Berlin Airlift demonstrated the resolve of the western powers not to yield,
so now communist forces were threatening Vietnam and so in the same way,
the western powers would need to demonstrate their resolve not to abandon that country.
First of the Cold War, the prospect of negotiating with the Soviet Union with our adversary was seen as a repetition of Munich in 1938
when Neville Chamberlain decided that the easiest way to forestall the Nazi advance was to appease Adolf Hitler and make some token concessions.
Munich, of course, carried a stigma for years thereafter because it didn't prevent war
and if anything, some historians argued it enabled Hitler to miscalculate the will and the resolve of the western democracies
and thus made war more likely and so negotiations were seen like Munich.
In the late 1940s, Stalin was seen as being like Hitler.
In the early 2000s, any case of terrorism anywhere was seen as a recurrence of September 11th, 2001 and for opponents of abortion.
Abortion was seen as basically like slavery.
Just as slaves at one time were not recognized as legal persons, so fetuses are not recognized as legal persons,
but just as the public consciousness on slavery eventually changed, so these critics reasoned public consciousness on abortion eventually will change
and just as the Dred Scott decision was effectively overturned, so they reasoned, so will Roe vs. Wade.
Well, if nothing else, this litany of cases should suggest to us that reasoning from literal analogy is a very common reasoning pattern
and it's easy to see why.
One of the things that we know about how our minds work and how people are persuaded and how attitudes are changed
is that we're persuaded by resemblances between something that is new and something that we already know and understand
so that if the new can be assimilated to the old and shown to be basically like it, we are much more likely to accept what's new than if that were not the case.
So that's the literal analogy.
Now before we look at the other kind of analogy, I want to comment on two specialized cases of the literal analogy that we may want to zero in and focus a little bit more intently on.
One of these is the judicial analogy that like cases should be treated alike.
As you might guess, the judicial analogy is frequently used in law when advocates argue that a case should be decided in the same way as a precedent case
and the fact that courts tend to reason in this fashion helps to explain why there's a consistency to court decisions
and why courts are not frequently overturning their own decisions.
For instance, a few minutes ago I mentioned the case of Roe v. Wade.
It may be worth reminding ourselves whatever we think about that case, how it came about.
In 1965, the Supreme Court heard a case called Griswold v. Connecticut in which the Supreme Court established that there was implicit in the Constitution
and in several of the amendments of the Bill of Rights a right to privacy.
And that right of privacy protected communication between married couples.
The particulars in the case involved the use of contraceptives.
But the point was that the case of Griswold v. Connecticut established a right to privacy.
And then what the case of Roe v. Wade did when that came along is it applied the precedent from Griswold v. Connecticut.
It said if there is such a thing as a right to privacy, which we've established that there is, then this right to privacy certainly applies to one of the most private decisions that anybody needs to make
and that's the decision whether or not to terminate a pregnancy.
And so Roe v. Wade was decided on right to privacy grounds and it focused primarily on the privacy of communication between a woman and her doctor.
So what's being done here is to apply a precedent case to a new case and that's the judicial analogy.
Sometimes the judicial analogy is used not just in court but as a general rule of conduct arguing that like situations should be treated alike and the way one acts in one case should govern the way one acts in a similar case.
It's called the rule of justice.
So let's suppose that the CEO of a company announces that he or she is going to fire and prosecute any employee who is found to be embezzling.
And along comes an employee who's been found to be embezzling and that person is indeed fired and prosecuted.
And then a little while later another employee is found to be embezzling except this time the employee is the boss's son.
Well the rule of justice says like cases should be treated alike as the CEO did in the first case of firing and prosecuting the person for embezzling so the CEO should do even when the alleged embezzler is the boss's son.
So that's the judicial analogy and it's a particular application of a literal analogy.
The other particular application that I want to mention is a form of argument that we've encountered before in a slightly different context and that is the argument of for sure.
The argument that compares more and less.
You may remember when we talked about refutation I suggested that it's a general means of refutation that's available to either attacker or defender of an argument.
But let's zero in on that argument and see what it's actually doing.
It suggests that what is true of the lesser is even more true of the greater or vice versa.
For example, if a business insists upon accounting for missing office supplies then all the more should it insist on accounting for missing amounts of cash.
What it will do in the lesser case, office supplies, it ought even more to do in the greater case than is the case of large amounts of cash.
Or if US senators are willing to filibuster against nominees for lower court appointments all the more will they be willing to filibuster against Supreme Court nominees where the stakes are higher.
So what's true of the lesser will even more be true of the greater.
And as I said, sometimes this argument is used the other way around.
For instance, what's false for the greater is even more likely to be false for the lesser.
If I'm not going to pay for an extended warranty for my car, even less will I be likely to pay for an extended warranty for my cell phone.
If I don't think it's worth it to protect this really expensive piece of property, all the less will I think it's worth it to protect a much less valuable piece of property.
Or if I'm willing to sell my house without a lawyer, all the more will I be willing to sell my timeshare without a lawyer being present.
So you see how the argument of forciori works.
This kind of argument is sometimes called a super analogy because look at what it's saying.
It's not saying that one situation is basically like the other one.
It's saying one situation is even more so or even less so than the other one.
And so what applies in the one case will apply with greater force in the other or what doesn't apply in one will apply even less in the other.
So we have the judicial analogy and the argument of forciori as special cases of literal analogies, direct comparisons between things, events, situations, people, and so on.
Now you'll recall I said there were two kinds of analogy and we've been talking so far about literal analogy and its variations.
The other kind is a figurative analogy.
This is a comparison not between things themselves but between relationships between objects, events, places, situations, and so on.
The items compared are not in the same sphere of reality.
They're not in the same category.
They're in different categories and they're brought together for the moment by the figurative analogy.
Let's take a simple example.
Responding to concerns in the early 2000s that there were impending shortages in the Social Security Trust Fund, one of the suggestions that was advanced was that some or all of social security ought to be privatized.
That is, people ought to be able to take a part of their social security benefits and invest them privately in order if they were lucky to derive a higher rate of return.
Some critics thought that this was far too drastic a remedy for the real problems in the Social Security Trust Fund.
And they would say, well that's like using a machine gun to kill a mosquito or burning down a barn to kill the rats.
Now, look what's happening here.
The things being compared are not at all in the same category.
We don't think of Social Security and its Trust Fund together with machine guns and mosquitoes or burning down a barn and killing rats.
The comparison is the relationship between them.
The relationship between privatization and the problems of Social Security is like the relationship between the machine gun and the annoyance of the mosquito.
In both cases, the remedy is far disproportionate to the problem.
And that's what the argument is really trying to suggest by bringing together these two very different things and comparing the relationships between them.
The form of a figurative analogy is easy to describe.
A is to B as C is to D.
Now notice it's not A and C that are being compared or B and D that are being compared.
We're saying the relationship between A and B is like the relationship between C and D.
One of those pairs of terms are things that we're relatively more familiar with.
And the pair that we're more familiar with is called the foros.
For those of you listening, that's P-H-O-R-O-S.
And the pair that we're less familiar with is called the theme.
The theme is what the analogy is really about.
And the point of the analogy is to suggest that the relationship between the pairs in the theme is like the relationship between the pairs in the foros.
And since we already know and are familiar with the relationship in the foros,
we're more likely to accept that same relationship applied to the theme.
The warrant is the relationship between the terms in the foros will also characterize the relationship between the terms in the theme.
Now if we often use literal analogies, we're sometimes a bit more wary of figurative analogies.
We might think that they are literary devices, that they're figures of speech and intended for embellishment.
But as we saw in the lecture on language and style,
you can't separate the language in which an argument is cast from its substance.
Figurative analogies have an important argumentative purpose.
They're used to make ideas more concrete or acceptable by comparing a not-so-well-known pair of terms with another pair of terms that is much better known.
And since our mind works by way of resemblances, if we can see the unfamiliar pair as being basically like the familiar pair,
then we're more likely to accept the relationship in the unfamiliar pair having already accepted it in the more familiar pair.
By the way, in addition to this argumentative purpose of figurative analogies,
they're also used to test our understanding of relationships.
And that's why, depending on what age you are and when you took standardized tests,
you found standardized tests often having a section of analogies in which you would have term A is to term B as,
and then there would be four or five different options to pick from to complete the analogy.
And of course, what's being tested there is can you recognize what it is that characterizes the relationship between the two given terms,
and then which of the pairs of terms that you have to pick from has that same characteristic to it.
And if you can see the similarity of the relationships, then that's a sign that you can reason analogically.
And that's a particularly important way to effective reasoning.
There are some outstanding historical examples of the use of figurative analogies,
and I'd like to take just a few minutes and talk about two of them that are quite famous.
One is Abraham Lincoln's House Divided Speech.
We talked about that speech in lecture 11 when we talked about his stylistic devices and use of language.
I want to zero in here on one particular feature of that speech.
You remember I said he talked about workmen who were building a frame house,
and he said when we see a lot of workmen who've gathered up these timbers and we find that they all fit together,
they exactly make the form of a house or a mill,
or if there's one piece missing, we see exactly the niche that's cut out
and we know exactly where it's going to fit,
then we find it impossible to not believe that the workmen all worked together
on a common plan that they had drawn up before the first blow was struck.
And I didn't emphasize it when I talked about it before,
but Lincoln went ahead and named the workmen Stephen, Franklin, Roger, and James.
This, of course, was not a coincidence since Stephen Douglas, Franklin Pierce, James Buchanan,
and Roger Tunney, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court,
were the figures that he was trying to indict as being part of a plot to spread slavery all over the country.
But what's he doing? He can't prove that there's a plot to spread slavery all over the country.
In fact, it's rather preposterous and a far-fetched set of arguments.
So what he does is he argues by figurative analogy.
He's saying Stephen, Franklin, Roger, and James planning to spread slavery all over the country
is just like an imaginary Stephen, Franklin, Roger, and James who are getting ready to build a frame house.
In the frame house case, they've got all the materials and they fit exactly and they make the house.
In the slavery case, we have all these legal examples, the Kansas-Nebraska Act and the Dred Scott Decision in particular,
and what these examples are doing is they're making the structure of national slavery leaving only one piece to be filled
and that is to prevent states from outlawing slavery.
So that's what Lincoln is doing in the speech.
He's trying to prove by using a figurative analogy, something that he can't prove directly,
that the relationship between these politicians and national slavery is the same as the relationship between these imaginary workmen
and the frame house that they're building.
So that's one very famous example.
Another one involves Franklin D. Roosevelt.
We talked about him briefly in the last lecture.
During the period before the United States entered World War II, but after the war had already broken out in Europe,
President Roosevelt was trying to strike a delicate balance between preserving the neutrality of the United States and giving aid to the allies, especially Britain.
And as Britain's cash reserves dwindled, it became clear that in order to defend itself, Britain would need destroyers that it couldn't pay for
and weapons that it couldn't pay for, and so it asked the United States for help.
Now, President Roosevelt wanted to preserve American neutrality, and so he thought about this as a very simple transaction
and in justifying what he was going to propose, which came to be known as lend lease,
he delivered a famous speech over the radio in which he used a figurative analogy.
He said, if my neighbor's house is on fire and I have a length of garden hose and my neighbor comes over to me and says help,
I don't say I'll sell you that garden hose for $15, I guess that's what they cost in 1940.
I don't say I'll sell you the garden hose because the neighbor doesn't want that.
He wants the use of the hose and it's of no value to him after the fire is put out.
So what I do is I say neighbor, take my hose, borrow it, use it, put out your fire, and then when your fire is out, bring it back.
And so President Roosevelt concluded it would be the neighborly thing to do for the United States to permit Britain to borrow these old destroyers
and use them for the duration of the war and give them back when the war was over.
Now, of course, little of these materials actually came back, but that's another matter.
The point is that what President Roosevelt did was to justify a highly controversial action, arguably a violation of neutrality,
by saying it's just like the neighbor who lends his garden hose in order to put out the fire.
My point in citing these examples is to make clear that figurative analogies are not just literary devices or figures of speech.
Now, since we said at the beginning that both literal and figurative analogies are inductive, they always need to be tested carefully
because resemblances are not identities, and there's one key test.
Do the essential points of similarity between the items or the relationships outweigh the essential points of difference?
If not, if they're more different than alike, then we have a false analogy, and that's something we definitely want to avoid.
In the next lecture, we'll talk about yet another pattern of inference and warrant, those based on sign.
Lecture 15, Establishing Correlations
It's good to be back with you. In the last two lectures, we've been talking about individual patterns of inferences and warrants
so that we can learn better how to construct various kinds of arguments and also to appraise and evaluate them.
We've talked so far about warrants and inferences that are based on example that relate parts to holes,
and warrants and inferences that are grounded in analogies that are based in comparisons and resemblances.
Now, in the next two lectures, we're going to be talking about two other patterns of inference and warrant that are closely related and often confused,
sign and cause. We'll be talking about sign inferences and warrants in this lecture and causal inferences and warrants next time,
but we'll need occasionally to remind ourselves of the difference between the two because they're often confused with each other.
So, sign inferences involve correlations, that is, patterns or occurrences or changes that vary in relation to each other.
We could say that what sign warrants do is that they establish that there is a predictable relationship between things
so that given one, we can predict the existence of the other, or given changes in one, we can predict changes in the existence of the other.
Let's consider two examples right off the bat. You may remember that in lecture 13, I talked about teaching company customers who ask intelligent questions
and I gave you several examples. I said, this person, this person, this person, and this person asked intelligent questions,
so teaching company customers generally ask intelligent questions. Suppose I went further with that example and I said,
teaching company customers generally ask intelligent questions, therefore they are probably intelligent people.
What I'm saying then is that asking an intelligent question is a sign of being an intelligent person.
I can't tell for sure if somebody is an intelligent person, but I can predict it if they ask an intelligent question.
So one thing is a sign of the other. It's an indication that the other one is present.
Now here's a more extensive example. In the 2002 State of the Union message, President George W. Bush referred to the nations of Iraq,
