And finally, we use causal arguments sometimes to assign responsibility. After an election in which the candidate who the polls predicted would win didn't, and we ask the question, why did the candidate who was expected to win lose?
We're looking for assignment of responsibility. Who's responsible for that? Who's to blame? What's the explanation for that? And that's a case where we start off with the effect and we search for the alleged cause.
Well, each of these represents a different purpose for using causal arguments, and the frequency with which these purposes come up should reinforce the fact that we use causal arguments, arguments based on causal warrants, all the time.
Now, suppose we're making such an argument, and we want to know, in the given case, how do we determine whether we have causality or not? And again, there's some different approaches depending on the subject matter.
There are empirical approaches to deciding if we have causality, and these rely on the tests for sufficient condition that have been developed in the 19th century by the philosopher John Stuart Mill.
Here is one of Mill's tests, the method of difference. He says, create conditions in which two things are identical in every respect except one, observe whether there is a difference between the two things, and if so, you can safely infer that the one respect in which they're different is what produced the cause of the difference between them.
Because you held constant everything else. Mill has several other methods, but that should give you an idea of how he suggests going about it.
Now, in the last few decades, quantitative approaches have been developed that rely on statistical regression analysis, which is a mathematical technique for explaining how much of the variance between things is attributable to each of the factors that you might identify.
So we have empirical methods, those of Mill, and we have quantitative methods, regression analysis. And both of these, I'll tell you, are probably not applicable to much everyday argument. Why?
Well, often, when we're talking about very complex systems or large populations, holding everything constant, making sure things are alike in every respect except one, may be an impossibility. It often is an impossibility.
The system is just too complicated. There are too many factors. They interact. We can't be sure we've controlled for everything. And you know, even if we could, there are many situations in which we would have real ethical questions about doing that.
We want to determine, for example, whether exposure to some element causes cancer. And so what would we do? We'd get two populations. We'd have them alike in every respect except we'd expose one population to this element and the other population we wouldn't.
And we'd see if the exposed population got cancer. Now, I don't know about you, but I suspect we would all have serious ethical qualms about doing that. If we have reason to think that here's a cause of cancer, we wouldn't expose anybody to it.
Even though doing that would be a way to empirically test whether it's a causal influence or not. So we tend not so much to use empirical or mathematical approaches in everyday argument. Instead, we use a rhetorical approach.
We make a two-stage argument. First, we identify how some factor possibly could be the cause. We give a reason how it could be the cause. And then the second step is to explain why it ought to be considered the cause.
Give reasons again. So we show how it could be and why it ought to be considered the cause. When human actions involve the first one of those steps, establishes means and opportunity. How could a person have done something?
And the second step establishes motive. Why would the person have done something? And so this approach is very common, for example, to causation in legal argument. So we've got empirical, quantitative and rhetorical approaches to determining causality.
However we go about determining it, and whatever conclusion we reach, we remind ourselves that it's probably an inductive inference and so our conclusion could be wrong.
And to test out whether it's right or wrong, whether we have confidence in it or not, just as we did with sign arguments, we want to satisfy several tests. And here are some examples of the tests to which we would subject causal inferences.
First, has a simple correlation been confused with a causal relationship? Have we asserted causality when all we have is a sign?
This was one of the criticisms that was advanced against early studies of the relationship between smoking and health. What the earliest studies established was that there was a correlation between heavy smoking and increased incidence of lung cancer.
And some people argued smoking causes cancer. And the early studies probably didn't permit that conclusion because all they established was a correlation.
As later studies controlled more carefully for other factors and examined this relationship under more controlled conditions, it became clearer that smoking was not just a correlation, that smoking was a cause of various kinds of health problems.
So has a correlation been confused with causality?
Second test, is there some common cause that is masked by the appearance of a cause-effect relationship that is really spurious?
In the years shortly after World War I, historians who were examining the war noticed that in the years shortly before the war, there was a build-up in spending on armaments among the major belligerents.
And historians concluded increased arm spending causes war. Other critics weren't so sure. They said, wait a minute, it may be that both increased armaments spending and war are caused by some other common factor such as a breakdown in the conventions of normal diplomatic procedure.
That's what led countries to spend more on armaments and that's what led them to ultimately go to war.
So the question is, we have something that looks like a cause-and-effect relationship. Might it be that the alleged cause and the alleged effect really have no relationship but are both effects of some common cause?
Third question, has temporality been confused with causality?
Now granted, a cause must come before its effect, but coming before its effect is not enough for it to be called a cause.
Suppose you say, I bought a teaching company course on argumentation and since I did, I have won more arguments with my spouse, therefore buying the course caused me to win more arguments.
Now remember, by the way, I said in the very first lecture that this is not about how to win more arguments with your spouse, but look what you've done.
You've assumed that just because one thing came before the other, you bought the course and then you won more arguments, buying the course caused you to win more arguments.
You've confused temporal order with causality.
By the way, there's a fancy name for what you've done. You have committed the post hoc fallacy.
Post hoc means after this and the fallacy is assuming that what comes after is caused by what comes before.
A fourth test, are there significant multiple causes or multiple effects?
Now this test is a little bit different from the others because it's not identifying so much an internal failure in the causal argument as it is identifying a difficulty with the action that you propose to take based on the argument.
Let's explain it this way. The world is complex and effect might have multiple causes in which case treating only one of them might not alter the presence of the effect.
Difficulties in getting to the polls cause people not to vote, someone might say.
Therefore we should make election day a holiday.
Now suppose we do. Suppose we make election day a holiday.
Can we now say that more people will go to the polls and vote?
Maybe, maybe not.
Suppose we find that among the reasons that people don't vote is that they don't care who wins.
They don't think their vote will make any difference.
Or they're not registered.
Or they're afraid if they show up to vote their name is going to be put on a jury list and they don't want to be called up for jury duty and so on and so forth.
Now if we make election day a holiday, have we changed the likelihood of people to vote?
Well it depends. It depends on whether having election day a holiday has an independent influence on people voting above and beyond these other possible factors.
Now you'll find committed partisans who will say the most significant reason people don't vote is because of difficulties getting to the polls.
And so they'd say we haven't taken care of all of the causes granted but we've gotten rid of the most significant one and so it will clearly make a difference.
Again maybe or maybe not.
If each of these causal factors has influence independently of the others then getting rid of the most significant cause will just promote the second most significant cause into the number one position and you could still have the same problem.
And so one of the questions we ask of a causal argument is are there multiple causes of a given effect?
Likewise a given cause can have multiple effects in which case you may have unintended consequences of something that you propose to do.
So let's imagine the argument that we ought to have annual testing of all students in basic skills of reading and math and the argument is that will lead to greater accountability of schools and better measures of student performance.
And for the moment assume that's true.
But what if it's true that annual testing also leads to high anxiety, disruption of the academic curriculum, focusing on teaching for the test, greater pressures to cheat and so on.
Now if that's so and we've got multiple effects of this one cause then if we support this policy position that annual testing will produce greater accountability and better measurement we will have brought about also consequences that we didn't intend and don't want as well as those that we did intend and want.
Sometimes cause and effect may be reversed.
We might say that having the technological capability turns a dissonant faction into a rogue state when in fact it's being a rogue state that creates the desire for the technological capacity.
So all of these are examples of questions that we ask about causal inferences in order to determine whether we've got a strong and reliable inference or not.
So what we've seen in this lecture is that causal warrants and inferences based on them both identify and explain relationships that the term cause has different meanings and that causal warrants are used for different purposes.
There are a variety of means to determine causality and we often use a rhetorical approach and that causal inferences are usually inductive and therefore must satisfy several tests.
In the next lecture we'll talk about the remaining two dominant patterns of warrants common places and form.
Lecture 17 Common Places and Arguments from Form
Lecture 17 Common Places and Arguments from Form
Hello again. In the past several lectures we have been considering individual patterns of inference and warrants and the arguments that are built upon them.
And we've looked so far at arguments from example, analogy, sign and cause.
Now there are two more of these basic patterns of inference and warrant that will be the focus of this lecture.
Common places and arguments from form. They seem to be very different from each other but as we'll see at the end they have a very important feature in common.
So let me begin with common places.
The idea behind common places is fairly simple as the name suggests there are things that are generally available as places to go for warrants to justify inferences.
There are general categories of inference that have usually proved reliable and are assumed to be reliable in the case at hand.
Another way to talk about common places is to say there are kind of social knowledge.
There are general beliefs that can be accepted as facts and can serve as warrants or there are general categories to which we might appeal.
So for example, the statement government bureaucracies are inefficient could be taken as a general belief that most people would accept as true
and so it could function as a warrant in an argument. That's one kind of common place.
Or as another example, we should do what's principled or we should do what's pragmatic are examples of general categories to which we might appeal for warrants in arguments.
The argument takes a particular situation, applies the common place of whichever kind and derives a claim from it.
It looks like deduction. The claim seems to follow certainly and absolutely from the knowledge of the situation and the statement of the common place.
And it may work that way for somebody who believes absolutely in the common place.
In fact, there's a name for this structure of argument. It's a fancy term. It's called an enthameme.
And an enthameme is just like a syllogism except that at least one of its premises is drawn from the beliefs or values of a particular audience.
Rather than from statements that are independently established to be true.
And so for that audience, whether it's a person or a group of people, for that audience, it may work just like deduction.
But these inferences really are not certain because, ironically enough, the generally accepted beliefs can be contested.
Why? They can be contested because there are certain beliefs that we accept that are at odds with other beliefs that we also accept.
Such as the value of coordination and the value of decentralization.
We generally accept both of these beliefs or values and yet in a particular situation they can be at odds with each other.
And so the fact that we generally accept it doesn't automatically mean that it warrants the argument.
Similarly, we sometimes privilege a category that's at odds with another category that we sometimes privilege.
For example, we sometimes privilege freedom of individual choice and we sometimes privilege benefit to society.
So simply to appeal to one of these categories or the other will not automatically warrant an inference because it can come into conflict with another category that we also value.
So, while these may look like deductions, in fact they are inductions, they require an underlying warrant which is the applicability of the particular belief or value to a specific case.
By the way, we should remember that back in lecture 12 we talked about commonly accepted beliefs and values as a kind of evidence and they are, but they can also function as a kind of warrant as we see here.
Now so much for general theory. Let's look at some specific kinds of common places. There are two basic types that I want to take up.
First, shared beliefs. Well, maxims and adages are a kind of common place. If you want the job done right, do it yourself.
A generally accepted belief or value that can serve as a warrant to an argument. It might support the argument or there might support the claim that the home rather than the school should be the source of moral instruction.
Because if you want something done right, do it yourself. Or another example, if something seems too good to be true, it is.
While some people might use that as a warrant to support the claim, the prescription drug benefit in Medicare won't work.
Seems like it's going to solve all the problems if something seems too good to be true, it is.
Or don't put off until tomorrow what you should do today might be a warrant to justify the claim we should fix social security before it goes bankrupt.
So these are maxims and adages, one sort of general belief that can serve as a common place.
Another kind of general belief that can serve as a common place is beliefs about the essential nature of something.
So again, here are some examples. The United States has a special mission in the world.
That's a widely shared belief about the essential nature of the U.S.
And it might be used, let's say, as a warrant to justify the claim we must be an active player for peace in the Middle East.
Or another example of a belief about the essential nature of a thing, God directs the affairs of our lives.
Might be used as a warrant to justify the claim, few things happen by chance.
Or another example, human beings are basically guided by self-interest.
Might be used as a warrant to justify a claim such as appeals to altruism are not likely to succeed.
So we've got maxims and adages, we've got beliefs about the essential nature of a thing.
Another kind of a widely shared belief is a value judgment.
So for instance, we could say a widely shared value judgment is all human beings deserve respect.
Which might be used to justify a claim such as society has an obligation to people without means as well as to those who are well off.
Or another widely shared value, our children should have the best future that is possible.
Could be used to warrant a claim we ought to privilege the future over the present in forming our public policies.
Or a very different kind of shared value, there is beauty in a colorful sunset.
Might be used to warrant a claim such as we shouldn't rush our lives so fast that we don't see what's around us.
Now these are all examples of widely shared beliefs.
Ironically however, as I suggested before, there can be conflict about supposedly consensual beliefs.
There can be conflict about whether they are the most important.
So we might generally hold the belief and yet it could be trumped by some other consideration.
And there might be conflict about whether the belief really applies to the situation at hand.
Now you might wonder where do we find these common places in actual argument.
And we find them all the time, we find them in arguments between friends for example.
But one particular place I want to mention where we often find common places in the US is in presidential rhetoric.
Presidents in their speeches frequently employ common places of this kind, widely shared beliefs,
because they are trying to speak to and for the entire nation.
Let's look at some examples.
President Reagan in his first inaugural address and in several of his speeches would make statements like
why shouldn't we be optimistic about the future after all we're Americans.
And what President Reagan is doing there is appealing to the common place that Americans can do whatever they set their mind to do.
And he used that common place to warrant claims for particular actions or particular policies that he urged upon the American people.
President Lyndon Johnson in his 1965 inaugural address asked is a new world coming.
We welcome it and will bend it to the hopes of man.
Well we will bend it to the hopes of man reflects another widely shared belief that serves as a common place,
which is we are in control of our destiny and can subdue the forces of nature and forces that are external to ourselves.
President Kennedy said United there is little we cannot do,
appealing to the common place of unlimited possibilities, another widely shared belief.
President George W. Bush in the aftermath of September 11, 2001 said freedom and fear are at odds and God is not neutral between them.
Now he wasn't really saying that he knew the will of God.
What he was doing was appealing to a common place that says there is a divine order and there are certain divine preferences.
So presidents frequently employ just this kind of common place.
There's a notable exception that I can think of in recent years and even that exception proves the rule.
President Carter with his crisis of confidence speech, which was sort of a sermon about the failings of the American people that talked about limits to what we could do,
didn't go over well at all.
Why? Because it violated the common place belief that there are no limits to what Americans can do if they put their mind to it and are determined enough.
So this is one kind of common place then, generally shared beliefs.
The other major kind of common place is a preference for one or the other of opposed general categories, often categories of value, but not always.
Now there are lots and lots of these I'm going to consider just a couple of examples to make the point.
One of the examples I want to consider is the value conflict between pragmatism and principle.
The argument from pragmatism is we should decide between choices on the basis of their consequences.
What gives us the best results?
And the argument from principle is we should decide between choices based on enduring beliefs or enduring values without regard to their consequences in particular circumstances.
Now in different situations, each of these preferences could trump the other and opposing advocates may appeal to one or the other of these categories.
So for instance, in 2003, when there was extensive public discussion about whether or not the United States should go to war in Iraq,
some people argued we have an obligation to promote freedom and democracy.
This is an argument from principle.
It's something that says even if it's going to be long and difficult and costly, we should do it because we have this obligation.
Others argued we ought not do it because it will divert from the war against terror and if anything will make us more vulnerable to terrorism.
This is an argument from pragmatism.
We ought not to do it because of the consequences.
Now the point that I want to make is that neither one of these arguments necessarily is better than the other.
In fact, what's going on in this situation is one advocate is invoking the argument from pragmatism.
The opposing advocate is invoking the argument from principle.
They're each making the assumption of a warrant that one is better than the other in the case at hand.
And as analysts of argument, what we have to ask ourselves is have they accurately described the situation?
Is there a countervailing principle or a countervailing consequence?
Do other considerations outweigh the ones that have been stated so that we have to decide in the particular set of circumstances
which one of these opposed categories is more applicable?
Second example I want to mention, the value conflict between quantity and quality.
These are also opposed categories that could be a source of common places.
The argument from quantity is based on achieving the greatest good for the greatest number at the least cost.
And the argument from quality is based on the value of the unique.
Now again, each of these preferences could trump the other in a particular circumstance.
Among other organizations that are faced with just this kind of a conflict are school boards in deciding how to allocate school district resources.
So the argument from quantity would say we ought to put our resources into support of basic instruction because that will do the most for the most students at the least cost.
And the argument from quality would say we ought to support honors classes or we ought to support co-curricular programs or we ought to support unique activities because these are special.
These distinguish us as a school district and these make unique opportunities available to students who are particularly poised to benefit from them.
Now again, there's no way to say universally that one of these is more important than the other.
In any given situation what we as analysts have to do is to weigh and balance them and consider whether the quantity or quality claim has really been established,
whether there's a better way to achieve the goal of quantity or quality and whether other considerations outweigh it.
But in a particular argument what an advocate is likely to do is to appeal to one or the other of these categories as a kind of commonplace and rely on the warrant that it applies to the case at hand.
So in each case one value, one belief, one category is put forward as a decision rule as a basis to settle the controversy but is answered by a contrary decision rule.
And so the controversy centers on which is more applicable to the case at hand and hence more appropriate to serve as a warrant.
Now we understand commonplaces. Let me now focus on inferences from form.
These rely on the structure of the argument itself and the structure looks like deduction in which the conclusion follows with certainty but they really aren't.
As used in ordinary argument they really reflect probabilities and hence require an underlying warrant.
The inference is that the form justifies accepting the conclusion because it looks like a form with certainty
but the form despite its seeming resemblance doesn't really resemble deduction. It doesn't completely match.
So there's an underlying warrant that has to be relied upon in the case at hand.
Let's consider some examples of inferences from form which by the way are sometimes called quasi-logical arguments because they look like the arguments of formal logic.
Let me begin with the dilemma. The dilemma appears to resemble the disjunctive syllogism, the either or kind of syllogism that we talked about in lecture three.
We are presented with alternatives, each of which will lead to unattractive outcomes.
So here's an example of a dilemma that might have been posed in 2004 or 2005.
We can either stay in Iraq or we can get out. If we stay in we'll be committing men and money indefinitely to a cause whose end we can't predict.
If we get out we will leave behind anarchy in an important region in the Middle East.
So we either will be making an indefinite commitment or we'll be leaving behind anarchy.
We have two options. Either of them will lead to an undesirable consequence and that's our dilemma. We can't avoid an undesirable consequence.
Now what the basis of this inference is is the seeming completeness of the alternatives. Staying in or getting out are only two choices.
But often with dilemmas there are more options, more possibilities such as plan for an eventual withdrawal, stay in contingent on certain things happening and so on.
And if there are other alternatives then we have what's called a false dilemma meaning that we can't be certain that we'll be stuck with one of these acceptable alternatives.
So the power of the dilemma resides in its form that it looks like a disjunctive syllogism.
The actual warrant however is in the particular case we really have exhausted all of the possible alternatives.
And the reply to the dilemma would be you haven't exhausted all the possible alternatives.
That's one example of an inference from form, the dilemma.
Here's another example. The argument from hypothesis looks like the conditional syllogism, the if-then syllogism that we discussed in lecture three.
This argument begins with a hypothesis and predicts what will happen if the hypothesis is true.
So we might say if the theory of global warming is true then hurricanes will have more destructive force than they've had in the past.
We observe what happens and we see particularly after Hurricane Katrina in 2005 hurricanes have more destructive force than in the past.
And so we conclude the theory of global warming is true but not so fast.
When we talked about the conditional syllogism we said that affirming the consequent, which is what we just did, that affirming the consequent is a fallacy.
Why is it a fallacy? Because hurricanes could have more destructive force for reasons other than the truth of the theory of global warming.
And so the destructive force of hurricanes by itself does not prove that global warming is true or false.
But now you might ask, doesn't most scientific inquiry depend upon just this kind of argument?
We assume a hypothesis, we say if it's true we'll get these conditions, we test it out, we get the conditions, we conclude that the hypothesis is true or false.
Am I saying then that all scientific argument that's based on inquiry and experiment is fallacious? No I'm not.
What I am saying is it's not deductive, it's not certain, even though it looks like the conditional syllogism.
And so the question is, in a given context is one explanation stronger than another explanation to account for the observed phenomenon?
And this incidentally is why, when the scientist does an experiment, the scientist tries as much as possible to eliminate other possible explanations.
That's why there are control groups, that's why there are matched groups where everything is held constant as much as possible, except for the thing that the experimenter is trying to test.
Of course in the natural world we don't do experiments like that, but we can compare historical evidence, we can do simulations, we can do careful questioning of our premises,
instead of simply assuming that the destructive force of hurricanes proves that the theory of global warming is true or not true,
we ask ourselves what other explanations might there be and is there a reason to think that those explanations might have greater force?
So two examples then of inferences from form are dilemmas and arguments from hypothesis.
I want to mention one more example and that's reasoning from comparisons.
This appears to resemble a simple mathematical computation.
And of course in mathematics probably more than any other field we could say conclusions follow automatically with a degree of certainty when we follow an accepted procedure.
But there are a lot of arguments that look like they're mathematical that really aren't.
For instance, we can discuss terms like more and less without really measurable units.
When President Reagan, campaigning for office in 1980, asked are you better off than you were four years ago, he was invoking just this kind of argument.
There's no precise way to measure better off whether you're better or worse, whether you have more or less is a subjective judgment.
And yet Mr. Reagan was appealing to it in the same way that one would make a mathematical comparison.
Or here's another example, the law of transitivity.
Mathematics it says if A is greater than B and B is greater than C, then A is greater than C.
Well what about this?
Ohio State sometimes beats Michigan in football even when Michigan is more highly ranked.
On rare occasions, Northwestern, where I teach, beats Ohio State.
So if Northwestern was better than Ohio State and Ohio State was better than Michigan, does it prove that Northwestern was really better than Michigan even though Michigan was ranked number four in the nation?
Of course not. It looks like a transitive relationship, but what's different is any team can beat any other team on a given day.
Or here's another example, argument from sacrifice.
I occasionally encounter this when a student comes to my office and says, of course you have to give me an A on this paper, I worked for 20 hours on it.
It assumes that effort or sacrifice can be measured precisely and that reward is relative to it.
So these are three examples then of arguments from form.
So what do common places and arguments from form have in common?
They both resemble deduction.
Common places resemble deduction in the contents of the statements, inferences from form in the structure of the arguments, and yet they aren't deductive.
They depend on interpretation and agreement that they apply to a given situation, which is why they need to be scrutinized carefully and subjected to the tests that we have described.
Now we've now considered a number of inference patterns one at a time, but often we find that they are combined, as we will see in the next lecture.
Lecture 18, Hybrid Patterns of Inference.
Welcome back. We've now considered six basic patterns of inference, example, analogy, sign, cause, common places and form.
We've talked about how they work and some of the tests that they must meet, but there are some textbooks and argumentation that will identify as many as 20 or 30 different patterns of inference, or as they're sometimes called argument schemes.
Often what these are is combinations of the basic six building blocks, hybrid patterns of inference.
And in this lecture, I want to consider some of these hybrid patterns. I warn you at the beginning, I'm not going to be comprehensive at all. In fact, I'm only going to look at three hybrid patterns of inference.
But I hope to illustrate how in general these combinations can be put together, as well as to talk about the specific inference patterns I'll describe and how they work.
The first of them that I'd like to talk about is reasoning with rules. Now a rule is an if-then statement. Its typical form is if conditions x arise, then y is either required, permitted, or forbidden.
If you drive faster than the speed limit, you may get a ticket. It's an example of a rule. Like any conditional statement, it contains antecedent and consequent clauses.
And it also contains an indication of the force of the rule, that is whether it is required or whether it's permitted or whether it's forbidden.
The rule functions as a commonplace. It's treated as an established principle, generally accepted, and could be used as if it were fact.
And what the rule does in an argument from rules is it mediates between a statement of factual conditions and a statement of what should be done in the particular case, so it facilitates case-based reasoning.
What about the statement of facts in an argument from rules? Well, the statement of facts is used analogically. So what's the evidence? The facts of a particular case. What's the claim? The action stated in the rule should be taken.
And what's the warrant? The rule applies in the case at hand because the conditions in the case at hand match those in the rule.
Now, since the rule was framed from a consideration of specifics, the case at hand is claimed to be basically like those on which the rule was built. That's the analogy.
