Hello, bonjour, bienvenue, and welcome everyone to Perimeter Institute's public lecture series.
My name is Emily Petroff, and I'm Perimeter's Associate Director for Strategic Partnerships,
Grants and Awards.
I'm delighted to welcome you back to the Mike Lazaridis Theatre of Ideas here at the Perimeter
Institute in Waterloo.
It's a great pleasure to welcome you tonight at the Perimeter Institute for those of you
who are sure we'll have a fascinating presentation.
Perimeter Institute was created to be a gathering place where people can come together like
we're doing tonight to ask the big questions about the universe and search for the big
answers.
Perimeter will soon celebrate 25 years of bringing people together from all paths, researchers,
students, the general public, teachers, to explore the fascinating world of physics.
But people on this land have been asking the big questions about the universe for thousands
of years.
Looking up at the night sky and understanding our place in the cosmos is a human constant
throughout the ages.
We acknowledge that Perimeter Institute is situated on the traditional territory of the
Anishinaabe, Haudenosaunee, and Neutral Peoples, and is located on the Haldeman Tract, the
tract granted by the British, to the six nations of the Grand River, and the Mississaugas of
the Credit First Nation.
We greet and thank the diverse peoples who preceded us, and we encourage them to act
responsibly and collaboratively to advance the quest of knowledge for the good of all.
We thank the Anishinaabe, the Haudenosaunee, and the Neutral Peoples for their support.
For those watching the live webcast, please join the conversation online.
We are at Perimeter on Twitter, or X, and if you have a question for our speaker, you
can ask it with the hashtag PI Live.
This week, Perimeter Institute has been hosting a fascinating workshop called Dark Matter First
Light, which brings together experts to discuss the ways that dark matter impacts the formation
and evolution of stars and galaxies.
This workshop, which concluded today, focused on the new observational programs and techniques
coming online and new modeling tools that may enable a better understanding of the mysterious
matter you'll hear more about tonight.
And now, it is my great pleasure to introduce one of those workshop attendees and our speaker
for tonight.
Theoretical physicist Philip Flip Tenedo is an associate professor at the University
of California, Riverside, and his research seeks to determine the fundamental physics
of dark matter.
He's a 2021 career award winner from the U.S. National Science Foundation and a 2020
Hellman Fellow.
He has appeared in popular media on shows like Nova and Science Friday.
Dr. Tenedo grew up in Los Angeles and is a proud product of the Los Angeles Unified
School District.
He earned his bachelor's degree in physics and mathematics from Stanford University
before completing graduate studies at Cambridge University, Durham University, and Cornell.
He spent three years as a chancellor's advanced postdoctoral fellow at the University of
California, Irvine, before moving to Riverside.
Dr. Tenedo is the first Filipino-American professor of physics and he has served in
several official capacities as an advocate for equity and academia.
His research focuses on developing a fundamental theory of dark matter.
His work has interesting intersections with fields including particle cosmology, machine
learning, and information.
Tonight he will discuss recent developments in the search for dark matter and how the
scientific community can come together to find new answers.
Please join me in welcoming to the stage Professor Flip Tenedo.
Good evening everybody.
My name is Flip.
I am a theoretical physicist and I work on dark matter.
So quick show of hands.
How many people have heard of dark matter?
Good.
Good.
Good.
Good.
You know what dark matter is?
One hand up.
So we're all in good company.
We are all in the same tribe.
Very good.
We're all in the same boat.
All right.
So let's get started.
Here is my very best attempt at a completely realistic picture of dark matter.
It's completely invisible.
Okay.
So that's not very interesting.
If you'll permit me a little bit of artistic license.
Here is astronomers up to false color of their photos.
Here is a false color illustration of dark matter.
And I've even done the extra work of sketching where we are.
This is the Milky Way.
And we're sitting in this bubble of dark matter, this big blue bubble of dark matter.
And if we were to zoom out again in this artistic rendition, we would notice that our bubble
of dark matter is actually sitting in a cluster of bubbles of dark matter.
And I didn't draw it here.
But if you looked into each of these bubbles, most of them also happen to have galaxies
sitting there.
That's interesting.
And David Foster Wallace had a story once where there were two fish who meet in the
ocean.
And the first fish says, isn't it great that we have water?
And the second fish says, what the hell is water?
And this is where we are as a scientific community thinking about dark matter.
What we know is that we are little fish living in oceans of dark matter.
There are bubbles in a cluster of other bubbles of dark matter.
And there is so much that we do not know, but we know that that much is true.
And this is our cosmic mystery.
So like all mysteries, there's a who, what, when, where, why, and how.
And we won't quite go through them in this order.
This is a piece of art, it's an installation at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art.
And in this dark matter business, we have a phrase that we overuse.
And the phrase is looking under lampposts, looking in the dark under lampposts, looking
for truth, finding some angle to learn about this mysterious thing that we're in.
So this is going to be our guidepost.
These are my attempts at lampposts for understanding not just what is the puzzle, but how is it
that me, a theoretical physicist, which you might already think and my colleagues do think,
what can you possibly do if you don't have a lab, am tasked with understanding a substance
that surrounds us that we can either see, nor touch, nor smell, nor taste, nor anything
else to the best of our knowledge and then somehow do science on this.
It's a bit of a tall order, isn't it?
So let's start with what.
And in fact, what I need from you today is to start with the assumption that dark matter
exists and there's one thing that we know pretty well, which is roughly how much there
is, right?
Of all this matter, all the stuff in the universe, all the things you would call chunky matter
like things, we're dark, we are about 15% and most of the rest of it is dark matter.
Are we okay with that?
We're all on board?
Anybody skeptical?
Any physics students in the room, any science students in the room, very good.
And I will speak for you.
You are all feeling very uncomfortable right now.
You do not like someone sitting here telling you there's this invisible thing that surrounds
the universe and it's real, I just need you to believe me.
All right, so let's not just take this completely on faith.
There is evidence for the existence of something more, something that we do not understand.
For these bubbles of dark matter that we live in.
And the evidence comes from the sky.
When we look at the motion of stars in galaxies, when we look at motions of clusters of galaxies
that happen to be pancaking towards each other in the distant sky.
And when we look at the photons from the cosmic microwave backgrounds, the very first photons
from 13 billion years ago reaching our telescopes today, each of these probes give indelible
evidence that there is stuff that is clumped up that cannot be explained by protons, neutrons
and electrons and their cousins.
Everybody convinced now?
Are we all on board?
Physics students are all on board?
Okay, so one of the organizers for the conference that I've just come from is Katie Mack who
is sitting here in the audience.
She's a faculty member here at PI.
You've heard of her?
And I had the special joy of attending one of Katie's colloquia at the Aspen Center
for Physics a few years ago.
And Katie gave us a fantastic talk which I am summarizing in this board which you cannot
read deliberately so because I don't want to give that talk.
I am not qualified to give that talk.
But here are 12 pieces of evidence that Katie has organized for why we are so sure that
dark matter exists.
Now you might be able to read the titles.
What is important here is that there are many reasons.
What is important here is that they're complementary.
And so it's not just that you see a few stars.
It's not just you see a galaxy cluster.
It's not just that you observe this cosmic microwave background.
That's like saying if it walks like a duck and talks like a duck, it's probably a duck
and therefore dark matter.
But all of these different pieces of evidence are telling you.
Taking at different length scales, at different times in the cosmic history, it's not only
that it walks like a duck, it talks like a duck.
It's got feathers, a beak, it has duck DNA, and it tastes great with hoisin sauce.
So that doesn't mean that it is definitely dark matter.
Like this guy on stage is saying it's dark matter.
But what that does mean is if it is not dark matter, something really strange is going
on.
The most conservative thing we can say is that all of these different pieces of evidence
are pointing to something that looks like stuff matter.
That is not the stuff that we are used to.
So that's where we are.
It would be amazing if it weren't dark matter.
Something way more exciting is happening.
So the other thing that you might notice, all of this evidence is coming from the sky.
Astronomy and cosmology.
There is no problem with inferring that dark matter exists from astronomy and cosmology.
I am a theoretical particle physicist.
The problem is in my tribe.
The problem is what is this dark matter?
So let me jump to a very different type of question.
When is dark matter?
Why is it that we are studying dark matter now?
And this is where the apology of my talk comes in.
So let me give you a very biased, it's almost true.
Anybody here who is a specialist will know this is not quite true, but this is morally
true of history of dark matter.
And this is a history of two tribes.
So physics, where the problem is, and astronomy, where the observations are.
And this goes all the way back at least until Orton's wiki, who observed in the early telescopes
that the motion of galaxy clusters didn't quite match what they expected from the calculations
that they made.
And they said, hey, you know what, this data really looks consistent with missing matter
that is not the ordinary stars that we expect to see.
Now I wasn't around at the time, but I imagine what happened between the 1930s and the 1970s.
People said, well, that's kind of interesting, this is a brand new telescope, telescopes
are hard, we don't really understand these instruments, so who knows what's going on.
And in the 1970s, Vera Rubin also came to the same conclusion, looking at a completely
different scale, looking at spiral galaxies, like the spiral galaxy, the Milky Way that
we are in right now.
So this is a completely different system, right, as Vicki was looking at clusters of
galaxies, Rubin was looking at spiral galaxies, and the motion of stars within the spiral
galaxy also seemed to imply, oh, wait a second, there appears to be missing stuff.
Okay, now I imagine in the 1970s, if you were a particle physicist, a fundamental physicist,
whatever that means, and you just happened to be sitting there in your office, sitting
on your thumbs, not knowing what was going on, you had nothing better to do in your life,
nothing, you would have dropped everything and thought about this problem.
This would be the problem to solve.
It just so happens that in this other tribe, and usually the astronomy and the physics
floors, there are different floors in the building, so it really feels like a different
tribe, in this other tribe, something else was going on.
Around this period of time, particle physics, which was a new field, were building new toys,
these colliders where they're smashing together protons and elements, and producing all sorts
of new and unexpected particles.
And it was a puzzle, why are we getting all of these particles, where are they coming,
are they inside the atom, what does that mean?
And I will arbitrarily pick a period of 1970, so my higher mark will be the Nobel Prize
for what's called the electroweak theory.
There is a tremendous effort leading up to this and after this, but this is a benchmark
for me for the development theoretically of what we now know as the standard model of
particle physics.
And it was a heroic effort between experimental and theoretical physics to build this mathematical
edifice.
And there was one puzzle, which had obsessed the community, rightfully so, and that puzzle
had to do with the reason why we built the Large Hadron Collider and that thing is called
the Higgs Boson.
So how many people here have heard of the Higgs Boson?
I suspect it as much, I'm a crowd that comes to the perimeter institute in the snow outside.
So the story then, the apology then, is if we have known about missing matter for almost
a hundred years, why is it that we're talking about dark matter and the theoretical progress
in dark matter in the 2020s with fresh new oz?
So let me take you, let me continue this biased history.
Let's go back to my tribe, particle physics.
This edifice that we built up, the standard model, if you ask me, the standard model looks
like this.
And if you wanted to be fancy and if you visited CERN, you can buy a mug like this, which is
roughly the mathematics behind this ugly thing.
This ugly thing is a table.
And it's a bit strange, but we've seen tables before.
Some of us have taken chemistry.
Those of us who did poorly in chemistry went on to do physics.
But in chemistry, you have the periodic table, right?
Anybody hear a chemist before I say a few chemists?
Now the periodic table, I'm going to guess not even chemists say, I love the periodic
table.
The periodic table is so great because I can look up any atomic number and learn the math
and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
I think that's a fair statement.
But the periodic table is fantastic.
And it's not fantastic because of the data that is inside it.
It is fantastic because the table is an organizing principle.
If you have a box on the table, you know there's an atomic number, there's some number of protons,
some number of neutrons, da, da, da, da.
You know if there's something missing.
And this is a mathematical picture of what we call the standard model of particle physics.
The periodic table is beautiful because as physicists we understand that the periodic
table reflects a deep mathematical organizing principle and that is quantum mechanics applied
to atoms.
So this is what third and fourth year physics students do in the quantum mechanics courses.
And this thing, this mess of a table is beautiful not because they're these weird funny symbols
and they look kind of alien, but because this also reflects an organizing principle.
And this organizing principle lives within a generalization of quantum mechanics called
quantum field theory.
And what this table is, each row is a class of particle or a quantum field if you want
to be fancy.
These are their funny names.
Each row, one half means these are matter particles.
If it's not one half, it's a force particle, we'll get to the H in a bit.
And each of these columns is one of the three fundamental forces of particle physics, so
gravity is not included here.
And each of these funny symbols is a mathematical description of how those particles interact
under these fundamental forces.
So if you have new particles, the new particles should have something called spin which tells
if it's matter or a force particle and some numbers over here or some symbols over here.
And the one thing that was missing from the standard model of the 1970s was something
related to the Higgs boson.
It was this question that if we didn't have this last row, something funny happened to
our equations when we calculated the likelihood for two particles to smash together.
And the mathematics were giving us weird numbers like infinity, if that's even a number, any
mathematicians.
And the simplest explanation for why this theory would make sense is that there is one
more line here, the Higgs boson, that had particular properties and if you turn the
crank, everything made sense.
Everything except for one thing.
So we had a great idea of finding the Higgs boson.
If the Higgs boson actually exists, most of you know the answer, if the Higgs boson
actually exists, there was one additional puzzle.
Why is it so light?
We now know that the Higgs boson weighs about 125 times the mass of a proton.
If you turn the crank in this theory, you would expect it to be much heavier.
So this is give and take that didn't quite make sense.
And so if you zoom back to the 1990s and you went to the particle physics floor, not
the astronomy floor, they had two choices.
One choice was this puzzle of why is the Higgs boson light?
This was a puzzle that their community had built up to over 40 years of colliding particles
and building mathematical models, learning what all these weird symbols and tables meant,
and oh yeah, this is an open question.
And then there was this puzzle that our friends downstairs, our friends with these funny telescopes
and they go out at night, they're kind of like vampires, and they kept telling us this
weird thing about this missing matter, okay, which one are you going to work on?
The one where there were faculty who will hire you as a postdoc.
So this was the most important question.
And now I'm going to lead us down to the story of an opinionated, mostly correct story of
the weakly interacting massive particle, the wimp.
And this dominated our idea of what dark matter ought to be, and as a scientist you'd be really
careful when you say nature ought to be something for about 30 years.
And here's how it works.
So you have this big problem, this big deep problem.
Why is the Higgs boson light?
You do the calculations, it doesn't seem to make sense.
But you realize that there's a way to explain why the Higgs boson would be light, and that's
to invoke some deep, elegant mathematical principle that would explain why the theory is actually
more constrained.
Here is one such deep, elegant mathematical principle, it's called supersymmetry.
Symmetry is some deep, elegant mathematical relation between force particles and matter
particles.
And they all have silly names.
If an electron is a matter particle, there's a silly force particle, they say electron.
You have to get your kick somewhere.
So what?
So this ends up solving this puzzle that we had found.
Symmetry, because every particle has a copy, gives you new particles.
This theory predicts new particles.
So lesson number one, moe particles, moe problems.
I want this all to be on board with that.
So what happened?
Oh, this theory has more particles.
So what?
It turns out, the moment you put these new particles in, and you knew exactly what they
were, because for every proton, there's a super proton, all this stuff, protons suddenly
have new reactions where they can decay.
Well, that seems kind of dangerous.
You're here, I'm here, our protons are still around.
And in fact, for the physics students in the room, the bound on the lifetime of the proton
is actually longer than the age of the universe.
So you should think about, how do we have a bound that is longer than the age of space
time itself?
But protons are pretty darn stable, so that's not a good feature.
But we're thinking, you know, this is some weird practical problem, and this is this elegant,
deep mathematical thing was so beautiful, let's try to save it.
And what we do is we put a bandaid, a mathematical bandaid, and we invent some additional symmetry.
It's not deep, not elegant, but we just say, maybe there's some rule that prohibits these
interactions, and it has this silly name, r-parity.
And I will bet you nobody in this entire institute knows what the r means in r-parity.
I don't know.
But what this r-parity does, mathematically, you apply r-parity, and that means that the
interactions that would have caused the protons to decay are no longer allowed.
And it looks like everything starts to work again.
You solve your deep elegant problem, and the immediate other problem that comes up seems
to be okay, and you start feeling pretty good.
You bring your team of graduate students, and you look at this, and you say, hey, what
else does this theory do for us?
Well, with all of these new particles, and some reason, some parity, it turns out the
lightest new particle is stable.
So the reason why electrons don't decay into neutrinos, which are these other funny particles,
is because electrons are the lightest particle that carry electric charge.
There's no way to conserve charge if that electron decayed.
So the lightest new particle which carries r-charge is stable, cosmologically stable.
And it is at this point that we think, hey, you know, I heard something about cosmologically
stable new particles.
Oh, it was our friends downstairs, as we go down the stairs, and they say, what do you
know about dark matter?
And the one thing that we knew about dark matter is roughly how much there is.
So there's a calculation to be done, and it's a good thing, because there's a grad
student now in the room who says, hey, you know what you should do?
Do this calculation.
And let's be very honest, the first thing the grad student does is, nah, that calculation
is hard.
And it is hard.
It's hard because this calculation is telling you how much dark matter is left over after
the Big Bang.
So on the one side of the calculation, you're doing this particle physics calculation, something
about quantum mechanics and reaction rates for producing dark matter and dark matter annihilating.
On the other side of this calculation is something about the expansion of the universe to figure
out how much dark matter is left over.
So you have gravity, you know, G-Newton is in there, and on the other side, you have
all these particle physics numbers, and the grad student says, you're telling me that
you want me to do this really hard calculation.
Learn all this general relativity, and you expect me to match this arbitrary number from
these people downstairs who I've never met in my entire three years as a grad student.
And you say, yeah, it's for your thesis.
And wouldn't you know, wouldn't you know that the number that comes out is the correct number?
No, OK, that's a lie.
But it was a correct number within a couple of orders of magnitude.
I need astronomers, at least one astronomer in the front row.
But if you're a particle physicist sitting on the fifth floor and the astronomer's on
the fourth floor, you think, two orders of magnitude, that's amazing for astronomy.
You're dead on.
So we write papers and we celebrate.
OK, you wake up the next morning feeling pretty good about yourself.
And then someone knocks on your door.
Who's here at 9 a.m.?
You open up the door.
Professor, that was a fantastic series of paper you wrote about super symmetry and
dark matter.
I'm your new grad student.
What are we going to work on now?
And you think, oh, gosh, I don't remember that I hired a grad student.
Well, there is one game that I know how to play.
And it's this puzzle of why is the Higgs light?
Oh, maybe we got it wrong last time.
OK, let's try alternatives.
Let's look for some other deep, elegant, mathematical explanation for why the Higgs
mass should be light.
And it turns out one such deep, elegant, mathematical solution is to extend space
time, have an extra dimension.
Totally weird.
Turns out it can kind of work.
Well, if you have an extra dimension, what do you get?
Like higher modes in the violin string, like higher octaves, these extra dimensions
predict new particles.
Huh, OK.
And what happens when you have new particles?
Mo particles, mo problems.
Turns out these new particles, when you put them into your theory, screw up all sorts
of weird observations that we found over the past 30 years.
So that can't be right.
It's not quite proton decay, but related to proton decay.
And there are weird different flavors of extra dimensions.
And so the grad student starts to slump.
We say, it's OK.
We've done this before.
So you invent a humbler new symmetry.
It's a band-aid, mathematical band-aid.
It's called collusive client parity.
What that means is some of these new particles are prohibited from interacting
in certain ways, and it ends up curing these observables, just like preventing
the proton from decaying.
And the grad student says, oh, good.
What else happens?
Well, once you have a new symmetry and some conserved charge, the lightest new
particle is stable, cosmologically stable.
And the grad student says, OK.
And then, well, what I would like you to do is to read your predecessor's thesis
and learn how to do the calculation where this new light particle, this lightest
particle with KK charge, how much of it is left over in the universe?
And the grad student says, OK, well, I can read the previous student's thesis,
but that was like a shot in the dark that it worked out.
How do you expect?
And you said, just do it.
And while the grad student is going through this calculation, you look at this chart
and you realize the new particles that you get, you know a lot about these new
particles.
You know a lot about them because they inherit their properties from the Higgs
and all of the Higgs' cousins.
Why?
Because there is this deep, elegant mathematical symmetry.
It's like a mirror.
The thing on the other side of the mirror, you know what that person looks like.
And so when the grad student comes back and says, would you believe?
You'd say, yeah, it probably works out, doesn't it?
And you're starting to realize it's not a coincidence.
The details of the calculation change, but the numbers that go in are all basically
the same scale numbers.
The grad student goes off to celebrate and you buy a bottle of champagne for their dissertation.
Next morning.
Professor, oh my gosh, I love the series of papers that you're doing.
What's my first project?
I'm your brand new grad student.
And you think, holy moly, this large electron collider has better turn on soon
because I am running dry.
But you think, well, why is the Higgs light?
Let's think of a new ring.
Maybe there's substructure.
Maybe the Higgs is not a fundamental particle, but there are some, you know,
sub protons and sub neutrons that come together to form the Higgs.
Oh, OK.
So what does that mean?
Well, if you have like sub protons and sub neutrons and you have some other particles.
Great.
Is that OK?
No, probably not because you have all these observables that we have seen.
And these new particles screw it all up.
Oh, should I be said?
It's OK.
We can apply a bandaid.
This one's called T-parity.
I'm pretty sure.
Actually, people at Perimeter might know what T means.
And I should ask.
What does it do?
Well, it solves this problem.
And it means that the lightest new particle is cosmologically stable.
And then you tell the grad student, go and do the calculation.
I'm pretty sure it's going to work out.
It almost has to.
The details of this calculation, even though it's on the one side,
it's all particle physics.
On the other side, it's all general relativity.
The fact that they're all the same essential properties,
the same essential mass scales, the same essential fundamental
couplings, even though the details change,
if they're within a couple of orders of magnitude,
it's going to land in that window.
And it does.
And as a discipline, you are feeling pretty darn good.
Not only was there this puzzle where you needed a Higgs boson.
OK, we predict the Higgs boson.
But then you anticipated another problem.
And you came up with this deep, elegant mathematical solution,
not just one, but three.
It's got to be one of them.
And each one of those predicts new particles that
solves the downstairs people's problems.
Not only are we doing great in our field,
we're solving astronomy's problems.
Good for us.
Oh, boy.
It's a no-lose scenario.
You tell your colleagues, we have to build a collider.
We have to look for the Higgs.
And then we will learn truth.
There's something to see.
If you didn't find the Higgs, that's even better.
It's a bigger mystery.
So circa 1990s, this is what the standard model of particle
physics looked like to a theoretical particle
physicist.
And this is what experimental particle
physicists looked like to a theoretical particle
physicist, which, of course, I'm joking.
This is how progress happens.
And the key point is, when you have this no-lose theorem,
that there is a deep, meaningful reason
to build this collider, because whatever comes out,
you will learn truth.
You very quickly go from this to this.
And then even faster than it took to build this,
you go from this to this.
So how many people here remember the Nobel Prize
for the Higgs boson, 2013?
Very good.
And then remember the Nobel Prize for the discovery
of supersymmetry.
That's right.
The Nobel Prize for the discovery of extra dimensions
of the compositeness of the no.
So something went tremendously right.
There was a Higgs boson.
But something went tremendously wrong.
So 2013 also happened to be the year
that I defended my thesis.
It was a thesis you probably have heard of the chapters.
Chapter one was supersymmetry.
Chapter two was extra dimensions.
And chapter three was the compositeness of the Higgs.
And all of the great new things we
would discover at the Large Hadron Collider.
I don't know how it happened, but by some happenstance,
someone put me in contact with science news.
And the next thing I knew, I was literally the poster child
for a particular type of ennui among particle theory
graduate students who are graduating right around this time.
And it was so great.
It was a perfect love story.
You solve this problem in particle physics,
and for free, you predict the solution to this other problem.
And what this meant was that maybe the love story
has a breakup.
And like your first love, when it ends,
you get a little bit gothy.
And that's when I said, you know what?
I'm done with the Higgs boson.
I am now a dark matter theorist.
And there was some reason to this.
There's this idea that there is still an open problem
and a toolkit for building theories that
had not been fully utilized directly for this problem.
How do people feel right now?
I know my own emotional feelings about this.
It takes some time to get over it.
But it's a little bit of a downer.
So let's move on to where.
And here is where there's a little bit of hope.
Because even though this fantastic program of the weakly
interacting massive particle, the supersymmetry
actually dimensions, composite Higgs,
even though all of that didn't quite pan out
as well as we had hoped, it worked great for Higgs,
we still have the large hadron collider, which
probes smaller length scales than ever before probable
by the human race.
This is humanity's best microscope ever built.
We still have labs like Snow Lab, about 400 kilometers
north of here, where we have the most pristine environments
to look for the chance interactions of dark matter
scattering off of a nucleus, some of the most pristine
environments, again, literally ever made by humanity.
We still have an upcoming program of telescopes
to search with higher and higher resolution for this light
from 13 billion years ago.
And this is a site in Chile in the Atacama Desert.
And completely unexpected, we now
have gravitational waves, which are literally
a brand new way and qualitatively different way
of seeing the universe through radiation of space
and time itself.
We are equipped to make progress on this problem.
And so for all that I will apologize,
and you know what, maybe the 1990s and 2000s,
we were thinking in the wrong direction.
This program, some of its serendipitous,
is well suited where we have a fighting chance
to make deep progress on this question.
So for the past two years, the North American particle
physics community goes through this decadal process
where we review one of our priorities,
our scientific priorities, in our field
of fundamental physics.
And it should not surprise you that one
of the unifying themes was to understand,
what is dark matter?
All right.
So that says something about particle physics.
That says something about where the field is.
I am a theoretical particle physicist.
How is it that I search for dark matter?
All right, so I have a quiz.
This depends on whether or not you're wearing glasses.
What is the difference between these two pictures?
Anybody?
Good.
So one of these is the Millennium Falcon.
I think this is a screenshot from one of the movies.
Let me say this is the Millennium Falcon.
The other is a Lego model of the Millennium Falcon.
And there's something very deep here
that I think rings true to any physicist.
The model is an approximation for the actual thing.
If you zoom into the model, if you lift it up,
if you look around, if you pick it up,
you say, hey, this thing is kind of small to be the Millennium
Falcon.
But in the right context, you learn something
about the Millennium Falcon.
You learn, oh, maybe this little deflector dish, which
fell off in one of the movies.
It's roughly the same size as this bit over here.
There are things you can learn from a model.
But the model is not nature.
The fact that you have a mathematical model
does not prescribe what ought to happen in nature.
And this is where we are.
So when you ask, what is it that theoretical physicists do?
There's a misconception that we tell you what nature is.
We don't do that.
We cannot do that.
We build mathematical models, and here
is the model that we introduced earlier, the standard model,
to describe nature and to mock up nature
and maybe glean some principles that nature realizes,
but that is not a prescription.
So there is this great painting.
It says, this is not a pipe.
I will spare the Quebecois, my attempted French.
But when we do theoretical physics,
we are exploring what types of models
can explain the dark matter puzzle
and what can we learn from those mathematical models.
And like any good crime procedural,
there is a motive, means, and opportunity.
A mathematical model for dark matter
answers these questions.
First one is, what is it?
Some super symmetric partner, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
The next thing is, how did it get here?
You have to explain what mechanism created this particle.
Then most of the particles that we know of
are actually unstable.
You have to explain, why is that particle still around?
And given that we've been searching for dark matter
for 30 years, then your theory has
to say why we haven't found it yet.
And any theory worth its weight will tell you,
and this is how you will discover this type of particle.
It'll give you something falsifiable.
And so for the weekly interacting massive particle,
there is some deep, elegant mathematical symmetry
that explains to you what this new particle is.
And that was very deep, and exciting, and meaningful.
Then there's a series of answers.
How did it get here?
Well, the same way that ordinary particles got here
through something called thermal freeze out,
that was the calculation that we asked the grad student
to do over and over and over again.
Why is it still here?
We have to put that band-aid on.
Remember, if you put this band-aid on,
you solve some problems, and for free you get stable particles.
Why isn't it ruled out?
Well, for all we know, dark matter might still be a wimp.
How do we discover it?
For the wimp, we keep doing exactly what we are doing,
because we have the experimental program to probe this.
But there are other answers to these questions.
Maybe it's less interesting what the deep mathematical
principle is before.
Maybe we start with, there is dark matter.
Let's build the simplest building blocks, the simplest
LEGO model, the simplest mathematical model,
and see what comes out.
And then, how do you discover it?
You start thinking more creatively.
If there are different answers to how to get here,
you have different interactions, which
means there are different reasons why it's stable,
and you have different ways in which it'll manifest itself.
And one of the really great things
we've been talking about over the past three days here
at Perimeter is one puzzle that I'll shout out, which
is there are a handful of black holes.
So this is a quasar with an artist's rendition.
There's a handful of these.
So our galaxy is far, far away that
are powered by a supermassive black hole.
And what's the difference between a black hole
and a supermassive black hole?
The supermassive black hole is so large
that our understanding of how black holes form
cannot explain how they got so down large.
And the usual story is that first you form stars,
and stars form little black holes.
Little black holes combine to form big black holes.
But that cannot happen fast enough
to explain these gigantic black holes.
And one of the really cool things that we've been doing,
this is a photo taken earlier today,
has been puzzling over the ways in which the dark matter, which
we know was already in these galaxies,
because they held the galaxy together,
might be contributing to answering this puzzle.
And how this puzzle might be the first step
in this refined way of looking at this open question of learning
something new about dark matter.
All right.
So this is just a slice of the type of really exciting types
of questions that we've been thinking about.
Now, I want to change gears here and answer the who.
So who gets to do this thing?
Who gets the privilege of exploring the cosmos
using theoretical physics?
And there's an analogy that we often use.
Dark matter is in dark.
It's invisible.
And the analogy has to do with equity and diversity
in physics.
It's probably not surprising that such an analogy would
come about.
There are a few different analogies.
And in the same way that dark matter
is a puzzle of missing mass, mass that we don't understand
what it is or where it came from,
there's just missing talent puzzle.
Oftentimes, when you walk into a room in a physics department,
the people that you see there have a different demographic
makeup than the people that you see outside the university.
And the analogy here is, why is it
that we've discovered all this stuff about atoms?
Like, we know all sorts about chemistry.
We know about biology.
It's because ordinary matter, protons, electrons, neutrons,
and trinos, well, not neutrinos, are charged
under electromagnetism.
That is the probe that we use to see, smell, taste, hear
everything about matter.
Dark matter does not seem to have
that privilege of being charged.
That means our telescopes, our microscopes, all our tools
do not automatically work the way
that they do for ordinary matter.
That doesn't mean that dark matter doesn't exist.
That does not mean that the talent doesn't exist.
And there's a lot of fantastic books writing about what this is.
These are people who are far ahead of their journey
in thinking about this puzzle than I am.
And I encourage you to take a look if you're interested.
But another way in which this is analogous to the puzzle
of dark matter is that this is not a puzzle of missing data.
Just like Katie's slide, we have many, many reasons
to believe that there is a missing mass problem.
And there is no shortage of data that
across different types of demographic slices,
whether it's gender or ethnicity or unseen things
like socioeconomic background, belief, political background,
all of these things, the demographic inside the ivory
tower is different from the demographic outside.
So it's not a matter of missing data
or orders of magnitude in astronomical observations.
Like the puzzle of dark matter, maybe the way
that we have been doing things might not be the best way.
Maybe there should be new approaches
and new theoretical instructions, new frameworks
to approach this puzzle.
And when we think about this, there's
something that oftentimes well-meaning people will say
in earnestness.
Well, but physics doesn't care about the color of your skin
or your race or your gender.
Maxwell's equations are indifferent to the human
who is creating them, right?
It's a reasonable thing to say.
But oftentimes, the people who say this at one stage
of their career go on.
And then there's inevitably some road bump,
because we all hit road bumps.
And then there are different things that are said.
Oh, well, the committee would have selected me
if only I had this fancier university on my diploma,
if only I had this fancier knickknack on my CV.
Or if only I had advanced calculus when I was in high school,
I'd be able to do research when I was my first year of college.
Or when one's hand is the only brown hand in the classroom,
maybe it's a little bit harder to be the one
to ask a question.
And I mention these because these
are sociological human issues, even though the subject itself
is indifferent to the humanity.
And to be able to do this, this is a human endeavor.
I argue, though, this is still the wrong way
of thinking about it.
So how many people here saw Oppenheimer?
That's a smaller percentage than I expected.
So one of the characters in Oppenheimer is Vannevar Bush.
This is his character over here.
And for those of you who saw the movie,
the person he's shaking hands with is the villain.
But Vannevar Bush was the architect
of what is now known as the National Science Foundation.
And this is the report written during wartime
where Vannevar Bush advocated for the US
to form a funding body to support not applied research, not
military research, but research in fundamental science.
I will say that the National Science Foundation
and its cousin in Canada, NSERC, have been perhaps
the greatest forces in fundamental science
in the history of mankind.
And I do not mean that, ironically, this is true.
The commitment to fundamental research
that these institutions have put forward.
I would say that even if I were not currently
funded by the National Science Foundation,
but I feel like I should mention that.
But this is true.
And this report is online.
If you look into this report, there
is this phrase by a chemist, James Conant,
in every section of the entire area of the word,
every section where the word science may be applied,
the limiting factor is human.
The limiting factor is human.
And so here is the version from Perimeter Institute.
Rob Myers, the director of Perimeter Institute.
We can't afford to leave any great thinkers
or any great ideas behind.
The limiting factor is human.
So you might have the best microscope
humanity has ever built.
You might have the most pristine environments
to look for dark matter scattering off a nuclei.
You might have the ability to see with finer resolution
than ever before the first light of the universe.
And you might have a damn new way of seeing the universe
itself.
But the thing that is holding us back is human.
This is the value of places like Perimeter.
This is where the progress is.
And if you ask purely about scientific interest,
you're saying nothing about fairness or equity
or any of these things.
When you want to draw people to this column,
you want the people who will sacrifice and work hard
and who are willing to do this.
This is a hard job and it's difficult work, tough problems.
You want to be able to draw from not just the 15%,
you want that entire 100%.
The power of full participation is analogous
to the standard model.
The standard model does a lot of great things.
Chemistry is because of the standard model of particle
physics.
But dark matter creates galaxies.
So let's do one last question.
That's how we do it, who does it, who gets to do it.
Why do we do this?
And whenever I think about this, there's
a painting by Paul Gauguin.
Who are we, where do we come from,
where are we going in some order?
And I think about this, why do we do science?
I think about this painting because it reminds me
that every culture for as long as humanity has been human
has had a story, has had a cosmology of how we belong,
how we came to be who we are, where we came from.
Right now, science is part of our cosmology
as a global human species.
And we have our own story.
And that story is something like this.
13 billion years ago-ish, there was something called
the Big Bang.
We don't quite understand what happened.
It's curious.
The Big Bang formed a lot of the matter and stuff
in our universe.
A good chunk of that stuff is dark matter, which you see here
in these weird filaments.
The universe expanded rapidly and cooled down,
and these filaments condensed.
Where these filaments overlap, there
is an over-density of gravity.
They started pulling in more dark matter.
That dark matter over-density then
had a bigger gravitational pull, and started pulling in
this really funny stuff called hydrogen gas.
And that hydrogen gas collected into this clump of dark matter,
and eventually the hydrogen gas found each other,
and they started forming these funny things called stars.
Some of those stars would go supernova and produce metals,
and you would form more complex stars.
Those would get together into things called galaxies.
In the galaxies, you find these little solar systems,
and the next thing you know, there's a planet called Earth,
and there are these people who are little goldfish, who
are just discovering the dark matter ocean that we happen
to be living in.
And that is why we do this.
So thank you very much.
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
All right, so we have time for questions.
So as I said before, there's a microphone there on the stairs.
So if you have a question, please make your way
to the microphone if you can.
I'm more from a philosophy background,
and I don't know if they like that question.
Have you heard of flies too young for the empiricism?
No, I'm not familiar with it.
Sorry.
Should you stand up for the microphone?
Here we have flies, which is called
the Undetermination of Theory by Experiment.
Ah, OK.
Do you want me to explain it?
Please.
The Hammers had a great influence on Einstein and Mark.
He wrote a book on the nature of physics in 1908, I believe.
And what he was claiming that every theory involves
theses that can never be reduced together.
So it kind of confirms what you're saying.
So let's say a theory how a telescope works
is part of your structure.
But the theory of light, of how that new telescope works,
you have to, is part of the theory.
So you can never go to a groundwork.
He actually criticized Carl Popper, who thought that everything
had to be verifiable.
And he said, no, he can never do that.
And he thought even basic ideas of physics,
like motion and stuff like that, we
also have to have a point of reference.
But everything in the universe is moving.
So how do you have a point of reference for all the motions
of the universe?
So that's the basic thesis.
So that's called the Dhamm-Quine thesis.
And it's one of the most important things
in 20th century philosophy.
And it's called Two Dogmas of Appearicism.
And what Quine was saying about the dogmas of empiricism
is that we have a way we, a plant had the idea
of the way we think of the world and the way the world is.
And he created this idea of the thing of itself.
And Quine attacks that idea and says
it's a false idea.
Because how we perceive things is then changed.
So the theory, we don't work that way.
And the things get actually mixed together.
So that's the basis thesis.
So you might want to look it up.
It's called Two Dogmas of Empiricism by Willard Van
Wook.
And it confirms exactly what you're saying in a certain way.
So yeah, I can offer.
I'm afraid of saying this in the wrong way.
My best friend that usually represents a philosopher.
And I'll say one short thing on that, which I thank you
very much for sharing that.
Part of what I wanted to share here
was the way in which my sub-tribe of particle theory
thinks about theories.
And what you're saying is exactly,
it is a philosophical question.
But thinking about capital T theory,
where this is some framework for everything.
And I think what's relevant here epistemologically
is that the theories that I'm talking about here
are lower case T theories.
And that's why I emphasize by the Lego analogy
that these are toys that are meant to do one thing.
And that's exactly what the answer is and why it's so low.
And actually, there's a philosopher of QT called
Basque-on-Frasen, and he said that as well.
So all three of you effectively agree on that theory.
Thank you for that.
Yeah, so we have some questions from the online audience.
And if you have questions in the audience,
please feel free to make your way to the microphone.
So let's see.
We have plenty of questions from online.
So here's a good one.
If we found Dark Matter, what other physics mysteries
would be easier to solve with that new information?
That is a really good question.
Thank you, person in the universe who asked this.
We have a list of puzzles.
And depending on what it is that we find, how we find it,
there are different ways of piecing that into these puzzles.
And so one way of playing this game that we play as particle
theorists is pick your favorite particle physics problem.
Why is there more antimatter than matter?
So why is there more matter than antimatter in the universe?
Why is it that certain particles have these weird properties?
Why is it that the Higgs boson is light?
That problem is still out there.
And then you play this game of there's
this new telescope coming online.
If that telescope has this new ability
to see the world in a certain way,
what implications does my proposed model, my toy theory,
imply for that telescope?
And so there's this whole, in fact, in our conference,
we had this fantastic figure, it was a flow chart of,
if you see this, then what do you think it could be
and what is the next experiment that you do to verify that?
But the question hits exactly at the heart of what
it is that we're doing.
That's great.
Go ahead.
Can you comment on the modified gravity theory
introduced by John Moffat that claims to explain cosmological
data without dark matter?
This is a fantastic question.
Thank you.
So modified gravity or cousins modified Newtonian dynamics,
this is an alternative to what I was saying where
let's all get on the same page in dark matters and new particles.
Thank you very much for pointing this out.
And so this is a different proposal.
People have different opinions about the viability
of these proposals, embedding into a full capital T theory.
But that's all human opinion.
We call it Bayesian priors.
What a good theory ought to look like.
What's really neat about modified gravity
is that it is a proposal that has value in the space
of understanding what dark matter is.
And I'll give you an example of this.
So even in my tribe, there's this idea
called self-interacting dark matter.
Dark matter isn't just inert.
Sometimes it bounces off of itself.
And what modified Newtonian dynamics tells you
is that maybe gravity behaves a little bit differently
on different scales.
One of my colleagues at UC Riverside, Hybo-U,
realized that, oh, that theory has some merit
in connecting to experiments.
That's really exciting.
I have my own pet theory if that dark matter will bounce off
of itself.
And if dark matter bounces off of itself,
the distribution of dark matter in these bubbles,
in these halos, would be different.
It'd be more puffy.
It's like a popcorn machine.
And if dark matter is more puffy,
that means the gravitational interaction,
the net gravitational interaction,
will be a little bit different.
And if it's different just the right way,
it can end up looking like modified Newtonian dynamics.
And say whichever tribe you follow,
and whatever you prefer as a human being,
experiments will figure things out ultimately.
But the fact that there's this idea
led to cross-pollination of new ideas and new observables.
And this is the key point.
What happened was the community was
able to say, we should look for this type of observables
in our new telescopes.
And that will teach us something.
And so I know a lot of the way people frame this
is as a debate between one camp versus another camp.
We're all on the same team trying
to discover truth here.
And I think that's a really fantastic example of that.
Hi, thanks a lot.
Hello, thank you.
Pretty simplistic question, I think.
My background on this is so elementary,
so please forgive the silliness of the question
if it comes off that way.
You know you start the question.
Now I'm terrified.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
The idea that dark matter, the candidate for dark matter
that you're discussing, is a massive particle.
The fact that there's like 85%, et cetera.
Like instead of it being a few massive particles,
what about a whole lot of really light particles?
And is that still in the running?
Very good.
That is not a simple question.
That is a deep and insightful question.
And that's a question that we ask ourselves over and over
again.
Good, the mass range for plausible dark matter candidates,
which again plausible is something
that human beings make up, is actually incredibly wide.
On the one end, you could have gigantic, 10 to the 30 solar
mass black holes.
On the other end, you could have things
which one would barely call a particle quantum
mechanically.
What I will offer here, instead of just saying,
could be anything, what I will offer here is, OK,
what do we know about dark matter?
The puzzle exists.
We also know roughly how much there is.
And there's one other thing I hadn't yet told you.
We also know, in fact, the way to say,
dark matter is cool.
And not just in the hip way, but it's
cool that it is cold.
It's non-relativistic.
Today, dark matter isn't traveling very fast.
And we know that because it had to form these bubbles,
these halos, that were needed to collect the hydrogen,
to form stars, to form everything.
So the limits on can dark matter be a bunch of light things
rather than a few heavy things is actually
set by, if they're very light, are they also moving very fast?
And if they're moving too fast, you can't do it.
So it's a very deep question.
And you actually have the exactly right intuition
that you can have a bunch of heavy things,
or a bunch of light things, which
would be equivalent gravitationally,
to a few heavy things.
So yeah, thank you.
All right.
Thank you so much to all of the folks who asked questions.
Thank you to our online audience.
And thank you so much to Professor Tenedo.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
