Lecture 28 – The First Taste of Freedom
Hello again. In the 1960s, when Southern Africa, as we have seen in the last couple of lectures,
began its immersion in violent conflicts over decolonization, or heightened repression
in the case of South Africa. At that time, most African countries were embarking on the
first years of freedom from colonial rule. We need to return to them, to those situations.
After all, this was the majority of the African population, the majority of African countries.
What was this experience of independence like? We need to remind ourselves also of just what
the nationalists had won. They had taken control of a colonial apparatus, the state, of course
formally colonial at this stage. And finally, we need to ask the question with which we ended
Lecture 24. What would they do with this new prize? Anyone who watches film footage of the
official ceremonies marking independence, typically the lowering as national anthems are played,
God Save the Queen is played in the background, the Union Jack is lowered,
and then the new flag of Zambia or Kenya or Nigeria or Ghana is raised, the same for the
tricolour of the French and so on. Very often, of course, a new flag for a nation with a new name,
Ghana instead of the Gold Coast, or eventually Zimbabwe instead of Southern Rhodesia.
Certainly Zambia instead of Northern Rhodesia in the period I'm referring to.
When you see those packed in crowds, the surging, you're taken with one great emotion, joy,
freedom, hours at last. Now the world will see the new Africa. The feeling was genuine
and it was thrilling. I'm reminded again of that very simple statement by the great
Ghanaian historian opening an article on the period from his own reminiscence.
It was certainly great to be alive in those days. But clearly the expectations raised in the
heady ride to independence would be a challenge to meet. It's worth repeating a point we made earlier
in looking at decolonization in lecture 24, and that is that in the late colonial period,
some of the officials in places like France and Britain concluded that disappointment was coming
and that it would be better for it to be directed at African rulers as opposed to themselves.
Nonetheless, the new citizens were not passively awaiting the delivery of the fruits of freedom.
The widespread mobilization of the nationalist movements during the 1940s and 50s carried over
into widespread willingness to pitch in, to participate in, to personally work toward
the next great triumph, development. In this case, they don't mean the sort of halfway house,
the half-hearted development of the developmentalist states which Britain and France turned to in the
late colonial period. No, we want the full measure, the real thing, and we want it under our own
direction, our own supervision, and not yours. So there's a tremendous amount of energy which
is apparent in the early years after independence in country after country. In Kenya, Jomo Kenyatta,
who'd been in jail after all up until 1959, when he cried out at his post-independence rallies,
Harambe, Swahili, for let's pull together, the crowds yelled it back and they meant it.
They yelled it back with with enthusiasm and indeed many of the achievements of these years
depended on the self-help initiatives of energized local communities, efforts to build the new school,
to clear the way and and and create or build the new road or repair the the old one, the bridge that
needs the same sort of work. Often we saw this in a sort of work party atmosphere punctuated with
songs from the nationalist struggle and so on. Despite this popular participation, which was
real and widespread and again genuine and enthusiastic, still there was no getting around
the pivotal role of the state. The colonial states had been highly interventionist, sponsoring and
orchestrating the colonial economies, perhaps especially in the late colonial developmentalist
period. Now, I often find that people assume and it's a natural assumption that coolness in
independent Africa, coolness toward what we might call free market approaches,
hesitations towards that, people assume that that largely stems from having a socialist or
quasi socialist perspective and of course that would be correct, but in fact some of this coolness,
some of this hesitation comes from the colonial roots. Those state apparatus, apparatus that the
nationalists had inherited of course had deeply interventionist, often counter market, certainly
counter free market tendencies and character. Now the new leaders had no intention of changing
this large interventionist state role, except perhaps to make it even larger. Remember in
Krumas mantra, the father of African nationalism, the first to become president of an independent
sub-Saharan state, Ghana in 1957. Seek ye first the political kingdom in Kruma, had said, and use
it to add all else. In Kruma, of course, it spent his Sundays when he was a student at Lincoln
University in Pennsylvania attending African-American churches and he borrowed some of his rhetorical
style from what he saw there and as you can see he also learned some scripture. He's paraphrasing
there of course, seeking ye first the kingdom of God. Seek ye first the political kingdom,
seize the apparatus of the state, turn it to add the other things that we seek above all real
development. So although in Kruma and others had in fact exploited during the
the nationalist crescendo, the resentment of farmers over colonial marketing boards,
after he took power he was quite prepared to retain them. Again the notion of the board was
a monopsony, a sole buyer, which bought in this case especially cocoa in a situation like Ghana,
at a given price, sold it on the world market at another price. This was a resentment during the
colonial period because of course they felt that the margin was going in essence into the
colonists hands. In the independence period in Kruma retains the boards and uses the margin or at
least says he will use the margin, promises to use the margin to finance other projects.
In the avowedly radical states like Ghana and like Tanzania in East Africa, usually proclaiming
themselves to be quote African socialist as opposed to rigidly Marxist, a good measure of
nationalization took place as well as some experiments with state farms and so on. Take
the case of Tanzania where Julius Neurari, the former teacher who had earned the affectionate
nickname of Malimo or teacher in Swahili and had studied overseas and so forth, Neurari issued in
a sense his African socialist manifesto if you like in 1967, the Arusha Declaration and it's
still an eloquent and impressive document essentially articulating a vision of socialism
built on traditional African values. It's in a sense the sort of economic side of his articulation
of the one party state which we'll turn to in the next lecture. But what I'm trying to get at is
an approach which blends ideas from the outside, in this case socialism, with ideas generated
from African culture itself. But in the name of his African socialism, Neurari pushed a disastrous
villageization scheme, the Ujama scheme. It comes back to a notion of familyhood if you like in
in Tanzania, the Ujama villages, forcing farmers into compact settlements, it did not work.
Such schemes like the state marketing boards, the state farms, express perhaps an ominous fear of
a truly independent vigorous peasantry despite the fact again that quite a number of the new leaders
had written to power precisely on the grievances of such peasantries.
Now I've been stressing a state role, an interventionist role, the overall orchestration
and management of an economy. And we've seen as we would expect that in the more radical regimes,
the quasi-socialist or African socialist regimes, we would expect that. But it was also common to see
it, a state role inserted or expanded into numerous enterprises in conservative regimes.
Those, for instance, of Senegal or the Ivory Coast or indeed of Kenya. A word that often came up this
time was peristatal, meaning precisely the notion that there's a kind of public-private
blend here, a partnership between a substantial state role, whether it's owning shares in the
name of the government or the insertion of publicly paid officials into the steel production or the
textile industry or what have you. Peristatals. Now whatever the longer term weaknesses of these
approaches, for a while, and it was a good while, it wasn't simply a moment. For a while they yielded
some impressive results. The economic growth of the late colonial developmentalist period,
and certainly in macro terms there had been substantial economic growth in the late colonial
periods, this not only continued but in fact increased and accelerated in quite a number of cases.
Overall, the GNP, gross national product per capita for all of sub-Saharan Africa,
grew each year in the 1960s and through the first half approximately of the 1970s,
often at rates, quite respectable rates, of some two to three percent a year. Again, that's an
overall per capita rise in GNP after independence. Kenya, to use one example, per capita GNP rose
30 percent in the 10 years after independence for Kenya in 1963. That of the Ivory Coast doubled
in 20 years after its independence in 1960. Even manufacturing industrialization, and this is often
taken to be the sort of litmus test, the measuring rod, if you like, of economic modernization
and development to many, whether on the right or the left. Even manufacturing had its moment.
It expanded overall on the continent at twice the rate of the overall GDP
improvement or increase between 1965 and 1973.
Despite this, African economies failed to achieve a truly meaningful diversification.
But boom, there was, rested largely, on exports of primary products produced by farmers and miners.
In other words, the dependency on an export-import economic base forged in the colonial period,
as we know, as we've seen, was only marginally altered. This continued to be the basis of the
development that we're seeing. In this respect, we need to go global again to achieve an understanding,
just as we introduced the Cold War to look at political developments in places like the old
Belgian Congo, in places like Angola last time. In this respect, the expansionary world economy
of the 1960s, and it was a very expansionary economy indeed in that era, was extremely important to
this whole process. In particular, the buoyant commodity demand and prices were the context,
if you like, for the sorts of successes that we are seeing, which is not to minimize them.
One still must take advantage of even favorable conditions, and country after country, and indeed,
we must concede that leader after leader showed some skill in doing that.
Now, most impressive of all, certainly to ordinary people, the new African governments
kept their promises in many cases to improve education and health care.
Between 1960 and 1980, sub-Saharan school enrollment rose by over 50 percent
at the primary level. It rose by over 500 percent at the secondary level. That is a five-fold increase
in people, African children, attending high school. All the new nations built universities,
which, with a handful of exceptions, had not even existed before independence, and were
symbolically incredibly important. Countries like Tanzania made concerted efforts to give
rural populations access to clinics. Infant mortality rates dropped. Life expectancy rose.
Of course, that implied that population was going to rise. At this stage, that was not
a particular problem. In fact, one could even count on a rising population from some perspectives
as an asset. Later, under different conditions, these larger populations, of course,
may indeed pose a very different question and a very different kind of problem.
Now, I've been generalizing so far about Africa's first decade, the first fruits of freedom,
the first tastes of freedom that Africa experienced with independence in or around 1960.
Let me focus this a bit and let me personalize it a bit and try to illustrate some of these points
from my own experiences in the place I know best, my first love in Africa as far as countries go,
and that is the country of Zambia. Northern Rhodesia, of course, the British territory,
originally created by Cecil Rhodes as a British South Africa company. When Northern Rhodesia
became Zambia in 1964, the new currency, which the government adopted and came into general use
at that time, the new currency was called Aquacha, still called Aquacha. Aquacha was a word from
a couple of the languages spoken in Zambia and the meaning was dawn. To me, that captures perfectly
the exhilaration of the times. The various symbols on the Aquacha, the sequasi, the fisheagle,
very reminiscent when you look at it, of course, the symbolism of the American bald eagle or golden
eagle as the symbol of freedom. The portrayals of the statue, which stands there in central
Lusaka, of the very muscular African literally breaking the chains of colonial rule. That appears
on the Aquacha, it appears on the currency itself. The president of Zambia, of course, the hero of
the nationalist struggle, was Kenneth David Kaunda, and he certainly seemed to many, both inside Zambia
and outside, as the epitome of decency. Kaunda's father had been an African missionary. We often
forget that many of the missionaries in Africa have been, in fact, Africans themselves. But like
a lot of missionaries, he carried his gospel from one place to another. In this case, Kaunda's father
had come from Nyassalan next door, now Malawi, where Livingston's old influence of the Scottish
Presbyterian missionaries, in a sense, was reflected, and had come into the northern part of Zambia
earlier in the century and settled there as a teacher and a pastor, a preacher, in Zambia. So
Kaunda, raised in that household, as he very lovingly evokes in his autobiography. Again,
an autobiography, it's a memoir. It's certainly not his whole life. Kaunda very much still with us.
But published in 1962, Zambia shall be free. His, again, loving portrait of that upbringing
with his father and mother in a remote mission station of northern Zambia.
In short, what I'm getting at is that he was a thoughtful and sincere Christian,
and he's a very devout man indeed. Eventually, he expounded his political philosophy, his sort of
counterpart to Neurary's Arusha Declaration, was the development of Kaunda's philosophy,
ideology of humanism. And this was indeed a people-centered vision, like the Arusha Declaration,
quite impressive, eloquent, an articulation of an approach to public affairs, to life itself,
to questions like development centered on people. And in Kaunda's own view of it,
something which avoids the extremes of either capitalism or socialism avoids the extremes
of right or left. Kaunda, again, seems then, and a lot of respect still seems,
to be both dignified and down to earth. I interviewed him once for my own historical
research purposes. And like a lot of others who have come away from a personal encounter with
Kaunda, it was the word gentleman that first came to my lips. Now, although Zambia was obviously
still a third-world country, Zambia's economy, when I first went there in the mid-1970s, the early
to mid-1970s, was humming. It was fat. You can spell that FAT or spell it like my students do,
PhAT. But it had a lot going for it. Again, I don't want to overstate this. Obviously,
it was a poor country, but people had to work. If you went down Cairo Road in Central Lusaka,
you could see on either side the cranes on the tops of these building adding stories and putting
up new skyscrapers. There were goods in the shops and so on. Now, again, the reason for this in
economic terms, although for a time it had to be managed adequately and for a time it was
managed adequately, the reason behind it, though, was that Zambia, almost totally dependent on copper
export, was still riding the long copper boom, which began in the post-World War II era. It's
not accidental that when they constructed the new Parliament House in Zambia, again, a symbol of this
new age and the pride of this new age, its roof over this considerable expanse of this building is
100% copper. It's a symbol of the new age. The University of Zambia. I mentioned the
establishment of these new universities as an achievement of this first taste of freedom,
this first experience with independence. University of Zambia, built out on the Great East Road,
obviously east of town in Lusaka, was a citadel. You approach it. It has this very modern
architecture, shiny white appearance from a distance on a small rise, a small hill.
I was a research affiliate there and I found the place to be full of dedicated teachers.
A number of those, quite a number of those at that point, were still expatriates. They were from
many other countries in the world who wanted to be there. They wanted to play their part,
at least make a contribution to what they saw as this era of hope taking shape in modern Africa.
It was full of idealistic and very committed students. It was an exciting place to be.
Now, to localize this even further, the village where I did much field work was located in Southern
Zambia, in the so-called Tonga ethnic group, or inside the Tonga-dominated area of Zambia.
At this point in the early to mid-1970s, the small farmers, and that's what everybody in that
village was. They were peasant households. They enjoyed a steady income from sales of maize,
cotton, sunflower, seeds, and cattle. Again, I don't want to overstate this. These were not
commercial farmers and they didn't live like commercial farmers. But this was, for a time at
least, a prosperous peasantry. The pride of the village, and perhaps the one symbol that strikes
me still today as representing the promise of the New Age, the sin-quanon, the symbol more than any
other, the meaning of independence, was the new primary school, Chiwabola Primary School. The
construction of this, which was partly a state enterprise, but partly again this mass participation,
local pitch-in construction, became in essence the centerpiece of the whole village life. I can't
stress enough the fact that this was taken to mean that the fruits of independence have reached
us, that we can be part of this new age like anyone else. So there was a dawn. There was a
quacha in much of Africa with the coming of independence and the new rulers deserve considerable
credit for it. There were omens on the horizon, however, and we might mention a couple.
I said earlier that a ruler like Inkruma in Ghana had not dismantled the marketing boards, which,
of course, he had criticized so vociferously during the nationalist rise. And I mentioned that his
reason for not doing so, his stated reason, was to use the margin between the producer price and
the selling price to finance other projects, usually said to be development projects. But
it's also true that Inkruma began to invest some of that margin and numerous other marginal resources
that he was able to control because he controlled the state in what we can call showcase projects.
The notion of the Volta Dam, which remains a fairly dubious, large-scale
investment in Ghana, but certainly was the sort of project which puts you on the map,
which gets attention. The construction of the new national stadium for the soccer
teams that will now be wearing our new national colors, back to Inkruma's case, the construction
which he definitely put resources into of a new headquarters for the OAU, the Organization of
African Unity. Now, these kinds of showcase projects, again, were symbolic enough, but they did not
necessarily represent the same sort of investment in ongoing development that other investments did.
The new rulers rather furtively tried to instill a sense of identity with the new nation,
as opposed to, especially, an ethnicity. Now, we've mentioned this challenge before,
we've said it many times, but all the new nations encompassed a number of different ethnic groups,
and they faced a tall order. They had some success with it. The counterpart to
Kenyatta's shouting harambe, and having it recalled, is that Kaunda at his rallies would shout
one Zambia, and the crowd would shout back one nation, one Zambia, one nation. People did come
to think of themselves as Zambians to a considerable extent, but that was easier to do
during these buoyant times.
And finally, still enjoying perhaps deserving, and I would say they did deserve considerable popular
support. The new, the independent leaders could afford, bearing degrees of tolerance. After all,
if you don't feel that you're in danger of losing your political office, it creates some room,
some space for you to allow opposition, whether those are parties or critics or what have you.
Already, however, even by the late sixties, by the early seventies, during this favorable first
boom period in the post-independence years, there were moves afoot to stifle opposition,
having one power none of these leaders planned to surrender it. Still, despite these omens,
the achievement of independence was exactly that. It was impressive, and I refuse to see it
as cynically. A new Africa had been born. Thank you.
