Lecture 12, Great Zimbabwe and the Cities of the South Hello.
As we have seen in the last two lectures, which focused on West Africa and East Africa,
the spread of Iron Age agriculture and pastoralism and the development of long-distance trade
set the stage for the emergence of towns and states. Southern Africa is no exception to that
pattern. However, since farming and ironworking generally moved southward across the continent,
the Southern African subcontinent was the last major region to be transformed.
Nonetheless, radiocarbon dates for archaeological research show evidence for the whole so-called
Iron Age package, that is crops, cattle, and iron, south of the Limpopo River in modern-day
South Africa by the 3rd century AD and has spread through the whole eastern half of that country
by around 1000 AD. I should add that this also was part of the arrival of Bantu peoples and languages
which came to dominate in the eastern half of South Africa.
Now, these radiocarbon dates represented the sort of death knell. They were the
most decisive refutation of an apartheid era notion of the so-called empty land. You'll often see
references to this as the so-called empty land, or excuse me, the myth of the empty land.
Now, the myth of the empty land has had a long staying power in South Africa,
and it shows up in curious places. I actually have encountered it, not so much recently,
but 20 years or so ago. I would encounter it more than once among ordinary Americans who,
thank God, were curious enough to delve into South African history, for instance, a bit.
Now, the myth of the empty land took a number of forms. I think probably
one of the more extreme forms I ever heard was from the guy, the real estate guy, who was trying to
sell me my first home. When he learned what I did for living, he obviously had done some delving
into Southern African history, which I'm always happy to see. Anyway, he pronounced that most
people are unaware that, in fact, South Africa was empty, and that, I believe, his actual words
were, the blacks came down to get the jobs. Now, I would say again, that's a rather an extreme
elaboration of the myth of the empty land. More commonly, it was simply held that ban two peoples
and iron age cultures were moving into South Africa at about the same time that Europeans
were moving in their frontier expansion to the country as well. Now, clearly, this myth had
political, you might say, moral political utility as people like my old mentor, Leonard Thompson,
of Yale showed in his rather brilliant book, The Political Mythology of a Party.
What I mean is by moral political, if it is true that the bulk of South African land was not
occupied or not held by the indigenous, the ancestors of the indigenous majority, then it
certainly puts a different light. It means that it was not necessarily expropriated or taken away
from that population by the immigrant Europeans. Now, as I say, this has fallen rather hard under
the impact of radiocarbon dating in particular. But myths, including historical myths, however
misleading they may be, often contain a kernel somewhere and they're a grain of truth. I mean,
even my real estate man, the blacks came down to get the jobs. Well, the kernel of truth is,
of course, that in the 19th and 20th century, he's right, millions of blacks did come down
from areas further north and engage in the migrant labor pattern, which is going to be so
important to our discussion of South African history later in the course. And in this case,
again, the kernel of truth here, it is true that Bantu expansion, Iron Age culture expansion,
apparently halted at the point, the so-called 20-inch rainfall line, where there was insufficient
moisture for their crops. Now, this 20-inch rainfall line that I refer to is a line, it's a little,
it may be a bit of exaggeration, considered a single line, but a zone, let us say, which runs
north to south and essentially bisects modern-day Republic of South Africa.
To the east of that line, to the right side of that line on the map, there was an excess of 20
inches on average of rainfall a year, which is about the minimum for the cultivation of crops.
To the west of that line, to the left side of the map, there generally was not with the exception,
however, of course, of that Mediterranean basin in and around Cape Town. But remember that from
where the 20-inch rainfall line falls to Cape Town is a space of several hundred miles, so there's
a considerable gap in there. One could always ask the question, you know, would it have been possible
for Mandela's ancestors, the close of peoples of South Africa, who are the southernmost Bantu people,
to have, I'm going to use this term, to have colonized that Mediterranean basin?
Well, yes and no, again, are adaptation of crops to environment. The crops that they were used to,
to cultivating, like millet and so forth, in fact, don't do well, like a grain like wheat does,
in that Mediterranean climate. Nonetheless, it's always useful to ask what might have happened.
It's conceivable, but as we'll see, something else happened in instead.
So these cultures then were of the late Bantu Iron Age are concentrated on the right side,
inside the modern Republic of South Africa. To the west of that line, there was no extension
of cultivation, although there was an adoption by considerable numbers of people of half of the
agricultural revolution, and they became pastoralists. We'll meet them again when we look at the
formation of the Cape Colony. Now, in the later Iron Age, let us say the late 1st millennium AD,
especially in the savanna grasslands of what is now western Zambia, Zimbabwe, eastern Botswana,
and eastern South Africa, we see increasing wealth, complexity, stratification, and commerce.
We've seen it before in other parts of Africa, and we're seeing it again.
The hilltop settlements known as the Tautse tradition, when the name comes from the largest
excavated site in eastern Botswana, seem to illustrate the importance above all of one of our
old friends, increasing numbers of cattle. Again, the measure, the store of wealth, perhaps supreme
in this part of the world. Control of cattle was the key to power and wealth,
and because cattle were held by males in general, this may also have sharpened the gender divide,
if you will. Emerging slightly later was the cultural complex called Leopard's Copy,
after a site in southwestern Zimbabwe. The word copy, K-O-P-J-E, is actually Afrikaans,
the Dutch-based language for hill. Certainly, cattle in this success or cultural complex
remained central. Peoples here in this rather dry part, especially dry part of, we could say,
the southern savanna, maximize the efficiency of cultivation by the use of stone terracing
on hillsides. They also used stone to construct residences and cattle enclosures.
And the peoples of the Leopard's Copy culture mined not only iron, but large quantities of copper,
and then probably beginning in the 10th century, again very late in the 1st millennium, gold.
The culmination of the Leopard's Copy culture early in the 2nd millennium AD was what we could,
perhaps, style as the first urban center in southern Africa. And that was the town of Mappangubwe,
located around a hill site just south of the Limpopo River in modern day South Africa.
The physical evidence here, which has been extracted for decades by particularly archaeologists
from the University of Pretoria, but is only now showing up in places like museums in South Africa
and so forth, suggests a sharply defined hierarchy. Rulers at literally the top of the hill,
living indeed like royalty, living in structures made of stone,
and the flatter country, or the bottom portions of the hill, were the poorer commoners.
Mappangubwe was clearly connected with the Swahili dominated east coast
that we surveyed in the last lecture. Ivory and gold were traded eastward, and excavations have
uncovered many glass beads from India in particular, and find Chinese porcelain bowls at Mappangubwe.
Now the full flower, in a sense, of the southern developments is seen at Great Zimbabwe,
located in the central portions of the modern country, of course, which took the name of Zimbabwe
at its independence in 1980. This was the capital of a major late iron age state,
generally given the same name, a bit like Mexico City being the capital of Mexico, if you like.
The city of Great Zimbabwe represented the largest stone ruins, represents today,
the largest stone ruins in Africa, south of the Nile River.
Great Zimbabwe comprises essentially two focal points. There is the so-called hill complex,
which, as you'd expect, is located on the hill where the kings and the royals resided for most
of the time, and the valley complex, which housed the ordinary citizens of this town of
perhaps 20,000 people. But the valley complex also included the most impressive single ruin,
the high walled Great Enclosure. The Great Enclosure has an outer wall which runs
in an elliptical shape for approximately 700 feet. Its greatest diameter is the greatest
space between the edges of the walls is approximately 300 feet across. The walls themselves are 30 to
35 feet high, sometimes decorated at the top or in other cases even midway by coursing.
Coursing is the word for a layering of stone by decorative patterns. The largest walls at the
base are some 15 feet thick and they are solid throughout. There's no cavity in them,
although they taper upwards and therefore narrow as they reach the top.
This is the largest single structure by a considerable margin in pre-colonial
sub-Saharan Africa. Now the Great Enclosure with its passageways, its stairs, its inner chambers
surrounding the so-called conical tower, which again is about 30 feet high and about 20 feet at
base, was likely the political and indeed the religious focal point of the nation. In other
words, the speculation by archaeologists is that at certain moments obviously harvest festivals,
religious rites, etc., that the kings probably descended from the hill complex and carried out
these practices inside the Great Enclosure and most likely around this the so-called conical tower.
Millions of blocks of stone went into the walls of Great Zimbabwe. It must have taken many years,
probably certainly we can talk about decades to complete, which was accomplished by about the
year 1300 or so. The granite outcrops in this part of southern Africa have fissure lines,
so-called fracture planes, created in over eons by a constant alternation of exposure to a very
bright and warm sun, but very cold nights because this is situated on a plateau at about 4000 feet
elevation or so. By addition on the part of the builders of additional heat to these granite
outcrops, in a sense it's possible to sort of peel off the granite in more or less flatish
layers. At that point the builders are able to cut and finally shape the individual granite blocks
with, what else, iron tools. We encounter again an example of how none of this is on the cards
until this gift of iron becomes part of African life. Now the walls are dry stacked, that is
there is no mortar used in the construction of Great Zimbabwe in these millions of blocks.
And again the fact that they are still standing predominantly 700 years or so later suggests
that there was certainly considerable skill on the part of the dry stack masons.
Archaeologists believe that the largest buildings here are designed primarily to convey the power
and the prestige of the rulers, almost by cloaking them behind these walls and imposing or imparting
an air of secrecy and mystery. To visit this place it certainly does emit this aura of mystery.
European architecture, of course, long ago became quite concerned with the straight line,
the sharp corner, often the right angle corner, et cetera, et cetera, and obviously this created
some masterpieces. This is very different, there are no corners at Great Zimbabwe. It's constant
gentle curves and ellipses, often particularly in the hill complex, the constructions of the humans
are in essence blended into and make use of the actual granite outcrops themselves. So you have
this combination of the human injection of construction with what was put there by nature.
When I say mysterious, if you go inside the Great Enclosure and down a passageway which lies between
the outer wall and an immediately parallel inner one and leads over a course of 200 or 300 feet
into this kind of enter sanctum of the conical tower, that's quite an experience. First of all,
the sun, because it's such a narrow passage, very rarely hits it and you walk in there and suddenly
the temperature is about 10 degrees cooler. It starts out at probably about eight feet wide,
but it continually shrinks and narrows so that by the time you finally see the tower in front of
you, and the speculation again is this would have been sort of the center of the center of the
religious political life of the nation, it's barely as wide as your shoulders.
Now as I said, this is perched on the edge, as it were, of the quite high-lying Zimbabwe
plateau, a classic example of one of those overturned bowl images that I used earlier.
Great Zimbabwe was well situated to take advantage of both the high-country
passage and low-country passage, or in southern African terminology, high-felt and low-felt
passage. In other words, in the much drier winter months you could move cattle down into the
lower country and take advantage of steel-flowing rivers and passage there.
There's no question that we see an enormous multiplication then in wealth as measured by
the presence and the possession of cattle, and there's some interesting evidence that comes from
this of what we might call the royal or at least the elite lifestyle. In the 1960s and 70s some
excavators intentionally began to collect fragments of animal bones to try to get at
some clues about Great Zimbabwe. They collected something like 140,000 pieces of this, and they
did a fairly detailed examination of no less than 20,000 or so of them. Of the 20,000 all,
but 263 of them, in other words, well over 99% or so, were in fact cattle bones, but
something more interesting occurred here. 80% or so of these cattle had apparently died, had apparently
been slaughtered at the ages of approximately 24 to 30 months. That is the prime time for beef,
and it certainly suggests that there was a very regular slaughter of cattle to provide beef
for the consumption of an elite, because you may recall in lecture number six, I was quite emphatic
in saying that cattle alive to an ordinary African cultivator long ago or today are too valuable
living to embark on regular slaughter. In the case of the capital of a major state and its elite,
that's not necessarily the case. Now Great Zimbabwe is even better placed than Mappangubwe to
export gold and ivory to the east coast, and the ruins have yielded many samples, far more,
than Mappangubwe by far the most of any single site. Of prestige goods brought in from India,
Chad of the usual suspects at this point, glazed Persian bulls with inscriptions on them from
the 13th and 14th century. Again, the Chinese porcelain and caledon ware, glass beads from
India and the Near East. There, of course, was homegrown treasure as well, perhaps above all,
the carved stone birds, which represented the oracle of the king, you might say.
Again, there's some evidence of divine kingship of a sort, or semi-divine kingship.
Unfortunately, most of these birds, there were probably eight or ten of them, and we're talking
about sculptures that are probably six feet high or so. Most of them were actually looted
when outsiders first reached this city about a century ago. After independence in 1980,
quite a number of them were actually recovered and brought back to the museum there by the ruins.
Now, for reasons that are not entirely clear, by the way, just one more thing on that, those stone
carved birds, the so-called Shiri Yamwati, or bird of God, has become the modern symbol of the
nation of Zimbabwe. It appears, for instance, on their flag. For reasons that are not entirely clear,
Great Zimbabwe was abandoned. Rather suddenly, sometime around 1500 or so, the experts have ruled
out evidence of invasion here and have generally turned to ecological explanations. Again, we've
seen exhaustion of local resources, particularly timber, in the case of Maroway, for instance.
Some speculation that perhaps a human disease epidemic or a cattle episodic may have led to
the abandonment of it. However, the kingdom which grades Zimbabwe anchored was clearly the prototype
for a series of successor states built by Zimbabwe Shona peoples, the largest single ethnic group
in Zimbabwe, past and present. And these successor states like Torwa or Matapa, the last of these
survived to the 19th century. And the capitals of these later states, although not as large,
were constructed of stone in a similar style. In some cases, even more intricate. My personal
favorite is a Zimbabwe, a small Z there representing the sort of generic term translated usually as
literal meaning is house of stone, but it generally carries the connotation of royal court. Sometimes
simply translated as capital. At Nalitali, there is a Zimbabwe with a small Z. And this is on top
of a really high hill. It's beautifully decorated with several examples of the chevron styles and
alternating coloration of stone and so forth at various stages in the coursing.
As some speculation, it may have been a sort of summer getaway because of the coolness of the very
high hill for the old royalty. Now, let us flash forward a bit after the British led by Cecil Rhodes,
colonized southern Rhodesia, which of course is the same which became modern Zimbabwe.
Many white settlers who came to the country refused to believe that Africans were capable of
such a creation as Great Zimbabwe. The civilizing mission so-called of colonial rule,
it seemed, required the absence of anything resembling civilization prior to its arrival.
Instead, the official line was that Great Zimbabwe was a mystery. Now, it is mysterious,
I just tried to convey, but not exactly in the context that it was intended here.
That it was, the origins of it were a mystery that perhaps it was the doing of the lost tribe
of Israel or indeed the Queen of Sheba whom we encountered in the lecture on Ethiopia or maybe
the Phoenicians had had had a colony here long, long ago that was lost, King Solomon's minds,
and so on. In other words, anybody but the local Africans.
Just to give some of the flavor of this, a book published in the 1960s concluded,
quote, that Great Zimbabwe is completely out of character of the Bantu and has no justification
from other Negroid parts of Africa past or present. As late as 1974, the old Rhodesian regime
sent instructions to the essentially the parks department that any brochure on Great Zimbabwe,
quote, should indicate quite clearly that as yet no irrefutable evidence is available on the origin
of the ruins, unquote. Now, this contradicted the quite clear conclusions of every professional
archaeologists for almost a hundred years who had examined these ruins, starting with
Randall McIver in 1905, Richard Kate and Thompson in 1931, and followed by people like Peter
Garlick and Roger Summers later. They all concluded that it was of local origin built by
ancestors of the Shona and of medieval vintage. Part of the evidence for that is that as I mentioned
a moment ago, Great Zimbabwe is not unique. It's simply the largest of some 200 of these Zimbabwe
small Z that are found all through Zimbabwe today in the western parts of Mozambique, in the eastern
parts of Botswana, the northern parts of South Africa. In this part of the world, people built in
stone whenever it was available. The pottery, and there's an enormously greater amount of pottery
scattered over the entire town site than anything else, including the more exotic importations and
so forth, bear all the hallmarks of the period of pottery, style, and design that was typical of
the Shona ancestors in that period. Roger Summers, who was a fine archaeologist and
eventually had a sort of precarious position because his salary was paid by the Rhodesian
government in the 1970s. He commented at one point that anybody who questioned the
notion of external construction of this, this had been done by outsiders, in Summers' words,
quote, was met by anything from polite incredulity to downright abuse. Roger Summers found out the
hard way that that was true. I remember clearly a moment from graduate school in the 1970s, we had
just read a book by Summers called Ancient Gold Mining in Rhodesia and walked into the seminar and
Leonard Thompson, the teacher, mentioned that he had just heard that Roger Summers had been sacked
for, in essence, following his professional conscience, if you like, and asserting the local
origin of Great Zimbabwe. Now, a couple of lectures ago, you know, when we were looking at the history
of ancient Egypt, its relation to the history of ancient Greece, it took up these questions like
who were the ancient Egyptians, what color were they, and so forth. You know, it simply underscores
that, as human beings, we cannot help, any of us cannot help, viewing the past repeatedly from our
own perspective. All we can do, and I'm not saying that we should avoid that, all we can do is be aware
in a sense of how the contemporary concerns we have, how these contemporary lenses are affecting,
perhaps, our view of the past. I would suggest, again, perhaps in an echo of how I ended the
lecture on Egypt, that the colonial Rhodesian mythology about Great Zimbabwe is most revealing
about the colonizers themselves. We foreshadowed here some lectures which will
concentrate, in fact, in our penultimate 35th lecture, on the origins of the contemporary crisis
in Zimbabwe. Thank you.
