At your 29, the taste turns sour.
Welcome.
Independence was an achievement, a genuine achievement.
And the first taste of freedom in Africa was sweet, but it didn't last.
The taste turns sour.
The honeymoon ended, the quacha, the dawn clouded over.
Although the degree of decline certainly varied widely and in some places never occurred
at all, there's no avoiding the conclusion that in much of Africa, the hope and promise
of independence changed to disillusionment.
In this lecture, we focus on the political, social aspects of this story and in the next
lecture on the economic.
Now we've seen repeatedly in recent lectures that state power was central or more than
central, maybe all important, in the overall political economies constructed in the colonial
period and carried over into the independent countries.
Important implications flow from this fact.
In more developed and diversified societies, there are, to put it bluntly, many ways, many
avenues, many paths to do rather well financially.
A politician or a bureaucrat in such places who loses his or her position, job through
elections or otherwise, can turn to a host of other occupations.
You can go back to the law firm, to the law practice, where so many seem to come from,
of course.
You can become a lobbyist.
We all know what the revolving door between Congress and the lobbying organizations is
like in a town like Washington, D.C., can turn to business.
This was far less the case in the new African nations.
Getting access to the state machinery at high stations or at low was, in a sense, the name
of the game.
And it often seemed to be the only game.
And that, in turn, meant that it was a game likely to be played with considerable seriousness,
if not, indeed, with deadly ferocity.
As is so often the case, I think we can get a better feel for this by turning to an artist.
And in fact, we'll do that by turning to one we've turned to before.
One other than Chenyua Achebe, the legendary writer out of Nigeria.
And in this case, I want to turn to his novel entitled A Man of the People.
And I will just mention, in passing, that this book was published in the United States
in 1967.
The copyright held by Achebe is 1966.
I assume that he was writing it in 1965 and 66.
In that sense, it is an incredible forecast of what his home country, Nigeria, was about
to experience.
We'll come back to that story in a moment, but I'll just say that in some respects it
bears a comparison with a book like The Quiet American by Graham Greene, published in 1955
and yet extremely prescient about what the future might bring in the history between
Vietnam and the United States.
Okay, let's set the scene here for this excerpt from A Man of the People.
Our protagonist, who's a bright young man, has gone and he has spent an evening with
a member of parliament in the newly independent African nation, in fact, a minister.
And he's sort of dazzled by it.
His host, whose name is Nanga, is known for his abolient personality, his generosity,
and also known, increasingly suspected, to be engaging in illegal activities in corruption.
So the protagonist, after dinner, after the after dinner drinks, goes back to his well-appointed
room and I'll pick it up at that point.
I was simply hypnotized by the luxury of the great suite assigned to me.
When I lay down in that double bed that seemed to ride on a cushion of air and switched on
the reading lamp and saw all the beautiful furniture anew from the lying down position
and looked beyond the door to the gleaming bathroom and the towels as large as a lapa,
I had to confess that if I were at that moment made a minister, I would be most anxious to
remain one forever.
We ignore man's basic nature if we say, as some critics do, that because a man like Nanga
had risen overnight from poverty and insignificance to his present opulence, he could be persuaded
without much trouble to give it up again and return to his original state.
A man who has just come in from the rain and dried his body and put on dry clothes is more
reluctant to go out again than another who has been indoors all the time.
The trouble with our new nation, as I saw it then lying on that bed, was that none
of us had been indoors long enough to be able to say to hell with it.
We had all been in the rain together until yesterday.
Then a handful of us, the smart and the lucky and hardly ever the best, had scrambled for
the one shelter our former rulers left and had taken it over and barricaded themselves
in.
And from within they sought to persuade the rest through numerous loudspeakers that the
first phase of the struggle had been won and that the next phase, the extension of our
house, was even more important and called for new and original tactics.
It required that all argument should cease and the whole people speak with one voice
and that any more dissentant argument outside the door of the shelter would subvert and
bring down the whole house.
So if I can paraphrase here some of the highlights from that passage from Chebe, if you were inside
what he called the one shelter our former rulers left, as Chebe described it, he's talking
of course about the state, formerly colonial, now independent, if you were inside you wanted
and intended to stay inside.
And to those outside you said stop your clamoring, though you were there and I am here we must
think of ourselves as one, we're doing everything we can and we'll pass you morsels through
the window.
Or to change the metaphor, our challenges are great, our enemies often erstwhile imperialists
are many.
Don't rock the boat else we all shall sink.
So opposition, dissent, competition came increasingly to be seen as threat and depending
on the case as treacherous threat, even indeed treasonous threat.
Now the upshot of all of this was the move almost everywhere in Africa to greater authoritarianism.
The open multi-party parliamentary systems left behind by the departing colonialists began
to be abandoned.
But remember that these had begun life very late in the colonial day in a sort of deathbed
conversion to the virtues of dispensing democracy.
The colonies, after all, had been quite autocratic institutions themselves until late in the day.
The late historian Michael Crowder once wrote an article whose title of a play in the 1980s.
The title of his article was Whose Dream Was It Anyway?
And he sort of challenges the notion, this dream, and concludes that it was a bit of
a pipe dream to have expected that these plants of Western-style parliamentary democracy with
such shallow roots would thrive.
Instead they were rather easily stunted.
Now one option chosen by a great many rulers was the declaration of the one-party state.
It's an important term for much of recent African history, as so often positively or negatively
in Krumma, Afghanistan led the way.
But all the great ones, Kenyatta, Nyerere, Kaunda, Banda, Hufwebwani, Senghor, all of
them followed suit.
In all of those countries led by the legendary nationalists of the nationalist generation,
the one-party state became the legal reality a decade or so after independence.
Now at its best and most sophisticated, the one-party state was positive, was put forward
as a more authentically African political model than the imported one.
Indeed, I often hear people say, people in Africans, especially people who are sympathetic
to Africa in this country in the United States will say, well, you know, it seems that what's
needed here is something more authentic, something rooted in African, maybe they can find or
return to something that is a more authentic form of governing.
But I think it's important to recognize that it's not like this has never been tried.
The one-party state, again, at its best was an attempt in precisely that direction.
The arguments went something like this, that rather than this constant negative competition,
this dragging each other down, we should look for a search.
We should search indeed for consensus.
The imagery drawn here, and this is why I say they hearkened back to something they
argue was more authentic, rather like the village gathering of old.
You don't take a vote, you stay there until a decision is reached by some sort of consensus.
So the notion that first passed the post, that winner takes all, that kind of thing
that it had negative ramifications.
Again, the argument sometimes taken to be our challenges are so great, whether that
challenge is to mobilize for development or increasingly to foil the lurking imperialists.
We cannot afford the luxury, and that's how it was often put, the wasted time of disunity.
So again, at its most positive in the formulations presented by some brilliant minds like Julius
Niereri in Tanzania or Kenneth Kanda in Zambia, they argued in this vein that we can move
to a one-party state, and indeed in their formulations of it, with considerable reality,
they permitted within the single ruling party a fair amount of competition and dissent.
You can see this, particularly perhaps in Tanzania, where I think this idea had perhaps
the greatest reality.
Even during the one-party era in Tanzania, it was relatively common for some prominent
politicians, members of parliament, and indeed quite often ministers, to be thrown out of
office, to be defeated at the polls by a challenger who, it's true, had to be vetted by the party
leadership, and so on, but nonetheless was able to compete against someone in power and
replace them.
It comes down to sometimes what are your measures for the vitality of a democracy?
One measure that some would be is how frequently do you get the rascals being thrown out, and
in Tanzania at least, that was with some frequency.
Voter turnout.
In Tanzania's one-party era, voter turnout was often in the 70, 80% range, 90% occasionally,
and that was under a one-party system, and with, the evidence suggests, relatively little
compulsion, that's certainly a considerably higher proportion than one gets in the elections
in the United States, France, particularly off-year congressional elections.
Okay, now I've said repeatedly here, the one-party state at its best.
The fact is, the one-party state operated at its worst in quite a number of other cases,
and in these instances, the one-party state was simply a quite transparent cloak, if you
will, for iron dictatorship.
The new emperors, in many cases, had no genuine ideological clothes.
They had naked power.
So the one-party state was one aspect of what Ali Mazruli, the East African scholar, calls
the search for stability.
And indeed, if you measure stability by longevity in office, several of the rulers mentioned
above found it by turning to the one-party state.
Senghor, in power for 20 years in Senegal, Huffway, something close to 30 in Côte d'Ivoire,
Ivory Coast, Kenyatta, for 15 years in Kenyan, only ended with his death, Uriere for 24, actually,
in Tanzania, Kauanda, 27 years in Zambia, and Mabutu, 32 in the Congo or Zaire, as he
called it.
Now, in many cases, longevity was papering over, growing instability.
But even stability as measured strictly by longevity in office was not the case, was
elusive in a great many other places.
So what were the threats to stability?
One of them, certainly, was ethnic conflict.
As we know, almost all the African countries contained numerous nations, if you will, ethnic
groups, so-called tribes, and faced a rather daunting task before and after independence
of building a new and larger sense of national identity based on the externally imposed units.
Why did Côte d'Ivoire start every rally with one Zambia and have the crowd shout back
to him, one nation, trying to build that new form of national identity?
Now, in my view, there is nothing natural, it's often assumed to be, or inevitable, it's
often assumed to be about ethnic conflict or ethnic difference.
Tolerance and coexistence are just as common historically between ethnic groups as conflict.
But it's also not surprising that in a struggle, in an arena, the state arena, over quite limited
resources in these new nations and with these greatly heightened expectations and hopes,
it's not surprising, shouldn't be surprising to us, that people often mobilized around
ethnic lines.
As we stressed early on, and I always stress, when I talk about ethnicity or so-called tribe
or nation in Africa, ethnicity is fluid, it's changeable, it's expandable, it's contractable,
et cetera.
You can see this in the history of previously quite separate communities coming together
to mobilize as an ethnic block.
I've seen this in southern Zambia, where you find that peoples who often had conceived
in themselves as separate tribes, if you like, separate ethnic groups, begin to discover,
or at the very least begin to emphasize, cultural affinities, cultural similarities, common identities.
Why?
I suggest partly to mobilize for power, for resources, for a piece of the pie.
Now, in its benign form, in its more benign form, this is common to politics in very many
places.
The situation I'm describing could lead, for instance, in Africa, as it has elsewhere,
to ethnic balancing acts, taking the cabinet and making sure that they're enough from the
east and from the west and enough Bimba, enough Lozi, enough Nyandja, enough Tonga, so that
indeed everybody gets a piece of the pie and keeps the lid of satisfaction on.
This is quite familiar to any student, I think, of say, American politics, again, something
quite common.
So, the benign form there, but in certain circumstances, in these African nations, to use Crowder's
term, cobbled together at one point, he's talking about the borders and the artificiality
of the borders constructed during the scramble, in certain circumstances, this ethnic reality
was dynamite.
The most obvious example here was Achebi's home country, Nigeria, the most populous country
in all of Africa, again, something like one out of every five or six Africans on the continent
today is Nigerian.
In Nigeria, we find three large ethnic blocks, there are many smaller ones, coexisting in
the past and in the present, uneasily.
The Hausa and Fulani in the north, a heavily Islamic area there, the Yoruba in the southwest,
who probably had the greatest prosperity in the middle, at least, of the colonial period
because of cocoa production, and the Ebo peoples in the southeast.
The Ebo in particular, and this, in fact, is Achebi's home ethnic group, the Ebo in
particular had taken to Western education with alacrity and often wound up in relatively
elevated positions all through the country of Nigeria, in other words, they would get
a position in bureaucracy and be posted to the north or the west or to the capital or
what have you, some extent this is echoed in commercial life as well.
They found themselves, the Ebo people then increasingly found themselves to be the targets
of, frankly, of resentment.
Now all of this exploded in 1966 on the occasion of Nigeria's first military coup and it erupted
in the north, what can only be called pogroms, systematic attacks resulting in thousands
of deaths of Ebo were carried out in northern Nigeria in 1966.
A great number of Ebo from there and from elsewhere in Nigeria retreated, if you like,
to their home area in the southeast and leaders led by Colonel Ajuku in the southeast essentially
declared independence.
They attempted to secede from Nigeria and the name that they gave their fledgling or would
be potential new nation was Biafra.
This all took off in 1967. Nigeria's rulers had other ideas as you might expect and a bloody
civil war raged from 1967 to 1970.
This was the first time that I personally can remember the images that have become so
distressingly familiar of essentially hungry or starving children, in this case the results
of food cordons or, yes, prevention of food getting through into southeastern Nigeria.
Now at the wars in, the military ruler of Nigeria, Yakubo Gowan, adopted very Lincoln-esque
posture and asserted that there would be no victors, no vanquished and so on. So Nigerian
unity prevailed, but anyone can see 35 years later that it remains precarious.
Another threat to stability was the military coup, which I mentioned in passing a moment
ago. As no less than Mao Zedong said famously, power comes from the barrel of a gun and it
is true that any leader anywhere without a loyal army is vulnerable. There's a paradox
here, at least on the surface, because coups were often launched precisely in the name
of restoring stability, of combating indiscipline and corruption. We'll come to corruption in
a moment. The officers involved, often young ones, the notion was we'll set things right
and then, after we've righted the ship, we'll return to the barracks. Now, frankly, that
rarely happened, although it was not unknown. The problem was that once the precedent was
set, a new group of officers would get the same idea. Yet again, in Krumah, in the lead,
the shock of his overthrow in 1966, meaning Krumah, the father of African nationalism,
overthrown leaves the country as part of his grander and grander international ambitions.
Actually, it left the country to pursue diplomatic matters related to Vietnam in 1966. Overthrown,
not permitted to come back, the image of people pulling down the statue of himself, which
in Krumah had put up in the capital city and smashing it to bits, it was shocking. But
the shock diminished as coup after coup, over 150 of them, and all became a dismally familiar
bit of news out of Africa.
Now finally, and obviously, we must mention corruption. We looked briefly at the Congo
or Zaire's Mabutu, who has to be considered the all-time champion. But many, many others
found it impossible to resist the temptation, as the Chevy put it, once they were inside
the shelter, albeit on a vastly diminished scale from Mabutu. Some saw themselves as
deserving after all those years of struggle, after, again, a Chevy's image, after all those
years of being out there in the rain. Others, as the fine political scientist Peter Ecke
suggests, saw the state arena as an alien trough. He suggests that this was seen as
an alien implantation, and therefore not subject to traditional African mores about accountability
and honesty. Again, it echoes Michael Crowder's notion of whose dream was this, anyway. If
this is an alien thing, then it doesn't pack the same moral punch, or immoral punch, to
feed it that trough. Eventually, as the Ginean novelist, i.e. Kwai Arma, in his book The
Beautiful Ones Are Not Yet Born, which is a thinly disguised parable, really, about the
overthrow of Enkrumah, he showed brilliantly in that novel that, at some point, to many
people, it simply seemed stupid, rather than courageous, not to join in this free-for-all.
Now, the larger problem, in a way, was that it was often what I'll call dead-in corruption.
After all, I take it that corruption, of various types, into various degrees, is a universal.
I simply think that there is no such thing as a political system, or a society, that
is free of corruption. It's a question of degree. It's a question of whether ordinary
people can get onto their lives without running into roadblock after roadblock after roadblock,
and it's a question of whether what corruption does take place is simply a payoff. In other
words, you pay off somebody so that you don't get in bigger trouble, you pay off the police
commissioner, or the cop at the roadblock, or what have you. Dead-in corruption like
straightforward ripoffs of foreign aid money, such as Mabutu unquestionably carried out.
In other words, dead-in corruption like that, not, unfortunately, a sort of commission on
a project that might otherwise be genuinely productive. I'm going to paraphrase a story
that comes from the book written by Keith Richberg, the African-American journalist who reported
for the Washington Post for quite a number of years from Africa, and it's a story that
he was told in Africa. And it goes something like this, that there are two quite brilliant
outstanding young men students, one from an African nation, one from an East Asian
nation, or Southeast Asian nation, one of those economies called the Asian Tigers, eventually.
They both earn scholarships, and they both go to Britain and study at a place like Cambridge
or Oxford Study Finance. They both come back and become prominent in their home countries,
occupy positions like ministers of finance and so on. And finally, 20 years later or
so, they visit each other. First, the African man goes to visit his Asian friend, finds
him in a very luxurious home with a swimming pool. They're out there on the deck and overlooking
the city, and he sees the freeways and the skyscrapers, the apartment blocks, waving
palm trees and so on. And the African asks his Asian friend, well, how did you do so
well here? How did you get into such good circumstances? And the Asian friend waves his hand at the city
below and says 10%. And then the next year, according to Richberg, the visit is reversed.
And the Asian gentleman visits his African friend, finds him in an equally sumptuous domestic
palace with a beautiful home, and again the swimming pool on the hill, elevated, overlooking
the city. But they're looking at streets with potholes, with bridges that haven't been repaired,
with crumbling skyscrapers and falling down apartment blocks and so forth. And according
to Richberg, the Asian friend asks his African friend, well, how did you do so well? And the
African friend waves his hand at the city and says 100%. That's what I'm getting at
here in terms of corruption is, I assume, going to happen. But the degree and what it
also accompanies, whether productive or not, is clearly an additional issue.
So coups, conflict, and corruption, that's the title of a Time Magazine cover story from
the mid-1980s. It's a picture that was, is, exaggerated in the West for sure. But it was
real enough, and it wasn't Westerners who were paying the price. Thank you.
Thank you.
