Lecture 18 South Africa, Diamonds and Gold
The year was 1867.
The place was the dry, dusty interior of what we call South Africa today.
Along the middle reaches of the Orange River, this was the Plotland in Afrikaans, the Flatland.
This was Southern Africa's outback, and indeed this was an open frontier zone to use the concept
we introduced in the last lecture.
One day in 1867, a couple of children, children of a farm worker family on an Afrikaans-held
farm in this area found a small rock, a pebble.
They played games with it, kids all over the world, of course, played games with stones
and pebbles and marbles and what have you.
It looked different to them, it looked different to their parents.
The owner of the farm, Skokfanikik, wound up giving it rather casually to a guy named
John O'Reilly, who was a transport rider, as they called him, that is a handler of teams
of draft oxen and horses, an itinerant hawker in this part of the Southern African interior.
O'Reilly took it to Hopetown, which is the nearest crossroads sleepy village.
The local merchants assured him that the rock was worthless.
Not to be deterred, O'Reilly took it on to Colesburg, a little bit bigger place where
the local magistrate found that the edge of this pebble would cut glass quite easily.
Eventually, the stone is sent at an unsealed envelope a couple of hundred miles further
south to the eastern Cape Colony town of Graemstown, where a trained, a legitimate jeweler, in fact
pronounced it to be a diamond, in fact a rather handsome one of something over 21 carats.
Eventually, the diamond would make its way to Cape Town, where Richard Southie, the colonial
secretary of the Cape Colony, at one point announced, rather pompously, perhaps that
this diamond is the rock upon which the future success of South Africa will be built.
Pompas may be, but also accurate.
If that rock, however, was to be important, what about a different kind of rock?
In this case, gold, less than 20 years later in 1886, gold, enormous deposits of gold, begin
to be discovered in the area now surrounding the modern city of Johannesburg.
The dramatic discoveries of diamonds and gold, the world's largest deposits of each, set
in motion a mineral revolution, which constitutes, in my mind, the last great piece of the puzzle
leading us to 20th century South Africa.
The mineral revolution eventually impacted virtually every household in the whole southern
African region in the past century.
Let's turn back to diamonds and what ensues following the discoveries in 1867.
The key to understanding the significance of Kimberley, and Kimberley is the city which
emerged overnight in the middle of these discoveries, it did not exist before, any more than Johannesburg
existed before gold was discovered there.
The key to understanding Kimberley's significance is to see the transformation of a diamond
rush into something very different, a modern, deep level mining industry.
Let's take that term rush for a minute, in a classic mineral rush, and we think of the
gold rush in 1849 in California, or the gold rush is in the Klondike in the Yukon in 1898
and so forth.
If we have imagery of that, it goes something like this, the word spreads fast.
Lots of people, mostly not exclusively, but mostly males, pour into the area where the
finds have been made.
There's lots of furious searching and clawing and panning and digging for these hope-for-riches
during the day, at night there's generally lots of drinking and fighting.
A few people strike it rich, most don't, everybody leaves, and a ghost town is left behind.
Now most of that stuff did occur at Kimberley, except the last part, the exodus and the left
behind ghost town, and again the key to that is the transformation of this into a modern,
deep level mining industry.
Now to take the rush phase, thousands of so-called diggers, and that was the term they were known
by, came to the region from all over the world, and I mean all over the world, they came from
America, they came from Latin America, from every corner of Europe, from Australia, and
from every part of southern Africa, and a substantial number of them for a while were
black southern Africans.
Now the diggers were assigned and worked separate small claims, and I do mean small.
Some of them were as small as 10 square yards, that's approximately 2 yards by 5 yards, 6
feet by 15 feet.
In a particular diamond-diferous area around Kimberley, that is places where the diamonds
were being found, we would find hundreds, at the largest of them, 1600 different claims
laid out on a space of a number of acres.
Now holding a claim in theory gave you the right to dig directly perpendicular into the
earth's surface.
You can perhaps see that this is going to lead to problems.
The deeper they went, the greater were the difficulties and the dangers that they met.
After all, if I am, as my students say, the slacker, and next door to me, you are working
very hard and excavating more dirt than me, you are going to carry your claim further
into the earth than I am.
This creates, of course, a wall of dirt on the side of your claim, which at any moment
could collapse.
It not only might bury the hard-working digger next door, at least Endrum, it raises the
kind of interesting legal question about whose diamonds those are that are found in the rubble
of the cave-in or the collapse.
Just getting the dirt out of here becomes a project, and it's just jerry-rigged for
a long time.
Among the edges, they create small towers with ropes or guy wires leading to the particular
digger's claim, and a set of pulleys is used to take, bucket by bucket, the excavated dirt
out to the edges of this claim.
The great South African historian C.W.D.
Keevey described this as an insane asylum unleashed upon a beach.
That's the way it looked.
This furious activity, the beach, is a reference to how dry and sandy the soil is.
If you go deep enough, of course you hit the water table and the problems of flooding begin
to be a factor.
Now, meanwhile, though, as more and more diamonds are being discovered, just as the costs and
dangers are going up, the price of them is falling as more are coming onto the market.
Now, supplying the main scarcity is a factor in the pricing of almost anything, but here
it's worth making a particular point.
Diamonds and gold are different cattle of fish than things like iron or copper or petroleum.
With all of those things, you get energy or you get materials that are useful in carrying
out actual tasks.
They are productive minerals in the most direct sense.
Diamonds and gold is a different story.
The value of diamonds and gold for centuries, I guess millennia, has rested largely on a
psychological appreciation here, and that means that the question of scarcity becomes
even more important.
It was none other than Adam Smith, one of the great economists of all time, who carried
out an analysis that he called the water diamond paradox.
I remember encountering this in Econ 101 at some point.
He was trying to explain scarcity and pricing, and he said, look at water.
It's the most valuable thing on earth.
Everybody needs it.
Every plant needs animals.
Every human needs it to survive, and yet relatively inexpensive because relatively plentiful.
Diamonds on the other hand, you can't do much of anything with, but relatively expensive
because relatively scarce.
The solution, if a viable diamond industry was to survive, was to control the output
of diamonds onto the market, to control the scarcity factor, and to attract the huge capital
investment necessary to finance up-to-date mining technology and a large mine labor force.
Diamonds were still there.
As you go deeper, you encounter the so-called blue earth in the Kimberley region.
There's plenty of diamonds there, but getting at them at deeper and deeper levels spelled
the end of the digger with his pick, his shovel, and his bucket.
At this point, we need to introduce an economic genius, and I think he deserves that label,
and of course he's a towering figure in Southern African history.
His name, of course, is Cecil John Rhodes.
Many of you may know him as the one who endowed the Rhodes Scholarships at his old alma mater
where he was a General Mediocre student, and that was, of course, Oxford.
Born in England of an Anglican priest, he went out to Southern Africa as a very young man
to join his brother, who was already living the life of adventure there.
It shouldn't surprise us.
He soon made his way to where the action was centered and concentrated at Kimberley,
and there is where he first worked, in some ways, his magic.
Rhodes was able to forge through his own charisma and charm, through his own ability to turn
the deal, through what many thought was indeed his wheeling and dealing, or in some cases
backstabbing, he was able to forge a marketing mechanism for the diamond industry that is
still with us today.
It's a word that all of you have heard.
It's De Beers.
De Beers consolidated, De Beers mine incorporated, et cetera.
De Beers was Rhodes' creation and designed specifically to control the feeding of markets
on to the world economy, so that the scarcity was controlled and the price could be maintained.
I don't know of any other commodity or any other firm, I suppose, that has gotten as
close to a long-lasting monopoly.
In a sense, De Beers puts Rockefeller and Standard Oil or Gates and Microsoft in the
shade when it comes to creating something like a workable monopoly.
I had reason to be in a jewelry shop a few months ago, and the local jeweler said that
despite such things as so-called dirty diamonds, the smuggling of diamonds onto the world market
that we'll revisit in a later lecture, that De Beers remains the central power in the entire
industry even today.
Rhodes was also the guy behind attracting and organizing this enormous infusion of capital
from the great banking houses of Europe, the Rothschilds and so on.
So that the beginning of the excavation and creation of these huge or very deep vertical
shafts into the earth, the horizontal shafts that would go to the rock face where the actual
mining would be controlled, all of this required new kinds of technology, new sources of energy,
the application of steam energy, electric energy, eventually petroleum, and so forth.
For its time, it was state of the art of the industrial revolution.
So like Chaka, whom we met a few lectures back, Rhodes had an enormous impact on southern
African history despite living a comparatively short life.
Chaka lived 41, 42 years.
He was born in 1853, dies in 1902 at 49.
His ambitions and his achievements certainly went far beyond the business world.
He became prime minister of the Cape Colony in 1890, held that post for six years, and
as we'll see in a lecture fairly soon, he is the key factor in extending the British
empire northward from South Africa into the two territories that were named for him,
northern Rhodesia, southern Rhodesia.
I don't know of any other figure myself in history with not one but two countries named
after him.
Now Kimberly became the, again to quote C.W.
DeKeefe, a book written in 1941, a history of South Africa, social and economic.
The language is old fashioned, but in some ways nobody ever nailed the mineral revolution
better than DeKeefe.
He called Kimberly the quote the cradle and testing ground for certain practices, certain
institutions with a lasting visibility in southern Africa.
I would highlight above all, I think, Kimberly as the original home of the so-called closed
compound.
Now if you think of a compound as a physical structure, you may see for instance, enclosure
first of all.
You see fencing or walling around a space, inside that space, in other words, access
and egress very closely controlled there.
Inside there you're likely to see in a compound, large buildings of a hostel or barracks style
designed to house a large number of people in relatively rudimentary sorts of style.
Now how and why does the compound emerge here?
Again we go back to the peculiar nature of diamonds.
Diamonds pack an enormous amount of value, but they pack that value into a very, very
small package.
For that reason, diamonds have always been a target for what mine owners considered theft.
Diamonds have always been objects of smuggling and contraband and so forth and they are today.
So one problem which Rhodes and his fellow diamond magnates refer to as IDB, illicit
diamond buying or illegal diamond buying if you like, in other words, they're evading
the flow controlled by the beers and this begins with theft by miners.
The miner puts in the eight hour shift or the ten hour shift might indeed be tempted
to take the tenth after giving the mining company the first nine or putting that into
the hopper.
Finding that tenth one at the end of the day might indeed be tempted, I think I would
be, to slip it into a pocket, maybe put it under the tongue, tuck it in your ear, indeed
swallow it.
This is the hardest thing on earth.
There's nothing in your intestines that's going to dissolve the diamond.
So indeed this is one way to smuggle diamonds out of the mines.
So controlling IDB, Rhodes and others pioneered the erection and creation of these closed
compounds.
By housing and feeding the mine workers in an enclosed space with restricted access
in Hegress, the miners could at the close of each shift, not only could they be marched
there to start the shift, at the close of the shift the first place they could go were
into the so-called holding rooms where they could be searched and I do mean given full
body searches in order again to get a handle and a control on this problem of so-called
IDB.
Now Rhodes had no illusions of this temptation affected only black African miners.
If he had his way, he would have had, I'm sure it would have been more comfortable,
but he would have subjected white miners.
Already we're seeing a kind of precipitation of this labor force into a group of white
miners doing the shift boss work, the skilled and semi-skilled work, and a huge number of
low-skilled or semi-skilled African workers beneath him in the authority structure.
White miners to put it bluntly had the social and political clout to resist this kind of
control.
So the closed compound comes to be an institution associated with the black workforce, on the
mines first at Kimberly.
But although they're originally constructed to control theft, I put it this way, IDB is
a good place to start in understanding why compounds became so important, but it's not
a good place to stop.
The compounds provided a number of other advantages if this was going to be a viable industry.
They were useful in imposing sort of overnight what we might call modern labor discipline.
This is an industry where everybody has to be in their place at a particular time.
The notion of being able to wake the miners en masse, feed them en masse, get them there
at the right time to do the shift work and so forth, a tremendous advantage.
The sheer effort of control, you could keep troublemakers out of the compound or union
organizers or what have you.
And finally simply the economies of scale.
You could control costs by feeding people, buying in economic lots of large scale by
housing people en masse here.
Now the dichotomy here, this geographical, this spatial dichotomy between the mine, the
point of production over here, but over here the workforce.
This dichotomy, the residential area assigned to the black workforce, eventually you see
this mirrored, you see it reflected in almost every city and town, large and small, in
South Africa today.
You have the town center, the point of production, and then over there, maybe across that open
space you find the township.
Very specific meaning in Southern Africa.
It's not just urban area, town here, the township, the location in Afrikaans de Lokhazi, that's
where the black urban workforce is housed.
Again, this is left unmarked, still visible today even though the legal structures behind
this have been erased after 1990.
Now the diamond industry alone would have had a substantial impact on Southern African
history, no question about it.
Take that impact and multiply it by a factor of about 10.
And you have some idea of what the gold mining industry has meant.
I think it can honestly and rightly be said that gold, in many respects, built modern
South Africa.
Gold was the basis for the development of the gigantic Vitvatstrand Johannesburg urban
complex.
This is the largest urban complex in all of sub-Saharan Africa.
Gold underlay the enormous investment in infrastructure and eventually in secondary industry, which
became typical of these urban areas here.
In a sense, South Africa is starting down the road to what it still is in a lot of respects,
and that is a first world country combined with a third world country rolled into one.
The urban and industrial sector becomes the country's driving force.
But again, the peculiarity of the particular minerals we're talking about here, the deposits
found around the Vitvatstrand area, around Johannesburg, were the largest that had ever
been found in total quality.
But in terms of ore quality, it was a very different story.
These were very poor in ore quality.
In other words, it was an enormous amount of gold bearing ore, which produced a relatively
small amount of actual gold, and it was embedded, it had to be extracted and so forth.
In general, you had to take out something like three tons of rocks and dirt in order
to come up with and extract a single ounce of gold.
Now what does this have to do with what I turn to now, and that is the development of
migrant labor?
You could put it this way.
Without a huge, low-wage African workforce, South Africa's gold might have been left
in the ground.
The cost of getting it out with its low ore quality might have meant that these huge deposits
might never have been exploited, instead, as I said, they made modern South Africa.
Eventually, then, the mineral revolutions impact on people, on ordinary people.
Throughout Southern Africa was felt most directly in the creation of a low-wage oscillating,
that's something to mean back and forth, that is from the rural village to the mine or the
city increasingly and back, a low-wage oscillating migrant labor system.
The creation of this migrant labor system is the way the effects of the mineral discoveries
is transmitted to ordinary people, ordinary households, right through the entire subcontinent
of Southern Africa.
For my money, labor, and migrancy, you can certainly make an argument is the single greatest
reality in most people's lives over the last century or so, right through that region.
But why did people go?
It's not as simple a question as people often assume.
First of all, mining is hot, dirty, dusty, dangerous work, 58,000 deaths in the last
hundred years from accidents underground in South Africa's gold mine.
That doesn't include people who lost hands or fingers or people who developed lung diseases,
et cetera, et cetera, especially at low-wage levels.
Why would anybody do it?
Why would they migrate from a rural community to work in these mines and increasingly in
the secondary industry?
So eventually, the question morphs into one of, why do people go from the rural countryside
to the mines and the cities of Southern Africa?
And again, it's more complex.
There's a whole variety of reasons for this.
The same migrant might go for different reasons for one journey as opposed to the next.
There's combinations of factors at work here.
There was a measure of direct compulsion early on, yes.
People who would go into rural communities, put a gun to people's heads, round them up,
literally bind them and take them to mines.
Did this happen?
Yes, it did happen.
It was a kind of temporary slavery.
But it tended to happen only early on.
It was illegal for one reason.
But after a while, as the mineral revolution takes hold and this becomes a system with
a momentum of its own, frankly, direct compulsion of the sort I just described is unnecessary.
There are other factors, both push factors, compelling people and pull factors, attracting
people which create a dynamic of, in fact, usually a surplus of available labor without
the need for these kinds of crude compulsion that I mentioned.
Some migrants went quite voluntarily, indeed, to obtain the money for consumer goods, cultural
tastes after all are changing in this period.
People want Western-style clothes or they want that factory-made wool or cotton blanket
for their dear old dad or the three-legged iron pot that you see in so many places for
their dear old mother or grandmother.
They might want to work for a while, come back home and invest in the rural sector,
purchase cattle for as draught oxen by the iron plows that allow you to perhaps be more
prosperous without having to go to the mine next time.
You might want to invest in your children's education and therefore make it possible for
them to avoid going down in the mine such as you had to do.
And finally, there's no need to deny the reality of cultural factors here, you know, the attraction
of the bright lights all over the world.
Rural peoples or peoples from small communities have wanted to go to where the action is.
And indeed, in cultural terms, the big city, these townships become the place where a vibrant
urban culture, which is still seen today in music and drama and poetry and literature
and so forth, this is where it's born and a lot of people want to be a part of it.
Now, to continue our understanding of why people migrated in such numbers, remember
that the mineral revolution was unfolding in these decades of the 1870s, 80s, 90s into
the first decades of the 20th century, exactly during the same decades as the overall military
and political conquest of Africa is taking place.
And that, of course, we're going to turn to with a wider lens in some following lectures.
All of the new regimes, of course, were states and states tax.
They imposed taxes on the population and they had to be paid in colonial currencies.
Now, for a time it was possible, for a time it was possible, for some people, a substantial
number of people, to earn the money they needed to pay the tax or the money they wanted or
felt they needed for some of these new goods or to invest at home and so forth by selling
produce from their rural farms.
After all, urban populations have to be fed.
And some people are able to actually get the resources they need by selling products off
the phone.
You might consider this the cash crop option, a way to avoid going to the city.
But of course, if you're going to follow the cash crop option, you have to have land on
which to grow the crops.
If land has been lost as it was in enormous quantities precisely to settler occupation,
then the land is not available and therefore the cash crop option is not available.
Some people live too far from the infrastructure, it was simply too costly to get products to
market which again might have allowed them to pursue the cash crop option and to avoid
the option of going to the mines and the cities.
Over time then, migration tended to become unavoidable rather than discretionary.
Again, this doesn't happen overnight, but by the 1920s or 30s, this mineral revolution
has taken hold.
And as I say, at that point, it is no longer a discretionary migration in many respects.
It's become a reality for household after household after household, that someone in
order to, in the most basic sense, make ends meet and to survive is going to have to be
part of this migrant labor equation.
Virtually every household, as I say, is touched by it.
The development of the city then and the development of southern Africa, south Africa's enormous
wealth at one level and at the urban locus is mirrored by the underdevelopment of the
countryside as able-bodied labor, particularly male labor in its most productive years, is
absent.
Now, what does this mean for women?
Increasing numbers of women did make it to the city and they filled various niches ranging
from beer production to domestic service to small-scale retail commerce, etc., etc.
But for several generations, most migrants were male, who returned periodically to their
families in the rural areas.
What their absence meant was that the burden of maintaining rural households, where, after
all, the next generation of migrants is growing up, is born increasingly by women alone.
It's not like they didn't have a great deal to do before, but now they often have to perform
those tasks.
The early season plowing, for instance, the clearing for fields, formerly performed by
males in a very real sense.
I don't think this is overstating the case.
Rural African women, even millions of them who never saw the city, who never made the
journey, who never went to the urban areas, played a crucial role in making the growth
of Southern Africa's urban economy viable.
Thank you.
