Lecture 11, The Swahili Commercial World
Welcome.
In our last lecture, we surveyed the histories of Ghana, Mali, and Songhai.
Now, just as these major trading states arose in West Africa, along the southern shore of a sea of sand,
so in East Africa, there emerged a distinctive commercial culture on the shore of a real sea, the Indian Ocean.
A remarkable document from the first century AD, written in Greek in the Roman Egyptian city of Alexandria,
called the Periplus of the Arethraean Sea, which was the name for the Indian Ocean,
is essentially a guide to the Indian Ocean for Mediterranean and Red Sea trading ships and their captains.
It shows quite clearly that by that point, some 2000 years ago, that what the Greeks called Azania,
that is the East African coast, was already connected commercially with areas to the north.
Now, forgive me a slight digression at the start on the word Azania.
We've noted when we looked at Ghana, for instance, and we'll note again in the next lecture on Great Zimbabwe,
that some of these fabled names from the African past are brought forward, and in essence appropriated,
as a sort of resource for African pride, if you like, when colonies become independent.
The Gold Coast takes the name from the old West African Empire of Ghana.
Modern Zimbabwe takes its name from Great Zimbabwe, which we look at in the next lecture.
Now, what does this have to do with Azania?
In the 1970s, as the apartheid system in South Africa was very much in the saddle,
there were, of course, a number of opposition movements to it, some inside and some still legal and some exiled and, of course, outlawed.
Some of the opponents of the apartheid regime, and in this case, they were opponents who differed from and, in fact,
were split away from, opposed the African National Congress, which was illegal and in exile.
And, of course, the African National Congress is the party of Nelson Mandela.
But these opponents of apartheid who styled themselves to be more radical than the African National Congress,
at a certain point took up the name Azania and forecast this, in a sense, began to use it to refer to the country officially known as the Republic of South Africa.
In other words, the notion that the sort of Ghana and Zimbabwe precedent would be followed again here.
So you get movements like the Azanian People's Organization coming into some prominence in the 1970s, et cetera, et cetera.
Now, as I just noted, Azania is a little bit different case here.
This is a term, after all, coined by outsiders, by Greeks.
It's one that they came up with for the East African coast.
And, of course, the East African coast is not exactly South Africa, although that didn't matter in the case of ancient and modern Ghana.
Well, the Greek origins of this were not lost on the A and C.
And after Mandela was released, and South Africa, of course, went through its C change and emerged as the country it is today with the African National Congress very much,
the ruling party, you'll notice that the name has not been changed to Azania.
Okay, so much for my digression.
A series of small settlements along what the Greeks call Azania, along the coast, provided ivory, tortoise shell, coconut oil, in return for ironware, cotton cloth, wheat, wine.
The southernmost of these settlements mentioned in the periplus, this guide to the Indian Ocean, was called rapta.
The exact location of rapta remains a little bit unclear.
Some suggest that it was the island of Pemba off the shore of the northern part of today's Tanzania, others that located closer to modern-day Dar es Salaam.
But it gives an idea of how far south on that coast the familiarity reflected in that document went.
The population here, described as tall and dark skinned, consisted of early iron-aged mixed farmers.
But because of their coastal location, of course, skilled as well in taking advantage and fishing the coves and island waters of the coast.
By about the 5th century AD at the latest, they were almost certainly speaking Bantu languages.
That is, languages part of that vast family of 400 or 500 languages stretching from central and east Africa all the way down to South Africa.
In the later centuries of the 1st millennium AD, trade across the greater Indian Ocean began to take off, if you will.
And the groundwork was laid for a genuinely urban commercial east African culture.
Sailors in improved ships, and in this case the key was a ship out of Arabia, the Dao, late-teen sail.
Skillfully exploited the Indian Ocean monsoon winds, which blow essentially in one direction during half the year and in the other half.
They blow essentially from the coast, the east African coast, towards the Arabian Sea and therefore towards Arabia, the Arabian Peninsula, Persia and India from April to October.
And then they blow from those areas towards the east African coast from about November to March.
Now contact was especially expensive then with the Muslim societies of the Arab and Persian worlds.
They had their own term, as the Greeks had for east Africa, which was the land of Zanj.
Sometimes you'll see that spelled Zinj or Z-E-N-J.
And this comes from the word of Persian origin for black and obviously a reference to the inhabitants of this east African coast.
By this time it is likely that some Arab Muslims settled in towns along the coast, indeed may have founded some of those,
and some others descendants of the indigenous population may already have adopted Islam.
Ivory from African elephants was by far the most important export at this time.
The African elephant is considerably larger than his Asian cousin and the tusks are larger.
It's also considered superior in quality and is softer and more carvable.
The wider diameter of the tusk was useful for the making of bracelets, which were a very popular item made of ivory in India.
The greatest demand may have come from China where the carrying chairs, the sort of sedan chairs of the nobility,
the preferred material for the construction of those was also African ivory.
But this certainly was not the only thing coming out of east Africa.
Ambergris which is a fossilized resin but gives off a very pleasant scent.
In essence it's an early version of perfume if you like.
Mangrove poles which were valued for their straightness and a small quantity of gold at this point followed in importance.
Now we briefly mentioned the presence of slaves in our survey of the West African savanna kingdoms last time,
and again it will not be prominent here but it's a foreshadowing of subjects to come.
Some African slaves drawn from the coast's hinterland were also exported,
especially to the Basra region of today's Iraq, southernmost Iraq I suppose you'd say.
And in fact there in 868 AD a major slave rebellion broke out which was titled by historians of that area the so-called Zange revolt.
Now as I did last time I want to go to some contemporary sources to give us a little bit of a feel of the unfolding of the human experience in some of these places along the East African coast.
And the earliest of these is a document which was written in 916 AD by again an Arabic scholar and traveler named Al Masoudi.
He traveled down the East African coast on Adal which originally came from his home in Oman at the southern tip,
the southeastern tip of the Arabian peninsula.
And here's his description of Zange just at the close of 1st millennium AD.
The land of Zange produces wild leopard skins, the people wear them as clothes or export them to Muslim countries.
They are the largest leopard skins and most beautiful for making saddles.
They also export tortoise shell for making combs for which ivory is likewise used.
The Zange have an elegant language and men who preach in it.
One of their holy men will often gather a crowd and exhort his hearers to please God in their lives and to be obedient to him.
He explains the punishments that follow upon disobedience and reminds them of their ancestors and kings of old.
These people have no religious law, their kings rule by custom and by political expediency.
The Zange eat bananas which are common among them as they are in India but their staple food is millet.
They also eat honey and meat. They have many islands where the coconut grows.
Its nuts are used as fruit by all the Zange peoples.
One of these islands which is one or two days sail from the coast has a Muslim population and a royal family.
This is the island of Kanbalu and this again not exactly located.
This may indeed be the island of Pimba.
From Almasudi's description it seems that we can draw certain kinds of impressions.
He not only gives us some idea of everyday life in terms of food and diet and the commercial stuff, the tortoise shells and ivory etc.
Leopard skins he adds to the list.
But there are also interesting references to culture and religion here.
When he is speaking of the elegant language and the men who preach it etc.
He is speaking really of one of our localized indigenous religions.
The clue to that is his mild put down at the end of one of the paragraphs I read where he says these people have no religious law.
He is obviously speaking about a non-Muslim orator here in the sense that there is the lack of the Sharia, the Muslim law, which of course would be the case.
Were he Muslim?
And yet the very last lines I mentioned there show that when he mentions another island, a different island, where there is a Muslim population and royal family.
And in fact the predominately at this stage, still non-Muslim character of the area is indicated in the first sentence where he said that the leopard skins are exported to Muslim countries.
Implying certainly that this is not yet one of those.
Okay, between about 1000 and 1500 AD, early in the second millennium, the East African coast entered its own version of a golden age.
The Swahili world had arrived.
Now in a variation on our theme of state building, which has run through the last several lectures, eventually about 40 independent compact city states came to dot the coastal map.
And they stretched from today's Somalia, Mogadishu, now putatively the capital of that state, if indeed the Somalia state is operable, probably the northern most of the Swahili city states and Safala the southern most.
So about 40 altogether, quite independent considering themselves rivals, but rarely carrying that to the extent of armed conflict.
They're primarily commercial rivals and quite jealous of their share of particular trade linked to Arabia, Persia, India, eventually China, the Indian Ocean trade.
Now city state, of course, refers to a situation where the urban center, the city is coterminous with the country itself, if you like, or the state itself.
There are, in other words, it's not a capital in the center of a more extensive territory itself contained.
And we have examples of that still in the modern world, probably Singapore would qualify, Hong Kong might have qualified before its reabsorption into mainland China, perhaps even the Vatican.
Swahili city states then a variation on the theme of state creation and state building.
Now the city's elites here were quite cosmopolitan, there were frequent shipments and therefore a considerable availability of goods from Arabia, Persia, India, China.
They were common, they constructed elegant homes out of coral stone and mangrove.
Now coral is an interesting building material, it obviously comes from the sea, and it can be readily worked, that is cut and shaped into blocks while submerged underwater.
Once exposed to the air, on the other hand, it takes on a permanent hardness which makes it possible to construct buildings and homes with it.
As in West Africa, the literal importance of gold increased.
In this case the Swahili, especially the southern towns, like Kilwa, prospered from gold mined far in the interior on the Zimbabwean Plateau.
And we take up the Zimbabwean story as the centerpiece of our next lecture.
Now you might assume that gold would be the element used in the many thousands of coins that were in fact minted at a couple of centuries.
There were certainly mints at Kilwa, Zanzibar, and probably Mogadishu.
That appears not to have been the case.
The gold was for export.
The local coins tended to be made out of copper, although in 1985 a team of archaeologists unearthed a cache of over 2,000 coins minted locally made of silver.
Let's try to parse this world a little bit in terms of disentangling, if you will, the indigenous African and the external influences.
My take on this would be essentially that the Swahili culture was basically African.
But that there certainly was an important overlay, a substantial overlay, coming across the Indian Ocean down that coast from Arabia and Persia, from parts of the world of Southwest Asia.
Now we can see this perhaps best by looking as language, which so often gives us clues to historical realities.
The language here is Ki Swahili.
Now I emphasize the prefix there of Ki, Ki Swahili.
Bantu words, one of the characteristics of Bantu vocabulary of those languages, is that the root meaning of words lies at the end of the word rather than the beginning.
So whereas in the Indo-European Germanic languages, Romance languages and so forth that we are more familiar with, the root of the words is at the beginning and you change or specify, refine the meaning of the word by changing the end of it to make it plural or to put it in past tense or what have you.
In Bantu languages is exactly the reverse.
You change the prefix.
Now what does that have to do with Ki Swahili?
Ki is the prefix of course and in this case it simply refers to the language of the Swahili and you find that prefix of Ki, Ki or CHI or ISI as the prefix in front of many Bantu ethnic names.
So Chi Tonga, the language of the Tonga, but you can change that prefix and make it Bu Tonga to be the country of the Tonga or what have you.
Isi Zulu, the language of the Zulu.
So Ki Swahili, the prefix there itself is a giveaway that this is a quite thoroughly Bantu language.
And if you put a page of Swahili side by side with a page of Isi Zulu or Chi Tonga, you can see this similarity quite clearly.
Now on the other hand, the root meaning there of Ki Swahili, if you recall our explanation of the root of the West African term Sahel, that it comes from the Arabic similar terms Sahel or Sahil for coast or shore.
It's essentially Swahili is drawn as a bit of a corruption of the same word.
So it's an Arabic word, it's based on the Arabic word for coast just as Sahel is in West Africa.
So yes, Bantu language that's shown by the prefix, but the root itself is a borrowed word from Arabic.
And again, that's an indicator of this cultural overlay in the language of the coast.
You can find a large number of vocabulary terms that are imported from languages like Arabic on to a Bantu and therefore African indigenous base.
Now influence from places like Arabia and Persia certainly increased in certain periods, especially between 1050 and 1200 approximately.
Between those dates there was a further immigration from the Persian Gulf and especially from Oman at the southern tip of Arabia.
These were usually well connected traders and these newcomers and their descendants generally wound up as part of the local elite.
They often intermarried with indigenous populations and indeed a term like Arab slash Swahili begins to become relevant and even useful.
In our lecture 19, we'll actually look at a very famous Arab Swahili figure.
His popular name was Tipu Tip.
His original base was Zanzibar off the coast, but he in fact established an inland kingdom based around ivory and in his case, most definitely in slaves in the 19th century.
And we'll look at him in our lecture 19, Arab slash Swahili.
Now as we might expect the religious impact was perhaps the greatest part of the cultural package coming from Arabia and indeed this becomes a quite Islamic part of Africa.
As I said last time and I'll repeat it that this coastal area along with the West African Savannah regions historically probably the most thoroughly Islamized portions of the entire African continent.
Now again I'd like to go to the primary sources for a moment and give two quick descriptions of the so-called Queen of the South.
That is probably the most elaborate city of the entire Swahili world and that is Kilwa.
One of them comes from our old friend Ibn Battuta who we read a description of last time from 1352 and his travel from his original base in Morocco but he was everywhere.
Now he turns up even earlier 20 years earlier than that he's actually observing Kilwa in 1331.
You'll notice that at this point Ibn Battuta is referring really to the northern portions of the coast of Swahili and he's still using the older term Zanz to refer to the southern coast.
Ibn Battuta in 1331. Then I set off by sea from the town of Mogadishu for the land of the Swahili and the town of Kilwa which is in the land of the Zanz.
The people of Kilwa follow the Shafiyah right. They are devout, chaste and virtuous.
Their mosques are very strongly constructed of wood beside the door of each mosque or one or two wells, one or two cubits deep.
We spent a night on the island of Mambasa and Mambasa today is the principal port city of Kenya.
And then set sail for Kilwa, the principal town on the coast, the greater part of whose inhabitants are Zanz, a very black complexion.
Kilwa is one of the most beautiful and well constructed towns in the world. The whole of it is elegantly built.
The people are engaged in a holy war for their country lies beside that of the pagan Zanz.
Now in this case we see a considerably greater impact of Islam, the reference to devout and so forth, the reference to the mosques and so forth.
Maybe most of all in the notion of jihad or holy war in even Battuta's observation in 1331, apparently at that time currently going on against the so-called pagan inhabitants of the mainland.
One more from about two centuries later which I'm actually going to turn to briefly twice, but from a very different direction of source, of visitor.
This one is from Duarte Barbosa, who is Portuguese, and his observations come from the early 1500s.
Going along the coast from this town of Mozambique, there is an island hard by the mainland which is called Kilwa,
which is a Moorish town with many fair houses of stone and mortar, with many windows after our fashion, very well arranged in streets with many flat roofs.
The doors are of wood, well carved with excellent joinery.
Around it are streams and orchards and fruit gardens with many channels of sweet water.
It has a Moorish king over it. From this place they trade with Safala once they bring back gold.
Now Safala lies a considerable length south of Kilwa and in general was not reachable in a single season through the monsoon winds.
In the case of gold, which came from the Zimbabwean Plateau first to Safala, it had to move north to Kilwa whence it eventually wound up in the other parts of the Indian Ocean, Littoral.
Barbosa continue, of the Moors there are some fair and some black.
They are finely clad in many rich garments of gold and silk and cotton, and the women as well, also with much gold and silver and chain and bracelets,
which they wear on their legs and arms and many jewel earrings in their ears.
Well, I mentioned that Barbosa's observations come from the early part of the 1500s.
Around the year 1500, we reach an interesting and critical juncture, not just in East Africa, but in the world as a whole.
Think of the date of Columbus's voyage as perhaps the benchmark in that case, and this is a turning point in world and African history that I will take up in detail in Lectures 13 forward.
It's interesting, though, to contemplate sometimes in history what might have happened.
It's conceivable that China, which had already sponsored at least one recorded direct voyage to East Africa, could have expanded its influence there.
Instead, China's court intrigues led to a conclusion to turn inward.
Portugal, on the other hand, sponsored an epoch-making circumnavigation of the African continent in 1498, six years after Columbus's voyage across the Atlantic.
The European incursion had begun.
Just seven years later, in 1505, a fleet of eleven well-armed Portuguese ships under the command of Francisco Dalmeida sailed again around the Cape of Good Hope and into the Indian Ocean and approached the so-called Queen of the South,
the Swahiti town of Kilwa.
Again, we'll go to the primary and eyewitness document, in this case from a German fellow traveler, I guess you'd say, with the onboard of one of Dalmeida's ships.
From our ships, the fine houses, terraces, and minarets with the palms and trees and the orchards made the city, and this is Kilwa, look so beautiful that our men were eager to land and overcome the pride of this barbarian,
so referenced to the local sultan, who spent all that night in bringing into the island archers from the mainland, apparently a rather hysteric attempt to upgrade the military capability to resist the Portuguese.
In the aftermath of the landing and Portuguese victory, then the vicar general and some of the Franciscan fathers came ashore carrying two crosses in procession and singing the tedium.
They went to the palace, and there the cross was put down, and the grand captain, that is Dalmeida, prayed.
Then everyone started to plunder the town of all its merchandise and provisions.
Duarte Barbosa was not present at that sacking, but he later wrote about it, and he put it this way.
This town was taken by force from its king by the Portuguese as, moved by arrogance, he refused to obey the king, our lord.
They took many prisoners, and the king fled from the island, and his highness ordered that a fort be built there and kept under his rule and governance.
Now, we'll close the last lecture by mentioning the Moroccan invasion of the old West African state of Songhai in 1591, and the introduction of some of the first firearms in West Africa.
Again, these incidents, the one I've just described and the one in the last lecture, of course, occurring in the 16th century.
That is about 500 years ago. Perhaps do indeed sound an ominous note for old, independent Africa's future. Thank you.
