Butcher 15, South Africa, the Dutch Cape Colony
Welcome.
Our look at the Atlantic slave trade showed that in the modern era, West Africa's history
became inextricably bound up with that of the wider world and especially with Europe.
This is true of the extreme southern end of Africa as well, but the story played out very
differently here.
In another lecture earlier on the Swahili world, we noted that by the 16th century,
the wealth of the Indian Ocean networks had begun to attract the attention of new players.
From Europe, the first being the Portuguese.
Other European mercantile powers followed, including the Dutch, who particularly concern
us here.
By the mid 17th century, Amsterdam was arguably the richest city on earth.
Built by a Harvard historian, it is entitled The Embarrassment of Riches and it's a portrait
of Amsterdam at that time.
The Dutch East India Company was the world's most successful trading firm in that era.
As the company's name suggests, its principal object, its principal interest, its principal
target area in a sense, was Asia.
It was interested above all in the legendary wares, the silks and spices that we've all
heard about for so long, of the east of Asia.
The Dutch East India Company then was a classic example of the mercantile capitalist era.
The idea was to go somewhere, obtain the goods, and distribute them, take them somewhere else,
usually back home to Europe, in the calculation, in the hope of generating profit.
The company held a charter from the Dutch crown, giving it the right to operate, in
many respects, as a state unto itself.
We will meet chartered companies later in this course.
They're actually a rather common sort of halfway house between private and public enterprise,
which has been important in the history of many colonial parts of the world.
Already, the Dutch East India Company had pioneered the establishment of a Dutch colony
in what ultimately can be called Indonesia, and in fact that area stayed a Dutch colony
until the late 1940s.
In order to go to and from East Asia, from Europe, the company's ships had constantly
to circumnavigate Africa.
Again, there's no Suez Canal until 1867, so the circumnavigation pioneered by the Portuguese
was the essential step in this mercantile activity.
It's a long voyage.
It takes many months, and it was necessary for these ships at various points to stop,
and they did stop at various points along the African Littoral, the African coast as
part of that circumnavigation.
Beginning at some point, probably in the 1500s even, the company's ships had begun with
some regularity to stop at Table Bay.
Again, that shouldn't surprise us.
Our portrait of Table Bay in Cape Town was, in a sense, based around the notion of its
being protected deepwater harbor there along a very dangerous and rugged coast line.
They would obtain these supplies of fresh water and food and move on, often doing the
same thing on the return trip.
In 1652, the company decided its board of directors, the Heron 17, based in Amsterdam,
decided to establish a permanent post at Table Bay.
Originally, this move had quite limited objectives.
It was to streamline, essentially, or the objectives were to streamline the reprovisioning
of the company's ships with fresh supplies, certainly of meat dried or salted, and hopefully
of vegetables as well, and of course, all-important fresh water, which was available
with many points in the region.
Let us pause at this moment then.
1652 is a long way from being the beginning of South African history, but it's certainly
a critical turning point in South African history.
Let's remind ourselves, refresh a little bit on the human geography of what is now South Africa
at this point in time.
We know that the original Khoisan hunter-gatherer population had been settled thinly, distributed,
but settled over the entire region for some thousands of years.
We know that that population was displaced, replaced, or absorbed by Bantu, Iron Age,
mixed farmers, but only in the eastern half of what is today South Africa.
East of that 20-inch rainfall line, I mentioned a few lectures back, 20 inches being essentially
the minimum for cultivation.
On the east side of that line, we find Bantu mixed farmers, but not on the west side of it.
In that western half of the modern country, Khoisan peoples, therefore, still predominated.
But by this time, quite a number of Khoisan communities had adopted pastoralism and kept
extensive herds of fox and herds of sheep and cattle.
At this point, I'm going to do a little linguistic work here, where I'm going to break down that
term Khoisan to get at this adoption by some of these persons in the western half of the modern
Republic of pastoralism.
Khoisan, let's take the first half of the word Khoi, often doubled into Khoi-Khoi.
This is the term that we will use to refer to pastoralists of the western part of South Africa,
including the area in the immediate vicinity of Table Bay.
That region, today we think of it as Mediterranean, but crops like wheat and wine,
obviously were not being grown yet, and the pastoralists found considerable good
pastureage in the vicinity, the hinterland of Table Bay.
The Dutch eventually called them hotentots, and you may have seen that term, and you will see
that term in old historical documents and so forth.
It's of obscure origin, and I'm not going to take the time to explain that right now.
Now those who remain dependent on hunting and gathering at this point then, let's
reserve as it were the last part, or the second half of the word, and refer to them at this
point and forward then as San, and these would have been the people that the Dutch
dubbed the Bosman, or so-called Bushman.
Okay, now gradually the company's original limited intention of creating an outpost on the edge of
the sea, and obviously on the edge of the land, gave way to something very different.
Again, this is a classic case of sort of unintended consequences, or the unfolding
of the story rather different than it differently than it was originally envisioned.
It became something quite different from an outpost.
It became a beachhead from which eventually the European conquest of modern-day Southern,
modern-day South Africa would proceed.
Now at first, before this change gathered momentum, Koi Koi communities, and these are these
pastoralist communities in the vicinity of Cape Town, were reasonably happy to trade some of their
livestock to the Dutch for the provisioning of these ships and the maintenance of the company's
settlement. In return, they often received copperware and ironware.
In fact, they received some of the goods. This is probably from the east.
This is probably when tea drinking, which is now ubiquitous in South Africa, was introduced.
Again, at first and for a time, this was a relationship between the local Koi Koi pastoralists
and the Dutch post under the Dutchess and the Accompany of mutual benefit,
and the transactions were entered into more or less voluntarily.
Over time, the balance there begins to shift towards coercion, but it did take some time.
In 1657, the company released nine of its employees
and granted them small farms not far from Table Bay. If you go around the side of Table Mountain to
a river valley called the Liesbeck River Valley, this is where those nine eventually settled.
This was a classic case, among other things, of different cultural traditions
leading, in this case, to conflict. When those first nine settlers went around and attempted to
establish their farms, they didn't see any of the markers that were familiar to them from Europe
designating this area as the property of anyone. They didn't see the fences or the beacons or the
permanent structures, etc. To them, quite understandably, it looked empty.
Now, as you can imagine, one, at least, of the several, and I want to emphasize that there was
not a single Koi Koi pastoralist group in the vicinity of Cape Town, or probably a dozen,
of anywhere from a few hundred to a couple of thousand each. At least one of those saw that
pastridge very differently, that land that these settlers came to. They considered it part of a
seasonal pastridge cycle to which they intended to return. This was an absolutely crucial precedent
because it represents the start of permanent European, permanent white settlement at the
southern tip of Africa. Obviously, South African history would have been very different if that
had never occurred at all. The world that Mandela grew up in would have been a vastly different world
had there not occurred at some point the beginnings of permanent people who intended to stay
and who intended to see their succeeding descendants, children and children's children,
stay there as well. More settlers followed, although the numbers, it is fair to say, were
small compared to immigration to a place like America, for instance. Most of the land taken
up by white settlers, therefore, was seen by the Koi Koi as their own. The pressure on the Koi Koi's
livestock also redoubled, both because there was increasing number of ships calling into Table Bay,
not only the company's own ships, but once the post was established, they realized they could
pay for this station partly by provisioning ships from other nations who called in there as well.
Well, of course, all of that means increased demand for livestock to be slaughtered to provide
the meat provisions for all of these ships and, again, the demand, therefore, for Koi Koi,
the principal item of Koi Koi livelihood, accelerated. It's also true that, of course,
as more settlers came in and established themselves on the land, they needed livestock
to stock those farms. And, of course, originally, those are likely to come from the Koi Koi as well.
So we begin to see what we could call a sort of squeeze being exerted against this old Koi Koi
world, which eventually will be decisive. Now, Koi Koi were not necessarily at all passive in
this case. There were at least three substantial wars fought before the 17th century had come to an
end. The first of these was actually in 1659. And for a time, it appeared that Koi Koi would prevail.
They had basically all the settlers, as well as the company personnel, pinned up inside of the
fort on Table Bay, but they were unable to deliver the decisive blow. And in the succeeding weeks and
months, the pendulum turned, and eventually they had to negotiate terms. In the aftermath of that,
we have a remarkable first-person account, which I want to read a little bit from.
It comes from the diary, the journals, of Yan Funribeck, who was, for 10 years, from 1652 to
1662, the commander of the companies, when I say the company, I'm going to be referring
to the Dutch East India Company, commander of the company's fort at Cape Town. Funribeck then
established that fort, and he kept quite meticulous, as I say, journals and diaries, and they're
really a very rich source indeed. The passage I want to read to you essentially is the minutes of
a meeting between Funribeck and his aides and some of what the Dutch call captains,
that is the leaders of these Koi Koi communities in the vicinity of what is becoming Cape Town
at that point. So he starts this passage with what strikes me as a rather fair, perhaps remarkably
fair, recording of the points made by the Koi Koi themselves, and let me give it to you.
They spoke for a long time about our taking every day for our own use, more of the land which had
belonged to them from all ages, and on which they were accustomed to pasture their cattle.
They also asked whether, if they were to come to Holland, they would be permitted to
act in a similar manner, saying, it would not matter if you stayed at the fort, but you come
into the interior, selecting the best land for yourselves, and never once asking whether we
like it, or whether it will put us to any inconvenience. They therefore insisted very
strenuously that they should again be allowed free access to the pasture. They objected that
there was not enough grass for both their cattle and ours. Are we not right therefore to prevent
you from getting any more cattle? For if you get many cattle, you come and occupy our pasture with
them, and then say the land's not wide enough for us both. Who then, with the greatest degree of
justice, should give way? The natural owner or the foreign invader? Again, this is from
Fonribeck's journal. It's remarkably candid, and it ends remarkably bluntly, Fonribeck's words.
They insisted so much on this point that we told them that they had now lost that land in war,
and therefore could not expect to get it back. It was our intention to keep it.
Now, as if the squeeze on koi koi livelihood in the form of land and livestock was not enough,
we have another example here of the intervention of disease in human history.
In this case, the most dramatic moment was the smallpox epidemic of 1713. Now,
in a lecture a couple of times ago, I said that Africans from West Africa had developed
over thousands of years a relative degree of resistance to old world diseases because of
coming and going between the Mediterranean, European world, and West Africa. But of course,
how far away from Europe can you get and still be on the African continent? We're at that place.
If there was any population in all of Africa that would not have had exposure to these old
world diseases or to European microbes, we might expect to find it at the very southern tip of
Africa. In fact, the introduction of smallpox, it apparently came ashore from one of the company's
ships, the Stavenisa was the name of the ship, with the crew's laundry. There had been an
outbreak of smallpox on the ship. The people had recovered, which was remarkable enough.
The captain was wise enough not to allow them nonetheless to go ashore, but sent ashore the
laundry, and that apparently had enough of the bacillus to create a devastating impact. It affected
all the population groups in Cape Town, but it ravaged the Koi-Koi population again, perhaps,
because of no previous exposure. By the later 1700s, the Koi-Koi, or indeed the San, the so-called
Bushmen, who remained independent, were those who were still outside the Cape colonies' reach,
or in some cases had moved outside the Cape colonies' reach. Those inside the colony were
largely reduced to a servile working class. They were not, however, legally enslaved.
So we get the incorporation, essentially, of the remnants of the old Koi-Koi San, the old Koi-San
world as part of a working class in a new kind of society, a colonial society on the make,
in the case of the Cape colony at the southwestern tip of Africa. The first, in a sense, frontier
fate here, then, that we'll be pursuing later ends with the absorption of the survivors of these
processes as part of the servile class in the Cape. Now, meanwhile, as early as 1658, the company
was trying to meet another need, and that was a growing need for labor. And as we noted in our
lectures on the Atlantic slave trade, it certainly is not surprising that Europeans of this era would
have turned to the option of chattel slavery to meet it. Most of these slaves, however, were not
African at all. They came from various points around the Indian Ocean Rim, Madagascar,
southern India, Malaysia, Indonesia. Many of them were Muslims. And in fact, this is the rather
indirect route by which Islam establishes a presence in southern Africa, quite different and
quite separate from its presence established in west or eastern Africa. Now, again, this makes for
some interesting comparative thinking to me. In the last couple of lectures, we were talking about
West Africa, West Central Africa, where millions of persons were essentially exported against their
will, left Africa, and, of course, brought to the New World. South Africa, on the other hand,
represents a case where, one of the few cases in the African continent at this point, where
enslaved persons are going to be imported. Now, in that respect, the history of what became
South Africa, the history of the Cape Colony here, in some respects, South African history therefore
bears more resemblance, it seems to me, to the history of a place like the United States. In
other words, that importer of labor. But again, the irony here in this modern expectation that
the subject slavery in the modern world, oh, it must have been black Africans who were enslaved.
Not so. In this case, we have in the bulk, in the great majority, people of non-African origin
brought into a part of the African continent as chattel slaves. So we have a sort of bifurcated,
a kind of defided working class which is emerging in the old Cape Colony. You might see the Cape
Colony Society as a sort of three-layered pyramid with the company and its officials at the top.
They, after all, constitute the government of the place. The independent Dutch descended, a few
French Huguenots eventually and a few Germans, but predominantly Dutch settlers in the middle
and then this divided laboring class at the bottom. Incorporated koi, koi, predominantly,
not legally enslaved and these imported slaves brought in from the Indian Ocean Rim.
Now, the Cape Colony provides a perfect example of one of my pet themes and that is how ethnic
identity, ethnicity is fluid, that it is, it is, it is changeable. It's a product of history.
Two ethnic groups were in essence born in the old Cape Colony and it's virtually impossible to talk
about modern South Africa without mentioning them. So let us look at the origins of Afrikaners
and so-called Colored. The Dutch settlers at the Cape were known as, as just that, as the Cape Dutch
in, in translation, it rendered as the Cape Dutch and eventually, however, as they, as they literally
became landed in Southern Africa, they came to be known as, as Boers. That is simply the,
the Dutch word for, for farmer, basically. Again, as is so often the case, language gives us a lot
of clues as to the unfolding of history. We saw that in the case of Kiswahili and, and so forth
in East Africa. In this case, the, the, the label for a community and identity literally reflects
their permanence at the southern tip of Africa. Their landedness, their roots, if you like,
now transplanted from Europe and established in Southern Africa, Boers.
The Dutch-based language they spoke eventually, of course, came to be known as Afrikaans and Afrikaans,
which will be encountering many words in Afrikaans, the rest of the way home. Afrikaans is considered
by linguists to be a separate language from Dutch, but obviously they are, are certainly related.
Now, eventually, the Cape Dutch, who came to be known as the Boers,
emerge, especially in the 20th century, as the so-called Afrikaners. And when we use the term
Afrikaner in South African parlance today, this is who we're talking about. We're talking about the
white settler population there of predominantly Dutch origin. Now, it may be ironic that Afrikaner
basically means Africans. In other words, they have taken the label, the name, from the place that
they have come to. In a way, it's a process, again, parallel with American history, where people who
considered themselves to be colonial English, for instance, in the 1600s or early 1700s in a place
like Virginia, obviously, at a certain point, began to consider themselves Virginians, or dare I say
it, Americans. The way that colonial English become Americans, in a way, reflects the way that Cape
Dutch, colonial Dutch, eventually become Afrikaners. They become, in their own mind, Africans.
Ironic, as that may seem to later observers. Now, eventually, the descendants, primarily drawn from
the two sections of this working class, incorporated koi koi or koi saan, and the imported slaves,
came to be, if you'll forgive the term, came to be lumped together, as it were, as South Africa's
so-called colored population. Now, it's important to clarify this term, especially, I think, for a
predominantly American audience here. Colored, as we all know, is an old term to refer to people
in the United States of African descent, what today would be called African Americans or Black
Americans. It's understandable, perhaps, therefore, that many people assume that colored in South
Africa must be the same thing, in a sense, that it refers to the Black African population.
And that is incorrect, legally, for many years. And I have to say, to substantial measure,
socially, as well, these are quite distinct categories. Black and colored in South Africa came
to be very different legal categories under the old apartheid system. The colored, in essence,
occupied a sort of middle rung, if you like, between the privileged whites and least privileged
blacks in that population. Again, another way that, not simply ethnicity, but racial
categorization can be shaped and made differently by humans in different places. People make race,
and they do it differently. Now, given, the translation often given for colored is, quote,
mixed race. If you look at news items about, you know, South Africa's colored population, this or
that, often in parentheses, they'll say, colored or mixed race. Well, there's certainly a kernel
of truth to that, although, again, I think it can be misleading. I think a lot of people
in the U.S. might think, well, oh, I see, okay, that person had one black parent and one white parent.
Probably not in the 21st century or 20th century. They probably had two so-called colored parents,
and probably four so-called colored grandparents, et cetera. Now, there was some, quote, racial
mixing, if that's what we want to call it, and maybe that shouldn't surprise us, since both
the immigrant Dutch populations, for a time, and the imported slave populations, were disproportionately
male and sought partners in anything ranging from legalized, sanctified marriage at one extreme,
to rape at the other, should not surprise us that that comes up in a racially ordered colonial
society and everything in between. Now, the children of any of those unions tended also to fall into
this so-called colored category. But I emphasize, again, that most of this so-called mixing took
place long ago in the old Cape Colony. And in fact, most of the persons today categorized as colored
are probably more or less purely descended from the old Croissant and imported slave populations.
The Dutch eventually lost their colony at the Cape around the year 1800. This is related to
intrigues surrounding that guy called Napoleon in Europe, and sort of the geopolitics of that.
It did need not concern us directly. But the Cape Colonial Experiment comes to an end in the dozen,
fifteen years or so around the year 1800, and we have yet another player, another part
of South African history to examine. In 1820, the first British settlers arrived, and South Africa's
in this complexity deepened. One aspect, eventually, of British rule was that when abolition of slavery
in the British Empire came in the mid-1830s, it meant that the old legal distinction between
enslaved persons in the Cape and indigenous persons who were not legally enslaved was
meaningless, yet another element which tended to blur and meld the line between initially
separate populations and to see them, in a sense, emerge as this category known as colored.
In the next lecture, we'll be leaving the Cape Colony and leaping far to the east to look at
equally dramatic developments in the southern Bantu world. Thank you.
