These lectures are part of the great courses series they are produced by the teaching company.
These lectures are titled, The African Experience, from Lucy to Mandela, Part 3.
Chapter 25, The Congo, Promise and Pain.
Welcome.
The word Congo, like the words Timbuktu or Zulu, conjures up all sorts of images in the
minds of many of us in the western world.
Whatever the validity or reality behind those images might be, there is no getting around
the place's tremendous significance.
We pause to focus on the Congo at this particular point because it provides vivid illustrations
of the processes we've been examining, conquest, colonization and decolonization.
In fact, for continuity's sake, we will carry the Congo story further, up to very recent
history, up to the present, in other words, to another great theme which would have to
be described as the disappointments of the independence era.
And in general, the reason for devoting a full lecture to the Congo, as we did to Ethiopia,
is partly because the vividness of its history, its experience with all of these things, its
history of conquest, of colonization, of decolonization, its experience since independence, seems to
be writ large.
It's as if the characters and the events in the Congo versions of these general processes
are under a magnifying glass or something.
They seem larger than life.
If you were going to invent a country which wanted to throw into stark relief all of the
great themes of modern African history, the Congo might be a good choice to base it on.
Now I'm going to pause here for a moment to make a geographical clarification.
If you've looked at the map of Africa, of Central Africa, I certainly hope you have.
Like most maps, it tells many stories.
You may have noticed that there are, in fact, on most political maps of modern Africa, two
countries labeled or marked Congo.
So let us sort these out, first of all.
There are, in fact, two.
One, the more northerly country, is the Republic of Congo.
The more southerly one is the Democratic Republic of Congo.
The Republic of Congo, which is more easily referred to as Congo-Brasaville after its
capital city, was a French colony created as a part of the, during the scramble then,
and one of the territories which fell to France as part of French Equatorial Africa.
The other, again, perhaps easiest to refer to as Congo-Kinshasa, was begun, as we'll
see in a moment, by Belgians King Leopold and eventually became the Belgian Congo.
After independence, known as the Congo for a time, its name, just to further muddy the
waters, changed in 1971 by its ruler of the time to Zaire, which is a corrupted version
of a name for the Congo or Zaire River.
It stayed Zaire for about a quarter of a century until the ruler whom we'll meet was evicted
from power and the country's name changed back to Congo.
So I will be referring, in this lecture, to the Congo-Kinshasa, the former Belgian Congo,
the country known as Zaire, and now known, again, as Democratic Republic of Congo.
Now, perhaps the place to start is with some geographical realities.
The Congo is a huge place.
It straddles the equator, and as most of you know, the countries that are in that bulge
of the Earth's middle often get underrepresented, in a sense, in two-dimensional maps.
In fact, the Congo-Kinshasa is as big as the United States east of the Mississippi River.
It encompasses a great portion of the world's second-largest rainforest, vast savanna belts
which run below that rainforest.
In the east, we see some of the manifestations of the Great Rift that we talked about early
in the course, and major mountain ranges and lakes are part of the geography in the east.
In terms of its human geography and history, this vast region was home to numerous major
Bantu kingdoms such as the Luba, the Lunda, the Cuba.
With all of this diversity, with this massive scale, perhaps it is little wonder that the
Congo has proven to be such a challenge.
Now, the modern Congo originates with the rather amazing, almost incredible, and still
shocking tale of Belgium's King Leopold II.
A man of gargantuan appetites, of huge ambition.
Leopold never set foot in the Congo, nor in Africa, but was ultimately responsible for
the devastation of the lives of millions.
I hope to show that I don't believe that's an exaggeration.
In some respects, he started the country down a path from which, in some respects, it has
never recovered.
Leopold ascended the throne of Belgium in 1865 upon his father's death, and after a
childhood in which he appears to have been, or at least felt, starved of love, as you
can imagine, like Chakazulu and Cecil Rhodes.
He's been the stuff or the object of a number of amateur psycho-historical treatments.
He was, I mentioned, gargantuan ambitions.
He was a man of gargantuan appetites in the most literal sense, as usual breakfast consisted
of six poached eggs, an entire rack of toast, and an entire jar of marmalade, matched by
lunches and dinner of equal scale.
In modern terms, he would probably be called an obsessive compulsive.
He was one of those who washed his hands dozens of times a day, who insisted that the table
cloths be boiled after each meal, who perhaps most curiously wrapped a bag around his quite
lengthy beard when he went out in public if there was dampness or rain.
It may be that the felt deprivations or hollowness of his childhood led him to seek fulfillment
to seek validity with grandiose projects.
Apparently the kingship of Belgium was not enough.
It was a small country, after all, and nothing on the scale of the power of Britain or France.
To pursue these dreams then, Leopold increasingly turned toward Africa and becomes a major player,
a major figure in the scramble for Africa, which we looked at earlier in the course.
As early as 1877, before the scramble really has taken off, he wrote to one associate,
I mean to miss no chance to get my share of this magnificent African cake, this magnificent
African cake. It's a rather nice image, a useful image, I think, for the era of the scramble for Africa.
Now his first vehicle in doing this was an association which he founded called the
International African Association, and he put it forth in a series of meetings very adroitly.
Again, whatever one says about Leopold's record or personality was a man of great
intelligence and great cleverness and with the ability to attract to him support or at least
tolerance for his projects from those with the force of his considerable intellect and
considerable charm. He put the International African Association forward as essentially
a philanthropic project. This would be an association which in Central Africa would,
for instance, combat the slave trade, in this case the ongoing slave trade connected to the east
coast and usually referred to as the Arab Swahili slave trade. It would bring moral uplift,
it would bring the advancement of science, it would bring, in other words, the civilizing mission,
and as we've seen earlier in the course, this is very much the order of the day, the agenda.
So he was putting on the table an additional version of a project justified in precisely
those terms in a lot of different places in Africa at that time.
Now, in reality, and I will put it that way, his objects were far more material and far more
mundane. He sought a fortune in Africa and his first means of building that fortune was
through one of Africa's age-old commodities, will not surprise us, and that is ivory.
But eventually, Leopold's project in Africa would be associated with a quite different
commodity and that would be rubber, in this case wild rubber, and as we saw in the case of palm oil,
for instance, in the oil rivers and other parts of Nigeria. Oil rivers not named for petroleum,
which comes out of there now, but for the palm oil which was used to lubricate the rapidly
multiplying machines of the industrial age. As with palm oil then, rubber is almost a perfect fit
between a product coming out of Africa and the requirements of that industrial age. Obviously,
its principal uses exploding at precisely the time the last decades of the 1800s and first of the
1900s would be in the automobile and electrical industries.
Now, Leopold's territory in Africa came to be known as the Congo Free State and it was something
unique. This was his colony. It was not the possession until later in the story from 1908 on.
It was his personal colony in the center of Africa. So, this is not an example of a competition
as part of that scramble between governments as it is a remarkable individual's role in carving out
his own Central African territory. Now, his principal agent was none other than someone
we've met before. He was born John Rollins out of wedlock in Wales, but eventually after travels in
America and in Africa was known to the world as Henry Morton Stanley, and of course he was the
man who found Livingston and we met him before in that case. Stanley had become frustrated in
his efforts to get the British government to back his own efforts in launching the scramble.
The British obviously came on board at a certain point, but he offered his services to Leopold and
a very convenient partnership was born. Stanley's first step in creating the Congo Free State
was something we can see as part of the scramble for Africa in many parts.
And that was what we might call treaty making. The notion was to go in with a very well-armed force
to chiefs, indigenous rulers, and persuade them one way or another to agree to a legal document,
a treaty, giving certain rights, usually rather shadily defined rights, to the outside power,
in this case to King Leopold. It is fair to say that most of the indigenous rulers he was dealing
with were illiterate and probably had very little indication or understanding of what they were,
in fact, signing or getting into. In any case, the orders, the instructions from Leopold himself
to Stanley were quite clear and I usually upholds words here. The treaties must be as
brief as possible and in a couple of articles must grant us everything. The diplomatic importance
and that's really what it was. These treaties gave Leopold the ability to put a case forward to have
his possession in Central Africa recognized by the other national powers involved in the scramble
and that was really the purpose for doing them. To establish genuine occupation on the ground,
on the other hand, Stanley obviously had more difficult work involved, but began to recruit
a service of not just Belgians but frankly a large army of adventurers, in some cases
Rogues, I think we could say, who began to man what the Congo Free State called the stations
of the interior. They were backed, of course, by military force and in this case that force
came to be called the force public, which in fact remained the name for the police and military
forces in the country until independence in 1960. This was a force which meant business
and it introduced Congolese to, for instance, one instrument which was known as the chikot.
It was a longish whip made of hippopotamus hide and shredded at the end in a sort of corkscrew
style and used to deliver the corporal punishment which Stanley and his followers
utilized effectively to get the resources that they were after.
Rubber is essentially a coagulated sap in the wild form. It's now, of course, been replaced
first by domesticated production of rubber and then obviously comes from petroleum today,
but in the wild form it essentially is available in the rubber trees plentiful in the Congo rainforest,
but often up quite high. It's difficult and dangerous work to collect wild rubber.
So in a lot of respects the great obstacle here, the great object of the game, was to
create the labor force which would collect this wild rubber.
Here is where the facts of this matter become rather graphic indeed. In order to get men to
ascend the rubber trees and deliver the rubber to the agents of the Congo Free State,
essentially the agents took hostages. Predominantly women, in some cases children,
usually the wives or relatives of those, and then insisted upon quotas for the delivery of
rubber from the related males. I mentioned the latitude given to the man on the spot
in colonial administration generally a lecture or two ago, but this was the man on the spot
latitude with a vengeance. Failure to meet the assigned quota resulted often in the loss of one's
hand, foot, ears, nose, or in some cases head. Eventually whistles began to be blown and one
of the most remarkable of these was the African American journalist, later historian George
Washington Williams, who actually bought into Leopold's project quite a bit, but went in 1889
to prepare a journalistic report and returned with a bitter open letter which he published
about the king, suggesting that the king had in fact been engaging in the slave trade himself
internally there. And as Stanley Williams said, his name produces a shutter among these simple
folk when mentioned. They remember the broken promises, his copious profanity, his hot temper,
his heavy blows, his severe and rigorous measures by which they were mulked of their lands.
Williams was followed by others, Edie Morel who wrote the book Red Rubber, Roger Casement,
and eventually what emerged as what you might see is sort of the first international human
rights movement came forth. Obviously the western world had no objection to colonialism per se at
this time, but became so appalled by these excesses that indeed this first human rights movement arose.
The pressure eventually led to Leopold turning the Congo over to the Belgian government in 1908.
The depopulation from killings, from starvation, from exhaustion, from disease, from plummeting
birth rates was estimated by one scholar, and this is Jan Fonsina, one of the very senior scholars
formerly a professor at University of Wisconsin. He considered that the Congo's population may
have been cut in half between 1880 and 1920, and that in turn, based on later estimates,
would mean a loss of population of something on the order of 10 million.
And for the next half century, the Belgians reigned over a generally quiet colony.
In fact, the Belgian government delegated a substantial amount of its responsibility.
The Catholic Church played a huge role, even greater than in, that missionaries played in other
places, not just in education, but certainly in health as well.
The Belgians granted gigantic monopoly concessions over vast regions to private firms.
Most importantly, Union Minier held exclusive rights over the colony's most lucrative source
copper from the Katanga region. At its best, the system represented a reasonably benevolent
and firm, though firm, paternalism. Union Minier, for instance, led the way in the stabilization,
so-called, of labor, and did indeed undertake the creation of, in many respects, quite well run
company towns where education and healthcare and so forth was available.
This was, in a way, the Belgian version of the developmental estate that we saw in the case
of the late French and British empires. The Belgians, however, were not interested,
probably even less than others, in so-called trouble-making, and were particularly resistant
to the notion of African involvement in politics. As a result, when the winds of African nationalism
began to blow in the 1950s, the Belgians at first cracked down hard and then permitted
only the most modest exercises in local elections. Political parties were legalized only in August
of 1959. Then, astonishingly, the Belgians announced in January 1960 that independence
would be granted in six months. The Belgians had done virtually nothing to prepare the nation for
independence. A France and Britain eventually showed a haste to decolonize. Belgium showed
something close to panic. The notion that they might be faced for another generation or two,
with constantly escalating demands and so forth, led them to make the political turnover in the
hope, as we've seen before, of retaining as much of the economic possibilities as they could. Given
the size and the diversity of a country with less than a dozen university graduates in 1960,
what followed was perhaps unpredictable. Now, the first person elected in these hastily
organized election was a former clerk named Patrice Lumumba. Lumumba was, in many respects,
a radical. He voiced a vision of a genuine revolutionary sort and, as you might imagine,
this did not endear him to either the departing Belgians or those in the West. The context we
must introduce here, of course, is the Cold War. 1960 is in the heart of this epical competition
between the Western Bloc and the old Soviet Union Bloc, of course, for influence all over
the world. And eventually, both the Soviet Union and Western powers, including the United States,
would install or support or back up or give aid to leadership and leading to situations which
can hardly be called admirable. The first proverb I ever learned out of Africa was
something like this, when two elephants fight, it's the grass beneath the feet which suffers,
and it was directly put forward in reference to the Cold War. Lumumba immediately faced crises.
The army mutinied within the first two weeks when the old Belgian officer
rode on a blackboard in front of them before independence equals after independence. In other
words, we're going to continue to have Belgian officers and so forth. The younger members of
that army wanted promotions and wanted to see the fruits of this hastily arranged independence
immediately, and Lumumba was faced with a crisis. Soon enough, the Katanga, the copper-bearing
region in the far south, declared its independence. Again, in this case, with quite direct Belgian
support, the landing of official Belgian troops to try to break away from the Congo. They were
supported by numerous mercenaries drawn from South Africa and southern Rhodesia.
Certainly, the attitudes and ideologies of Lumumba, as I said, earned him the enmity of
not just the Belgians but the Americans. These were amply documented in the church hearings
between 1975 and 1978 on the Central Intelligence Agency. President Eisenhower, for instance,
is recorded at one meeting after a briefing asking if, quote, we can't get rid of this guy,
unquote. The Belgian foreign minister in a document unearthed later said that, quote,
responsible authorities had the duty to render Lumumba harmless. Well, eventually, the triggers
are pulled by Congolese themselves, given the support of the external powers, and Lumumba was
assassinated in early 1961 after something like six months in office. They're ensued a half decade
of incredibly complex chaos. If you remember, if you lived through the early 60s, the headlines each
day seemed to be a kind of revolving door of movements and successions and interventions
and different leadership and so forth. Behind the scenes, though, a shrewd young army officer,
originally known as Joseph Desiree Mabutu, was consolidating his power. He visited Washington,
actually met with President Kennedy in 1963. In November of 1965, he pulled off a bloodless
coup d'état. Thus began 32 years, no less, of Mabutu's regime. We ask in the last lecture
what Africa's new rulers would do with their power, and we will see that the answers to that
are variable and changeable. In Mabutu's case, the answers are clear and disheartening.
Internally, Mabutu was quite prepared to hammer any opposition, but he also, again,
a man of great intelligence and political skill, rewarding allies, buying off rivals,
adept at both the carrot and the stick. Internationally, he played the geopolitical game
very cleverly again, adroitly positioning himself as a friend of the West to keep the Cold War era
aid coming. He developed a cult of his own personality and, in fact, dropped the Joseph
Desiree to his name and became known officially as, listen for all of it,
Mabutu says he secco, cuckoo, gbanda, wasabango, meaning the all-conquering warrior who triumphs
in all, triumphs over all obstacles. An alternative translation, which I actually think is more
accurate, is the strutting rooster who covers all the hens going from battle to battle, leaving
enemies in his wake. Above all, Mabutu lined his pocket on a colossal scale, becoming literally
one of the richest men in the world, a fortune estimated at certainly over four billion, excuse
me, dollars. Most of the wealth wound up in European banks and real estate. Eventually,
the center could not hold. The corruption at the top percolated to every level of Congolese society.
Mabutu had become, by the 1990s, something of a caricature, even an embarrassment to his
western supporters. In Zaire, as he had renamed the country, I would say essentially ceased to exist
by the 1990s. A rebellion launched from the east in 1997, again with some external participation,
in this case by neighboring African countries, quickly drove him into exile and he died shortly
thereafter. Since Mabutu's fall alas, things are a little better. A major civil war, complicated by
spillover from Rwanda and Rwanda's genocide in 1994, and other Great Lakes countries has
festered. Congo has always been a target for external interest because of its enormous mineral
resources in things like copper, diamond, and these days, in Coltan, a crucial element which
is found, for instance, in every cell phone. I don't have to tell you how strategic that has
become in the last decade or so. In fact, in the civil war which has emerged in the Congo
in the 1990s and essentially continues off and on with sporadic ceasefires and breakdowns again,
there are numerous nations that have forces inside the Congo, including at least five other
African nations. We have, in a sort of perverse sense here, a kind of perverse rendition of the
era of Leopold and of the scramble. As you might imagine, over the years I've had a great number
of students in my classes, ordinary undergraduate classes from Africa, and as you might imagine,
I rely on them. I turn to them. I ask them to supplement my obviously limited knowledge
with their own. I often ask them to give presentations about their countries.
I have to say the only ones I've ever seen break down in tears for their home countries are the
students who have begun to tell their fellow students about the Congo. Let us hope that the
next generation brings better times. Thank you.
