Lecture 22 Colonial Africa Comparisons and Change
Hello. In the last lecture, we stressed some fundamental common features of colonial rule
in Africa. Let's review them very quickly. Economically, colonies were expected to pay
for themselves and to contribute to the economic health of the mother country primarily through
the intensification of export production. Politically, all the colonies were run on
authoritarian top-down lines, though there was scope for the creativeness of the so-called
man-on-the-spot, and there were numerous roles assigned to various functionaries drawn
from the subject population. Culturally, the colonies all saw the institutionalization
of white supremacy and the establishment of the western model of civilization as the
model. Flowing from this was the great importance of western-style education, and another commonality
between the colonies was that this was in the hands largely of Christian missionaries.
In this lecture, let us add some subtlety to this portrait of the colonial period in
Africa by describing some important variations, both variations over space that is between
different colonies, between different colonial systems, and variations over time, that is
by observing how some of the systems in particular changed, especially during and after the Second
World War. Now, I suggested last time that all empires
in Africa, probably all empires anywhere, made use of various functionaries drawn from
the subject population. In Africa, besides the African soldiers, the African police,
the African clerks, the most important such figures were the ubiquitous chiefs. However,
there certainly were significant variations, at least of degree, in the positions of chiefs
or of kings, of headmen, between the different African empires.
To the British, the key to maintaining order, and thus to orderly progress, lay in preserving
a functional tribal system as they put it. As one author has said, the British were particularly
concerned to construct what he calls tribal boxes in which to contain, as it were, their
diverse and multi-ethnic populations. This emphasis on the tribal system implied, of
course, supporting a tribal authority structure.
It was Lord Frederick Lugard who elevated this idea of indirect rule, and spelled with
capitals here, a capital I and a capital R. Lugard who elevated indirect rule to an influential
theory of benevolent imperial administration. He did so primarily in his 1922 book, The
Dual Mandate in Tropical Africa. The dual mandate representing the notion that, yes,
we're here for ourselves, but also to improve and allow for progress amongst our colonized
populations, hence the idea of benevolent imperial administration in his view.
Now, Lugard's experience was largely in Uganda and especially in northern Nigeria. These
are two places with elaborate royalties, with state structures, with bureaucracies which
long predate the colonial imposition. In northern Nigeria, still today, we find enormous influence
still wielded by the caliphs, the heads of the caliphates, the emirs, these very Islamic
flavored systems of statecraft and administration created at various times in preceding centuries
in that savanna belt. Here is where Lugard had his principal experience in Africa and
where he forged a system which worked barely efficiently in a place like northern Nigeria
as it did in some parts of Uganda. Elsewhere in the British Empire, despite this eventual
devotion to indirect rule, in places where authority was more diffuse, where it was
more elusive, indirect rule was more problematic. In the extreme case where we had what were
in pre-colonial times, state-less societies, it degenerated to an almost humorous kind
of game of what we might call find the chief. I can illustrate this from my own research
which has been based in southern Zambia, the home to the so-called Tonga peoples, the Tonga
ethnic group, and the Tonga were an example of one of these traditionally asephalos, except
he means headless or state-less peoples. They didn't have chiefs. They certainly didn't
have kings. And in the early decades of the century, even before indirect rule gets elevated
to a grand theory, the British administrators were concerned nonetheless to find these authority
figures in a culture which essentially did not have them. So you had scenes unfolding
something like this, the district officers we've met in the last lecture, going into
a particular village, the center perhaps of a neighborhood of six or eight villages, and
asking through his interpreter who is often drawn from a different ethnic group that happens
to speak Chitonga, the local language, but perhaps not terribly well, asking him to ask
the assembled people, who is your chief? Who is the chief? Now the Tonga word today for
chief is wami, M-W-A-M-I. As I say, often translated, if you ask someone for the translation
of wami today, you'll usually get chief and vice versa, but its original meaning actually
was something closer to important person, big man. After all, because the Tonga didn't
have institutionalized, formalized chiefs, it doesn't mean that they didn't have persons
who, by the end of their personality, by the end of their ambition, their power, their wealth,
wielded more influence than others. So the notion of the district officer asking who
is your chief, but people hearing who's an important person in this region, of course,
there might be multiple answers to that question. Who is the wami? Who is the chief? He thinks
he's asking. They're hearing who's the important person here. Well, they might point to this
one, might point to that one. They might, in fact, point to somebody who's actually
not terribly important because they don't know what the implications of chief ship are
going to be at that stage of the colonial game. Again, nobody has hindsight at this point.
Eventually, this was not the shortcoming, the intellectual shortcoming of the district
officers to some extent. Many of these men had very little understanding or conception
how would they of stateless societies? They had grown up and were familiar only with state
forms of organization. As the science of anthropology went forward and analyses of stateless societies
became more available, in a lot of respects, the original error, if you like, in a place
like the Tonga country was recognized. Let me quote from a district officer's journal
written in 1936 in this very area I've been discussing, the Tonga region of southern Zambia.
He said this, as is the general rule throughout the Mazabuka Plateau, that's the Tonga country,
or part of it. Certain big men have been appointed chiefs by government who were not so recognized
before the advent of the white man. In very many cases, owing to the size of the district
and the non-existence of real chiefs, it was found necessary to pick out the most important
man in a given area and call him a chief. In fact, this man was, in most cases, only
primus interperis, that is, the first among equals. And it is due to this fact that claims,
by other, only slightly less important men are still being advanced three and a half
decades into the colonial project. Now, the great anthropologist Elizabeth Coulson, who
was one of that group of anthropologists I'm speaking of, echoes the last sentence. She
said that for every man who thus became a chief in this very region, there were probably
ten who had an equally valid claim since they, or their ancestors, had also been recognized
as leaders of small groups of villages or as ritual leaders. Now, this did not mean,
however, this recognition of statelessness as the indigenous reality did not lead to
a dismantling of the indirect rule structures. By the 1930s, the British are so wedded to
the notion of indirect rule that, in fact, even by the very same officers I've just been
quoting, we're seeing a strengthening of the structure of what they call the native authorities
at that point. Coulson noted that at her time, which begins in the 1940s, that these chiefs,
so-called, are accorded no particular respect or deference more than anybody else. And indeed,
the chiefs are still around. They've been inherited in the era of independence, and
I can assure you that I think that's still the case, no particular respect or deference
given to what are seen as, essentially, the appointees of an alien system.
Now, the other empires, to move us away from the British indirect rule situation, the other
empires in Africa, and I think this is true of most of them, tended to take a more practical
view of the need for African authority figures to serve as assistant rulers, if you like.
And I think they took that view based in a much more straightforward way on political
expediency. In other words, they had an empire to run. They had a colony to run. And there
wasn't this, again, theorization, such as Lugard and others in the British Empire were
striking of that necessity. Now, in these other empires, in other words, in these other
colonies, therefore, kings and chiefs were more likely to be supported or dismissed or
appointed or even created based on a very straightforward evaluation of how helpful they
were, how cooperative they were. Now, this was certainly known to happen in the British
Empire as well, in the British colonies as well, the replacement of, as I noted in the
last lecture, the replacement of somebody who is proving to be a thorn in the side and
proving to be, in the imperial view, a troublemaker with someone else. And that could certainly
happen in the British colonies as well. It's a question of degree. It's a difference of
degree. But it meant that there could be a difference in how far a particular chief or
king could go in questioning, in opposing, in even defying a colonial government. And
there was somewhat greater scope for that in the British Empire compared to the others.
Now, in some ways, the opposite side of the coin represented by the position of the
traditional chief was the side of the coin represented by the educated native. I'm using
a couple of sort of key phrases that come out of the colonial period. The relative sympathy
according to these two types, if you will, was reversed in the French vis-à-vis the
British system. An underlying question here was basically this. How universal, how accessible
was this thing called civilization? Were people, any people, including Africans, who
acted in so-called civilized ways according to their dress, their speech, their education,
their income, if you like, were such persons entitled to equal rights, to equal privileges?
In theory, the French answered yes. Now, I say in theory, and that's indeed a very important
qualification, as many so-called black Frenchmen found out. If you read an account like Franz
Fanon's Black Skin, White Mask, now Fanon was from the West Indies, but he was certainly of
African descent. And his experience after indeed obtaining very high education, becoming a
medical doctor, his experience colliding with the realities of continuing discrimination
against him inside of the French Empire was a very jarring experience, and he portrays
it very vividly in that book. Nonetheless, there was in practice, beyond the theory,
there was a greater scope for advancement through the French policy of assimilation.
In other words, different scope given to the so-called educated native here under the French
system, different scope given to the so-called traditional chief under the British system,
questions and differences of degree, but nonetheless, they do affect the flavor of the colonial
experience for both the colonizer and the colonized in these empires.
The British were far less enthusiastic about the so-called educated native, often suspected
as a troublemaker. And here's a telling indicator, I think, of this relative difference in degree.
It was inconceivable in the British Empire that African representatives from the colonies
would serve in the British Parliament in London. It was not on. Yet in the French Parliament
in Paris, beginning rather early in the century, dozens of Africans from French West Africa,
French Equatorial Africa did in fact serve in the French Parliament. Often this was
their sort of apprenticeship before returning and becoming part of the nationalist movement.
So a difference there in the relative degree of mobility in this case, not the latitude
given, but the longitude given, the ability to rise, provided one, indicated, gave proof
of this assimilation to the Western mandated ideal.
In the Portuguese Empire, we find a very pale reflection, a faint echo of the French policy
of assimilation. The Portuguese called them assimilados. But if you look at the numbers
of persons given the designation of assimilado, and therefore, in theory, permitted the same
rights and privileges of a Portuguese citizen, such as they were, after all, Portugal was
run by self-identified fascist governments for much of the 20th century. The number of
assimilados in places like Angola or Mozambique was infinitesimal. It was a fraction, well
under one percent of the total population. And even many of these, so-called assimilados,
were mestizos. They were persons of mixed African and Portuguese descent. One must be
exceedingly wary, it seems to me, just to continue our range of comparisons. One must
be quite wary in trying to assess degrees of oppression or degrees of brutality in the
European empires in Africa. All of the empires were capable of appalling abuses. All of the
have seen those abuses minimized or exaggerated at times, depending on the perspectives of
the supporter or critic or activist or commentator on the colonial situation. Having said that,
in my view, it also must be said that in Portuguese Africa, the intensity and longevity of forced
cultivation, of forced labor, the burden of taxation, the survival of corporal punishment
was notable in Portuguese Africa. But probably the most brutal regime of all, it didn't last
long for a while, was a colony which didn't belong to a nation at all. But the most brutal
but personally to that nation's king. I'm speaking of the so-called Congo Free State,
which was, until 1908, the personal possession of its proprietor, Belgian King Leopold II.
We will examine the notorious episode of the Congo Free State in our later full lecture,
lecture 25 on the Congo.
Now Germany had an African empire too, of course, but the German case immediately illustrates
that colonial empires can change over time because it ceased to exist in 1918. To the
victors of World War I went the spoils. And the German colonies, the possessions of one
of the great losers in World War I, the German colonies were divided between the other colonial
powers on the war's winning side through the mechanism of so-called League of Nations mandates.
The League of Nations, of course, created only in the aftermath of the First World War.
And the fledgling league designated these mandates, these mandated territories, taking the World
War I defeat of Germany as the mandate to assign various colonies to various of the
allied powers so that Cameroon is divided between France and Britain. Togo goes to the
French. Tanganyika in East Africa is assigned to Britain. Rwanda and Burundi are taken
from German colonial power and assigned to Belgium. This is after the period of the Congo
Free State. Now there's one sort of semi-exception to that pattern, and that is the German colony
of Southwest Africa, now known as Namibia. Southwest Africa was mandated and given over
for administration to not one of the European colonial powers, but one of the European colonial
powers but to the recently formed Union of South Africa. And they stayed there until 1990.
The German Empire did last long enough to ensure that the only major theater outside
of Europe during World War I was in East Africa, in and around the German colony of Tanganyika.
Now, for my money, the most vital distinction between colonies rested not on which nation
owned which colony, but on a deceptively simple question. How many European, that is, white
settlers came intending to stay? Now I emphasize intending to stay because there's a big difference
between the district officer, the colonial governor, the army commander, the merchant,
the missionary. In almost every case those persons plan to go out to a colonial territory,
spend a year or two or five or ten, in some cases twenty or more, but their ultimate objective
is to retire back to the mother country, back to the metropole. Settlers are a very different
matter. They come intending to stay, intending for their children and children's children
to stay, for their descendants to stay. Now here we can enter a comparative note. If
you take a longer view of colonialism, a place like Virginia or North Carolina or Pennsylvania
or Massachusetts in an earlier phase of empire represented settler colonies, of course. So
I want to set up this dichotomy between settler colonies and non-settler colonies. Now it's
a useful distinction for reasons I hope to make clear, although of course it's also
a spectrum. There's a range of situations depending on how many settlers we're talking
about. A substantial number of settlers coming to stay makes it a settler colony, although
it's a judgment call on substantial. Let me add right here that in none of the settler
colonies, as I will designate them, did the European transplanted populations become an
actual majority. So there's a difference between the United States situation where of course
European settlers did become the majority. In places like South Africa even, or Algeria,
lies outside of our purview because it's in North Africa, but the places that sustain
the greatest numbers of European settlers, even there, they were greatly outnumbered
by the indigenous peoples. Now the settler colonies were concentrated in southern and
eastern Africa, again aside from Algeria. South Africa was clearly the granddaddy of
the settler colonies in sub-Saharan Africa. It had the longest history, it had the deepest
entrenchment of European settlers, and we've looked at that history in some previous lectures.
Southern Rhodesia, Southwest Africa, Angola, Mozambique, these certainly qualify as settler
colonies as I'm defining it. As to a lesser degree, do Kenya and Northern Rhodesia, those
two are somewhat in the middle of that spectrum and on the fence. Substantial number of white
settlers, but not so many as the other cases I just mentioned. Now what difference did
this make, this difference between settler and non-settler colonies? In day to day terms
the intensity and the frequency of what I can only call racial humiliations, the notion
that as an African I have to get off the sidewalk if I see a European, a white coming
toward me, that as an African I have to go around to the side of the butcher shop and
be handed the meat I want to purchase without being able to see it through a small hole
cut in the side of the wall. These kinds of things in settler colonies, at least in the
areas within those settler colonies where the settler population was concentrated, these
kinds of day to day humiliations were multiplied, they were much greater than in the non-settler
ones. Now the demands for labor, excuse me, were far greater and more intense, they were
more constant, but this in turn rested partly on the greatest impact of settler versus non-settler
of all. In settler colonies people lost land. It's difficult to overestimate this consequence
and it's related to what I just said about the demands for labor were greater. Of course
in settler colonies there are more employers for one thing, but in settler colonies after
the colonial populations have lost land they have their little alternative. They need wage
employment because the alternative of production on their own land is an alternative which
largely disappears with the appropriation of that land by the settlers. So without minimizing
the impositions at all, the black man's burden, if I can put it that way, the burden born
by ordinary Africans in colonial situations, the black man's burden in non-settler colonies
was comparatively lighter. African residents of Nigeria or Togo or Uganda may have lost
their freedom, they may have lost their sovereignty, but they did not lose their land and that
made a big difference. Finally, as we'll see in later lectures, the difference between
settler and non-settler colonies will affect the decolonization process in very substantial
ways as well. Now let's turn to bring our lecture to a conclusion to change or differences
not across space but over time. It's common to divide the colonial period in Africa into
three principal phases. The consolidation phase before World War I, the so-called high
colonial period between the World Wars and the third era leading to colonialism's end
beginning with the Second World War itself. Let me turn to this divide between the second
and the third phase, or centering around the decade or so on either side of the Second
World War. World War II affected Africa enormously. Something like a half-may in African soldiers
served the Allied side overseas, they were critical in campaigns like Burma in southern
Asia. But beyond that, the mobilization required for critical war materiel, stuff like copper,
hastened urbanization. It meant that more and more people were drawn into these export
nexuses. The cities, as one description in colonial Southern Rhodesia said, the cities
heaved and grown under their human load of more and more people producing more and more
feverishly because of the intensification of the need for these things during war time.
France and Britain during the war and even after it embarked on a substantially more
serious approach to development. There was a genuine increase in investment, in education,
and in projects designed to benefit a wider range of the population. So to the soldiers,
the administrators, the merchants, the missionaries, and in some cases the settlers, particularly
after World War II in the French and British empires, we see the arrival more and more
of the technician, the engineer, the agricultural advisor, in other words the experts becoming
part of the colonial apparatus. Now the motivations for them to take this turn towards what I
will call the developmentalist state, the late colonial developmentalist state in the
French and British empires, a term that I'll use again later in the course. The motivations
for this varied. In some respects they owed and felt a genuine debt, a genuine gratitude.
Charles de Gaulle, the leader of the French, the free French, felt genuine gratitude for
the assistance given to him from French Equatorial and later in the war French West Africa.
But they made this turn toward reform, towards making their colonies more widely embracive
of the notion of development. Of course they'd always been interested in development of a
certain kind, export development for instance. But they make this turn partly, precisely
to ameliorate what is a rising tide of discontent with colonialism itself.
So it is an effort at reform in order to preserve and to hang on to the colonies, at least
in part. Now this turn, this move towards the developmentalist state in the late colonial
period in the French and British empires, it has implications and we will pursue some
of those implications. In for instance the dynamics of nationalism, the dynamics of decolonization
and indeed the creation of these developmentalist states in the late British and French colonial
empires continues to have implications and consequences in the post-colonial states of
today's Africa. Thank you.
