Lecture 14, The Atlantic Slave Trade, The Impact
Hello.
In our last lecture, we traced the ways in which Africa, specifically West and West Central
Africa, became critically important in the making of the Atlantic world, the Atlantic
system, mainly through the mechanism of the Atlantic slave trade.
In this lecture, we want to bring our focus back to Africa itself, look at the way the
slave trade worked on its African side, and consider what the long-term impact of the
Atlantic slave trade may have been on the continent.
Let's start by attempting to approximate the sheer scale of the trade over the two
to three centuries of its existence.
How many people are we talking about?
Like almost everything else about the Atlantic slave trade, this question has been hotly
contested by scholars and non-scholars alike.
Over the years, there have been some heavily biased estimates, as low as two million, and
as high as six hundred million a century ago, the great African-American scholar and historian
W.B.
Du Bois put it at a hundred million, which turned out to be almost surely and considerably
too high.
We might start with Philip Curtin's 1969 study, which at the time it was undertaken
was the most meticulous to that point.
Curtin suggested a figure of about nine million Africans landed in the New World.
This takes us slightly away from our focus this time and back to the overview, but it
is worth considering that something like half of the total went to the islands of the
Caribbean, a bit less than a third of the remainder went to Brazil.
In other words, the Caribbean islands in Brazil accounted for something like 80% of the total
African persons brought to the New World under the Atlantic slave trade system.
The United States, on the other hand, was responsible for importing less than five percent
of the total.
As you might imagine, these figures create some extremely interesting questions for historians
of the New World, and of course that lies outside of our purview.
Now Curtin was attacked in his calculation of these numbers by scholars like J.E. Inakori
and Walter Rodney, who concluded that the total number was probably at least 50% higher,
perhaps 15 million persons.
The most comprehensive study yet, which is represented by a database actually released
on CD form from Harvard led by the team of scholars directed by David Altus and released
in 1999, suggests the figure of around 11 million.
It seems reasonable to estimate a total, therefore, of perhaps 10 to 15 million persons.
Most of them aged 15 to 35 years in the prime of their physical productivity, and overall
and in the long run at something like a two to one male to female ratio.
The peak century, the slave trade, of course, varied from year to year, decade to decade
in its intensity.
The peak century was the 18th century, the 1700s, the same century as the European Enlightenment.
History does not always run in the same direction.
Now the numbers I've been talking about above do not include those who perished on the hard
middle passage.
This again varied from place to place and over time, but seems to have been in a 10
to 20% range.
Or does it include those who were killed, injured, who died in the process of obtaining
slaves and getting them to West African ports?
Some have suggested what you might refer to as a kind of multiplier effect, in other words,
from the kinds of numbers I've been talking about, as high as five to one.
That is, total casualties required in a sense to produce the one enslaved person actually
transported and relocated.
If it is five to one, that obviously multiplies it many times over.
Even if it were one to one, that would clearly double the number of victims.
It's clear then that Africa lost tens of millions of people in the operation of the Atlantic
slave trade, although it is also true that this was over a fairly long period of time,
again two, two and a half centuries, three centuries at the longest, and over a fairly
large area.
Now before we look at how slaves were obtained, let's consider a related question.
Was slavery something brought from the outside, something previously unknown in Africa?
The short answer to that is no.
But I hasten to add that we should not assume that, quote, slavery in Africa necessarily
meant the same thing as the chattel slavery, which became the norm with which we are familiar
in the American cases.
There was in fact a wide range in African societies of what we might call unfree labor, a sort
of halfway point.
Some scholars have begun to use the term limbry, which of course has the same root as limbo.
You're in a sort of in-between status between what we might consider free versus slave.
So in these varieties, just to try to categorize them a bit, some have proposed a sort of two
broad category division in African forms of unfree labor between what they've called
royal slavery on the one hand, that is persons held by very powerful people, rulers, or at
least the elites associated with them, and in considerable numbers.
On the other hand, an opposing category which might be called domestic slavery, that is
essentially on a much smaller scale and involving essentially a single household or family holding
as it were a person in this status of limbry.
In general, I would probably suggest that the royal slavery notion came closer to something
like the chattel slavery of the New World, that the domestic slavery was considerably
removed.
For instance, it was not necessarily perpetual.
In the New World, slavery was intended to be an inheritable status.
The children of slaves were to be slaves.
And once enslaved, unless emancipated by the owner or the society at large, one is a slave
for life.
Again, neither of those can be assumed, even in the case of royal slavery, sometimes people
were able, for instance, by service inside a king's army, and in some cases, there are
stories out of old molly and so forth of slaves who rose and became commanders at some level
within the military.
And certainly in the case of what I'm calling domestic slavery here, or domestic limbry,
if you like, there was room for adjustment of that status over time.
For instance, a male who possesses a person receiving it through perhaps a payment of
a debt, receiving her, excuse me, I'm referring here to a female.
It was not at all unusual that that woman would be absorbed, as it were, into the family
as an additional part of a polygynous household, another wife.
And that in time, the children of the owner and the slave would, in fact, be absorbed
into the lineage as more or less full members of it.
Nonetheless, I don't want to minimize the possibilities and the fact of a range of unfree
labor, and at an extreme, it probably did include versions that would have resembled
the chattel slavery of the Americas.
So how did individual Africans then come to suffer the hard fate of becoming a victim
of the African slave trade?
What preceded their forced embarkation onto that ship from a place like Gore Island in
Senegal, just off the shore of Dakar, Elmina Castle in Ghana, the so-called doorways of
no return, how did they get there?
To say the least, this is a very sensitive question, because of course it raises issues
of responsibility and indeed of guilt, if you like.
Some slaves were certainly captured directly by Europeans.
The very famous novelization of his researches, which Alex Haley published in the 1970s, and
of course I'm referring to roots.
The capture of Haley's ancestor, Kunta Kente, is a capture directly by Europeans and their
paid retainers who come ashore, search for people, and find Kunta Kente.
In fact, in the TV series version of it, it's a very dramatic and indeed famous scene, they're
literally using nets to ensnare, in a sense capturing those people as one might get fish.
Now incidents like this certainly did occur.
There were examples of direct capture by Europeans and their immediate agents.
However, they tended to occur either early on, before this dynamic really got rolling,
or they tended to occur along the parts of the West African coast, which were either
thinly populated or not the seats of reasonably strong states.
And again, we related in a couple of lectures back the notion that then population might
be more likely to have a stateless situation and therefore be in less of a position to
defend itself.
But again, the number of persons obtained and brought into this system through that
means were relatively insignificant.
The principal reason for that was that African states were too powerful to permit it.
And here I pause to emphasize a point that I make to my undergraduates.
It may not be news at all to the listeners or viewers of this tape, but I do find that
a number of them in a sense conflate the operations and the period of the slave trade with colonial
rule or the colonial domination, the colonial takeover of Africa.
In other words, the kind of impression they have is one where Africa was taken over by
Europeans, which then began a kind of systematic exportation of slavery for a couple of exceptions.
But in general, the era of the slave trade does not overlap with the era of the colonial
period, and African rulers and states by and large remained sovereign during the entire
period in which the slave trade operated.
So the great majority of persons brought onto these ships were purchased by European slave
traders from powerful African traders, most of whom were connected with political rulers,
kings or chiefs.
This however simply raises, of course, an additional question of how these brokers at
the coast assembled their supplies of tradeable slaves.
Now they may not at all have obtained them directly.
I'm talking about the coastal entrepose and the rulers and traders operating the trade
there and making the final sale to the European slave ship.
They may not have done that directly.
In fact, a given enslaved person may have been sold and resold in several different
steps from a home or a place of origin deep in the interior until reaching the coast.
An example of this comes from probably the most famous narrative and memoir of enslavement
and eventual freedom and a very moving book indeed.
And I'm talking about Alotto Equiano's memoir published first in 1789.
He claimed that he was born in about 1746.
So he certainly was one of the victims of the African slave trade at its height.
Now Equiano came from a place that was in the interior of what we would call modern
day Nigeria.
He was part of the Ebo ethnic group, which is the dominant people of southeastern Nigeria.
In Equiano's case, he was kidnapped, though not by Europeans.
And I'll just read the last sentence of his second chapter of his book.
Thus I continued to travel sometimes by land, sometimes by water through different countries
and various nations till at the end of six or seven months after I had been kidnapped,
I arrived at the sea coast.
And there were a number of transactions involving him, which eventually led Domino's style
to the final fate.
Now in some cases, the persons who wound up being victimized in this traffic were criminals,
they were detours, they were political undesirables, dissidents or opponents of a ruler perhaps.
In this case, in a sense, people were being deported, if you like, rather than just exported.
And again, sometimes this creates a kind of warping of norms, and I suppose this prefigures
the end of this lecture when I talk about the long range effects.
Again, to go to Haley's very popular novelization of his lineage, coming out of Africa and of
course to the Americas, there's a passage in the early portion where he says that people
began to wonder why when the European slave ships were anchored in the harbor for weeks
at a time, that there seemed to be more in the way of court cases for serious offenses,
that there seemed to be a greater likelihood that mild criticism of the king or authority
would result in imprisonment, etc.
And of course he's suggesting that these persons were in fact going to wind up on that ship.
But there's no question that the great majority of persons who went through those doorways
of no return were the products of conflicts of various intensity, of wars, battles, raids,
kidnappings.
These usually occurred between persons of different ethnic groups or at the very least
different political units.
So in a sense what the African slave trade did was to create an alternative fate.
An alternative fate for a person who might have been convicted of a serious crime earlier
and might have faced corporal punishment, let's say, or indeed ostracism, exile, being
thrown out in essence of the society.
Or a captive who might have been incorporated into royal slavery, as I've called it, or
on a smaller scale distributed into a so-called domestic slavery.
Now there's an additional possibility.
There's an alternative fate for such persons and that fate, of course, is to wind up on
a slave ship.
A comment here, a personal comment, and I think I should make it clear that that's what
it is.
I have encountered more than once Europeans or white Americans who seem to take satisfaction
from the fact that most Africans brought involuntarily to the Americas were sold by Africans along
the West African coast.
And the implication to them is that this somehow shifts the blame, as it were, from European
on to African shoulders.
Now for my money, there's plenty of responsibility, guilt, if you want to put it that way, to
go around.
Though I would note in passing that the demand which ultimately drove the system came from
Europeans and I would note that it was not Europeans who were its victims.
Now for a more substantive point, the notion that Africans sold their own people assumes
that African sellers, that Africans generally thought of themselves primarily as Africans.
But surely they did not.
They thought of themselves primarily or first as Ashanti or Yoruba or Congo.
A shared identity of Africanness, it certainly begins to emerge but it takes a long time
to crystallize, a notion of pan-Africanist identity, etc.
This should not surprise us.
Certainly a sense of commonality, a sense of common European-ness, for instance, also
has taken a very long time to crystallize as the long record of conflict, a lot of it
bloody conflict, between various European ethnicities, various European states surely
shows.
As Basil Davidson once put it on paraphrasing, he said Africans rarely sold their own people,
they sold other people who also happened to come from Africa.
Some of the stories of the rulers who became caught up in this slave trade are somewhat
wrenching.
Some are not.
Some are, inspire cynicism for sure.
But in the first category I would put the story of the Manacongo, the king of the old
Iron Age kingdom of Congo on the west-central African coast, near just south of the mouth
of the Congo River.
The Portuguese first came to the kingdom of Congo in 1490, so again two years before Columbus
and eight years before the Portuguese continued and successfully circumnavigated around Africa.
Nzinga Mbimba became the Manacongo, the king in about 1506 or 1507.
And his story is a sad one, it's a tragic one.
At first Nzinga Mbimba seemed to wish to seize upon a new possibility for improvement of his
own kingdom, and if you like a mutually beneficial alliance and relationship with the kingdom
of Portugal.
And indeed this seemed to be possible for some time.
There was as maybe we should not surprise us a religious aspect of this, and in fact Nzinga
Mbimba converted Christianity relatively early on in his reign and in the Portuguese records
he is referred to as Dom or King Afonso the first of the Congo.
One reason this story is such a rich one in its entirety is that the evidence is extraordinary.
In the Portuguese archives there are 22 letters which were dictated and written by Afonso
Nzinga Mbimba in the 1500s to the king of Portugal initially Manuel whom he usually referred
to as his royal brother.
It's clear that he wanted some of the technical advantages if you like, he was particularly
interested understandably in ships and ship building and was hoping that he could get a
whole of that.
He had an interest, he was an engaging mind, he had an interest in western styles of medicine
and as we've already seen he certainly had an interest in Christianity.
The Portuguese had an interest in a civilizing mission and I don't say that cynically at
least at first, but increasingly they also had an interest in slaves.
And at first as part of the price if you like that Afonso felt he had to pay to get those
benefits that he wanted he tolerated you might put it the dispersal, the sale of some slaves
from outlying portions of his kingdom.
But as Basil Davidson writes in his book on the Atlantic slave trade he has a chapter
entitled at first a trickle and a following chapter called and then a flood.
In a sense the dynamic of the slave trade tended to overwhelm everything else and Afonso
wound up being greatly disillusioned with it.
He wrote a letter at one point to his so-called brother king and I'd like to quote a minute
from it.
He cannot reckon how great the damage is since the above mentioned merchants daily
seize our subjects, we're actually referring to African merchants there in the direct sense.
Sons of the land and sons of our noblemen and vassals and our relatives, thieves and
men of evil conscience take them because they wish to possess the things and wares of this
kingdom.
They grab them and cause them to be solds and so great serves their corruption and licentiousness
that our country is being utterly depopulated.
That is why we beg of your highness to help and assist us in this matter commanding your
factors that they would send here neither merchants nor wares because it is our will
in these kingdoms that there should not be any trade in slaves nor market for slaves.
That was not to be and it's fair to say that Afonso died bitterly disillusioned and in
fact his portion of Angola became arguably the hardest hit single place of the entire
West African coast in terms of the long-term numbers of slaves extracted.
Well, we know what came out of Africa in the Atlantic slave trade and human beings defined
as property.
What went in?
As we might expect a whole variety of things, cloth, metal and glassware from Europe to
tobacco, alcohol, cowrie, shells and spices from the Indian Ocean.
Maybe one commodity deserves special mention and that is guns, some 20 million of them
in all.
African rulers often insisted on guns just as the European traders insisted on slaves.
At the end of the day then or the end of the long night, if you like, how did Africa fare
in this bargain?
What was the impact of the Atlantic slave trade?
As you can readily imagine, these are not easy questions.
It's possible to discern two broad schools.
One sees the Atlantic slave trade as thoroughly destructive, the largest single explanation
for Africa's continuing impoverishment.
Walter Rodney's book How Europe Underdeveloped Africa is a bold argument of this view and
the title in a sense reflects that.
That argument has been extended and made more subtle by scholars like Patrick Manning
and others.
The other school is associated with people like John Faige and more recently John Thornton
who while hardly applauding the slave trade and accepting its moral depravity are particularly
concerned to portray Africans as historical agents and not simply a sort of helpless victims
or stick figures, puppet figures.
And this is the one thing that Faige and Thornton point to.
State building in the slave trade zones was not inhibited and indeed may have been accelerated.
States like Ashante or Dahomeh in West Africa certainly did develop at one level politically
at least and partly through their participation in the slave trade.
We've seen a correlation between the rise of states and vigorous trade and like it or
not the slave trade was trade.
Now Africa's population unlike that of other continents stagnated during the slave trade
era.
Now whether this was the cause of economic stagnation or the result of it continues to
be debated.
There seems to be no avoiding the fact though that enslaved Africans and again taken in
their most productive years produced wealth elsewhere, not in Africa.
Walter Rodney argues for instance that if you want to look at this in very cold economic
terms exported people, in other words what's coming out were in a sense capital goods,
that is goods that produce other goods.
I mean it's normally applied to machinery these days.
So he's arguing that productive goods in a sense in the form of people are coming out
while what's coming in is either consumable entities, consumer products not capital goods
but consumer goods and in fact undercutting the further development of the manufacture
of such things at home.
In other words cheap imports of cloth or iron undercutting and subverting homegrown industries
in those sorts of things.
He takes it one step further, not only are you losing the means of production in a sense
in Rodney's argument but you're importing the means of destruction.
Finally what of war and instability, what about fear and insecurity, what was the moral
and social impact of this?
I mentioned the kind of warping of political and legal norms that Haley refers to in his
popularized version there.
Were the enslaved captives in wars, were they taken in wars that would have been fought
anyway or were they the bounty which stimulated the wars themselves?
Were they the reason for the wars?
You might call that the byproduct model versus the primary object model.
John Newton who was the most famous for composing the him Amazing Grace had himself in mind when
he wrote, who saved a wretch like me, he had begun his career working on a slave ship and
then later became an Anglican clergyman and very much felt responsibility and guilt about
this his whole life.
He felt that most of Africa's wars would, as he put it, verily cease were it not for
the demand for the captives that those wars produced.
It's hard not to believe that this became at least a subsidiary motive for aggression
and conflict and the primary one in some cases and in any case the conflicts were increasingly
fought with more lethal weaponry and that is guns.
And what of fear and insecurity?
What of that feeling gnawing at the pit of the stomach, that kernel of fear at the back
of the mind?
Could it happen to me?
Could it happen to my children tomorrow what I know happened 20 miles away?
I'm not sure how we measure that.
And personally I find it hard not to conclude that this sorry chapter in human history inflicted
lasting damage.
If history is drama, this episode is tragedy.
Thank you.
