Lecture 7, Like Nothing Else, The Ancient Nile Valley
Welcome.
Two lectures back, we looked at the revolutions of agriculture and iron in Africa.
One way of defining a revolution might be to say that it changes the scope of possibility.
It changes the range of potential.
And one way of assessing the outer limits of the range of possibility is to look at
an extreme case to ask just how far could the changes go.
This brings us to ancient Egypt.
There's nothing quite like ancient Egypt.
The subject certainly could be the focus of an entire teaching company course, and lo
and behold, it is.
It'll be the last commercial I do for another course, but it's a good one.
Although Egypt lies outside of our course's self-assigned area of coverage, that is sub-Saharan
Africa, Egypt's history, and really even more relevant, I think today, the greatly varying
approaches to Egypt's history, have played such vivid roles in interpretations
in controversies about world history and about African history that we simply cannot
ignore it.
So this will be one of our discursions beyond sub-Saharan Africa.
For nearly 3,000 years, the lower Nile Valley in Egypt, despite numerous dynastic changes,
something like 30 different dynasties, despite the fact that people talk about the Old Kingdom,
the Middle Kingdom, the New Kingdom, for something like 3,000 years ancient Egypt demonstrated,
displayed an essential, a basic political and cultural continuity, that's rather incredible.
If you compare that longevity with Rome, or the longevity age of the American nation,
for instance, it dwarves it.
Egypt's achievements in art, literature, science, perhaps above all in architecture,
continued to astound us.
Now the ultimate basis, however, of the Egyptian wonder was an incredible leap in agricultural
productivity along the Nile.
The key to that, of course, was the annual flood of the Nile.
Atop the rich deposits of silt, comparatively limited amounts of labor could yield previously
unthinkable amounts of agricultural wealth.
The people who produced that wealth were peasant farmers.
In this course, I will simply use the term peasant to refer to small-scale farmers.
You know, we pay so much attention to the spectacular things coming out of Egypt, the
splendors of it, understandably so, usually associated with the elite, if not the pharaohs,
at least the thinkers, the mathematicians, the architects, the creators of these wonders.
We perhaps are in some danger of overlooking the people who, almost literally in this sense,
were at the base of the pyramid, in this case the social pyramid.
Peasant farmers produced this enormous agricultural wealth.
They were poor, obviously not because they weren't producing much, but because the surplus
which they produced was, of course, regularly siphoned upwards through taxation.
And here again, the particular characteristics of a river and environment made a difference.
The Nile River Valley, the populated portions of Nile River Valley, of course, comparatively
actually quite by any standard, very narrow.
It also is a river which is quite navigable, upstream and down.
Revealing winds blow upstream, so you can take those to move up.
The river flow, on the other hand, of course, obviously, is downstream.
Now the narrowness of that valley and the navigability of the river meant that it was
possible for the pharaoh's agents, the scribes and the tax collectors, to reach these producers,
these peasant producers on a very regular basis.
In fact, I'm sure to many peasants, it was an overly regular basis.
After all, every phase of the agricultural cycle was, in a sense, regulated or monitored,
perhaps is the better word, by these agents, the bureaucrats, basically, of the Egyptian
state.
Consequences, in essence, were set for peasant producers based on the size or the scale of
the annual Egyptian flood, and therefore producers were assigned a particular level of surplus,
which they were expected to produce.
And the consequences of not producing it were usually, at the very least, corporal punishment.
So the siphoning of this and the geographical factors which made it possible to siphon this
surplus is ultimately what underlay these grand projects, which we still find so captivating.
Now perhaps surprisingly, Egypt, in its heyday, did not, in fact, employ iron tools.
But it certainly had metallurgy.
It made extensive use, or people made extensive use of copper and eventually bronze tools.
Bronze is an alloy of copper and tin.
And its expertise in metallurgy is shown also, of course, in the legendary Egyptian gold.
Such was Egypt's prosperity and the resultant population increase, that it is possible that
at the kingdom's height half of all people living in Africa resided here.
Half the people on the continent may have been part of ancient Egypt at its height.
Now the idea of civilization and related questions of the origin of civilization have embroiled
Egypt in controversy for a very long time, precisely because it seems to embody so much
of the very concept of civilization.
I'm going to take a slight personal digression here.
I rarely use the term civilization.
I'm not terribly comfortable with it.
To me, it's a word that is so laden with the possibilities of misunderstanding, and frankly
one often loaded with what could only be called bias, that I often find it unuseful.
I think that all too often the dichotomy between civilization versus barbarism or civilization
versus savagery is equated with a dichotomy essentially between us and them.
Who are the civilized?
Well, obviously we are.
What are they like?
Well, obviously they are uncivilized.
They are barbaric and what have you.
Now I want to quickly add here that this is not simply some sort of politically correct
attack on the Western world, although I think what I just mentioned has a history there.
I don't think I have to go into great depth to suggest that there are certainly people
in the world today who see themselves as the repository of civilization and see the Western
world as the repository of savagery.
So it's not exclusive to one place or one time, one culture, this us, them, civilized
versus uncivilized kind of dichotomy.
Just to extend that problem I have with it a little bit further, suppose we extended the
term civilization just a bit and talked about civilized behavior, for instance.
Take a country in Europe, Germany, and again this is not an effort to pick on a particular
place.
You know, Germany has been the home of people like Bach, Goethe, Einstein, creators of fantastic
achievements in culture and science and literature, products many would say of the highest of
civilizations.
Germany, of course, also produced Adolf Hitler.
It produced the Holocaust.
Where does that leave us in terms of the relationship or analysis of the relationship between civilization
and civilized behavior?
Again I'll take it a bit further personally.
I have spent more time in one particular part of Africa than any other and that's the area
of southern Zambia dominated by Tonga peoples, Tonga-speaking peoples.
Now the Tonga historically did not build pyramids.
They did not have literacy and yet in terms of my own experiences I've certainly encountered
a wealth and abundance of behavior I can only call civilized from that kind of culture,
from those people.
Okay, enough of my personal digression.
There may be ways to take some of the emotion, some of that tilt one or the other out of
a concept of civilization.
If we go to a source like the encyclopedia of the social sciences and look up civilization,
we'll get something that is a much, I think, more useful kind of objective set of criteria
that they are using to define the very concept.
In its most literal sense, civilization for instance refers to the presence of cities.
Do we have urban life?
Do people live or were cities of some size emergent?
Did they develop there?
Literacy obviously a characteristic that many would point to in a more, as I say, objective
sense or way of defining civilization and some may go on to that.
Monumental architecture may figure as a criterion for civilization or an extensive and elaborate
division of labor, some would say.
I think we ought to back up though maybe and just mention that the prerequisite for urban
life is of course agricultural life.
Without the agricultural production to feed cities, civilization in this sense is impossible.
Now, was Egypt the fount of western civilization?
Was Greece possible without Egypt?
Was Greece fundamentally different from Egypt?
Was Greece at some would have it a copy of Egypt?
I must say that in entering this question of the relationship between ancient Greece
and ancient Egypt, we are entering a bit of a minefield here and I think within a few
minutes you may see why.
Now over the long course of time, the pendulum in the western world has certainly swung back
and forth a number of times in terms of this relationship between Egypt and Greece.
When I say it has swung back, I mean it has gone from contentions that Egypt was extraordinarily
important as an influence on Greece or in the extreme case that Greece simply amounted to
an echo or a copy of it, to contentions that Greece was something fundamentally different
and that in fact western civilization needs to be traced back to there and stopped there.
It's something fundamentally different was represented across the Mediterranean in ancient
Egypt.
Now the pendulum has swung not only over time, this division if you like of approaches to
Egypt's role in the long run of western civilization certainly continues today.
I mean consider a couple of fairly recent publications.
Martin Bernal's multi-volume work entitled Black Athena, very provocative title there
and as you might expect he is arguing at some length and with some subtlety that in
fact the roots of classical Greek civilization were to be found in Africa and in Asia.
Another book by Mary Lechkowitz largely created or assembled in response to Bernal and others
has an equally provocative title.
It says not out of Africa is the title of the book so stressing that in fact the course
of so-called western civilization is something quite fundamentally different and that Greece
owed relatively little to Egypt.
Now those who would support Bernal's position that Greece did owe a great deal to Egypt do
have some contemporary by which I mean ancient sources that they can turn to and one of them
is usually considered the father of history again in the western tradition and that is
Herodotus who not only wrote a great deal of history about the whole ancient world that
spent some time in Egypt in about 450 BC.
I just quote him for a moment here on Herodotus on religion.
He wrote that the names of nearly all the gods came to Greece from Egypt.
These practices and he's referring to religious practices then and others I will speak of
later were borrowed by the Greeks from Egypt.
Now here is where the modern obsession with race enters the arena.
A century ago prominent American scholars went to Egypt.
They examined Egyptian crania that is skulls and they pronounced that these were Caucasian
that they were white in other words.
In other words they were making the case that Egypt the fount of western civilization almost
by definition therefore was white and now we've proved it.
In 1926 major Egyptologists published a book in which he stated flatly that the Egyptians
were part of his term the great white race.
Now in more recent decades as you might expect a counter argument has definitely emerged
and it goes something like this that Egypt was not just African it was black African.
This has become a central tenet of some streams not all of what in the last couple of decades
has been called Afrocentrism or Afrocentrism.
One of the founders in a sense although he never called himself that of the entire approach
to Egypt that that represents was the Senegalese scholar from West Africa and just give you
one sentence from him or a couple of sentences actually that states his conclusion.
He published a book by the way in the late 1950s called the African origin of civilization
myth or reality as you can no doubt deduce he certainly answered that it was reality.
The ancient Egyptians were Negroes the moral fruit of their civilization is to be counted
among the assets of the black world.
Now you can see from that that Job and his followers not only ascribe an enormous influence
from Egypt towards Greece but an enormous influence from Egypt towards the rest of
of Africa in a sense that the ancient Nile Valley and in Egypt bears the same relationship
to African civilization as Greece and Rome would to Western civilization.
So let me try to navigate this this minefield a bit.
My own view starts with what I might presumptuously call some common sense.
It's important to distinguish between modern Egypt and ancient Egypt today Egypt is seen
property scene is a central part some would say the central part of the Arab world.
But the full scale Arab invasions and permanent occupations of Egypt did not begin until after
the Prophet Muhammad's death in the 7th century AD.
This is a thousand years after ancient Egypt's fall.
In general people skin color closer to the equator was darker and farther from it lighter.
Now this might suggest that Egypt's original population if we could identify such was on
average somewhere between the averages in Central Africa and say Central Europe.
Maybe a phrase like people of color is more useful than black versus white.
This was at a crossroads of Africa the Mediterranean and Southwest Asia.
It is reasonable to expect that peoples of various origins live there and indeed the
representations out of Egypt and by that I mean that the paintings drawings the sculptures
etc appear to represent a great range a great variety of what modern people would call races.
Now maybe most important of all there's good evidence that people in ancient Egypt did not
think of racial categories in the way that modern peoples have that conceptions of blackness
or whiteness or of the black race or white race were simply not part of their lexicon.
We run therefore the constant risk of imposing classifications on peoples who didn't necessarily
see that things that way at all.
I find myself in agreement with Eric Gilbert and Jonathan Reynolds authors of another recent
textbook who I'm paraphrasing but they say that essentially asking the question who were
the ancient Egyptians which I would amend to say asking the question what color were
the ancient Egyptians reveals more about ourselves than the answer reveals about the Egyptians.
I'll end this section by saying that Egypt is indisputably part of the African continent.
That does not require divorcing it from the Mediterranean world or the world of the Near
East.
These are not either or categories they're not either or issues.
Egypt can be both and both part of the African world and part of the Mediterranean world
as it is part of the Arab world.
Now to seek a firmer link between Egypt and the rest of Africa let's look upstream, let's
look south on the Nile River.
Let's extend our Nile purview beyond Pharaonic ancient Egypt and let's move into the area
historically known as Nubia.
It's now the northernmost parts of the modern country of Sudan.
I'm going to turn first to the findings of the archeologists from the University of Chicago
led by Bruce Williams who carried out certainly the most extensive researches in and about
ancient Nubia that we have seen and began to publish these in the late 1980s.
Now what they found I'm going to go particularly to their very earliest findings or I should
say the findings from the very earliest period that they surveyed which ran from 3,800 BC
to 3,100 BC.
Now I mentioned those dates this is the case where chronology may indeed really make a
difference here.
3,800 BC leading up to 3,100 BC.
3,100 BC is used as the conventional date for the start of the founding of the ancient
Egyptian dynasties.
Now what Williams and his teams found they have argued in numerous publications through
the excavation and exploration for instance of royal tombs and cemeteries is what in his
phrase he calls a lost kingdom called Taseti or land of the bow again well upstream of
ancient Egypt and perhaps most important of all predating it.
Williams argues that ideas like divine kingship in other words may have originated further
into Africa than previously believed and that therefore the movement of ideas like divine
kingship at the notion of the state building impulse if you like moved from the south and
into Egypt from that direction.
Now as you might imagine this also remains controversial as it happens after 3,100 BC
as Egypt is rising these very areas of Nubia that Williams was excavating fell into to
some decline.
Still there was a revival about 2,000 BC that is about 4,000 years ago a major kingdom
centered at Kerma on the Nile emerged in Nubia.
Kush as this in its successor states came to be called was the second oldest state at
least in Africa if Williams is right perhaps the third oldest state in all of Africa.
Over a period of 2,000 years or so then relations between Kush and Egypt economic relations
political relations cultural relations were substantial and they were complex.
There were several swings of the power pendulum Egypt occupied Kush at times but around 750
BC the Nubians from Kush invaded Egypt and ruled it for nearly a century.
This is the 25th of the 30 or so dynasties in the Egyptian progression and it's usually
called the Nubian dynasty of Egypt.
In some ways the Kushites showed considerable Egyptian influence they built pyramids for
instance they're not on the quite the size of the Egyptian ones but they're most impressive
nonetheless.
Their kings referred to themselves as Pharaohs.
Their religion in a lot of respects was very similar in some of the named deities like
Amun and so forth show up in the Kushite history as well.
In other respects on the other hand Kush was quite independent.
It developed its own alphabetic script and this script is actually still undeciphered
extremely complex script which differed fundamentally from Egyptian hieroglyphics.
Now in the centuries leading up to the modern era the birth of Jesus up to 1 AD in the
early centuries BC the capital of Kush shifted to the south within Nubia and came to be
located at the city of Merroway between the Nile and the Atbara rivers at the junction
of those two rivers and it's here that we do find one of our old revolutions.
Merroway became an iron production site of the first importance in tracing the history
of iron and iron working throughout Africa.
One scholar called it the Birmingham of Central Africa.
Given Merroway's very wide trading contacts it's reasonable to view it as an important
center for iron knowledge diffusion.
Now eventually Merroway appears to have declined for instance in the production of its iron
partly because the rather limited woodland around this area which after all is nearby
contingent or next door to the portions of the Sahara.
The woodland was exhausted and the woodland was particularly important in creating the
charcoal which produced the heat which allowed the smelting of iron to take place.
Its final fall though actually came at the hands of Ethiopia known as Aksum then when
King Izzana conquered it and spelled it in to Merroway's old iron industry.
We will meet King Izzana again in our lecture on Ethiopia a couple of steps down the road.
Through Kush then we find a credible link between ancient Egypt and Africa to the south.
Kush and Egypt influenced one another. Egypt influencing Kush, Kush influencing Egypt.
Egypt influenced Kush and Kush in turn had effects through its trading links with Africa
to the south.
In essence the prosperity of old Merroway, old Kush was based on its middleman position.
It was able to take advantage of the commerce from inner Africa to the south and the Mediterranean
world to its north. We will see rather quickly other so-called middleman trading kingdoms.
When we look in lecture 10 at the rise of the old Savannah states of West Africa.
I'll end this consideration of Egypt and Kush by quoting the imminent historian Roland
Oliver of the University of London on Kush who concluded that it was indeed, quote, the
prototype of the later states of the sub-Saharan Savannah. Thank you.
