Today we're here on Standing on the Shoals of the Giants
with Dr. Leon Vanstone.
Hey, it's great to be here.
Thanks for having me on.
Look forward to it.
Indeed.
I'm really happy that you're here.
You have a PhD in hypersonics,
which is actually the cool part of rocket science
if I'm not mistaken.
It's certainly the newer part.
I mean, it's all pretty hot, honestly,
you know, like 4,000 Fahrenheit.
But yeah, no, I enjoy it very much.
But that's, you know, it's just a part of who I am.
I like to, if anyone asks, I normally say
I'm a rocket scientist, storyteller, idiot.
And aren't we all really idiots?
But yeah, no, I do know a little bit of rocket science.
Started, I founded the Texas Rocket Engineering Lab
for the University of Texas.
That was an absolute blast.
Moved on from that.
At this point, almost two years ago,
joined a startup, helped them grow
from about 10 million to 100 million.
And now they pivoted that I was cool with that.
I actually told them to fire me, but it didn't make sense
for the investor anyway, it doesn't matter.
But yeah, and since then,
I've been idioting for a month or two.
My son was just born, so, you know, that was a nice,
America obviously has fantastic parental leave.
Congratulations.
Thank you, I appreciate that.
I will show you a million baby photos later,
but no, and that's me in a nutshell really,
rocket scientist, storyteller, idiot.
Indeed, how did you sort of, actually, why?
Why did you get into rocket science and hyper science?
What was, is there a sort of fundamental story to that?
Or is it more like, I don't know,
wanna go to the moon and beyond?
I can't claim to have had a very good plan.
So, I actually went through, from Britain,
some of your viewers may detect an accent,
but I didn't go to a very good school in Britain.
This sort of American, it's called a council estate,
it's sort of analogous to an American,
what do you call them here?
Oh, a project, that's it, right?
Sort of like a project, but the school I went to was okay,
but they weren't exactly setting my ex,
they weren't setting the bar very high, right?
So, I'm like, okay, well, what do I like?
And I'm like, or more specifically, you know,
if I was honest, the subjects I hate the least
would be maths and science.
So, I was doing more of those.
And when I'm about 17, some guy turns around,
he's like, his name's Mr. Sizer,
I don't know if I'll ever see him again,
but he's like, Leon, you have to go to university,
and I'm like, okay, I guess.
Good shout out, though.
Yeah, right, if you're listening, Mr. Sizer,
thanks very much.
And so, I'm like, all right, well, which one?
He's like, I don't know, figure it out,
it's a book, right?
I think it's Giant Prospectors.
So, then my school does have a careers evening,
so I go there and I find this really bored
looking old man at the back,
who arguably changed the entire trajectory of my life.
Like, I don't know who he is, I don't know if he's alive,
I wouldn't recognize him
if I walked past him in the street,
but I walk up to this guy and I'm like,
hey, are you the engineering dude?
And he's like, yeah, why?
I'm like, I want to do some engineering.
He's like, okay, what do you like, right?
Which was, I didn't really think of the question at the time.
He said, what do you like?
And I said, I like planes, and I like rockets,
and I think cars are cool, right?
And he's like, oh, you should go and do
aeronautical engineering at some of these universities, right?
So he suggests, my pick one, I get in, boom, off I go.
And I nearly fail the first year, right?
Like, it was one thing to sort of be a, you know,
an achieving student in a shit school.
It was another thing to try and achieve at a good school, right?
You say nearly fail.
Oh, no, like nearly fail, like percentage points away
from failing out of that first exam.
When I turn things around,
I leave at the end with a respectable grade.
And I'm like, well, fuck this and fuck academia,
these fucking dusty ass bastards, right?
Don't do anything real, nothing matters, right?
It's fucking around with thoughts and ideas, right?
So I'm like, I'm going to go to the city,
and I'm going to make a bunch of fucking money,
fuck you with blackjack and hookers, right?
So I leave, because I'm just burnt out, honestly.
And I go to work for a big four consultancy company.
I won't say which one,
because who knows if they'll try to sue me.
And I often say that it's the best
and worst decision I ever made in my life.
I have never been so miserable in my life.
Shout out for any of you listening.
You know you have burnout when on Sunday,
you dread Monday, right?
That's a thing that's sort of the Sunday scaries.
Yeah, right.
If you're there suddenly, fuck, I have to go to work.
Dude, find another career, any worth it,
any of you listening, trust me on this one, right?
But one of the nice things about suffering
is it really makes you think about what you do want.
And I thought back to the last time
I was actually really happy.
And again, what do you like, right?
I thought, man, I really enjoyed my last year.
Weirdly, it was on insect flight,
which is fucking fascinating, by the way.
But we won't go there.
And dragonflies, man, piece of art.
Anyway, so, and I'm like, man, I actually had fun then.
And I'm like, well, fuck it, right?
I guess I'll do more of that.
So I applied to a few PhD programs.
One of them's in hypersonics.
Right.
Now at the time, this is 2000 and something,
oof, good question, 2010.
Is there a catalyst that you specifically wanted,
hypersonics over something else?
Was there a catalyst for that or?
It was the first one to take me, quite frankly.
I can't, again, I can't claim to have had this master plan.
And, you know, you might call it luck or, you know, I mean, again,
the thing you have to appreciate about hypersonics is actually
a big problem is America shut that shit down, right?
It was expensive.
They didn't want to do it.
No one else was really doing it.
And so they were just and they had all this cyber warfare stuff
at the time, it was a real problem.
So they just, all those programs got killed, right,
in favor of other things they thought were more pressing.
I was even told by, you know, I got advice from academics,
successful academics in the field who said to me,
you know, Leon, if you want to be an academic,
do not do hypersonics.
There's no money in it.
You'll never make a career here, right?
Thank you, China.
And so I did that and, you know, that was, I mean, it was,
it was great.
I had a blast to some extent.
I mean, it's still a PhD.
So it's often quite jading at the same time.
You know, it's a very personal journey
and it's often quite frustrating.
It was just the nature of those things.
But I got through it, I got out and again,
still hypersonics wasn't quite, I mean, it was in the military
while, but that hadn't trickled down past kind of the classified
barrier, right?
So I decided I didn't want to be in London.
I lived in London at the time, that's where my school was.
So I didn't want to be there anymore.
I had lived very comfortably in London for about eight years
at that point.
And so I wasn't challenged by it.
So I thought, I'll go somewhere else.
And I hold the controversial opinion as a European, I suppose.
You know, Brexit notwithstanding, but I still consider myself.
Yes, so I'll go with sort of European.
So I'll hold the controversial opinion that you can go to any
coffee shop in Europe, but your fingers and your ears, right?
Don't listen to people speak.
Don't read the menus.
I challenge you to tell me what country you're in.
I mean, the whole point of the EU says most of Europe can agree
on a lot of its ideals, you know, OK, the houses over there,
square and pink, and the houses over there are pointing yellow.
But and of course, you guys drive on the wrong side of the road.
But again, I'm actually I am willing to concede that.
I am all for standardization.
If Americans will adopt the metric system, I will drive on the right side of the road.
I will. I will happily trade you.
I will happily trade you, but I will not trade you on Celsius,
but that's a different story.
Well, you're just wrong, aren't you?
But just freedom units forever.
Is that what we're doing?
All right, we've had anyway, we've had that.
Let's go. We won't get into that argument.
So so I do that.
So I decide, OK, I just want to get out of Europe.
I'm going to get out of Europe.
I want to go somewhere because, you know, a lot of respect for many
of my friends that stayed in London, but I couldn't see myself being challenged that way.
And so I found myself a PhD in this hillbilly
hick town called Austin, right, in in Texas.
And at the time, I mean, you know, I guess it's my racism there.
But I kind of assumed Texans would all be these like cowboy, gun,
toting, homophobic, racist, like horse riding, whatever, right?
There's definitely some stereotypes to a number of different states.
Texas is definitely one of them.
I would argue that Florida, Florida and and for that matter,
California are also of that stereotype.
New York, there's there's more than a few.
No, I mean, there are. And and.
I, you know, I'd never heard of Austin, to be very honest.
I thought Houston was the capital.
You know, in Europe, the big city is always the capital, right?
So I assumed it was Houston.
I think there are some Texans who think that Houston is also the capital.
But I think there are some Texans that think they are the capital anyway.
But anyway, so I thought, well, I'll go.
I'll just just go, Leon.
And if you hate it, you can always leave.
You can always just say, sorry, I quit. I'm out.
So I show up and it's amazing here.
Yeah, I love I love it.
I love it. I mean, it's not without its problems.
Don't get me wrong.
London, either. But it's just it's just lovely.
This is a perfect, really, really nice city.
I think it's perfect for me.
So I start working here and start doing more work.
And then of course, hypersonics becomes a bigger thing.
We start doing more scramjet work, where a lot of my scramjet
inlet and start was where a lot of my some of my work was at least scramjet.
Yeah, you're familiar with a ramjet engine.
Not as familiar as I should be.
She ever took. All right.
So you have like a propeller, right?
That's your first engine.
And you have that on a world war two plane, right?
It's a propeller engine.
And then you say, oh, it turns out if I build something called a turbojet,
it's basically a standard fighter jet, right?
That that's a it's a better engine.
So it's a turbojet engine.
And then you say, what if I want to go far even faster than that?
It's the propeller only get you so fast.
And then you say, well, I can do better with a turbojet.
But then the problem you have with the turbojet is at some point
you're flying so fast that the sheer force of ramming air into you
does all your compression work for you.
And it really messes with your compressor stage.
That's fair.
So now you're like, if I just have basically an air funnel, an air scoop.
Right. And I slam into it fast enough,
it will push compress the air for me on it.
Oh, you know, with with my own forward momentum.
Just like if you stick your hand out of the car,
if you do that as a kid, you can fly your hand.
Right. Right.
The forward momentum of the car is doing the work for you
to compress the air against your hand and keep it
flight to balance the weight of your own arm out.
Right. That's that's where we get scramjets.
Well, so that's a ramjet.
That's a ramjet.
And which is engineers are obviously very complicated people.
So they named it a ramjet engine because it's a jet engine
that you ram air into.
There we go.
Very complicated, I know.
Hopefully no one got confused with that nomenclature.
But so that's all well and good.
You do have this problem, though, with with a ramjet engine
is if you fly fast enough at some point, the
everything gets hotter.
Every like when you're flying that fast, compressing,
just like, you know, if you've ever blown up a football
with a pressure pump, right?
Sometimes you notice the the bit that goes in is hot.
Compressing air makes it hot.
When you're going really fast, you're compressing the crap out of that air.
Right. In fact, it'll get so hot
that you might see several thousand Fahrenheit inside the engine,
just in the air, right?
The air just gets that hot from the compression.
So you have this problem.
If my fuel burns at, say, 1800 Fahrenheit and my air's at 2000 Fahrenheit,
I am cooling my air down by burning fuel in it,
which is the opposite of the way that an engine works.
Right.
And just as you can have a terminal velocity
where you can fall faster and faster and faster
until at some point you stop accelerating,
you can also have essentially a terminal temperature, right?
Which is where as you compress and compress and compress the air more,
it gets hotter and hotter and hotter,
that it that it approaches the combustion temperature of your fuel.
Once that happens, you can't put energy in, right?
If something's at the combustion temperature,
your fuel can't add energy into the flow anymore.
That's the whole point in burning stuff.
Exactly. It puts heat in.
If you're at the temperature it burns at, you can't add heat, right?
And so the Ramjet engine, I mean, there are a bunch of other problems
with having a really hot core flow, but the Ramjet engine...
I didn't want to take you too far off course, though,
because I wanted to make sure that we that we were sort of finishing up.
You were you were working on these scramjets,
which I guess is just an upgraded version of the Ramjet.
Yeah, it is. We can come back to that.
But yeah, so I was doing some scramjet stuff.
That was all fun and games.
And then weirdly enough, it's sort of, I mean, again,
just by pure opportunity,
someone shows up and says, hey, UT, would you like...
If I gave you a million dollars, would you build a rocket lab?
And the point in the rocket lab is less so about
necessarily the scientific development of rocket tree.
Right.
And it's more about the sort of systems engineering and learning.
It is an experiential learning piece.
So how do you train people to build rockets, right?
The lab was called the Texas Rocket Engineering Lab,
or TREL as I would often call it.
The point in TREL,
the point in TREL,
I would I would often say this.
TREL is not an organization that made rockets.
TREL is an organization that made people that made rockets.
Right. OK.
I would have been perfectly happy in that organization
if every single rocket would have blown up on the stand.
But if employers around the entire United States
would say TREL students are the very best people we can hire.
Right. If that was if it was you hire everyone that's TREL
and then you hire anyone else,
but we had never successfully flown a vehicle,
that would be 100 percent success.
It would be nice to fly a vehicle.
But the point of the organization
was to train people to build rockets, right?
Because there's a whole industry out there
that really needs these people.
And for the longest time,
many of us as academics were forbidden from teaching this,
just as hypersonics was kind of a topic you couldn't teach,
unless you wanted to have a lengthy conversation
with the State Department and pro tip,
you don't want to have a conversation with the State Department.
I believe that so effectively, you know,
bordering on the edge of sort of national security
and classified or at least partially classified technologies.
Yeah, it was it was what's now called QE,
which is controlled and classified information.
So it's not that the data was it's not that any of it was classified,
but it was controlled. So sort of like sort of like for again,
for most of us, I would probably relate this to something like
it's like HIPAA, right?
Something like HIPAA.
But even beyond that, I would say it's sort of like nuclear engineering.
They're not going to just train anybody
to become a nuclear engineer.
Yeah, that kind of thing.
You don't want to train people how to build.
I mean, you know, you don't want to train people how to build,
you know, nuclear reactors anymore.
So then you want to train them how to build flying rockets, right?
Because a student attempt at launching a rocket to the edge of space
is easily a surface to MSL, right?
Right.
Whereas a nuclear reactor could easily become an effectively a nuclear weapon.
Or well, more consensual.
Yeah, a dirty bomb would be the bigger problem.
Right. But anyway, yeah.
So that was all fun and games.
Had a great time doing that for about two years.
And it really gave me a flavor.
That piece really gave me a flavor for a large for what it was to operate.
I made the second.
I made the second worst and best decision of my life,
which was I set that lab up not to my personal career benefit.
And you and you know, if you're an academic in the US, the the the the very
honest answer is you have five years to get tenure.
You have one chance to get tenure.
If they say no, go fuck yourself.
Got it. That's how it works in the US.
Right. And not every country's like that.
And, you know, if you're if you're here.
You know, at some level working in those universities,
you can always go to the university sort of one level below you.
Right. And say, hey, I didn't didn't make tenure here, but will you take me?
But and, you know, that that answer is sometimes, yes.
But at the end of the day, you get one chance.
And if you're betting your career on this one moment,
you have you want to do everything to maximize your chances.
Of course, absolutely.
I, on the other hand, wasn't particularly concerned with tenure at the time.
I mean, obviously still not.
But so I built the thing to the benefit of the students.
Right. I built a lab that I thought the students would want to be in
and that would help them flourish that wouldn't necessarily move my career
forward, but was the point in the lab was to make people that knew how to build
rockets, not to make people who knew how to move my career.
Right. Not to make the best rockets, but to make the people who make the best
rockets, you know, it wasn't that wasn't that making the best rockets
would have been the middling one. OK.
I could have set trail up to make me the best academic
and I could have everyone working towards that. Right.
And that's what most university labs are doing.
Quite cynically, you might you might say, right.
Then I could have a lab that's just supposed to do the thing it's supposed to do.
And then I tried to build a lab that was supposed to build people
that knew how to build rockets at the point in the lab.
The and that and the everyone in it needed to understand this was about
building people. It wasn't about making rockets. Right.
And so out of that, you know, came a lot of learnings for myself and the lab.
I mean, the lab did really well just, you know, in just two years.
Humbly, I might say, it became one of the crowning jewels of the
of the Engineering Department, U.T. still going really strong.
You know, a shout out to Sandy Barker, who I handed the reins over.
She's done a great job since then. I can't fall for her at all.
And then I was like, look, this this sandbox clearly isn't for me.
And I moved on to other things too.
Then I sort of started dabbling in the startup world,
which is probably horrendously terrible for my career.
But again, I mean, do what you like, right. And not as someone who's been
in startups for almost 25 years, I can say that it's probably a good idea.
I'm just saying everybody should at least get one stint.
If you're in a startup for 25 years, can you really call it a startup?
Well, I said I've been dabbling in them for 25 years.
A few of them are pretty pretty big at this point.
But speaking of careers and sort of moving things forward and
rockets and whatnot, I think you know what my next question is.
In 2008, a seminal movie came out that I was dying to see
and still loved to this very day, and it's called Iron Man.
And you know where this question is going, since I'm asking it to a
hypersonics and rocket scientist, which is where is my fucking Iron Man suit?
I'm just going to say they clearly tell you in the movie
that it's a Molly Bendium alloy. So really, it should be Molly Bendium man.
And just just saying that it should be Molly Bendium man.
I hear you. But at the same time, what would it take for me to get my Iron Man suit?
I understand there's multiple problems where we don't have like, you know,
the fictional arc reactor power source.
And there's actually, OK, so all right.
So yes, there's lots of problems.
There's the power source, as you said.
There's the servo actuators.
There's a whole bunch of things.
There's actually one one thing I hadn't even thought about that.
So they tried this. They launched.
They did actually launch a couple of Iron Man projects.
We had jet packs in the 30s or whatever, right?
I mean, or something of this nature.
Well, you've got them now.
You've got the gravity, I think it is, right?
With with a little hilariously, for me, I think they're based off
of the model model RC plane, little pretend jet engines they built,
you know, the basically nerds, quote unquote, right, built.
It's funny how technology just comes out of it.
It's playing the same with the rockets,
or it's just a bunch of nerds playing with tubes.
But true, the the model RC plane people built little micro jet engines
that someone realized you could get a lot of thrust out of them,
strapped eight of them together.
And that was the that's the gravity guy riding around on a jet pack.
Right. Which has become it's a whole thing.
Um, but no, so so the problem that the problem you have fundamentally
with the Iron Man proposal is that they realized quite early on,
why do I want a human involved in this?
If I can, if I have the technology to wrap a robot around a human, right?
Why don't I just build the because I don't have the robots.
So let's just build a robot remotely operated autonomous, whatever it is, right?
Just build the robot because that's actually a lot easier
than trying to wrap an actuated skeleton.
Because that means that if that robot has you in it,
that means that robot already carries somewhere around 200 pounds, right?
Right. So so if I take you out of it,
I now have a 200 pound carrying capacity robot.
And so they actually started some Iron Man things.
They ended up cancelling them after a couple of years.
Because they realized that it would be probably made more sense
just to make the robot.
I mean, it makes more sense, but it's definitely less fun.
Yeah, I mean, it is less fun.
And that does make me a little sad.
But basically we're talking about, I mean, what we're effectively talking about
is why even do this when we basically are drone operators
who can operate these things hundreds of miles away?
Yeah. I mean, so you know, I mean, a spec.
So you would have a need from a spec ops, right?
You're kind of surgical strike and warfare is becoming more surgical, certainly.
Right. You would then want a human operator
because you're in an austere environment, right?
So you might not have comms to back to the base or, you know,
to remote in or whatever it is, right? Right.
So you'd want a human or you might want them to be covert
so that you don't want them broadcasting, right?
So you'd have a human wrapped in a robot
and they're running around doing some crazy shit, right?
And that's well and good.
But the bulk of your military, you know, 90 percent,
99 percent of your force projection, right?
It's just pure.
It's just, you know, pure threat of death, right?
You know, and and that's your that's your army.
I mean, it's just a bunch of people with a bunch of guns.
If you come here, they're all going to shoot you.
You're going to be fucked, as matter how skillful you are.
We're going to shoot the shit out of you, right?
So we come back to your original thing,
which is why not remove the human right?
Take the human out, build the robot first.
And then, yeah, you can you can remotely operate them,
maybe locally buy whatever else.
Um, you know, and and you know, it's actually really interesting
to think about how you would run joint human robot.
The classic one.
OK, here's an example.
We already have an example of a robot
and a human interfacing perfectly well.
OK, it's it's the it's the self-serve check out.
Right. You have 20 checkouts.
You have one person that goes around and fixes them when they break.
Yet no one wants to say that admitted.
But it is the self-serve check out.
That is a drone with a human blended together, right?
I think that's effectively true.
The human does the good things.
The human does all the edge cases and the exceptions.
And you can always be gathering the data and train improving the AIs, right?
So you can have larger and larger groups.
And it would be the same thing with robotics, right?
You might have a, I don't know, say a team of six or five
or whatever you decide is the best number.
One of them is run by a human.
They take the lead.
The rest of the robots basically support them.
So they fire at whatever the human fires at
or they might do threat detection or whatever else.
And then if the human, the one being piloted by a human gets destroyed,
you simply transfer them, you know, they're they're remoteed in, right?
They're not in the suit. They're remote.
You're right into the next one.
They take over that and they all reform, right?
And you just keep going like that.
And so what I find very interesting, some of them are called co-bots.
It's like, how do you work humans and robots together to to leverage
the strengths of humans and to leverage the strengths of robots?
Because we are very prone as a species to always
examining ourselves through the lens of our own technology, right?
Yeah. For better or worse.
Right. I mean, and it's not a bad way to do it.
You know, for the longest time,
people thought the human brain was like a computer.
A human brain is not like a computer.
It's not a serial device or it doesn't work that way.
If it did, arithmetic would be much easier for most people.
For sure.
And before that, you know, if you look back at one point,
we were all very concerned about our humours, right?
So humans discovered hydrology, which is basically water.
And suddenly we all believed that our well-being was about seven fundamental
humours or whatever it was, right?
And the levels relative to each other, because we were fascinated with that.
Like we've we've always seen ourselves through the lens of our technology.
Computers. Computers were no different there.
And so, you know, humans aren't aren't robots.
We are very.
Have you heard?
OK, it's a bit of a digression, so do cut me off if it isn't great.
But have you heard of freestyle chess?
Yes. Actually, there's there's multiple different versions.
I think Fisher invented one called chess nine sixty or something.
I don't know. I'd have to look it up.
But yeah, there's a lot of different variants.
So if you put a human against a robot or an AI at this,
we've got a good enough technology now that robot always wins.
And the reason for that is a robot never makes
never makes a bad move on the next move.
That's a tactical decision.
The robot always makes a more perfect next move.
The thing that robots really or AIs are really bad at,
there is long term strategic thinking.
Right. And so in three style chesses,
there are two teams.
Each team is made up of a blend of humans and AIs.
And apparently, the winning combination is three humans, three AIs.
So you have the three AIs that you constantly
feeding them information about what the board looks like
and what people are doing and what you're thinking about your next moves.
And they're telling you different stuff.
You have two people managing that
and you have one person making decisions as the strategy.
Like, hey, I want to move these pieces into these vague areas
because I think something's going to come out of it.
Turns out that that combination can actually beat AI on its own.
Right. Be any or be any combination.
Be it will be all AI teams and all human teams, right?
It's and that blend like a human robot blend
is always better than a purely AI team.
Or, you know, if you can blend the best of both, you lose nothing, right?
You cover the weaknesses of AI and robotics is
they aren't good strategic thinkers.
And that's something that's really interesting
about the way that you blend those technologies together.
Anyway, I don't want to derail the conversation too much.
I just I have many hobbies, but.
They tell the State Department, no.
So, yeah, it's just something that's really interesting about the Ironman suit.
And I mean, and as you you are alluding to, right,
there are a number of other technological problems.
Power is one of them and power limits a lot of things right now,
looking for better batteries for drones.
You know, where are my flying cars, Jetsons?
I was promised a future, right?
Absolutely true.
But speaking of power, this definitely definitely brings us into.
What I'm pretty excited about in this conversation,
which is the Alcubierre warp drive.
So I'd love to I'd love to get sort of an overview of like what?
What like what's the theory behind this?
Do we need exotic matter to actually create this?
Well, well, to power this thing or whatever.
And then beyond that, as we've sort of discussed a little bit offline,
I'd love to talk about basically the warp drive with with fusion,
because there seems to be some really amazing stuff happening.
Yeah, this is a fun sort of high to low.
And for those listening, basically, you know, warp drive is what it sounds.
It's faster than light travel, but without
theoretically, without actually breaking the the the, you know,
general and special relativity laws.
But can you can you sort of dive into like that again from from the high level
and then then I'd love to love to go go into the exotic stuff?
Yeah, I'd be happy to chat about that.
You know, and a special caveat here to any physicists.
Listen, I'm obviously not classically trained as a physicist.
It's propulsion.
I'm not even a modernly trained as a physicist.
So somewhere, you know, there are many physicists spinning in their graves.
There's an alternative source of power.
Perhaps we could rig them up to something, you know, and generate some power that way.
But but no.
So certainly take this in the spirit that since it's intended more so than than exactly.
But so Alcubierre, as I understand, it was a Mexican physicist.
And he gets a bit bored in 1994 and decides to sit down and
mathematically prove that a warp drive is possible.
Which is a very interesting thing, because it's amazing what happens
when you can tell children they do things.
You know, there's a reason that most of those Star Trek technologies came true.
It wasn't the Gene Roddenberry was a great futurist, no offense to the man.
In my humble opinion, if you tell children they can do something
when they become adults, they don't forget that, right?
Hey, I can have I can have a flip open transmitted device
that will work over thousands of miles.
Some kids like I will fucking make this.
That's I mean, honestly, that's that's one of the things about again,
from my childhood, growing up to literally watching, you know, sneakers.
And even before that war games, etc.
I mean, those were definitely pretty, pretty fundamental things
for my childhood as well.
So I agree with you completely.
No, and I mean, it is a slight tangent.
It's amazing how many technologies from the Star Trek universe came true.
And I think it really is because you you inspired someone they could do it.
And then they were like, fuck you, physics.
I'm doing it anyway, right?
And they found a way.
So Mr. Alcubierre.
An editable moment.
Mr. Alcubierre, he or doctor.
Sorry, actually, Jesus Doctor Alcubierre, Mexican.
Mexican scientist, he sits down, gets bored one day in 1994,
and he decides to prove that you can have a warp drive.
And the future armor said this best where you can't go faster than the speed of light,
but you can move the entire universe around you faster than the speed of light.
And if that confuses you good because it fucking should.
That's a, you know, you're not a physicist.
But the long and short of it is you the way to think of the speed of light,
the way to think of the speed of light, it's like a speed limit.
It's the fastest we think you can transmit information through the universe,
which is a sort of the C and equals mc square.
Right. That's the C and equals is three times 10 to the eight of my head,
more or less in a vacuum, right, would be the speed of light.
And the way to think of it is, imagine I have a sheet.
Imagine we're holding a bed sheet type between us, right?
That parachute game that kids love to play.
Yeah. If I ripple the sheet, a ripple moves through it, right?
And if I ripple the sheet harder, a ripple moves quicker, right?
What we seem to observe in the universe is there is a fundamental limit
to the speed that ripple will move.
You cannot move quicker than that.
And that is the speed of light.
The speed of light moves the fastest anything can move because it has no mass.
So it is the least impeded in moving through that system.
But there is, for whatever reason, a speed limit.
We don't know why.
And so that's a problem if you want to try and move through everything quicker, right?
But that doesn't mean I can't take two ends of the sheet,
fold them over on themselves, and then wiggle them next to each other,
which is to some extent what the warp drive says.
It says, can I, or in fact, the warp drive says is,
can I bunch the sheet up in front of me
and then wiggle through it with everything bunched up to transmit really quickly?
I haven't technically moved the wave through the sheet any quicker.
What I've done is bunch it all together to wiggle it at once.
And that's the concept of this.
So such that you can effectively trend,
you can effectively move the distance that it would be
in the time that would be faster than the speed of light,
but you actually haven't used propulsion in that mechanism.
You basically just folded spacetime.
Yeah, and the act of folding spacetime
in much in the same way that the planet distorts spacetime all the time.
With the planet distorts spacetime, it sits in a gravity well, things fall into it.
And that's often visualized like imagine a big rubber sheet,
you put a bowling ball in it, right?
And so if we're doing this just for a practical example,
I think the closest star is what Proxima Centauri, something like that.
And it's roughly four light years away.
And effectively it's four light years, meaning four years at the speed of light.
If we had an Alcubierre drive, we could effectively get there and let's say one year,
which would be basically like four, roughly four X faster.
Yes, but the problem with it, Mr. Alcubierre,
and this is physicists for you versus engineers, right?
Mr. Alcubierre needed, I think he needed one solar mass.
So I would have to take the mass of us equals mc2,
it tells me how much energy is given for a certain amount of mass.
If I took the entire mass of a sun, which has more zeros than I care to care to honestly think
about on the end of it, like you're doing like trillions upon trillions of tons of sun, right?
And I turned all of it spontaneously into energy, which a sun does slowly,
our sun turns all of its mass, no, turns a fraction of its mass into energy
over the course of about 13 billion years.
No, yeah, that's better off the top of my head.
And even so, most of the mass level, if I turned all of it into energy at once,
right, that's a staggering amount of energy that would release,
I would need that much energy to run his Alcubierre drive, right?
And what's more, I would need something called exotic matter.
Exotic matter is a physicist way of saying unobtainium, right?
It is a substance that while not illegal by the rules of physics has never been seen,
never even really been theorized to exist, like not even in a particle accelerator does this
show up, right? We've never seen this, never had evidence of it actually existing,
but the rules of physics say maybe it's there somewhere, right?
That it could theoretically be.
It could theoretically exist, right? Which is like, I don't know.
Dilithium crystals in Star Trek effectively.
I mean, yeah, it's again, it's unobtainium, it's a MacGubbins, right?
But the math was solid, and that was interesting. I mean, I'm not trying to knock his work,
he did good work, but just it wasn't very practical.
Well, what's very relevant is a bunch of people turned around, you know,
COVID was a hell of a time for all of us, and a bunch of physicists were apparently very bored
and possibly unhappy in their marriages. So anyway, they threw themselves into their work,
and what some of them worked out was, and I won't bore you with the math, but
they worked out it might be possible to do some of this with, you know,
a quote unquote normal stuff, still some pretty crazy things in terms of what you're trying to do,
but materials we've seen, properties we somewhat understand, right?
And so they found a way at very small scales, quantum scales, microscopic scales,
that you could use this thing to distort space time.
And that was at a quantum level. Yeah, very tiny, right? Because the bigger the space time
distance, because the the Alcubierre guy for fun, what he did was he did his math that showed
it was theoretically possible, and then he applied it to a ship, a conceptual ship about the size of
the USS Enterprise, he called his paper the warp drive, right?
But if you back out from that and say, okay, what is doable, but what I need to do
is I want to do it in a really small scale, suddenly your energy requirements drop
incredibly, right? And if you make some other tweaks, again, you can get some gains.
And essentially, it turns out you can distort space time, probably, you know, this is also
theoretical, no one's proved it, but you can do it with real materials that actually exist that
humans can make, and an amount of power that is within reach, like, I mean, you're maybe still
building yourself a power plant to sit next to your research facility, or your own substation,
right? Probably to pull off the national grid. But it's dual, it's a reasonable amount of energy.
And then you can have tiny quantum or microscopic distortions of space time.
And okay, that all sounds well and good. Until, and a friend of mine, actually,
he runs the Zero Carbon Institute, that's the Institute. He's looking for pre-seed,
if any of you are, you know, anyone's willing to invest, I'm happy to connect you. You can
come find me on LinkedIn. But he had this fucking brilliant idea that no one really
thought about, right? Which is, if you want to do fusion, your problem is that you need to stick
two atoms on top of each other. And atoms, much like the north poles of a magnet,
don't want to be next to each other. And in fact, the closer you get them,
the more you have to push. And you can imagine fusion, imagine you had two Play-Doh atoms,
right? Sure. And they're magnetic. And so the more you push them together, the more they fight you.
But if you can get them to touch, suddenly, nom, they turn into one big club of Play-Doh,
right? They fuse. They fuse. Now, the process of doing that spits out a butt road of energy.
Hence why we use fusion bombs instead of fission bombs, et cetera.
And that's why cold fusion has been this, you know, glorious promise. There's a golden bullet,
right? Cold fusion is... Free unlimited energy.
Can you dive into that for just a half second? Cold fusion,
basically fusion at room temperature or thereabouts?
Yeah. So fusion happens in the sun all the time. The sun is an incomparably large explosion,
right? So the sun is an explosion so large that the only thing that stops it from eradicating
the entire solar system is it's the sheer gravity, the mass of its own explosion, right?
So all this crushing mass is crushing everything down. It's always trying to explode out.
Its gravity is always putting it in and it sits there at equilibrium, right? It's super hot.
It's super angry. You know, it probably hates you. Who really knows, but...
And that's hot fusion, right? That's just, hey, I have the entire mass of the sun to crash a bunch
of shit and you're going to have a bad day. Cold fusion is, well, I'd like to be on planet earth
and I don't want to eradicate everything in a 400 kilometer circle, right? So I need to do this
extremely. And there's a few brute force approaches you can take to achieving that because at the
end of the day, all you need to do is push two atoms on top of each other or two nuclei even,
right? And you can do that with sheer oppressive crushing pressure and enormous ridiculous
temperatures that might overcome those forces, which is what a sun does. Or you can try and
achieve it another way. So some fusion reactors use magnetic confinement and some of them use
photons. And so your friend is doing this in a relatively unique way, which I'm guessing has a
deal with the warp drive. Yeah, he... So those are very brute force approaches, right? Which is,
I am... Yes, I know they will fight me and I will just have to find a way to push harder.
And that's what makes it so tough. And I mean, you know, recently there was an announcement,
of course, they came out with, not to make your show too dated, but they came out with a recent
announcement that they've got more energy out of a fusion reaction they put in, which is an absolute
milestone, right? Technically a match does that. Yeah, I mean, yes. They are a long way from
generating, certainly generating a power plant that could run with a cold fusion source, because
as correctly said, a match generates more energy than you put in it, but I'm not going to be
powering cities with it. But still, it was a landmark, but you know, it's this promise
for this point, I think 60 years. Yeah. And now they finally got more energy out than they put
in. And now it's, you know, okay, physically possible. And that's an engineering problem,
right? Right. Good luck to those engineers. But this guy's got this, this third approach,
which I just thought was brilliant, right? And it goes like this. I have two particles,
I want them to be on top of each other. It's hard to physically push them together in real space.
But I can distort space time. And when I distort space time, interestingly,
all you know, all of the forces of physics don't scale proportionally, which means
I can bend them together in space time, but still have them feel like they're far apart.
So this is sort of that incongruence between relativity and quantum?
Right. And basically, I fold space time on itself so that I fold the two things on top of
themselves. And then I let them go nump together. But from their perspective of, you know,
the relative perspective of each of them, they're still far apart until they're on top of each
other. And then they fuse and give out a buttload of energy. So it's like a hack. It's a quantum
cheat, right? Yeah. And so you can essentially lens space time to form what could best be
described as a quantum crucible, right? Some angry little section of space time.
And then I can pew pew atoms into it and I could use anything. You know that back to the future
piece where he's got like Mr. Fusion. Mr. Fusion, he throws a banana in there.
But you can fuse anything, lighter than iron. You can fuse it. So you've got some
carbons. You've got some night. This thing could run on air.
So why lighter? Water.
Why lighter than iron? There's got to be some, there's a chemical explanation I'm guessing.
Yeah. So well, this is, this is why there's so much iron in the universe, which is it turns out
if you fuse iron together, you get less energy out than you put in. Although that, well, actually,
technically that's for a sun. You know, you, if, if you would have to actually reinvent us
to our listeners, we would have to rerun the math. You know, currently this idea is theoretical.
You'd have to figure out how much energy you need to put in to lend space time appropriately
to merge things. You always get energy out, but in, in, in the furnace of a sun, you have to put
a certain amount of energy in. And so that's when a lot of suns go supernova is when most of their
core turns to iron and they start fusing iron. There's nothing, there's nothing to keep them
expanded and gravity crushes them down. And then they either explode or turn into a black hole.
Sure. Um, is there, I mean, would there be a difference in the sort of atomic numbers of
the things that we try this on? I think iron's 26 and what hydrogens one or something like that?
Hydrogens one, yeah. Good old hydrogen. But I guess, I mean, you could effectively fold things.
I mean, water would be great. Into themselves all the way up. Well, I mean, sure. That way,
you've got hydrogen and, and, and oxygen. Um, but yeah, I mean, you could do anything quite
frank. Carbon's not that high in hydrogen either. I mean, you could do air, air would be a good start.
Okay. Um, but yeah, I, it would, it would, it would fund a theoretically work on almost anything
depending on how much, you know, I don't know where that energy cuts up, what the energy input is to,
to fold things comes in at, but, um. So where is your friend's experiment at present?
So, well, so this research came out last year. Okay. Right. Where they were like,
hey, we think we can do this legit. Right. Not just, hey, this is fun on a blackboard.
Right. This is fun on a lab now. So he's now raising money. Again, wealthy listeners.
He's, he's now, he's now doing some pre-seed. He's, he wants to go to research consortium. He's
taken a very, um, it's like a biotech approach. You know, like a biotech company, right? Like,
okay, hey, we think this is the answer. We're going to work on it for 10 years and then sell it to
some big pharma group for whatever. Right. He wants to do a similar thing, build basically a
research consortium, research the whole thing, prove that it works. Um, so he's trying to basically
build the first round of that where it's about five years from now, you could probably have a lab
experiment that confirms you've been spaced on, which is super interesting for two reasons.
If it works, it also means a warp drive would be possible.
And two, it also leads, because you can warp space time, it also begs questions as to things like
anti-gravity drives, right? That's interesting. You, you, if you can bend space time, you, you
move, if you can set it up almost like a surfer winding, riding a wave, it's hard to explain
because you, you know, we live in 40 space, right? Three dimensions in time. Um, it's sort of a higher
order projection of that, but essentially the, the warp drive works. It doesn't require traditional
propulsion. You just, no more so than if you lifted me above the floor and dropped me, I don't
need a thrust, it's a slap me into the ground and break my legs, right? In the same way, you, you
bend space time and you fall into the gap you create in front of you, right? So you could sit on
earth, turn this machine on and go, whoop. You know, if you could do it at scale. And so that's
some of the really interesting, you know, it, that he, he's focused on the power piece, but
um, those are some really out, if you can do that, theoretically start to move on to some really
interesting pieces about where do we go as a species? What does that mean for us? What do we
want to do? Do we want to go to other stars? Are these things even possible? Well, I definitely
want to get into that at some point, but before we do that, let's come back down to earth for a
second. Um, rubbish. I know, I know. Um, we're definitely going to go back to outer space, but
before we do that, um, there's been some interesting developments, at least
somewhat recently in thrust vectoring, um, like dog fighting and various things. If you've sort
of seen the, the new, the new Top Gun movie, there were some pretty amazing maneuvers in there that
were basically impossible. And the answer to, to a lot of those that look like how the hell did
to do that is, is effectively thrust vectoring. Can you talk us through that a little bit?
Uh, yeah. I mean, well, I think it starts obviously with a recognition that you can ride
my tail anytime, but, um, yeah. Okay. So thrust vectoring then, uh, basically if you have an
engine that pushes a bunch of air out the back of it, and that's thrust, right? It'd be a rocket
engine, a plane engine, what it does, you could, you have a choice of either moving the engine.
So that's what most rockets do, right? They are constantly rejigging where the engine is pointed.
And that's quite mechanically challenging, especially for an airplane, which tend to be a,
a little less brute force than a rocket. Let's put it that way.
Sure. So what they do on the rock, on the, on the, on the airplanes is they tilt, try to tilt
the outside of the engine. So you see some of this sometimes with, um, you see it with the
adaptable outlet on, on, like, um, after Bernard engines, where they're like, open the outlet
out a bit to give you better performance. And you have to recognize, right? It's just like a car,
right? Has, is the engine is designed for a certain RPM, right? Most cars are designed to be
optimally efficient somewhere between 50 and 60 miles an hour, right? A plane engine is, you know,
most planes have an optimal cruise speed. That's where their configuration is designed to live,
the engine, the whole vehicle. And so if you, if you, like an afterburner, if you just throw a whole
bunch of fuel into the hot exhaust that you know will burn and put more energy in, it's not efficient,
but that's not the point where you're running from a missile at this point. Efficiency is not,
you know, it's like, it's like humans do well jogging, right? But man, a bear runs much faster
than I jog. Sometimes the sprint is worth it, right? And my legs might go to hell and, you know,
you'll end up, you know, with all the, the, uh, what's the acid called? Anyway, lactic acid, lactic
acid, right? They just messaged your legs up. But sometimes sprinting is really evolutionary
worthy, right? Sure. The same is true with some of these, these engine configurations. So
thrust vectoring says, okay, I kind of had the technology to adjust my nozzle outlet then
to make me more efficient when I am doing these really stupid off design things.
Bigger versus smaller. Yeah, you can make the out, make the whole bigger, make the whole smaller.
It's a joke that I'm sure, but, um, and so then they said, well, okay, what if we steer it, right?
What if the end, the plane is flowing forward, but I'm blowing the air
not in the same line as the plane off to the edge, right? I can get it to do weird loop deloops and
there's some crazy stuff you can see online. All of that is mechanical though. So what you do is you
have a duct that comes out the back of the engine and you are pointing the duct in some direction.
One of the things that, uh, real breakthrough in, especially for the, from the point of your
top gun, which is high, you know, very high speed vehicles is called fluidic thrust vectoring.
And what happens here is you distort the flow. So what you do is you might have
a long one edge of your engine, right? Let's say the bottom edge. So you have a rectangular engine,
right? And it's, it's longer than it is tall. So along the edge, you might have a series of,
of jets that you can turn on. Sure. And when you turn them on, they bleed a bunch of air,
not very much, but some. And what that will do is it will generate a giant shock because all
this air comes in and that's going to make a shock wave. I won't try and explain better than that to
your viewers. Why, but it just trust me that it will. That shock generates a massive pressure
amplification. Right. So all the fluid that goes through it is now much higher pressure than the,
the opposing wall where you've done nothing. And if you have surface there,
it will one, apply a lot of pressure to that surface because it's gone through the shock and two,
the shock itself will distort the flow. And so you can start to use, you can start to abuse the
physics of your flow. So instead of having to have some crazy mechanical actuator, because that's
the problem you have is as you go faster and faster, your forces get enormous and your temperatures
get enormous. So sticking something into the flow that sees all that heat and that pressure,
there's a surefire way to get it melted. That's why most things that aren't a space shuttle,
which is covered in thermal tile, don't fly faster than about Mach five. And so you're like,
well, what if I could, if I could use the flow as my actual, I don't care about the flow,
it gets exhausted at the back and blows away, right? So is there something I can do there?
So you're effectively talking about basically just instead of one big giant sort of flame
and propulsion coming out the back, sort of adjusting that in a certain way, so that's such
that the flow is discombobulated for lack of a better word. And that way you can maneuver
in new and exciting ways. Yeah. I mean, basically, if you understand the physics of the flow quite
well, you can, you know that, you know, okay, here's a good example. You know how the butterfly
flaps its wings and there's a hurricane, right? If you understand that you have a chaotic system,
or if you can design it to be chaotic. And this is from the chaos theory of butterfly flaps its
wings and in Hong Kong, and suddenly there's a, or not suddenly, but like, there's a tornado, right?
Months later, there's a tornado somewhere. Tiny changes somewhere can produce enormous changes
somewhere else, right? So if you understand the physics well enough, you can design specifically
for those systems, you can say, I want the outlet of my engine to be chaotic. And that is to say,
all the way up near the front of my outlet, right? The exit of the very beginning of my exhaust. Yes.
I know I'm really unstable. I design it to just be stable. And then I poke at it intentionally to
piss it off. But downstream of that, before I've left my exhaust, before I've left the
actual plane, now the flow is doing something completely different. And by doing so, without
actually changing the physical geometry of my outlet, but by poking at it to piss it off,
I've completely changed the way the flow is coming out of that hole, which again, I'm sure there's a
joke in there. That's what she said. Anyway, maybe that's an editable moment. Maybe it's not.
We'll never know. So the point being that... Well, just say that's what he and they said.
That's what they said. There you go. We covered all the bases at that point.
I've definitely had someone say that to me. Such as life. It's a hard life being a nerd.
I find it incredibly enjoyable.
That's what she said. Anyway, all right. So, well, in the effort to not get you
cancelled on your first podcast. But yeah, so you can basically abuse the flow. And that is likely
on these high-speed, top-gun-esque vehicles. That's how you do thrust vectoring. You
intentionally design your system to be chaotic. You poke at it in the place you know it's susceptible.
It's kind of like making the flow ticklish. There you go.
And you know a tiny input will give you a massive output.
Well, that's interesting. I definitely... Yeah, I mean, for me, top-gun was a pretty seminal movie
in the 80s. And then of course... I heard also it was pretty seminal.
The new ones was pretty amazing as well. Yeah, it definitely was. Super seminal.
It's all that. It's all that. The bit I really love is there's an interview,
supposedly, with Tom Cruise. They're like, did you not think it was weird they were putting
all that suntan oil on you? You know, what can you do? You got to appeal to everybody.
Yeah, I'm all for equal opportunities, do you want? But I'm just like, damn, that was a brave
movie for the 80s. So the question becomes, going back to outer space, if Elon came up to you and said,
Doc? Leon? Doc Vanstone. I've got gray hair. I'm putting things into my Mr. Fusion blender.
Yeah, right. But if he came up to you and said, help me go to Mars, let's do this,
would that be an interesting opportunity for you? Or... Oh yeah, I mean, if someone showed up
and said to me, you can get on this rocket, it's a 50% chance it blows up on the launch pad,
or there's a 50% chance you'd get that, right? Do you want to go? The answer's yes.
I mean, if literally, if the question is literally, if Elon actually came up to you and said,
let's do this. Oh yeah, let's fucking go. As long as I get to go on it, I better be on it.
So you'd want to both design it and go on it? I mean, one, I think if you're going to,
if you are going to build a risk of death into a machine, you need to be one of the first ones
on it. And I actually quite respected Jeff Bezos for that one. Totally fair.
Being the first guy to get on and put his brother on it, right? Although I will say,
credit to them, if you have an experimental vehicle, what is the best way to demonstrate
to the general public that you think it's safe? Clearly, you should fly on it.
You should get on it with your family members. That's a great way to be like, oh no, this isn't...
Yeah, we're all set. We're all set.
Well, first of all, how would we get there? Again, how does this work? How would we get
there? Why haven't we done this? Are the Van Allen radiation belts a problem?
Is the funding a problem? Are there big, giant asteroids in the way? What's the issue?
No, it's all just funding. I mean, the technology has been there for a very long time, frankly.
The issue is political at this point, right? So...
It's expensive.
I mean, it is expensive. I mean, although the IS... At this point, the cumulative budget for the ISS
is about $100 billion. And I think there was a white paper in 08 off the top of my head.
Don't quote me on that, readers. But around that time, when NASA looked at a Mars mission,
it quoted a similar price, about $100 billion. But it's just... Which is a tiny... I mean,
honestly, in terms of human GDP, in terms of all the money in the world, it's not even a lot of
money. I mean, God, it's one-seventh... For one year, you could cut one-seventh of the American
military budget out. Not going to happen, but continue?
I know. It's not practically doable, but just to illustrate the point, right? And then you could
go to Mars. It is practically doable. We're just not going to do it.
Well, no, because the trouble is, if you take the budget out one year, you fire all those people.
You can't just rehire them the next year. They've gone somewhere else. So I understand you can't
just do that. I'm not advocating for that. Please, military people, don't send me angry emails.
That's not what I'm trying to say. But still, just to put some context, it's not an enormous
amount of money in the grand scheme of things. You could go to Mars. And you might find something
you might not, who really knows. Just to kind of say you did it, I think it would really capture
the imagination of many people, just as the moon landing did, right? Who wouldn't watch that?
I think it was still, I think to this day, it's the most watched television event of all time.
I mean, if it's not, it should be. And so I urge you to go out there, viewers, and watch it on YouTube.
But what's stopping it? Yeah, I mean, it's budget. What stops us having a moon base?
It's politics. I mean, here's a good example of something.
Do you know what the maximum width of the SLS rocket is?
No.
So if you go to a US senator and you say, you're NASA, as you know, you randomly are,
you got a NASA and you say, I want to build a go fuck yourself satin five version two rocket.
Right.
And I want however many billions to do this. And they will say to you, okay,
I'm interested, but what does my state get out of that? How many jobs you bring in me,
blah, blah, blah, right? And that's why there are so many NASA centers spread around the US, right?
Versus something like SpaceX, where they build them. SpaceX builds everything at the launch site.
They produce it there, they build it there, they assemble it there, and they launch it there, right?
I believe a lot of that's here in Austin still to this day.
I mean, possibly, but just, you know, they build it very locally to where they launch it, right?
Whereas in the US, it all gets built in all these different centers. So how do you move them?
How do you move stuff around, right? The answer there is by truck.
So the maximum width of an SLS rocket is that on a low clearance truck bed, it has to fit
under whatever the national standard is for an overpass.
Which is probably like 14 or 15, I think.
Yeah, something that's about 15 feet, right? And you can't be wider than that, right?
And then you ask, why is the overpass height the width that it is, right? The overpass height
is related to the width of a standard road. And do you know what drives the width of a standard road?
What's that?
If you sat two horses next to each other, that's the width of a standard US road, right?
And so you're literally saying, you know, because of this kind of government bureaucracy,
the SLS rocket is in some way tenuously linked to the size of a horse's ass.
That's interesting. That's also fair. And quite frankly, this doesn't surprise me.
Infrastructure has to move from various places in the country, and there's only so many ways
to do that. Yeah, but you could build that whole rocket in one place. There's no reason
you have to do another. True. I'm just saying bureaucracy.
Yeah, by the way, I did just look it up. It looks like SpaceX is starting construction
just outside of Austin. That sounds about right. And then, you know, because they've got the
Starship launch sites in Texas, right? So they're basically building it all in the same
place, shipping it there and assembling it, right? And so that really is a big problem, right? From
the point of view, shit, we've been able to go to the moon since the 1960s, right? People say,
why can't we have a moon base? You can have a moon base. You just lack the political will.
So this is not a technological issue is what I'm hearing.
It's never been a technological issue. Well, okay. I mean, you won the space race,
right? The ISS is just a bunch of spaceships that you staple together, right? In the same
way you build a moon base, you could land a bunch of landers on the moon, staple them together,
call it a moon base. And then, okay, you have to keep resupplying it. That's a pain in the ass,
right? But it's entirely doable. The real problem is if you go to the moon, who owns it,
right? It becomes this big political problem. I believe we planted a flag in 69. So
it's very, it's very western of us to be there. We come in peace, but also we own this fuck you.
Well, it depends on really how you look at it, right? I mean, we carved up Antarctica in the
sense that no one effectively owns any part of it. No, and that's actually very interesting. So
there isn't really space law in the sense that no one has really agreed to who owns the moon.
There are a few treaties and things, although a large number of major powers haven't agreed to them.
The law of space is fascinating, like L-A-W, not L-O-R-E. I don't have,
you know, what is it, 15 billion years worth of time. But the law of space is really interesting
and how we're trying to figure that out. And that is a really interesting piece, right? America
won the space race. Right. Which is a strange thing to say, I think, when the Soviets...
I mean, they had the jump on us, no question. I think it was first satellite, first person.
First man, first woman. First woman as well. Yeah. I think it was, what,
was Sputnik Yuri Gurgarin, and I can't remember her name for some reason.
No, I don't. Probably. All right, that's shameful, but still.
That is bad of us both. Hopefully, if you're listening to viewers comment,
send us a message, tell me who that was, and I'll look into after this too.
Valentina Tereshkova. Valentina Tereshkova, right? First woman in space.
Thank you, comrade. But yeah, and I mean, shit, the first cat, the first dog, the first everything,
right? I mean, all this sort of stuff. But America won the space race, and okay,
history's driven by the winners, so there's that going for us. But America did genuinely win
the space race, right? And the reason for that is the space race was an arms race, right?
It wasn't a first pass. It wasn't like a, hey, 100 meter dash race, because if it was,
Russia would have won, right? Space race and arms race. You win an arms race not by being
the first one there, but being the last one standing, right? America went to the moon,
landed on the moon and said, we can put a fucking nuke here and fuck your shit up
from the moon, motherfucker. I was going to say, speaking of that,
if I recall correctly, there was some sort of piece of paper that passed over Eisenhower's desk,
where they were effectively going to nuke the moon. I mean, you nuked almost everything else.
You nuked the Seychelles or whatever it was. Project Starfish, there's a Wikipedia entry,
they nuked space. There's a whole radiation band that you have to navigate now, because
America was like, I'm going to blow some shit up. Yeah, I mean, there's literally,
there was an actual US plan to blow up the moon so we could win the Cold War, which is just ridiculous.
But for more information, go ahead and Google that. God, all right.
But no, I mean, and we've had that we've had that ever since, but you know,
you have to understand, right? The space race happened, America wins. The USSR basically
bankrupts itself, slash kind of gives up because it isn't doing too well.
Everyone turns around and looks themselves and says, okay, you know, the fifth, sorry,
the fourth theater, you've got five theaters of war, you have lancy air, space, and then cyber,
right? True. So the fourth theater of the fourth domain, sorry, of war, space, right?
Basically bankrupts one of the only two superpowers in existence. And everyone looks around and says,
yeah, that's fucking expensive. How about we don't? And everyone goes, yeah, that's a great idea.
So they take the US sort of military version of space and they form NASA from it, right?
NASA becomes a transparent civilian organization. Any government anywhere in the world is welcome
to come to all the facilities to have all of the data, everything you want. If you want to
pay some money, you can send some astronauts, yada, yada, yada, you can expect the payloads.
It's purely civilian. This is motherhood and apple pie in space, right? And I am absolutely all
for the furtherment. Oh, I love NASA. I do too. Great, great, great, great bunch,
great bunch of people. So the problem you have though, is though China shows up, right?
Thank you, China, for jump-studying my career. China shows up and they're like, hey, we want to put
some astronauts on the space station. And NASA's like, well, your astronauts are all military.
We did the thinly veiled thing of taking military guides into a civilian org,
but that's materially important, apparently, right? China says, no fuck you.
They're all going to be military. They're all going to be military. Everything's going to be
military. I'm not showing anything with you, right? And then NASA says, you can't come play.
So China says, well, fuck you down. I'm going to put my own space station with blackjack and
hookers. It's hard to argue, right? So China starts launching rockets because everyone starts
launching because, you know, whatever China and a bunch of them crash. But pretty soon they're
not crushing. Then they put a space station up. Everyone laughs. That'll never work, right? You
don't have the launch consistency. First one did crash. Second one, though, no one's laughing
anymore, right? So then they're up there, second space station. Okay, it's going pretty well.
Not perfect, but still, you know, they're doing it. And they're doing it like,
I don't know what they're researching on that space station, but it ain't motherhood and apple pie.
I guarantee you that. It's like AKs in space. I don't know, like, right? They're figuring
some stuff out. And exactly the same time, more or less, that they did that funding for the ISS
falls apart, right? Because everyone's like, why am I paying billions of dollars for motherhood
and apple pie when those guys get space AKs and hookers? Right. It's a tough trade. No, it is.
I mean, it's the same thing with the nuclear anti proliferation treaty between the US and Russia,
right? When China shows up and is building all the nukes at once because it never signed that
treaty. Right. Why would you agree to stay in that? You can't, you can't let China beat the two,
you know, both of you. So it falls apart, right? I mean, Russia was the first one to basically
blink, but still. The mad doctrine is still, I mean, there's a reason it's called mad. The
mutually assured destruction is still mad. It's, it's, it's silly, but. Right, but that,
but understandable. Tip for tat. Right, but you need to keep it mad, right? It needs to be
mutually assured. If you let China keep doing arms development, eventually they will,
they won't be mutually assured. They'll win. Right. Right. And so you have this problem that
you don't want China to get ahead of you. So you have to say, fuck you, I'm out. Right. I mean,
Russia blinked first, but that, but I don't think America was in any way sad that they did. Right.
America has no intention of trying to renegotiate that, right? Or if they do not without China,
because they want, they want, they don't want anyone beating them. The US, you know,
military shred is overmatch. Right. Which basically means, you know, curb stomping everyone that
would even vaguely try to oppose you. Right. And it is quite hilarious. But so anyway, so,
you know, China shows up, builds its space station and that kind of worked out. Everyone
isn't laughing anymore. Right. And then China's like, and now we're going to the moon. Right.
And what happens almost immediately? ISS funding falls through the floor. They're talking about
selling it or crashing into the ocean. Yep. And immediately we're like moon based now.
And not in a way that they're like, you've seen administrations do this. And each administration
in the US will cancel the last guys, you know, George W. Bush wanted to go to the moon. Barack
Obama canceled and said, we were going to Mars. Trump comes in and cancels that and says, I don't
even know. Space force is what he said. Space force. Space force is an interesting one actually,
because what the space force was was an explicit declaration that the fourth domain of war was
open for business. That's what that said, right? Space force always existed. It sat under the US
Air Force. It was a budgetary item in the US Air Force, right? They just took it out and made it
someone. And what they said was, we are hit. We came to fuck. Right. That's when they announced
the space force, Trump was saying, we have come to fuck you in space. Yikes. They're like, we've
got our own blackjack and hookers, motherfuckers. It's not fatherhood and apple pie. It's blackjack
and hookers, right? And that's what that was. And everyone laughed. And it was, it was a little
absurd, but the costumes especially are a little strange. I don't know who designed those, but I
mean, and it sounds weird to us having never heard it. I'm sure the Air Force sounded weird
to people who had never heard it, right? Right. But what that was was declaring hunting season
in space, right? This is now another war zone like anywhere else. We have no rules. We have
nothing. It's going to be a shit show. So when China said we're building a moon base,
what the fuck do you do when China lands on the moon with a flag? It's ours now.
Or what if there's only, what if they don't even do that? What if there's just one patch of ice
on the moon? Ice on the moon, ice is super useful. Right. Ice is obviously water. It's food,
because now you have water to grow food. It is oxygen, because you can split it with electrolysis
of water using solar panels. And it is also rocket fuel, because once you split it with
electrolysis, you can recombine it for rocket fuel, right? Sure. You basically, you have
oxygen for the atmosphere and hydrogen for your, your propulsion. Right. You have everything you
need, right? So if you are the one that lands on the only piece of water on the moon, frozen
water, and you say this belongs to me, how the fuck are you going to do about that?
Because man, they can really see you coming from Earth. They've got time to fire back. You
know what I mean? So if they land there and they say this is mine, you're fucked. I mean,
you can obviously attack the outpost, but doing so likely starts, I mean,
worst case, World War Three. Well, let's not do that. I mean, I would, I mean, I would prefer
not to, but I'm just saying like, this is, then this is the problem. This is why it was, you know,
this is why it was such a political issue. Yeah. Because who owns the moon? The moon is one third
the diameter of the earth. Right. Think of that. It's probably the largest thing. If you look up
the moon one night, it's the largest thing you'll probably ever see. You can look at the sun.
Don't look at the sun. But you can through a, you know, through a screen or anything else, right?
And sure, you'll see it. But you don't really see detail, just a blob, right? Yeah. The moon is
the largest thing you will ever see. It is one third the diameter of the earth. It is larger than
the entire continent of the United States of America, right? And actually, if you get an even
even an intro telescope, you can see reasonable amounts of detail. Yeah, crazy detail, which I
wouldn't encourage our listeners to do. But man, this thing's fucking huge, right? If you own the moon,
in terms of land area and resources and everything else, that the moon, the moon, here's an analogy,
right? Imagine you would, you live on a tiny, the bank of a tiny river, right? And you hear about
this faraway land, you have two choices. You want to go there, right? You build a robot that can get
down your tiny river. But at some point, it turns into an enormous ocean. So you have to build a
robot that you can drag across an entire ocean. That's pain in the ass. That takes so much engineering,
so much hope. Your other options are sailing to the mouth of the river, building a dry dock,
and then building an ocean worthy vehicle, and then sailing to the new world that way.
Similarly, the moon represents a gateway, a dry dock to our solar system, right? It has
all of the same shit on it that we have on Earth, more or less, right? It's already in orbit of the
Earth. It's close enough that if something goes horrendously wrong, you can get to it. Like, this
would be a great place to build, to build, to build something, to build something. And just as
they're talking about having you go to low Earth orbit, you get picked up by a lunar tug, it takes
you to the moon. On the moon, you've built the giant rocket that's going to go somewhere else,
right? And then that's where you stage shit to go to Mars from. That would be so much easier.
Like, and if you own that, if you own that strategic resource, everyone else is fucked.
Makes sense. And America is used to hand-fisting people. It's used to fucking people. The whole
Western world is. And it wants that too. I mean, and so when China said it was going to go,
they're going to go too. And they mean it. I mean, you look at what they're doing and who
they're eating, the money they're spending, the contracts they're signing. America is absolutely
going now. And I mean, it's nice. It's nice to see that. I think it's long overdue. It's obviously
sad. It has to happen on the backdrop of war, but that is often the cost of technological
processes, progress, right? Like, sure. So hit me. Now we really need to talk about UFOs,
because you know, this was coming, right? I mean, we basically explored a number of
different topics and UFOs is clearly next. So are they here? Have they been here?
Well, I mean, according to the US government, absolutely. And there are no shortage of pilots,
astronauts, ship captains that will tell you that UFOs are absolutely a thing.
I mean, on the flip side, though, much like Bigfoot, literally everyone in the world
has a 4K camera at this point. And yet somehow sightings of supernatural phenomena have gone
down, not up. Have you heard Mitch Hedberg's joke on this, which is that Bigfoot is blurry?
That's the actual problem. He's like, if you think about it, it makes it much scarier.
He's just a mouth of his blood monster. He's actually a cloud. He's a, he's a, he's a,
Jesus. But no, okay. So, you know, UFOs are an interesting one. And if you take a step back,
and you think of the classic UFO shape, right?
Are we talking about the, in my head, there's two of them. There's, there's that cigar,
one of them, there's the disc.
All right. So let's think of the, first let's start with the disc one, which I find interesting,
right? So the disc one is interesting because if you take the unidirectional wing,
right, in 2D, which is a symmetrical,
you effectively get what looks like a saucer and you rotate it in 3D, you end up with a saucer.
And the reason that's relevant is if you had a machine that you wanted to generate lift in
every direction, it would look like a UFO. And then you would just pitch it up in the
direction you wanted to generate lift. But also UFOs are often shown to hover, right?
So what does it matter? What shape it is if you, if you can hover, which is actually very hard to
do as a, as a vehicle, right? If you can hover, if you have that kind of, you know, and they
fly off in an instant and do all this crazy stuff, right? Where they clearly aren't
hurting for thrust, right? Well, if you can do that,
why do you need a lifting device? Why, why are you shaped like something that has to
universally generate lift in any direction? Now, there's two options. One is it's a coincidence,
but whatever electronics or whatever design this ship has, it makes sense for it to be,
you know, to have rotational symmetry, to be a disc or just make, maybe that's, make sense,
right? The drive or whatever propulsion form you have happens to be a donut shape and you just
kind of wrapped, wrapped the top over it and you live in the middle. Maybe that's the answer,
right? And I don't know, obviously. The other option is for some strange reason,
you do need to generate lift, right? And again, so why? So if you do need to generate lift,
that says you have to operate in an atmosphere that would kind of hint at you being more,
more human made. Which is fair, but my question would be, could it be two different types of
propulsion such that when you enter an atmosphere, you need one type, which is basically, you need
something that's, I don't know if it's necessarily anti-gravity, but it's definitely like, you know,
opposing gravity. So it is.
It's like upward propulsion. The only reason I say two different types is when you're in
the vacuum of space, you know what I mean? Like you could have a potentially completely different,
different type of propulsion, no? Yeah, I mean, yeah, you're not wrong. It is possible. That's
an answer. It just seems, it just seems really weirdly coincidental. You know, no more so than
a UFO would need wings. Okay, right. Why would a UFO have wings? I mean, it's a spacecraft,
most of the time. Why would it need wings, right? Similarly, a UFO is a 3D wing. Why?
Unless it spends most of its time in the atmosphere, but it's a spaceship. So it doesn't, right? The
space shuttle makes a terrible airplane. That's why when they had to fly it from one place to
another, they strapped it on top of an actual airplane. Because you're odds of getting that
thing off the floor, short of a rocket was zero. Sure. But doesn't this lead to a different hint,
which is if that's the little craft that makes it into most of the atmospheres, then there is an
interstellar craft that it came from. Well, yeah, there is a mothership. I'm just saying it asks
some interesting questions, right? That they're always, they're all often portrayed to be these
disks. But as you say, some of them are cigars. And some of the reports, if you read the UFO,
they make good reading. Some of them have really weird descriptions, too. Like,
some of them are completely different, like weird glass spheres with cubes in the middle.
So a friend of mine is actually a Navy fighter pilot. We went to Cambridge together. He's a
really good buddy. And he said, I'm literally directly quoting here. He said he almost took
one of those things that down his intake at 12,000 feet. He did a 180 to go see it. And his
exact description was transparent sphere with black cube inside. Right. And there are,
and I'm not here to say whether any of this is true or false, but man, there is a surprising
amount of consistency on some of these descriptions. Maybe they're manmade. Maybe they're not. Maybe,
I mean, one element is if you're the US government, wouldn't it be great to pretend you had crazy out
the supernatural? Esk, you know, alien technology, right? Especially you could deflect from
classified tech. Right. Just get your adversaries chasing imaginary technology.
I think we did that. That was that was Star Wars in the 80s, right?
So kinds of things, right? Just, but why not do that, right? Why not create entirely false
programs? Have people chase after it? Have them put in, have them waste their espionage
looking for things that didn't exist and then, you know, trying to catch them in the process,
right? And so there's all of that. But, but I mean, on the flip side, though,
you say, okay, we live in a very average sun. As we look more into the universe,
it seems our solar system is pretty standard. And we're in a pretty average galaxy,
honestly, not particularly extraordinary. You know, there are many like it, but this one is ours.
And so you're saying, all right, the best guesses would say there's one to two earth-like bodies
around most of your average. The average sun has one to two earth-like bodies around it.
Roughly. How many average suns would be in our galaxy? Roughly, roughly.
Well, the average galaxy contains about 100 billion stars.
Stars, but like, you know, we probably can't thrive around, you know, a red giant or something.
No, so on average of those 100 billion, there is one to two Goldilocks planet on each one.
So Goldilocks means a rocky planet, or I think it actually technically means any planet within
a range that is warm enough, but not too hot to sustain what we would consider life, right?
Right. As in, it's not cold enough that the water would be solid ice,
and it's not hot enough to where it would effectively boil off.
Boil off, right. And so you ask this very real question, okay, so if there's 100 billion stars,
and the average star has one to two Goldilocks planets, it means there's between 100 and 200
billion earth-like, earth-ish, earth-ish planets in our galaxy of light,
at which there are 100 billion, give or take, galaxies in the known universe.
Basically, when we do the math, right, we're looking over the span of, let's say, 13 billion
years, roughly 14 billion for the universe or whatever it is, and then several hundred billion,
if not trillion, actual planets in the Goldilocks zone, we're basically looking at it being not only...
It seems like a mathematical certainty, right?
Not only possible, but it's, yeah, not only looks possible, but it looks effectively certain,
and it could even, you could even go as far as to say it could be certain, like, at this time,
like, we are definitely not alone.
Yeah, we're, I mean, our sun showed up about five billion years after the galaxy started,
right, which, man, leaves a lot of wiggle room for someone else. Like, ours was not an early star,
right? I mean, we're early-ish in the lifespan of the universe, but...
Prior to the heat death of the universe.
Right, which is a fair way away, right. Although, who knows, maybe I'll see it,
but, no, you would, there was plenty of opportunity for lots of other suns to show up,
and lots of other similar planets, and things like that, so you asked the question then,
you know, what, like you say, when you take a billion, a hundred billion, right, two hundred
billion, and then times it by having, like, where is all this life? It should be out there, right?
Right.
Yeah, sure, it's a one in a million chance that life evolved at all, but when you know there's
two hundred billion planets out there, like, well, then you're guaranteed many times over to have
life, right? And so you asked the question, where is it? The classic Fermi paradox,
where is it then, right?
And the Fermi paradox is basically, just again, for those of us listening, it's basically where...
So the Fermi paradox says, if there is life out there in the universe, where the fuck is it?
Or if I have neighbors, where are they? Why don't I ever see them put the trash out?
You know? Okay, I know I'm too far, I can't go there and look for them, but man, I should see,
if I have, I can't kick their front door in and look for my neighbors in their house, but man,
I should see them put the trash out, I should see them turn their lights on, I should see them do
things that indicate they're there, right?
So I guess my question would be, let's reverse this problem. Let's say that you're on a planet
that's literally at Proxima Centauri, so about four light years away.
Pretty close. Theoretically, the closest that could support life.
So if you're there and basically, how would you be able to tell that life is even remotely alive
and well on Earth? Is there a way to do that?
So it's possible, I mean, if you had...
How would we signal it? Would it be radio waves or...?
Yeah, I mean, and that is one of the answers to the Fermi paradox, right?
It's that we're sort of like somebody there letting smoke signals off at the campfire,
while airplanes flow over the top of our heads saying, well, there's no one around me because
nobody else is doing smoke signals, right? Right.
If you have a civilization that's capable of traveling the universe faster than the speed
of light, as we imagine these very advanced civilizations to be, there's nothing that guarantees
they communicate on radio waves anymore, right? Correct.
And so we might just be at a time when no one else happens to be chattering.
And if you're not, we've only been listening for so long, so blah, blah, blah.
So there's like a coincidence part, like maybe just no one's talking in a way that we're listening
right now. And you could see it, right? I mean, you could just have a good enough telescope to
look, you could just look at a planet, and if you had a big enough telescope, you could see it,
right? The biggest telescopes we've built are pathetically small.
On a, you know, if you have the ability... Even the new, I'm sorry to interrupt,
even the new, the web telescope... I don't know, the James Webb is a fantastic piece of technology,
right? It's been... It's glorious. But on the idea, you're like, oh, I can interstellar travel.
Why can't I build a 20-mile-wide telescope in space? I'll construct it in space. I don't
have to worry about getting there or unfolding it. Just as we do on Earth, we build enormous
telescopes in space in a perfect position, stare out into the universe. You can do that.
Who even knows that a telescope, as we were classically imagining it, when it looks at light,
is even a... Like, maybe you can get equipment that's good enough to pick up gravitational
waves. You can reimage the universe of gravity waves, right? Just as some of the LIGO experiments do.
Okay, we're looking blatantly at enormously big, heavy things, but if you get sensitive enough,
there's all kinds of ways you might sense the world around you. And so these civilizations
could well know we're here. But just as when I drive down a highway, right, I don't stop
for every ant hill that I drive past, right? Because they're so common. I know there's greenery
all the way. I know there's ant hills all the way. I don't care to... I don't care that they're there.
And so an option that I always consider... Maybe that's a human flaw. Maybe we should care.
Well, perhaps, but I'm just saying an answer to the Fermi paradox that most people don't...
If you don't often see touted is, yeah, life is ubiquitous in the universe. It's so common
that it's devalued, right? And the assumption was always that Earth was this rare jewel in the
universe, that there were very few life-supporting planets. Right. As we've gotten better telescopes,
we've come to realize they may be super common, at which point, like, why would I come...
Why would I fight you for it? It's an interesting question and truth be told, again, just looking
at one planet's history, ours. Civilizations meeting each other never works out well. If you
actually think about how this has worked throughout history. Now, maybe it's just because we were
primitive, but I would argue that even though our technology has advanced, our mentality hasn't
necessarily, but you know, I'm just saying, think about it. Like, when two cultures completely ignorant
of one another end up meeting throughout history, that really hasn't gone well for at least one of
the cultures. Yeah, that would be much of human history. So maybe it's not such a... Well, again,
maybe the aliens have started to realize that maybe that's also ubiquitous and said we should
probably just stay away because this doesn't usually end up well. Yeah, I mean, that's a complete
opportunity. There's a lot of reasons. I mean, one thing I found very interesting, right? So,
humanity is supposed to hit 10 billion by 2050. I think we just hit eight, right?
About, yeah. Do you know what's super relevant about 10 billion at 2050, other than nice round
numbers? Tell me. That's a maximum. At 2050, at 10 billion, we go into decline. So we start to shrink
as a species. Why do you say that? That's what they think. That's what... I'm not saying that's
the theory. That's what people who are predicting population. That's what musky boys going on about.
We start to decline in terms of population. Total number on this planet, yeah.
Really? Yeah, 10 billion. Because we consume too many resources? No, no, because if you provide
people with education, if you give them access to sexual health care, if you lower child mortality
and you extend the average age of a human, people have less kids. If you look at... And I'm going
to say native Americans. I don't mean that to mean obviously classical group of people who were here
before the white people showed up. Native American Indians, but yeah, I understand what you're saying.
Native Americans is in the native population, the people that live here now. Correct. Versus an
immigrant like me that might show up tomorrow, right? If you look at the native population of
America, again, the people who are born in America, right? They have on average about
1.8 children per woman. You need two children per woman to sustain the population, right? That's a
good point. And what you'll see, we're just not doing that. Japan has this problem, you know,
a time and a half, right? Oh, tremendously. They have a very, very advanced society. They've been
in decline for at least a decade or so. Right. I mean, and so the answer to that, you know,
the answer is to bring in immigrants. The whole Western world has done this, right? Like, you
need immigrants to come in. And at the beginning, America would take white people, right? The Irish
and the Italians. They weren't very liked, but still you brought them in, right? And then you
ran out of white people to import. Now you're starting to brown people in. And now, of course,
ironically, the GOP, the Republicans are freaking out because what they've realized is America is
pretty much guaranteed to become a white minority country by 2050, right? That's not a theory.
That's going to happen. I mean, nothing short of those children were already born and they're
going to grow up and they're going to have kids. I don't know why, personally, I don't know why
anybody fears that. Truth be told, this is America, the whole point, the whole reason
that we're number one. And again, I say this, you know, as a subjective and, you know,
subjective number and as an American, so it's pretty biased. But it hasn't been anything to do
with our skin color. It's actually been the exact opposite. It's because of our diversity that we've
led the world for quite some time. At least I would argue. And I would completely agree.
The British Empire was reasonably the same way at their time, only because you guys had every
corner of the globe. At one point in time, the British Empire spanned every corner.
That never sets. Yeah. And it's because you can trust an Englishman in the dark.
Yeah, please.
You haven't heard that one.
You can trust an Englishman in the light. No, I mean, and please don't get me wrong.
This isn't some weird racist rant. But I'm just saying that is happening because
that's what happens. You bring people in, people who tend to immigrate, tend to have
lower standards of all of these. It is a great thing, but they tend to have lower standards
of those. They're coming to this country for a reason, right? It's because they want things
for their kids. It's because there is more opportunity here. It's because the world's
going to be better, right? But when they come from a place where they haven't had as much of
those things, where the child mortality is worse, where the sex, you know, access to education
is lower for women, right? Where the access for sexual health is lower. They have more kids, right?
So 10 billion is the upper limit.
10 billion is the upper limit. Because by 2050, you've got a handle on it. At 2050,
you've just about balanced, you know, the western world's kind of probably dipped even
lower than 1.8. You've taken enough people out of extreme poverty that those that are left are
sort of balancing it. Good.
Right? No, no, great. But then what do you do? Because our entire concept of classical
economics is based on growth of population. It's on the idea of growth of economy through growth
of poverty. That's why most of the western world kept letting people in because they're like, well,
we have to grow the economy, you know, three to five percent. So I have to grow my population,
whatever is one to two percent, because I have to have extra workforce to do that.
That's classical economics. So we kept bringing people in.
And if you look at almost any country in terms of what their estimates of illegal immigration is,
they will look at what they need to grow their population by a couple percent,
take what they think their illegal immigration is off and let that many legals in.
So they're, you know, people are like, oh, we have to stop the illegals. If you do that,
your country just lets more legals in.
I think I think Singapore is the one that has this like down to a science at this point.
Yeah. That and the chewing gum. Anyway, so all of that is to say, it's a really interesting place
because from the point of view of being a solar empire, then the idea that you would invade
another planet, you're like, why? We actually more or less filled this planet up.
Right. Like if you could be a bit more sustainable, it's not even full.
And if you if you come the cities together and build them a bit taller,
figure that shit out, you honestly could leave a lot of this planet untouched.
I mean, if you basically had federal codes that forced everybody to have solar panels on X amount
of the building, we can get to a sustainability. And then if you want, you go into the solar system,
you say, okay, what if 10 billion people spread into the solar system? You're like, man,
then there's basically infinite riches for everyone, right? There is like just this planet
could be sustainable enough. Let alone you go to the solar system, you start stealing minerals
from asteroid belts, whatever else I was going to say, speak, speak. I was going to literally
say this, speaking of that, I mean, forget UFOs. No, I mean, even including UFOs, they don't have
to be intelligent. There's been, there's been like various asteroids that have passed us that I think
were either full of gold or one was like an actual solid diamond. And it's like that thing crashed
to earth, like that's it. The world economy is just screwed because you end up with this
unbelievably huge mass of something that was relatively rare previously.
Yeah, no, I mean, the, the, the Oort asteroid belt, the asteroid belt in our solar system
is filled with innumerable riches. I mean, that there is an effective infinity just in our solar
system. And for those 10 billion people, there's an effective infinity. And you might say, well,
Leon, if, if you come and you give people a solar system's worth of resources, they might really
get quite, quite horny about that and fuck a bunch and a bunch of kids will fall out.
And I say maybe, but like, I mean, look, look, as you've given people more resources,
what they've done is they've produced less children. And so what you might see is that
naturally, most, most, most alien races grow enough to fill a, fill a solar system and they're
like, yeah, we're done. This is enough. I mean, I live forever. I've got my infinity jacuzzi.
I've got my spaceship that goes fast and the speed of light and go anywhere I want.
Like, why do I need kids when I'm immortal? I'm pretty set. I'm having good fun. I've got my
blackjack on my hookers. Why don't we need kids? Well, that, that, that begs the question of this.
It begs the question of if we want all these things and we want to get in touch with you,
Leon, how, how can we, how can we find you? Can we find you on LinkedIn or what, what are the
socials that we're looking at here? Yeah, I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm a great Luddite when it comes to
social media, actually. So, um, you, yeah, reach out to me on LinkedIn, LinkedIn forward slash
Leon Vanstone and maybe there'll be a link or something you can provide if you want to hit me
up. Um, as long as you're not trying to sell me, you sell me some nonsense. I normally accept every
ad. I'm not, I'm not a picky man. Um, but yeah, as, as the least ridiculous social media I could
find LinkedIn seems to be doing me well, but yeah, hit me up. We'll have a chat. I mean,
I'm, I'm happy to come talk to people. I do love the sound of my own voice.
Um, so do we. Yeah. And finally, of course, comes the main one, which is if there is a technology
that you could just will into existence and you can't say teleportation that's cheating, everybody
says that one, but something other than that, what would it be? What would you, what would you sort
of will into existence? So I suppose keeping within, within my theme, I would want something called a
single stage to orbit vehicle. So if I fly to another country, if I fly back to England,
drag it on a plane, that airplane, let's say it's an A380, one of the world's largest aeroplanes.
The cost of an A380 is actually almost as if its name implies about $360 million.
It's 320 off top of my head. That doesn't include the engines. Each one of those engines is about
$10 million each. It's got four adds about another $40 million. Let's call it 400 mil.
Sure. Roundup, right? So $400 million vehicle. You got the first class seats. You got the, yeah.
You got the first class of the business. I'm always in economy because I'm a champ, but
um, okay, you have $400 million. And I can fly 10,000 miles return right to England back
for about a thousand bucks economy. You say, okay, how much does, uh, you know,
Elon Musk, of course, you know, used rocket salesman, how much does one of his vehicles cost,
right? Okay, that's about 120 used, maybe less 80 for a Falcon 9. He's getting,
credit to the man. He's getting the price down. Credit to SpaceX. They're getting the price down.
Yeah. But still, it's a fraction of the cost of that airplane, but the ticket price is enormous.
Right. Ticket price of going to space on a, on a Falcon 9 is, is 10s of minutes, 10 minutes,
whatever, right? Um, I want to see a world and certainly it should be acknowledged even today.
You know, to, to say, whereas I, I find it difficult to say we're a space fairing species,
right? Less than a thousand people have ever been to space. Do you know, I mean,
even to say that we're an air fairing species, one, it's largely only the western world that's
gone on a plane. That's about one to two billion people. Two, um, you know, even if you look at
America, only 90, about 90% of Americans have ever been on a plane. So 10% of Americans have
never gone on a plane. I don't know what the number is, but it's, it's even crazier the people
who have actually been out of the country is, is right. It's even to, even to Mexico or Canada,
it's, it's low. Right. And so, and so to say then that, that even, even to go as far as to say,
is humanity really a, you know, an air fairing? You know, is that what we do? Who knows, right?
But you need to see the equivalent of air travel to space. I should be able to buy,
right? We're in Austin, Texas. It is further to the Alamo in San Antonio right now than it is to
space. That's wild. Space is about 100 miles up. Straight up. Straight up. That's it. Right.
If I could get in a car that would drive up, I could be there in less than two hours. Yeah. Right.
And so you, in my mind, you want a single stage job vehicle, you want a space plane,
you want a vehicle that can take off from a runway, take me to space, dump some stuff out,
land back on a runway, refuel and take back off two hours later. And we don't have that
technology because when you can do that, you can put all these people in space. You know what, you
know, when they're in the space, would they be weightless? Would they be in microgravity?
They'd be in orbit, right? So you're technically not weightless. You're always the thing about
being float around. Yeah, you'd be floaty. You'd be floaty. And so, because the thing about being
in orbit is the way orbit works is you are still under gravity, gravity pulls you towards the
planet. The trick is if you can move forward so fast, the horizon falls away from you at the same
speed that you do. Right. So the horizon drops the same amount you dropped. So if you can do that,
you forever fall. Yeah, that's orbit, exactly. That's orbit. And then it's like being stuck in
an elevator at that point. The elevator is falling, you're falling. You're both under the force of
gravity, of course, but relative to each other, you're super floaty. And so, in my mind, the
technology I want to see is a space plane because then if you can make it $1,000 for me or you to
get a space for $1,000, you're talking about the same amount of cost you would pay for air freight
is now what it costs for space freight, right? Right. You can put all this shit up there. We can
all go. I mean, a bunch of people are going to die, a bunch of fuck ups are going to happen,
a bunch of lessons are going to get learned, but that's just sort of humanity for you, right?
Space needs to go from being this hallowed, sacred thing. I want to make it boring, man.
Pedestrian. So my life objective was, and still is, I got on this plane once to fly back to the
UK, a bit stormy in Austin. And for the viewers that aren't in Texas, man, the Texas Sunsets
really are something else, right? So we get on this plane, it's pissing it down, it's awful.
But we take off and we punch through the cloud layer and about 1,000 feet, 300 meters, we punch
through and I, and I'm looking and I, and I see this like womb of red and pink blast through
the plane. I've got the middle seat because I'm a fucking chump, right? I'm not one of those guys
like jumps together. The middle seat is fucking flat back together. Anyway, I look at the window
and the view is amazing. It's like 10,000 foot Texas, you know, cumulus nimbus storm cloud
shit, right? And then it's sunset too. So the bottoms are in shade, the tops are in sunlight
and it's this beautiful gradient all the way through from sunlight to reds to pinks to purples
to everything, right? And I'm like, this is amazing. And you can see all these like offshoots
these things through. It's just gorgeous. It's gorgeous view. And the woman who has the window
seat slams the window shirt. And I could have cried. I could have cried. Yes, but not because
I thought she'd done something awful, right? Because that woman had seen enough glorious
sunsets from that plane window that she'd rather watch the movie. And I want to live in a world
where you can sit in the Capella module or equivalent of your spaceship and watch Aurora
Borealis rolling from the top from the top from space, rolling over the Earth's magnetosphere
and be so bored of seeing that you close the blinds to watch the movie because that's when
humanity's gone to space. That's fair. I don't know. There's definitely something that's going
to always be magical about that stuff, but it will for the first time, for the thousandth time.
That's fair. I'm just saying, that's where I want to get. I want to get to the point where people
are doing that. That's not because in my mind, that's progress. When you have seen these beautiful
views enough times, you're like, yeah, whatever. It's true. I mean, I lived in Rome and actually the
time I, in 04 when I lived in Rome, the time I literally decided to leave was when I was in my,
I had all the Roman lifestyle. I literally lived in the Trevi Fountain Square. I had my little
scooter, like the whole deal. And the truth of the matter was, one time I was ending up coming
back from a friend's house and I drove past the Colosseum and didn't look up. And I realized that
I didn't look up and I was going, wow, I can't believe that just happened. The magic is gone.
Yeah. And that's where I want to take the magic out of that immediate piece. I want to move us
past it. We have to move on. There's a few thousand people in space. Yes, they're heroes,
but let's move on. So we're the first people that flew, right? So we're the right brothers.
We experience every day what just your grandparents may have dreamed. To be a pilot, if you were
a, you know, your grandparents, if they were kids, being a pilot was like being an astronaut.
And here we are today. And I want to make being an astronaut obsolete. I want to make it boring.
That's progress in my mind, right? It's just, let's move on. What's the next thing? Let's go.
I agree. And so in my mind, single-staged orbit vehicles, contact your senator today.
On that note, Leon, it's been unbelievable having you here. Thanks so much.
I've had a great time. Thank you.
It's been amazing. This has been, we have been standing on the shoulders of giants
with David Makai, myself. And thanks, everybody.
