Today on Standing on the Shoulders of Giants, we've got Dr. Drea Burbank, and I have to say this is
going to be an interesting one. Firefighting, medicine, carbon capture, the climate. You have a
hell of a background, Drea. Can you sort of dive in there and take us through?
Yeah, I'll give you the short version. I grew up in a fundamentalist anti-government cult,
and I tested into firefighting. I was a forest firefighter for nine years, went to medical school,
decided to fall off the deep end of the world into tech, and currently I'm living on the
Colombian Amazon with a fair trade carbon credit company. Indeed, and with a shaman.
Yeah, the whole idea. My bosses are five shaman, five indigenous Colombian medicine doctors.
They call them titans down here. They're great bosses. I got to tell you, that's
some crazy stuff. We've known each other for, wow, I mean, it's been like 23 years, I guess.
I know, we were just getting started. We met when you were a firefighter, right?
What's that like? Why did you go into firefighting? Why was that something that was interesting to
you? It wasn't at first. I was just looking for a job, and I turned 17 and I was part of a low-income
program for kids whose parents were not well off to get us some money. We grew up cleaning toilets
for the Forest Service, and I had a bet with four of the guys that had come back from a fire, and I
said I could do 10 pull-ups, and they said I was a liar, and I did seven, and they called me and said
come work for a firefighting fire. But I had no idea what it entailed at first. I just knew it was
supposed to pay more than trail building. Wow. Okay, and then it wasn't, as I understand it,
wasn't sort of residential firefighting. I mean, you were in forests and whatnot, right? Like giant
massive acre and hectare blazes. Yeah, I'm gonna sound like a dick here, but forest firefighters
make fun of structural firefighters. As do paramedics, as do policemen, because forest
firefighting is a completely different job. You're dealing with out-of-control external fire,
rather than kind of a controlled internal blaze. The technology is totally different. The job is
completely, you know, the professional requirements are completely different. Like a structure
firefighter has to be a pillar of the community, show up on calendars, fundraising, that kind of
thing. A structure firefighter or a forest firefighter is often ex-military, ex-convict,
a totally different woodsman, totally different group of people. I did gang intervention for a
while with forest firefighting. It's a great way to rebuild your life, if you've got a good work
ethic, and you're trying to kind of like find a traditional job that's not going to question your
background. Whoa. I mean, I'm kind of in shock here. So why does someone like yourself decide
that this is the right thing for them up front? I mean, you said you just needed a job, but you
stuck with it for quite some time. Yeah. Well, I think initially, so I grew up in the grid. I
didn't have any education, and I tested into university at 18, but there was no resources.
Like the women in my situation were encouraged to follow a completely different life course,
and it did not involve education, even a GED for a lot of my peer group. So I had no funding
whatsoever to go to university, and I knew it would pay enough, and it was during the summer.
So I stuck with it for that reason initially. I don't think I was anywhere near prepared for
the societal change that I would have involved. I tell people I was raised by fundamentalists
and firefighters, and they canceled each other up. But really, it was just two completely
different perspectives on the world. When I started doing it, though, I fell in love with fire.
Like, if you really stick with fire a long time, you're basically a pyromaniac, and I ended up
chasing it into the hotshots. I was a hotshot in LA for three years. And when you're doing that
kind of work, at the time, it was the second most dangerous job in the world. So the adrenaline
was just addictive. I believe that... Sorry, you said you ended up chasing it into hotshots?
Yeah, hotshots are 20 man crews. A lot of people know about smoke dumpers. So smoke dumpers parachute
in, and they're oftentimes singular in groups of three. Hotshots in contrast is a very organized
work group. They borrow a lot of tools and stuff from the US military, and you're in a very structured
group. You hike, you work for 16-hour days, 14 to 21 days at a time, and then you get a day off
to two days off, and then you go back to fighting fire. And we would only hit complex fires. So
we would go for the first three days, went out and controlled blaze in Oregon, the next three days
in Arizona. We went to Hawaii, fought a volcano fire. It was just for somebody in their 20s,
quick cash, easy money, hard work. I think the issue for me was that I was oftentimes the only
woman up to a thousand men in fire camp. So that was the hard part, I think, for me.
Okay. I can imagine what kind of things sort of technologies and whatnot do they use
to... I don't know, identify, contain these massive forest fires and then ultimately eliminate.
I mean, you know, for the rest of us, we're mostly thinking water, right? Water and maybe
some foam or whatever. I don't know. I mean, how does this work? Dirt and strategy.
Really? Yeah. If you really control a fire, I mean, you just can't put enough water on a forest
fire to put it out. Like, the seasons will put it out eventually, but even wintertime will always
suppress a fire. Fire is addictive because once you really get a sense for it, it just has this
absolute natural beauty. So fire runs uphill the way water runs downhill. And once you understand
that and you understand topography and terrain, and if you have a kinesthetic sense of the woods
that way that I do, you get a sense for where the fire is going to go. And what you do is you
kind of creep around the edges by digging ditches in the dirt and separating the burnt stuff from
the not burnt stuff. And then you slowly contain it, but you have to always stay behind it. You're
always trailing it. If you get in front of it, you die. And then sometimes it'll switch course
suddenly. So fire will do strange and beautiful things. Like it'll create a thunder cloud of its
own big enough to create a lightning strike that creates another fire. It'll run downhill.
Say that again. You just said that fire can create a rain cloud that ultimately gathers what I guess
enough static electricity that it literally can create a bolt of lightning that can create another
fire. You're kidding. Yeah, that happened on one of the fires. I worked on later in 2003.
And then we would sometimes work for like 14 days at a time and then see the neighboring fire come
and overrun when we were working. So you get this really interesting sense of the combination
between hard work. So you're literally swinging a pickaxe for 14 hours a day. You know, you'll
hike for like three to four hours that day up very steep. I mean, firefighters just go straight up.
We don't do switchbacks. And then you're carrying 40 pound pack, and then you're working in the
heat and then you're swinging a pickaxe. And so you're really, really working. Like it's manual
labor and some of the most inhospitable terrain known to man. And then also you get a sense for
like what you can't control. So the fire is completely outside of your control. So you had
this combination of like my backbreaking labor day in and day out for weeks at a time will control
this completely uncontrollable thing. And that is, it's beautiful once you really get a sense for it.
I mean, I can see how you got, I'm not sure it's for me, but I can see how you get there.
That's, that's, that's incredible. So, so in sort of doing this, I imagine you met some,
some interesting folks and whatnot. But continuing, you sort of mentioned dirt. You mentioned
digging ditches. What are some of the other sort of tactics and strategies that that that,
I don't know that that escaped the rest of us for like, what are some of the things that are
sort of misunderstood about this, this field? Again, I mean, I just mentioned water and you're
like, yeah, that's not really a thing in forest firefighters. I'm like, okay, cool. Like what
are some other things that that we could, you know, we sort of either take for granted or just,
just, you know, myths. Well, if you do is you water, use pumps and hoses and there's air,
you know, aerial drops from helicopters and all that. But it's just, it's just,
especially in the California where the fire is super hot and the weather is really dry,
the amount of water you'd have to borrow from the town's water supply.
So it's very strategic when you do and don't use water. One thing that is beautiful about
forest fires that only somebody who fought them went down is something called cold trailing.
And after you initially control the fire, so you're in a desert and even a spark will start it
up again. And so you have to go in with your hands on the edge of the blaze and you crawl in the
black and the dirt and you feel every single edge in the so it looking for hotspots. And then
sometimes you'll have to like, you know, in Idaho where the, where the trees get really deep,
the tree will, I was on a fire once for a month after it had been put out. And you would still
see like a month later, a stump would suddenly catch fire and start smoking. So you have to go
in there and you would hunt and you would like dig and dig and dig and dig and dig and dig,
dig an entire, like you would uproot an entire tree to get down to the tiny little amber at the
bottom. So those are like quiet times. And they're filthy, you're covered and stuck from head to toe.
But it's this kind of like hunt for the last little amber that's also kind of fun.
Wow. I didn't realize that. Did you say up to like a month that it could reignite?
Yeah, it'll come up and it's not uncommon. You'll see this all the time, like a fire was put out
and then all of a sudden the fire will pop up again. In fact, it's some of the most dangerous
time because what'll happen is the really hot blaze will go through and it'll dry everything out.
And then you'll have crews in there later going to clean up and you can have like these
these isolated chimneys or canyons just go off really quickly. And a lot of people die on already
controlled fires. Did you ever have any close calls out there? Yes, I did. More than more than one.
I think I would eventually one of the reasons I got out mostly is the toll on my large joints.
So most of my crew was like six feet tall. I'm five foot four. They were all men. I was a woman.
If you do the same amount of work as they do, it just takes a bigger toll on your joints. It's
simple physics. So I started to feel like my large joints aching a lot. And that's soft because I
could feel like I guess it's like an athlete, you know, at a certain point you realize you've
you've reached the limit and you can either beat your body up or you can move on to a different
different sport. My next sport was climbing, but we'll talk about that later. Anyway,
the was the question. I got distracted. That's all right. We were talking about close calls.
Yeah. Okay, we got struck by lightning. This should have been like readily apparent to us.
We were on a lightning fire at the top of a peak in like a huge plane in Arizona. And we
I remember we were on this this peak and we heard thunder two miles away. And one of the guys
standing next to me held his tool up in the air and he goes, strike me now, God. We all started
screaming at him or like, get on the ground. And about 10 minutes later or not even sorry, it was
like, it was probably 10 seconds later, we heard this sound like God's like had just like rained
hell on us. And for the guys got blasted off the rock they were sitting on. So stuck by lightning.
And then it was God's version of a thunderstorm. I've never been so in awe of like, hell breaking
loose around me as I was at that moment. So it lasted for about 20 minutes. And they had her
up top palpitations and stuff. So that was number one. And then I was on a night fire and there was
a constant threat of burning to death. It was nonstop. It was it was ever present. And it was
all we thought about all the time. But in this particular case, a burning snag fell like on
top of me. And I went to go run, but I ran right into a wall of brush. And so I was pinion there
like a fly in a spider web. And I just looked over my shoulder and the tree fell within probably
inches of me. And I just I just had this like intense feeling that my number was up. It was the
first time I ever experienced PTSD. It was mild version. But I certainly had it.
I would imagine. I mean, who wouldn't during that time work? What did everybody make it out? Okay,
I hope. In both cases, we did our crew was pretty lucky. I think right after we quit another crew
got paperized. It was about 20 people and there's movies and stuff about it. But it was routine routine
in the forest that I was on for in the 70s. People 20 man crews to go up and smoke, not
infrequently. They really got a better handle on it. And that's one thing I love about firefighting
is the Forest Service really sat down and looked at it and they showed it the system called near
misreporting. So if you had something that almost killed you, you would tell the entire nation about
it. It's embarrassing. A lot of people didn't want to do it. And I wish they did it on medicine.
Yeah. You're talking about this stuff so nonchalantly as if it's just part of I mean,
it is just part of who you are. Don't get me wrong. But wow, I mean, this is it's pretty
incredible stuff. I think living with an ever present awareness of death is one of the best
things you could ever do in your life, especially if you spend a significant amount of time like it.
Why do you think that?
Well, in Zen, Guru doesn't call it memento mori. Remember, you must die. It's the only task all
of us have in front of us, no matter how much we like to forget it. And living with it for a
significant period of time makes you so vastly aware of living. Like every day is a gift.
And every day is sweet. And you really never forget it. It just completely changes the way
that you see the rest of your life.
Okay, that's fair. Do you have other tales of firefighting that you wanted to bring up here?
The only reason I'm asking is, again, I'm just I'm kind of enamored with these stories.
But specifically, going sort of going through these these firefighting tales,
do we have specific instances and scenarios where basically your knowledge of, you know,
science and technology sort of was paramount?
Yeah, okay, I'll tell you one. We had these tiny little aluminum foil weather kits.
They probably made like two ounces. And it was it was it was the most simple technology ever. It
was like a little aluminum foil thing. And you would put it, it was a wick, and you put it on
the end of a string and you would spin it. And then the speed with which it evaporated would
tell you how much relative humidity was in the air. And my job on the crew every when it got bad
every 15 minutes was to take away the reading. And the only people I know who are so in tune
with wind or the sailors that have such a fine sense of wind and where it's at wildland fire in
the desert and sailors we even even a gust of a breeze and we know where the wind is coming from
and where it's going to go and it's going to pick up speed because desert fires and grass fires
are all wind driven fires. So every 15 minutes, I would take this tiny little flimsy technology
out of my bag and our lives would depend on it. And I remember vividly one day like taking a reading
and we were done in the 4% relative humidity and it was 110 degrees. Then that was not uncommon
during the summer. And my boss kind of did this and held us back and we all sat down on the dirt
and we watched the hill in front of us vaporize is about two miles from bottom to top and it went
up in smoke in about two minutes. So I got this very kinesthetic sense for for science and your
readings and how it can save your life or not. And then that that responsibility I remember was
super intense because you had to kind of like step out of line and you weren't working everybody
else would be working and you'd be doing your little reading. And there's there was a little
bit of sense of like isolation like why am I standing here waving this thing in the air when
everybody else is working. But our lives depended on it. So is this is this sort of sense of
mortality and for that matter you know saving people's lives is that is that something that
drove you into medicine? No I'm positive that I went into medicine. Well I went into for two
reasons. When I realized that I couldn't keep fighting for for the rest of my life like I
really didn't want to at the time. I went through the phone book. I was a ski bomb that winner in
golden British Columbia so I was learning how to snowboard. It's a ski hill that's 90% black
diamond and they would bomb it every morning with avalanche bombs. So I'm sitting in this town and
I finally got my work visa in Canada and I went through the phone book in this town because I was
like I like this town. This is a great town. I'm gonna stay here forever. And obviously I didn't
but at the time I thought I would and I found two jobs that I thought I could do and one was
doctor and one was a college professor like a community college professor and I chose doctor
because I thought it would be less politics. I knew nobody who was a doctor. I had never I
rarely had an encounter with a doctor because they grew up so poor we couldn't afford to go to the
doctor and so it was all just kind of lay people that like kind of did healings in their house
and stuff and patched you back together. Yeah and I just I had no idea what I was signing up for
not at all. I just thought it would be a good job. I did read Aerosmith when I was 13 and so
that was my main motivation or like exposure to a medical career in advance. What did you read
when you were 13? Aerosmith by Sinclair Lewis. I still think it's the great the best novel about
being a doctor ever. I thought you were talking about the 70s band apparently that's not a super
away. No it's like it's like a it's like a quintessential doctor novel and a lot of people
have read Sinclair Lewis for other reasons but I still think that he wrote the best book about
being a western physician that was ever written. Okay okay so that that might have been the seminal
point early on that sort of kicked this off eventually later in your life. I might have been
subconscious I don't know. I knew that I was smart but I had very little formal education
and I had a non-traditional intellect and I knew that early on so and it's not like anybody ever
sat me down and said women should be smart and go to school. Like everybody always told me women
should have babies and not get a GED and be a good support to their husband who will be their
relatives later their entire their entire lives and I I rejected that early on but I didn't really
have an alternative worldview to put in its place. I mean you certainly blew that stereotype out of
the water. Yeah someone intentionally I think there is there's something that people say about
Catholic schoolgirl syndrome and it's true like when you grow up with a very oppressive religious
kind of background it's it's hard not to identify yourself as its reverse
and I think I was aware of that early in my 20s and I worked really hard to achieve a more balanced
worldview. Good that sounds great. So then you went to medical school you became a doctor.
Yeah. What kind of doctor? I like that that's two sentences it's like 12 years of my life
and backbreaking work and at the same time in retrospect it it seems such a waste of time.
I was I didn't know what I wanted to do I was one of the only people in medical school who was
like I don't know what I want to do and I was so stuck on it I think I was stuck between emergency
position and plastic surgery and I didn't expect I would like plastic surgery but as a kid I did a
ton of taxidermy and in fact my first job was for a taxidermist and I was actually really really
really good at dissections and I didn't have any sense of what that would factor into in a later
career but plastic surgery was the closest to that competency. I also did a ton of embroidery so
with the two I was I just had a natural sense of my hands and plastics is the most beautiful
form of surgery by far. So yeah I loved micro surgery and then I liked the adrenaline emergency
medicine I went to paramedic school first to get a sense for patients because I felt like too many
people became doctors without knowing if they liked patients so I wanted to find out if I even
liked just the pattern of seeing people hurt and whether I felt disgust or compassion I wanted
to know that. I wish they did two things I wish they gave all doctors functional MRI to see if
they had empathy and I wish that they made them treat patients before they went to medical school.
Do you think that there's a number of doctors without functional empathy do you think that's
a that's a real thing and if it is the follow-up question is which discipline do you think they
go into the most? I have no doubt they there is probably out to estimate 20% of doctors lack
significant empathy and if they don't lack it before training they do their best to shut it
off during training it's it's a painful way to practice and then the by all self reports among
doctors neurosurgery is the best place for a sociopath. Patients do the poorest and having lack
of concern for outcomes makes you a better surgeon in neurosurgery. Okay um I guess that's good to
know. Yeah I mean you still don't I mean I actually if I had to get brain surgery I probably wouldn't
care if my doctor was a sociopath or not because neurosurgeons are driven by competition with
their peers and you can still be an amazing neurosurgeon and have absolutely no functional
empathy. I guess at that point when you're having brain surgery it's kind of irrelevant what the
person is it's more just wanting the outcome to be positive right? Yeah and and honestly
neurosurgery outcomes are almost universally negative so empathy just makes you burn out faster
so some of the better surgeons just don't feel any kind of empathy for their patients.
A lot of western doctors will tell you that empathy is a disability.
Well let's go the other direction uh what would you say I mean I'm not trying to play
off the what you just said but I'll I'll ask it anyway what what kind of doctor what do you think
would have the most empathy? Um it's not pediatricians like you would think because actually pediatrics
is pretty damn tough um kids get sick. I was gonna say that's that's what jumped that's what jumped
to the top of my head at first. Um I find palliative care docs can be incredibly empathetic
and internal medicine doctors are just big they're just big nerdy bleeding hearts like if you want to
find your ultimate like doctor's soul find an internal medicine doc because there's no reason
to go internal medicine unless you love medicine love patients that want to get your ass kicked
to save the world like. Okay okay. Actually emerged docs can be just astoundingly empathetic
and you would not expect it because they see so much trauma but uh they are the people who seem
to be the most broken in by their practice. Why do you think that is? Broken open. Um I think it's
interfacing on the border of life and death and then the combination of triviality like they deal
so much triviality they also deal with a ton of social work issues just as a routine and then
just extreme trauma so you know you'll go from somebody complaining about a hangnail for no
reason and taking up a spot in the ER to and demanding opioids for it to um you know a child
that got um that's going to die from a wreck and and you have to go you have to switch into that
mode immediately and something about it I don't know. I always emerged docs are some of my favorite
people. Okay um similar question to the firefighting one what what's something we take for granted
about plastics that is just either not true or or misunderstood? Plastics is the strangest specialty
I've ever been involved with um it attracts people who are straight up sociopathic and just
want to make money and do cosmetic surgery and it also attracts the the strongest surgical nerds the
people who just love surgery think it's the most beautiful thing we've ever seen and want to master
it with you know true ardent um dedication to the craft and a lot of plastic surgeons won't do
cosmetic surgery so you have to do it in training but a lot of plastic surgeons make less money than
other surgeons they do hand surgery or reconstructive wounds and they lose money. Also one thing people
don't know about plastics is that yes you will do boobs and noses and stuff um if you're in training
but also they deal with all the complex wounds if somebody botches a surgery it goes to a plastic
surgeon. Okay so a lot of time they're doing cleanups. Yeah they if some if a wound never heals
it'll go to a plastic surgeon um like I worked at Stanford's wound healing clinic um and it's almost
like a forest fire I will say you have this like intense devastation that you it seems like you'll
never get ahead of and you're just like carefully and labor intensively slowly cleaning and cleaning
and cleaning and it will heal you can heal almost anything. Wow okay um inside of plastics what are
some of the newest sort of things that are out there I mean we've got these days we've got lasers
and there's there's these incredible microsurgeries etc what what what does that look like in the
plastics field today versus let's say I don't know even 20 years ago even like the beginning of the
2000s versus versus where we're at right this second what what what what technological advances
have been made. Yeah that's what interested me to plastics in the first place I think is um anything
new any new technology and surgery almost always enters through plastics um and the reason is that
they're they're the surgical nerds so they are the ones who are willing to take the time on an
operation or do with an experimental therapy to try it out. With cosmetic surgery there's
sometimes more money involved in order to like bring something new and and tissue transfer is
one of the most beautiful operations I've ever seen. I worked at the Bunky Clinic for a while
where they're replanting hands and that can be really interesting. They'll take a muscle an
unnecessary muscle from one part of the body and move it through another and if you ever want to
see like true surgical nerd the Bunky Clinic has a website where they they describe each of
those operations in the most like simplistic and beautiful detail. Everybody in the world studies
their website. So were you involved with some I mean I would imagine you you mentioned two
different types of people who are who are specifically attracted to this one of them was
the sociopath and the other one is someone who just enjoys the beauty beauty of medicine.
Knowing you I'm guessing I'm guessing you're the latter. So in that particular case have you
exactly so have you have you sort of done some of these surgeries where you're either you know
reconstructing hands or various parts or cleaning up surgeries like has that been something you've
been involved in and did any of them stick out to you? Yeah I think I've done just about every
plastic case there is out there but only as an assessor and observer. Yes the one that I love the
most absolutely bar none and this is the one that kicked me out of medicine surprisingly. There is a
surgeon in Alberta that was pioneering the use of external nerve nerve stimulus so you could implant
an electrode on a nerve and then you would put a transmitter on the ear and you could take somebody
with a paralyzed hand and they would click their teeth and it would open and close their hand
and you would totally skip the brain and all the nerves and you would just stimulate the peripheral
nerve remotely and I had this vision that you could restore motor function in paraplegics. I mean
with enough stimulus and a complex enough computer program you could put the stimulant the electrodes
on the peripheral nerves and literally restore walking and somebody was completely paralyzed and
I just I was obsessed with this idea and I thought that I would leave medicine for a year between
medical school and residency and I would gain enough computer knowledge to make this happen
and what I discovered was that wasn't possible like the minute I stepped off the train track of
medicine I missed the train and it was over and it was so it was gone so quickly that I never
anticipated it would be like that but medicine is completely unforgiving to exploration of technology
which I learned when I tried to come back. So what what's stopping us from doing that I mean
that's that sounds like an incredible project what what stops us from from having that being the case
is it the code is it the the electrical engineering just just won't work out is it too complex I mean
what's what's what's the issue? I wish I could simplify it and there might be trauma in this
because when I lost medicine it was a blow that I I didn't anticipate being so painful
especially when I lost my chance at plastics and and I grieved it for a long time but
I think what it is is good things in medicine are about 80 years old so laparoscopic surgery
took 80 years to penetrate into surgery the the penicillin was 50 years the the gap between
when something is developed and when it's considered safe to apply to patients is long and
it's that's never going to change I don't think the human body evolved over like 5 000 years and
every doctor's been involved in experimental stuff that was botched or hurt the patient and the
hippocritic oath is pretty unforgiving in that sense like it's better to not act and that that is
that is the decision of the entire profession and it's the thing you take it's the oath you take
on day one and you never forget it which is that it's better never to do harm and so what that
means is medicine is totally loath to introduce new treatments or new therapies and often with
good reason doctors are the gatekeepers for this stuff and a lot of the stuff people think they
want to do like implanting brain stimulus that gives you an artificial reality overlay on your eye
I mean it would just infect the brain and like you would have to treat the body for a long time to
realize how how much of healing is dependent on the body's internal structures and how intelligent
the body really is and how staying out of its way is probably the best thing you could do as a
doctor in most cases so doctors learn and good doctors really learn this they learn to work
with what the body already does rather than trying to replace it or or impose an external well on it
yeah so in that sense I mean you kind of just brought it up but like I'm guessing you don't
think Elon Musk's neuro link is a is a particularly good idea if Elon Musk had ever cleaned out
an infected brain he would never even think about that if he'd ever seen what happens to anything
artificial planet in the human body after five years the body scars around it it it attempts to
expel it it'll like it like the body will systematically extrude anything like if you leave
a screw in a bone after a surgery and that even just leaving one screw in a bone is often times
the surgeon will agonize over it because sometimes the the bone will completely reject the screw and
the body over five years will will tend to push that screw out the idea that you would put an
electronic implant into a human brain and that the body would simply accept it is is horrific
to anybody who truly understands the body and the immune system okay so in order to actually
create something like that I'm again I'm spitballing but in order to create something like that it
would almost have to be biological in in nature right like it would all it you it almost couldn't
be electronic it would almost have to find something that the body would actually accept and then
effectively create for for some for some definition of computer a a computational device using
basically by biologics is that is that a reasonable supposition you could think about that but I
mean I work with scenographs and plastic surgery so you take like pig from sorry you work with
from a pig so sorry there's allographs which is like from your from your own body there's
a sorry autographs from your own body allographs are from somebody else's like a cadavers um and
then scenographs are from an animal so you could take like a biological species like a pig or something
and you can clean out all of the markers that make the body react to it and put it in but um a lot
of times what'll happen is when you take these external tissues and put them into the body
the body will will kind of degrade it the tissue will lose its characteristic form
like so I work with tissue engineering for a while and it's very very hard to take an external
biological substance put it in the body and not expect the body to kind of like morph it so
there's just so much about life we don't understand that's fair um that's definitely fair so
what caused you to leave medicine you you mentioned this a little bit earlier and I know
I know there's there's there's a little bit of a story here what caused you to leave
well uh two things uh first off I missed my shot like after I'd taken uh I took three I tried to
take one year at Stanford doing a biomedical informatics program and I ended up in a different
program instead and uh it was three years before I went back so I launched a telemedicine platform
around the US it was one of it was in 2014 we had 60 000 doctors and we had a specialty and
primary care consults for 30 bucks outside of insurance and that was fun and I thought that
would be like appealing to doctors but when I went back to make residency applications I was
universally rejected not just one year in all of North America three years in a row um I finally
made it into a very bottom of the barrel residency which was my version of hell on earth um I think
they call it uh vicarious trauma when you're when your external circumstances and the expectations
around you force you to do things that are outside of your moral code and I had a idyllic
training situation I worked with some of the best physicians in one of the best hospitals in the
world um I still think Canada and rural medicine is some of the most beautiful clinical care I've
ever seen and to work in in like bottom of the barrel like industrial residency where patients
were routinely hurt through action or inaction was was too painful and I ended up leaving
and I think that's that's okay at the end of the day I've looked at my career and my training and
my mind and I realized that I was probably not suited well for medicine um good doctors do the
same thing every day like a good doctor a really good doctor doesn't change their care they're very
much doing the same thing and it's and the thing has been done for 80 years and they're conformist
they're intellectual conformists um the more curious external innovative you are the the worst
of a time you'll have in western medicine and I wish I'd understood that when I went in but I
don't think I really knew that about my own brain before I went through that kind of like intense
training okay um you you kind of mentioned um you were universally rejected do you do you think
the telemedicine thing was the cause that what was the what was the impetus behind that I think
it's a combination of like why did I take time off usually when doctors take time off after
medicine um they it's because they did something wrong so they made a mistake in clinical training
and uh they weren't allowed to match the residency I hadn't done anything wrong but nobody would
believe that because um it was just me saying it and then the second thing was just my focus on
technology most of the residency programs are they're interested in conformity and that a
resident will follow rules and that they won't leave mid-training and the idea is that if you go
to technology you you have seen any other side of the world you you're just going to run away
anyway you're not going to put up with the with the trauma of training and I tend to agree actually
after I finally did land my residency I realized that I had absolutely no interest whatsoever in
living that kind of a life. Draya what what caused you to to leave medicine you kind of mentioned
that a little bit a little bit earlier and and and then we sort of talked through some of that
and then we ended up going you ended up mentioning that that you were sort of universally almost
rejected from these residency what what was the cause there what what was the impetus and driving
force behind that um I think I've already mentioned that doctors have a aversion to to
emerging technology and it's not necessarily a bad thing um in our in our generation the the
experience of being a western doctor is is significantly corroded I would say um so doctors
have a higher suicide rate than the military right now medicine has become industrialized
there are many many many more administerators than clinicians um the the art and the practice
of western of medicine as I saw it practiced by by stellar clinicians with a ton of hands-on care
is being eroded by electronic medical records and I was seeing these friends and I I couldn't
escape them like I maybe whatever it is about my brain I couldn't ignore what I what I saw
as the writing on the wall um and we're seeing all this stuff about physician burnout right now
but I saw it probably 10 years earlier and what happened was I was in my third year of medicine
I was supposed to pick a specialty and um I was interested in surgery and I was confronted with
a resident who had done 12 years of cardiac surgery training only to emerge from training
and realized that um percutaneous interventions which were handled by cardiologists had um been
selected as the as the preferred therapy and so all of these cardiac surgeons 12 years into their
they're like fine fine training were completely out of work and they had no hope of like they'd
have to do an entirely separate surgical residency and it wasn't just like her it was like all across
Canada there was no jobs for them whatsoever um because this technology had emerged and nobody
taking it seriously the cardiac surgeons thought that it was you know it wasn't open and so they
were like we'll give that to the internal medicine doctors and then I didn't just see that there I
saw it in laparoscopic surgery and all these other things so I was like I need to study
technology trends to figure out which specialties are going to have a job 20 years from now and it
wasn't just this it was tissue engineering all these different therapies were emerging and so I
started to look at technology and I really felt split like I didn't know which path to pursue and
also I was um I was becoming increasingly aware that um they call this in medicine there's this
metaphor they always use of like fishing people out of the river or going up and repairing the
bridge upstream and I became so obsessed with public health and preventative medicine and keeping
people healthy rather than treating them so far downstream after they were already sick um and I
felt myself being pulled into separate directions it was like your skis getting separated and you
can see yourself going downhill and they're just totally separate and I ended up getting pulled
I think more from my desire to have an impact than anything I wanted to make the most people
healthy that I could um and so because you just you can't treat and stage diabetes um more than
once or twice before you're like wow you know I just really want to get involved in a sugar
sweetened beverage campaign and talk about soda pop and how it hurts the human body so
yeah anyway so and then at the further I went down that road in stanford I started preventative
medicine and you're in the hotbed of silicon valley and high tech and I started to see how
high tech like Fitbits could like totally like terraform the world and make so many people healthy
all at once and then that was just the start and then it was just an endless stream of experimentation
projects after that okay but I mean so so so sort of to wrap a a little bow around it it was
effectively you were more caught up in the technology world than you were with medicine
be given that medicine's a little bit slow in adopting various things yeah if you're
want to say it simply but it's not simple if you're if you were trained in medicine they
they don't just teach you something it's like the military they take you apart at the seams
on the most fundamental level your identity sleep deprivation constant criticism you rewires who you
think you are and nobody who goes through medicine doesn't experience this um it's you get tired and
sad and traumatized and sleep deprived and you totally fundamentally change your identity
on a core level yeah and so I understand that is a betrayal it's like leaving my military and I
my friends who leave combat troops and the camaraderie and the identity of that and then
start again with the different life it's it's the same kind of trauma I don't know anybody who can
leave medicine without feeling that they've betrayed their mentors in some way okay that's fair but
but moving forward at present you've gone in a very different path where you're effectively not just
helping individuals your I mean your goal is to effectively help the planet as a whole because
you've sort of gone in this in this climate change area you've got your own company you've got a whole
bunch of interesting things here so before we dive into all that first and foremost what's
going on with climate change like what what what's the deal here like let's let's hear it from the
horse's mouth clearly something's up clearly the temperature is rising clearly something is causing
it like is it all humans is it part humans like I'm just genuinely curious for your take what is
that what does that look like from your perspective okay yeah wow I'm gonna tell you two things so so
first off I didn't stop being a healer just because I love medicine and I was on walkabout with these
five shaman watching your traditional healing just out of my own curiosity when I picked up this
project so and somehow I had everything to do with like forest fires and my other background
and it just felt like my life kind of came together in this complex pattern that I I didn't see coming
climate change okay so I am not as a scientist I am not going to get into a global warming debate
like the the objective evidence is that temperatures are heating up as to the cause the most likely
target that we could actually fix is co2 in the atmosphere which we know causes greenhouse gas
like effects or we we we hypothesize and it's probably the best theory we've got also it's
the easiest thing to target and the objective evidence is that the co2 has exponentially risen
ever since the industrial revolution so leaving aside why the planet is heating up and I believe
that there's you know there's good enough arguments on both sides maybe we're just in a heat you know
warming cycle you know or maybe we caused it but as you know in chimpanzee species
who's recently developed the ability to get past you know burning sticks and into burning
planes we might as well start with the co2 in the atmosphere because at least we can do something
about that um that's that's where I stand on that global warming debate as far as climate change
sorry go oh I was just gonna say yeah I mean I wasn't trying to draw you into a into a specific
argument or anything I'm just genuinely curious from your position like where what does this look
like for for the rest of us humans yeah no I didn't want to get into an argument either but I just
feel like it's so important to address it so many people are in denial about it and I just don't see
the point it seems to have become a political or an emotional issue as if and I think it really
comes down to fear like people are like what can I do about this and if you don't get people a productive
outlet um they're just going to do their best to suppress the information because that's how we
survive we we live every day with a threat of injury or car accident or whatever and we just we
can't afford to think about it if we can't do anything about it and um I feel like climate too
often ends up in that situation but there's no debating the fact that it started to impact us in
absolutely um undesirable ways like the power outages in Texas or the desertification that
we're seeing in the southern u.s. or the increase in forest fires all these issues that are impacting
some of the poorest people on the planet first doesn't mean they're not going to hit us and I
feel like we we have to find productive and interesting ways to deal with it because there's
no other way to live in my mind how do we deal with this I mean you you said it yourself we
have to find productive and interesting so how do we deal with this and I I don't want to be
prescriptive about your answer but I'm I'm actually you know I'd like to hear it from like what can
person a do and then from that matter maybe we jump up a notch and like what could a company do and
then maybe we jump up a notch like what could a country do right like like what on the on the
varying levels of locality you know what how can we combat some of this stuff well the first thing
to do is to change small habits and I'm a huge fan of from preventative medicine and learn something
called tiny habits so you don't try and change all of your global signature all at once what you do
is just trying to change one thing so I mean if people just stop eating meat for one dinner a week
it actually has a significant impact small things like that that you can change without even really
noticing the difference just developing a taste for like one vegan meal that you can possibly stomach
you know people don't have to eat meat all the time and if they understood about the carbon
signature of the of the meat consumption that they have they probably wouldn't eat it nearly as much
cycling it's all good like you just lose weight nothing to lose I don't understand the the the
impact of the of the meat that I eat on carbon consumption what is that is it like a cow thing
a chicken thing like how does that how does that work yeah pretty much all all animal farming for me
generates a much higher carbon signature than if you just made a plant-based diet
I'm really strong impact on the climate and we eat a lot of beef without really thinking about it
the thing is you just don't really know how much meat it's in your food until you try and go vegan
or something like that and then you realize oh my god it's in everything I eat and is it really
necessary okay entire society again from about it sure but again from from your suggestion it seems
like you know if you if you want to have an impact as a regular as a regular person if you go one meal
a week less just one meal a week less with with no meat or something like that you you could actually
have a significant impact again not only on a local level but if everybody did this it would be it
would be effectively almost on a global level right yep and these are small changes and they're
actually just super healthy like veganism is has been shown like eating one one vegan meal a week
has been shown to extend your lifespan and improve your skin like you don't need as much meat as you
think you do and then you know cycling like one day a week will literally I mean I think I lost 10
pounds once so I switched into a bicycle and so I must just go from a car and I just I never thought
that I would lose that much weight so fast but it just happens naturally so these are like globally
beneficial things you can do that are small um for me I I have a much you know I I like to
terraform things so if I can put out an ember that's great but if I didn't start a massive
backburn and put out a forest fire I'm much more entertained so I'm looking at bigger bigger scale
interventions I don't I think we should qualify that because I think I know what you just said but
I'm I'm not sure we talked about that in the firefighting segment which is a backbone is
effectively where you you're like intentionally setting a fire right to to to run into another fire
and thus both of them get put out something of this nature correct yeah the idea is that the
fire coming at you was too big to handle so you create your own fire that works for you and then
you like run them into each other which is way more fun like literally the most fun I've ever had
at one point I will tell you the story we were in Santa Barbara and there was a fire going downhill
towards Oprah's house and we were like oh no not Oprah's mansion so we were like we will set off
this entire canyon I think we burned like thousands of hectares we made a fire 10 times the size of
the fire that was threatening Oprah's house and it sucked up the fire into our much bigger place
and it was probably the best day of my life but um I'm in reforms now now I plant trees
I like it so it seems it almost seems like you going into the the climate that this climate is
is making up for your previous I have some karma to resolve although I just being the pragmatist
that I am I realize that like the amount of carbon stored in the desert around Oprah's house is much
less than the carbon in the Colombian Amazon so if you have to paint this much karma you just
want to be efficient about it um yeah okay so you've got a company and it's it's basically in the
in the space of the carbon capture market and the first question is what is the carbon capture
market how does this thing work we've all heard about it and people are trading credits and companies
are buying this and that and the other what's going on here what what is this how does this work
well okay first of all I'd like to say to all the critics what the hell else are you going to do
like do you have an alternative solution or if not stop criticizing it it's like the only
thing we've got economically that is driving even some part of conservation or carbon capture and
basically it's this idea that companies can pay somebody else to to store carbon and and in some
cases that's totally legitimate like I was working with this massive aluminum factory factory I don't
know if you know about aluminum but unless people stop using it which is great less the
aluminum foil is great you can stop doing that right now but um just aluminum in general we're
probably not going to get rid of it this century um and it puts out a shift ton of carbon and so
for an aluminum factory to to stop having the massive impact that it is um you have to pay
somebody else to do it they're not in the business of carbon storage and I think I talked to a massive
international port the other day about the same thing we're not going to get rid of international
shipping tomorrow and so for a lot of these industries the impetus and the idea to pay
somebody else to store carbon is excellent the criticism of the carbon market is are you actually
taking carbon out of the atmosphere and a lot of the early projects just weren't they were somewhat
fictional like national parks saying that they weren't going to cut down their trees um so that
wasn't really adding anything okay so that's that's right and that's that's sort of like maybe
where some of the criticism comes from but now let's go back to how does one store carbon like
what is what is the mechanism for this is it literally planting trees watching them grow
eat the carbon and then which they effectively store you know in the wood and then they expel
oxygen I mean what what's the what's the mechanism here so ironically and we don't
like to admit this our chemical methods for taking carbon out of the atmosphere are highly
ineffective and not not likely to scale anytime soon they just don't add up the economic the
energetic economics of it don't add up the best way to pull carbon out of the atmosphere in the
parts per million that it's currently in is plants and algae and they already have the technology
all we have to do is plant a tree the the science would say that we can never plant enough trees
there's not enough land on the planet to plant enough trees to pull enough carbon out to account
to account for our sins for our climate sense and that is true but trees aren't the only way to
pull carbon out of the atmosphere algae will also do it the problem is algae is very difficult to
transact if you look at international markets blue carbon which is algae it's very hard to say
where how much carbon has been pulled into water because water is in a flux state and then the other
one is biochar which is my personal favorite you um you turn trees or plants or organic material
into early coal and it still starts carbon for about 500 years and it also provides an alternative
fertilizer it's probably the most promising method of carbon capture that we've got but um the water
i work for about 25 of the world's land carbon is stored in tropical forests and they're under
extreme threat of deforestation right now so i work on preserving tropical forests and then
planting more trees in tropical forests because they grow faster they live longer and they storm
more carbon okay and then you've also had some some some interesting conversations let's just say
in the particular region that you're in given the competing business interest you want to
describe some of those yeah this is uh it's a little tough okay so let's let's go to meta level
there are two billion people on the planet that are subsistence farmers in other words they they
grow what they eat and they live off what they grow they don't usually have money or any kind of
wealth but what they do have is land and these people tend to live in the equator about one
billion of live in tropical forests so if you look at where carbon matters on land that you can
actually control it's in these trop this band at the equator and almost every single country that
covers this tropical forest is completely weakened in other words the congo uh the columbian amazon
the brazilian amazon these are areas that have um they're they're like 80 percent of the protected
land is with indigenous groups they don't really have strong central governments and there's a ton
of corruption and the people are not well served they don't have a digital identity they don't have
a banking system these are a totally different population and nobody really seems to care about
them on economic levels um for the first time perhaps in the history of the world these people
instead of trying to sell magles at the local market they actually have a valuable product in
their backyard so they don't have to transport their goods and be connected to an international
system in order to do something of economic worth the question is how do you transact with them at
all and where i work is in the columbian amazon i work in former frark territory um the only
viable economy here for the last 20 years has been growing cocaine and like heroin uh cocaine is
grown in small plots in the jungle in remote areas by small farmers by subsistence farmers
and um we we're very careful never to to talk about like competing with cocaine as an economy i'm
just not interested at all but what i'd like to do is offer an alternative economy in this region
which is uh planting trees instead or conserving your jungle or preserving biodiversity right and so
basically when you when we're talking about this carbon capture it's effectively forests that are
at risk of being cut down for and then basically just saying there's there's there's actually ways
that you can make money and literally not cut this down promote biodiversity do um subsistence
farming etc and like there there is an alternative for this that's not only good for you as in like
you can make money you can eat you can live the way you want to live but on top of that like you
are literally you were you were doing your part for sort of the global you know the global
community of humanity it's a totally under recognized workforce like i don't know why
nobody cares about subsistence farmers it's two billion people and they're some of the hardest
working most pragmatic people on earth yes they might not be easy to reach as an economic market
but if you put them to work in carbon storage uh there's some of the most cheapest and most effective
labor force you could ever have and also some of the most intelligent i work with small farmers
every day and you cannot live like this in the jungle off your own labor without being an incredibly
pragmatic honest hardworking person um i'd rather do business with a small farmer than the average
north american to be honest um they're just they're great business partners so let's talk about your
company what do we got going on there so because because basically we've been sort of leading
leading up to this now that we sort of understand like what's what's the impact that climate changes
is having you know what are the ways that that we could sort of attempt to stop this and then
and then beyond that um you know this this labor force of folks what's your company got going on
well we're like a forest fire in reverse and actually you want to say the name of your company
and then yeah we're savimbo yeah uh so savimbo was a name that my uh so i have a consulting company
for what i call the link with savance high q people um who don't really follow the rules
we're like the anti-mikinzi uh we've been working on hard scientific and social problems
ever since i left medicine so we started off tackling like uh medical research for bydo
and stanford and all these different universities who um were producing i would say conformist
intellects who weren't coming up with novel observations so they would hire us to come up
with their original research and then we would get paid and we would just go on to the next gig
that was that was where we started and then um this was the five columbian titans came to us
and they said why aren't we getting paid for conservation and we were like i don't know we'll
look into it we'll see we'll figure it out and then we hacked it and we're like oh my god 90%
of these carbon markets were going to brokers like all the money was getting like lost on the
trading floor in new york and chicago and these guys who actually matter the ones who really could
move the dial were getting zero dollars because they were the money was going through the un to
corrupt governments it would never penetrate to the jungle there was no economic incentives to
stop deforestation so we this was just a big experiment we were like what if we paid these
guys directly and these three things had changed like um uh international banking had evolved to
the point where i could actually pay a small farmer directly into a bank account i did a
couple of trials here in the amazon and i was like wow i can pay you five dollars and it doesn't
cost me that much so we realized we could pay them direct and that took out all of the corruption
and endemic problems working in these regions and then they started to get cell phones so i was
traveling around and i was like wow all five of these medicine doctors have a cell phone so um i
could like drop an app on their phone to monitor for us and then the satellite monitoring was up
and i was like wow this is uh this is actually viable we could actually work with this population
where they live in their context and then we just i don't know i guess i guess i got mad like the
people making the money from the carbon markets were these big multinational logging corporations
who were the major threat to the forest and then these tiny little smart farmers there's a
billion of them and they're not getting a cent and they each own about a hundred hectares of
rainforest and it costs so little to incentivize them and they're so happy and they work so hard
and i just i was like why not okay i i dig it uh it sounds like you have a pretty strong passion
for this so in that particular sense uh how do you monitor this i guess i guess you sort of
mentioned that that i guess it's there's a lot of satellite are there are people working starting
to work with drones and whatnot and and uh how does how does that work yeah we've been experimenting
with drones we have to get $80,000 for a drone that will be accepted by the carbon markets one thing
that drives me not so about the carbon markets right now is there are so much constant criticism
they just keep making the scientific requirements harder and harder and it just gets harder and
more and more impossible for somebody who actually lives on the jungle to participate in the market
and get any money out of it you have to be shell and pay a panel of scientists to do your paperwork
to get any revenue from it so um in our case we we give the farmers 20% of what we make we we
take 80% we pay a team of scientists to certify their carbon and then we're we're just radically
focused on scaling so we've doubled in size in the last um three months actually and it's just
farmers keep pouring in the door i made a little apple store for for small farmers it looks like
an apple store like almost exactly only it's got like you know crude wooden benches and pictures of
parrots on the wall and they come in and they sign up their their land we help them get land rights
and each of them brings a small portion but as a group as a collective um like you bring one small
farmer you make him happy give him his five dollars and then they get about a hundred dollars a month
for their micro payment they'll bring 10 more small farmers it's actual viral growth that's crazy
and it's all word of mouth well that's tremendous and basically for for each one of those it's
effectively protected it's it's it's now legally protected land in in the columbian rainforest
yeah and they monitor so we're doing we do three things we do reforestation
so they'll plant trees we ask them to plant fruit trees and they sell local superfoods so we're
looking at like distribution channels for that and then they monitor the animal species in their
backyard and we sell biodiversity credits so if they can prove that their their plantation has a
sentinel species so we'll monitor like jaguars as a as a metric of all the other species underneath
it if you have a jaguar on your land then likely the other species are intact we also monitor a
bird and a couple other rare species and then so they get biodiversity credits if they can get the
animals to come back in and then we also do conserved jungle so depending on how long it takes
for the forest to regrow this is not north america this is not california we can grow a
tropical forest to full standing height in six years it's addictive six years this jungle is
insane and it's alive like i've worked in other latin american countries where the jungle is dead
and then you have to like go through these labor intensive reconstructed
reconstructive efforts but for us if we just take the cows off the land it grows back to full
standing height and that's so much it's it's about 900 tons of carbon per hectare that's incredible
i mean i i was thinking like six decades it would it would end up coming back but you're talking about
six years for like full full reharmonization yeah it's not the same as as native jungle and so if
you actually care about forest restoration you'll do anything to preserve native jungle because
a native jungle here has 3 000 different species 30 of our best cancer drugs came from this area
the people i know who research uh novel experimental therapies know about 2 000 medicinal plants in
ecodore the titans that i work with have 5 000 in their formulary and this is 5 000 year old
medicinal knowledge that europeans have never been in contact with what what kind of cancer drugs are
coming out of there 30 of our best cancer drugs were developed from the amazon yeah the biological
information that is here that not only for redditary and the indigenous population but also just like
completely underexplored we we it is a global treasure the amazon is and the people in it are
as well a global treasure and we just have not valued it um one of the things that interests me
the most is this is like an alternative history like we say that this region is owned by colombia
but this has been independent indigenous land for 5 000 years since long before the spanish
conquistadors like the reason that the government is is not so strong here is because this land is
still owned by indigenous peoples and it follows their rules and that's why they're intact for us
this is what north america would have been like if we hadn't had smallpox on our side
okay um well that's some it's a powerful narrative so yeah you but i'm not not to not to get away
from that for a second but but you you mentioned these cancer drugs are in there so yeah rabbit hole
with me for a second here so we've we've i know you and i've spoken offline about this many many
times but so cancer is effectively uncontrolled growth of damaged cells what are these drugs
coming out of the amazon doing they're able to regulate the growth repair the cells identify
that i mean like how does how does that work um yeah most most cancer drugs uh they well it depends
on the kind kind of kind of cancer but most of our cancer drugs um will kill cells um in different
ways and they'll kill a lot of them uh like if you talk to a western doctor they'll always tell you
that the most effective medicine is the most deadly um so like pride in the zone is a steroid
and it's it's it's deadly if you don't need it but if you do need it it's life saving and so the same
thing goes for cancer drugs um some cancer drugs will trigger the immune system to help control
cancers um but a lot of them are just like like incredibly toxic uh and because cancer cells
usually a good cancer drug will kill a cell that is rapidly um mutating and cancer drugs tend
cancer cells tend to have their natural regulatory mechanisms disrupted and so if you can kill cells
that are that are growing fast usually that's why you lose hair because hair grows fast um
but also you'll end up killing more cancer cells than hair cells if that makes any sense
sure i mean yeah i mean it's it's brutal in my opinion it's i mean it's life saving and thank
god we have it but it's a little bit brutal you're effectively saying let's figure out how
much poison we can give you such that it kills the cancer before it kills you right it's like the
asian orange of of drugs it kills everything like a good cancer drug tends to kill everything
and if you're lucky at all killer cancer before it kills off the rest of your healthy body but
that's why chemotherapy sucks so bad yeah what's the reason we can't have a targeted drug i mean
we again not to go back not to go back and forth but so i don't remember in night i think it was
91 or 92 we were basically having this conversation when i was in grade school effectively talking
about uh hiv aids and and it being uh this this this really bizarre and again i didn't understand
hardly i still barely understand this stuff but they were basically talking about being this
retro virus that attacks i believe it's i believe it's t-cells right helper and it goes sorry sorry
there's two kinds of t-cells like t-cells kill your cells when they're acting out of line
and that's cytotoxic t-cells so they'll they'll kill yourselves it's like the it's like the soldiers
and helper t-cells are like the generals and hiv is brutal because it attacks the general not the
soldiers okay and but but the reason that i i thought about this is you know basically it
could identify this one type of cell that it literally just infects and the weird part is you
don't actually die from it you just you just have no immune system left so then you die from a cold
or pneumonia or anything else yeah the reason that i always was thinking about that is at the same
time they were talking about effectively the beginnings of genetic engineering again this is
you know early 90s and so i was always thinking to myself what's the reason we can't take this
this retrovirus because i didn't know that there were a lot of those but what's the reason we can't
take this thing genetically engineer it so that it thinks damage cells are these are these t-cells
that it normally goes after and that way you just infect them with with this on purpose and then
it nukes cancer like that's that's the whole point like you've infected yourself with a virus
apparently now they're doing that that's like anti it's like retroviral cancer treatment
it's almost like i would think of it almost like a smart bomb right it's it's very specifically
targeting these things why why can't we why can't we get there well uh cancer is an unregulated cell
so i always think about like a society it's like a completely it's like a unabomber
that takes over and starts cloning itself and so it'll it'll cancer is very de-differentiated
and it'll start to mutate really really fast and usually what happens is it loses
auto regulation capacity and so the cells that it produces are often undifferentiated
they're rapidly growing and it's synthesizing a specific target or synthesizing a specific drug
that will kill that cell in particular first off you're going to end up with cell lines that are
that are totally you might have one cell line for the cancer but you might have like four or five
that start to emerge out of it it's it's such a it's such a chaotic process if you think about it
so i guess the question is again very hypothetical let's just say i have unlimited access to money
i have literally infinity money yeah is there not a way that i could just basically hire scientists
and say this is the type of cancer go pull whatever it is that you need to pull out of
wherever the tumors are or wherever it is in the body go pull that figure out what the strains are
and literally find me a smart bomb develop it now and just absolutely nuke this again
with unlimited resources is that possible i don't think it's possible for a lot of cancers
because it cancers doesn't just kill you by replicating itself it also kills you by disrupting
natural structures okay so let's say you go in there the cancer will invade natural parts of
the body and it will disrupt function so like for instance you have a cancer in the brain and it's
taking over brain tissue you can't just go out there in there and get rid of the cancer because
you've also lost natural structures um they the word cancer comes from the word for crab
and it's for the way that it grows in the body like you know it it it crawls into the body the
way a crab crawls and if you've ever held it in your hand you have an intense kinesthetic sense
for um how invasive it is i guess is the best way to describe it so okay i think what's the
purpose of cancer therapy like is it the purpose to live forever because that's never gonna happen
the longer that you live the more that the body the more that your cell the cells in your body
have replicated themselves they're not the cells you started with they're like a copy of the cells
that you started with and if you live for 100 years then it's your body is copied itself 100
times so you aren't just necessarily gonna have one cancer maybe you're gonna have two like one
might be more advanced than the others so i think when you look at cancer therapy you have to look
at the reason for it is it because somebody was born with a genetic code deleted and it caused
them to have cancer in infancy like sometimes you see kids with retinal cancer from birth and
then there's all kinds of reasons to go in there and try and treat that but if it's somebody in
their 80s who's heart's wearing out and their liver's wearing out and they're also having cancer
then a lot of those people will choose not to do anything because okay yeah makes sense i didn't
want to sidetrack too much i was just very you know they're going from the the cancer drugs in
the amazon it just again it seems like we have this precious resource down there that can treat one
arguably the biggest plague that humanity is is is facing at present well i mean cancer
parkinsons like that we'll go hiking around the jungle and then shaman will look over and be like
oh that drug treats parkinsons and just be like mind blown like yeah no it's not uncommon they'll
be like oh that one cures diabetes and i'm just like oh shit like we can't even begin to study
this stuff until we can at least value this region um i'm just gonna go back 200 years 200 years ago
that indigenous groups here told some spaniards oh by the way um that tree produces rubber and the
next thing they know they were they were colonized in prudemy by the slave slave trade for the rubber
trees and if you read the historical accounts of how they treated the locals this is for rubber
this isn't for a cancer drug this is just for like something they didn't think of is that valuable
why in the heck would they share their knowledge and what have we done to make it possible for
them to share their knowledge in a way that our businesses can do business with them like um people
here don't believe in individual ownership of collective resources they own land collectively
if somebody has a house and their brother has a house then um when the brother needs the house the
brother lives in the house and when the other brother needs the house he moves in and they just
move around houses like that like we we don't even know how to do business with these groups
so why should they share their institutionalized knowledge that they use for healing with a
with an economic engine which doesn't respect any of their most fundamental beliefs
that's fair i i i i would agree with you that western society is very very much based around
individualism which produces some really interesting results but at the same time there are you know
there are distinct drawbacks but so you're what you're sort of bringing up is it seems like there's
maybe a little bit of a of a cultural barrier for us to to even understand how to how to interact
with these folks um to be able to bring their their knowledge and and what they know to be true to
to um to bear i mean you know just just recent the only reason i i bring this up is just recently
we've been doing i believe it's ketamine mdma and uh psilocybin trials for people who who've had trauma
or they've you know ptsd or a number of different things and those trials are just starting now
whereas i believe in the amazon this is i mean especially with ayahuasca and whatnot this is
stuff that they've known for quite some time yep my medicine doctors uh do the five tight as i work
for they do yahe which is um a little bit stronger version of ayahuasca that they've had traditionally
in the columbian amazon and they consider it they treat addiction they use it to treat trauma
it treats you being an asshole like it does a lot of things and uh they consider it like an
universally healing for our middle detox the body um you know it's like an ancient preventative medicine
if you if you're being a jerk and beating your wife one dose of yahe and you kind of figure it out
stop being a bully like it's it's just it's beautiful in its own way and i think that so many of our
paradigms are around the concept of treating downstream disease like cancer when if we just
treated the desire to eat unhealthy foods which is kind of what they do here
i can't remember there's some there's definitely some truth to what you've you've said i can't
remember who said it but i believe the quote is something like beware of easily uh easily obtained
knowledge something of this nature um jordan peterson one of my favorites i know as a feminist
and not supposed to love him but i adore jordan peterson i'm not sure if he's the first person
who said it but i know he said it before yeah he said i think it's from young and i think i
remember the quote and i wish i could give it verbatim but it was something like
beware of the knowledge of the gods um and i will say that i i do think um so you know i had a tough
background and i did some therapy when i was in my 20s and 30s and yahe's like therapy on steroids
so like you kind of like interface with the subconscious directly and you can face a lot of
your demons but you still have to do the work afterwards and so it's not like a shortcut in
any means like anybody who does it will still have to process it and integrate it into their lives
it's just a much faster therapy that therapists that i know love psychedelics because they're like
oh my god it would take me 10 years with somebody it will take me like a week um i still have to do
what's the insights but i think maybe some of the stereotypes with this stuff basically comes from
people sort of abusing those psychedelics in the west you know literally just as a way to you know
escape reality get high whatever it is have a good time whatever you're trying to do and what
we're talking about in in sort of your sense and again the same senses in the trials that they're
doing now with the mdma the ketamine and psilocybin and like you were saying with yahe
ayahuasca it seems like it's like it it's almost a side effect that it gets you high it's actually
not the purpose the purpose is sort of to really like this is the beginning of a journey but like
you're not done once once it wears off like there are things that need to occur
and there's a process that happens um and i think i think that's sort of the way we're
we're sort of going off the rails in the west not understanding these things right
yeah it's not a vacation it's your actual life the purpose isn't to go there it's to bring
there here and reintegrating into your life and applying it there there are two kinds of ignorance
you know one is that i don't know things like i personally am a terrible roller blader and i'm
sure that i have lots to learn about rollerblading and i'm ignorant of rollerblading um the other
kind of ignorance when you think you know something that you don't um i think i'm not a privileged
person even though i grew up white and then went to medical school in the us that's a different
kind of ignorance and the yahe and psychedelics fix the second type of ignorance it's the one
where you think you know who you are and where you're at in the world and what's right and what's
wrong and you don't and um what it does is it brings you into stark um confrontation with your
subconscious which is unforgiving and truthful and you cannot forget it and anybody who spent
any time with the subconscious trying to reset it through hypnosis or um expanding their
intellectual cognitive horizons or educating themselves or anything anybody who's ever
realized when they were being a shithead and they didn't know it um knows how painful it can be
um and so rewarding there's no better exploration or no better use of time on the planet than to
explore the things that we thought we knew didn't there's a lot of truth there there's more than a
lot of truth there that might be truth just flat out um i i want to go back a little bit
um towards sort of the uh what we were talking about a little bit earlier in terms of the carbon
markets um just because you you mentioned that like it's very difficult to get involved in this
and obviously like that's that's not good for a number of different reasons um because you know
if it takes someone with the resources of shell or exon to try and get into this not that they
shouldn't be in it i'm fine that they're in it that's good they're trying to offset some of the
stuff but it seems like there should be other people to get in it and then beyond that um i
know you and i have had some offline conversations um and sort of sort of exploring the the market
itself where it's like yeah you have to get certified in this very particular way and these
people like there's there's like there's there's not multiple certification bodies as i understand
it so again you end up with this sort of like this this monopoly of certification which ends up
being sort of a choke point for the for the market itself can we can we walk through that a little bit
yeah the the worst thing about the certification bodies right now well first off you're dealing
with nature you're measuring plants and algae and nature is inherently chaotic um and people
don't like that they want their nature to be like a pile of bricks where you can stack it on on top of
each other instead of a rainforest where it just everything is complex um we're our science is not
well designed to study complexity theory um like the weather is complex the human body is complex um
this is complexity and you have to measure it or quantify it in some way so the markets are all
standardized are in this concept of one ton of carbon like storing one ton of carbon for 32 100
years is kind of the accepted norm and then the problem then comes into how do you prove that you
did that and these certifying bodies have emerged and it's kind of a necessary evil where like you
need some kind of universal standard and then everybody hates the standard and then the standard
currently the the international like standards are so sustained sort gold standard and vera
and then i would argue that serchro bono is an emerging standard these are like the ones people
like the problem with these certifying bodies is they take their money from the projects
so you have to pay the certifying body off before you can go to sell your product and the more they
certify you the more you have to pay them so it's totally progress incentives um they they don't
benefit from you getting your carbon tons out into the market and then the external criticism
in the market has incentivized corporations it's easier to pay publicity department like sales
force did to say that you're going green than to actually buy the tons of carbon to offset your
signature like microsoft and stripe have done so microsoft and stripe are leading the market they
have very little carbon to offset so they can afford to overpay for good credits but so many
companies are just doing lip service and the more the more they criticize the markets the cheaper it
is for them to just say well that gives me an excuse not to buy carbon and not to put money into this
sure sure that the how do we fix that i mean i guess that's that's that's the that's the easiest
way to it's gonna get so regulation regulation you know who the the the epa is it is it you know
i don't know would you go who for this like seriously it's it's a health issue so like where
would you go um so i think that the right place to go so it's and it's already coming so there's
this thing called the Paris Accords so like um i think it's 190 countries got together and they
all said that they were going to lower global temperatures um by 2030 the problem with that
is it's supposed to be legally binding but there's really no penalty if you don't do it um so that
said um all the nations went back and ratified it in their home countries so everybody's committed
to this even if it's just lip service um and then that trickles down so government has about a five
year horizon uh industry has about a 10 year horizon and insurance has a 15 year horizon
so insurance companies like Lloyds of London are driving the market in a lot of ways because they'll
refuse to to ensure a company that hasn't looked into its climate segmentary and then the sec is
following suit so now companies in the sec have to report their carbon emissions um the two areas
of the world that are the most progressed on this is the airline industry where airlines by law have
to um offset a certain amount of their emissions and then California which goes after companies
but the problem with California is you have to like store your carbon in California which is
very stupid if you look at that if you're going to plant trees in California where forest fires
are a constant threat and trees don't grow as fast it just doesn't make as much sense so there's a
something called the tropical forest Sander where companies are saying can't we store our carbon
somewhere else it's air it travels okay that's fair i mean i i would imagine California is doing
that specifically because they really don't have jurisdiction outside of of basically California
land right they have they have just come out i hear what you're saying yeah right and so i hear
you're saying it's like right we may have to abide by this law but like what's what's the reason we
have to put it in this particular state it seems like that's that's that's you know
sort of suboptimal when there's a million other places that are apparently faster to grow the
land's probably cheaper among other things right yeah it's air like i mean i think the biggest
problem with the the carbon the international carbon market to date is the assumption that all
carbon storage regions in the world are created equal they haven't been if you look at their earth
as an organism so biogeochemistry is the combination of all three disciplines and it looks at the
earth as an organism and in this case the best place to store carbon is at the equator
okay um
and so what how does your company feed into this i mean basically do you you have to get your
trees certified and the various hectares that you've got i mean is just just one of the representatives
that have to come or or can you maybe send stat pictures or or what does that look like
so we have to go out and measure trees with the tape measure uh because that's where the
industry is at and that's what they want so we go out and measure trees with the tape measure
and then we extrapolate that to the area we're writing a 200 page document right now
an entirely different industry using what i would describe as some of the world's
worst scientific writing but it's the industry norm it looks more like a military grant than
any kind of science paper i've ever seen the the science is just that i am not a fan of the
certification standard as it currently stands i think it's not efficient it's not scalable and
it's not going to survive the market as market forces drive more and more people to want to
transact on this we're going to see a different standard emerging but it's where the standard
is at and we work for our small farmers so we'll we'll do we'll we'll take whatever box we need
to do to get them onto the market um i think we're the only company i know about who's trying to
both deal work with small farmers and go through the main certification pipeline right and it is
backbreaking labor i'll be honest well on behalf of all of humanity thanks for doing it for us
honestly dre if i was going to put someone in charge of this it would probably be you anyway so
i'm glad i'm glad you're at the forefront um so as as we're as we're walking down this path of
sort of climate change what you mentioned at the beginning was there's no they're like there's
not enough land to plant the trees that we would need to offset this stuff what do we do
like what what does the solution look like okay so first off you have to stop deforestation
there's okay literally nothing more important right now it's like you're in a tiny little life
boat and you got a leak in the boat and you stop bailing like uh you need to close you need to
bail the water and close the holes on the boat that's all there is to it and the forests are the
only thing bailing us out right now and there are the tipping point if we can't stop the deforestation
in the amazon there's there's local rainfall cycles and what happens is you cut enough trees down
and they stop sucking the water and creating the local rainfall the forest dries out it burns and
then it emits more carbon than we ever want to imagine so it makes the problem infinitely worse
there's really nothing more important right now in terms of our little global life boat
than stopping the deforestation and primary forest in the amazon in particular 25 percent
of the world's carbon start here so we stop deforestation that's the first thing i'm guessing
the second thing is use cleaner energy or something of this nature planet trees is great
like why not clean history it doesn't cost that much and instantly the tree starts going to work
for you so and i've got more people bailing out of the life boat and then you got to plug the holes
like um just simple stuff like um switching to electric cars um i talked to a major freight
company in the us they have tested their their fleet their gas fleet and it's equally energy
efficient for them to use an electric vehicle fleet right now for their major transportation
and shipping so there is no reason why not to switch to electric cars anymore economically it's the
same so stuff like that we can stop the holes in the boat as well and it's going to take us a long
time to bail out which is fair but as far as electric cars again you know there are other
issues there right like the rare earth minimal rules being pulled out of the congo child slave
labor i mean there's there's still some issues there but even beyond that when you're when you're
plugging in your car though i mean unless unless you know that for a fact that you're getting your
your stuff from a renewable energy source aren't you really just transferring from the pump to the
to the power station i guess as far as as far as carbon yeah this one's a debate um i so during
my long and illustrious semi scientific career i did work for a while on nuclear power um looking
at new nuclear power designs that are getting proved in the u.s tear power and in new scale or
some of them um as a doctor you know you like cancer drugs sometimes you kill cells and you
don't want to i don't think we have a lot of alternative um resources for a base power grid
other than nuclear power right now and i think we have to we have to move on it fast like china is
building a ton of nuclear power plants because it's really the only alternative we've got we don't
know how to get rid of nuclear waste well there are bacteria that will degrade it and i think our
best hope for learning how to clean up nuclear waste is probably in the bacterial research
not strapping it to some giant rocket and having elan shoot it into the sun that that's that's not
an option elan obviously doesn't think much about uh space junk but uh everybody i know is
studying space junk just says we're kicking the hand down the road and potentially making our
lives future lives much worse if we don't start thinking about that too it's only if you just
go out into space and not worry about garbage we have to get better at garbage as a species
that's fair and figure out how we can basically break these things down naturally correct yeah
i think we have to start making more biodegradable um and plant-based substances anybody who's ever
seen the cool little plastic spoons that are plant-based it's like wow we figured that out and we
made it and then our single-use plastics go away i mean we we can we're a smart species we can't
evolve i just have such an optimism about the human race um how far we can i'll be honest with you
here in my opinion this is very refreshing to to my ears and the specific reason is a lot of times
when i hear people talk about this and i i do i think i think that our environment and our climate
is is a very important subject and i think it should be paid attention to and i do think we need to
do things but every time i hear doom sayers and just saying everything's going to hell unless we
stop everything tomorrow every time i hear that i'm going but it's such it's so like why why why
even say something like that like let's can't we just start with some solutions and then build
and build and build and build and it seems like that's what you're saying like there are ways
out of this and i'm i'm i'm an optimist like you are i think human beings are incredibly smart
species i believe that we can find a way out of this we created the problem i'm positive we can
clean it up or at least part of the problem for you know whatever side of the debate you're on at
least so you know some of it's our issue and even if it's not who cares we still need to address
this issue right yeah we extended our lifespan by 30 years by cleaning up our drinking water
like it wasn't that complicated yeah if you look at the the reason that the human lifespan is longer
it's for public health things we cleaned up our drinking water we got rid of we figured out how
to manage our sewage like we just have no excuse not to try um i just don't think you know we we
have intelligence we have the ability we have the will we know about how to change we can change
and this whole like i'm just gonna sit in a funk and complain about everybody else doesn't
get anywhere it i'm a david brind fan he's the futurist um and if you read his books
they're really well researched um i i think he knows a lot about emerging science and he's an
optimist like i am like i just don't think i think pessimism is just an excuse not to do anything
and then you know i look at things like yahe that totally change the cognitive capacity
and self-regulatory ability of a human species we we have things like meditation yoga and psychedelics
that dramatically change our ability to act as holistic responsible integrated human beings
so we don't have the option i think we have technologies that we can use to change
our behaviors and we need to need to be more uh conscious and a radical about using them
we don't have the option to act like a chimpanzee species anymore we aren't and we
we will never survive if we keep doing that it's not about running away to the stars all right
so dreya if you could manifest a technology into existence like you just waving a wand and
it's there tomorrow obviously having to do with i don't one of your many fields what what would that
be what what technology would you like to see exist tomorrow cold fusion why cold fusion
it's clean puts out water as a side effect and it would totally radically completely turn the
world economy on its head and i think that'd be entertaining you think we could you think we
would stop climate change not necessarily in its tracks but like like like grind it to
extraordinarily slow if if just tomorrow there was cold fusion out there yeah it'd be so it'd be
so cool i think what we'd see is just uh like i really came to understand this when i was working
on the peruvian amazon i'm like far up river outside of cell service and i'm realizing that the only
economy that matters is gas to get up and down the river and electricity and electricity or internet
those are the only things that matter and that's the only thing that matters in the entire world
economy right now so like if you look at what drives like the way people move we're like an
anthill what what keeps the ants buzzing around energy is a really important thing and we can't
ignore it money's just a proxy for it and so if we had clean energy and we do we have we have good
solar power but it's not amazing nuclear power is okay but it puts out waste if we could do cold fusion
it's so cool i yeah that's a good one leon and i actually spoke about that on the podcast
yeah he's yeah he's that wasn't the technology he manifested but we we spoke about that it's
sort of the difference between the hot fusion and cold fusion etc was a it was a one of that one
of the interesting topics we went through but it's interesting that you would pick that that that
basically this this waste-free completely not i don't think there's anything that's 100
percent efficient but like unbelievably efficient power source that's just basically made from
magic rocks or you know what however it is that we end up getting getting the cold fusion to work
would be would be pretty incredible the question is would we have the software starting not to
immediately turn it into some kind of war war or weapon i mean the answer is no clearly it's
going to be weaponized at some point i think i think that's just who we are as a species
at least that's my answer than we used to be as a species that's true we actually
is as strange as it sounds i do believe we've actually gotten smarter and and more peaceful
as a species but again you know you hear about some crazy stuff that happens every other day but
cold fusion's a good one um anything else i'll give you a second shot at the question just in
case you want to manifest one more thing wow just curious i mean i'm a doctor so i'd love to see the
ability to regenerate like true cellular regeneration well i see it in yoga if people
practice yoga they're their whole body like they were age in reverse they lose weight their body
becomes more flexible just it's beautiful um i'm not sure that we don't have that ability but it'd
be really nice to be able to control it a little bit more i just hate seeing people suffer i understand
i understand okay um dreah where can people find you online like what's what's what's your
presence is obviously business website twitter where do you want people to find you online
okay well uh if you love me follow us on uh savimbo on any channel because it's all about
our small farmers and uh you'll get to see johnny's jaguars furry ass um and our sexy trees
do you want to spell that savimbo s a v i m b o excellent and where else you can
follow you can find me online but i don't recommend it like um dreah burbank on any channel or google
and so you will find an endless array of my opinionated bullshit but um i you will be highly
entertained i think somebody went down the rabbit hole a few weeks ago they're like my friend called
me and she said she googled your name and she spent four hours laughing her ass off i don't know if
it was at me or with me but yeah if you want to hear my opinion and stuff on medicine i think i had
an article a while out said why doctors are getting their asses kicked by technology that was wildly
popular on medium and netting 97 cents so i'm officially a paid writer now okay um you want to
give us maybe the highlights from that article before we wrap up i'd love to i mean i'd love to
hear it yeah i said the doctors deserve to get their asses kicked by technology because they
brownly rejected it instead of considering a professional responsibility and i thought doctors
would be mad but 67 000 of them read it and then they all tried to write me so i there's hope for
the profession i think that um doctors might be masochists but they're always willing to listen
to constructive criticism okay okay unless they're neurosurgeons in which case they're probably sadists
i love neurosurgeons no no not sadists sociopaths but very good at their job got it yeah yeah i would
be way too empathic to be good at neurosurgery i i i very much respect them
good outstanding dreah thanks so much for coming on board this has been amazing i really appreciate
your time uh folks we've been standing on the shoulders of giants with dr dreah burbank and i'm
david makai thank you thank you
