Today we are here with Razeeb Khan, the world famous geneticist, or infamous, or for that matter
infamous. Keep it real. I would I love basically for you to start and tell us a little bit about
yourself. You've got some really interesting sub stacks. Yeah. Can you give us a little bit of
background before we jump in? Yeah, I'll give you a bio. Let's start from. Let's start from the
present and maybe a little bit until the past just give some context. So the two things that
I'm doing, I'm actually, I am we are out of stealth. So I'm going to be open about this. I
actually do spend most of my working time on my startup called generate. Yes. And generate,
we're doing data storage management analysis in the genomic space. And, you know, just the
simple elevator pitch or, you know, however you want to say it, you know, we went from one genome
20 years ago to about a million genomes. Now, we went from the $3 billion genome to the $100
genome. So you can imagine the explosion of data. In fact, the cost of sequencing. So you,
you know, sequence for base pair, there's three billion base pairs in the human genome
actually beat Moore's law for six years between 2010 and 2016. So it was really running up against,
you know, just basically like storage and compute and all these things. It's a little bit
more under control right now. But in the near future, it looks like it's going to start crashing
again because of competition. So, you know, generate exists kind of to serve this explosion of
data because the data has a lot of interesting important actionable things in it, like, you know,
precision medicine, you know, with the COVID, you know, pandemic, there was a lot of sequencing
going on. I think like the sequencing of SARS coronavirus one took three months. And I think
the sequencing of SARS coronavirus two took like a day. Wow. Yeah. And, and as you know, the
sequencing continued for a long time. It's kind of like tamping down now. But we were tracking
all the sequences and all these, we didn't know any of that back then. So that's what I'm doing.
Generate is actually like most of my attention, my labor. Now, what many people know me from
is my sub stack. And the sub stack is called receive cons unsupervised learning, you go to
receive.substack.com. And, and for generate, just go to generate.com. Okay. But in any case,
for receive.com or receive.substack.com, that's kind of like the culmination of maybe 20 years of
writing. Often, but not always at the intersection of genetics and history. I am a geneticist by
training. I went to UC Davis, everything but dissertation. So I'm not a doctor. But, you know,
I stayed there for five years. And before that, I have degrees from University of Oregon
in biochemistry and biology with a focus on genetics. But I also have had a passion for
history. And that's just like a personal passion. But anybody who's, I think read my stuff knows
that, you know, I just know a lot of that. Okay. So I've kind of monetized that in my career. And
so in the past, I worked for National Geographic. I worked for Family Tree DNA. I have worked for
the co founder of 23andMe in the personal genomic space where I bring together kind of my geneticist
computational biology know how with my knowledge of ethnography and history. And so with the
Substack, I am, it's kind of like a core dump, you know, it's a little bit more intelligible than
the typical core dump. But, you know, I'm bringing together fields, answering questions that, you
know, I feel with my Substack, it's quite low volume, but good luck finding it anywhere else.
So I think I have a non substitutable good to be candid. And what I'm providing is, is answers to
historical questions using genetics. Yeah, one of the ones I read today was around sort of the
Bronze Age civilizations in the Han Chinese. I thought that was incredibly insightful.
Thank you. Thank you. So I'm actually, as we're recording, part two is coming out.
Oh, okay. Yeah. So Substack enforces a limit on length, because otherwise Google Gmail really
says it's spam. And so if you see people doing, I mean, I tend to do this more than other people
because I have long essays. You know, I'll split it part one, part two, sometimes part one, part
two, part three, part four, you know, it's 20,000 words. So it's about like 5,000 words per part.
And so, yeah, it's not like you can't figure this out or read about these things elsewhere,
but you know, you'd have to read a scientific paper, you'd have to read like maybe 15 scientific
papers. I'm there to kind of reduce it down, give you the gist in the summary. And, you know,
luckily for me, I can actually like analyze the data myself, as you see in many of my Substacks,
I'm actually just doing original data analysis to supplement the writing and the historical,
you know, essay part. Is that how you originally came up with the startup? You just started
realizing I need somewhere to put all of these, all of these sort of interesting things. So it
was almost necessity that brought it out. So that's a good question. So the startup,
so the way I like to tell people is, you know, and if anyone out there is an investor or an
angel, you can still reach out, we're still raising. But the way I tell them is, you know,
we'll talk after I've got some contacts. Okay. So basically, I have spent the last 10 years
of my career focusing on the past. So phylogenetics, evolutionary biology and graduate school, I did
domestication. I'm passionate about the past, you can take a single whole genome and you create
the pedigree and the genealogy of this whole individual. So that means you have a sampling
of the species history. Okay. So when you have one person's genealogy, you have three billion
base pairs of those, about six billion of them are variable from the average reference human genome.
So six million, so six million independent variables. So one genome is not just an N of one.
It's actually the terminal node in this phylogeny that goes deep into the past. And you can make
inferences about the past, right? So that's going to the past. Now, what is generate? Generate
is focusing on the data that's going to be generated in the future. Whoa. Okay. And that data
will be used to predict your future. Okay. So say something like precision medicine,
maybe not specifically your future, but you're young enough, you know, but you know,
like, let's say you have kids, okay. You have a whole genome sequence when they're little,
and it gives them all these outputs. Okay. Mostly they're going to be healthy. They don't have
congenital issues, but it could be like, you know, you have a quite high risk of hypertension. Sure.
At some point, like in your fifties, that might mean that a low sodium diet is probably good
for you. So I'm bringing that up because there is some evidence that the sodium, excuse me,
I have to cough, the sodium recommendations that I think, what is it, the US, what is the
nutritional, the nutritional guidelines, right? It's, it's not a lot. I mean, every time I eat
like a half bag of chips, so like, all right, you're at 50% stop. Yeah. So my understanding,
there is some work that those recommendations are for about like 10 to 20% of the population that
are highly sensitive, but they don't want to give an average because they want to target the people
that are highly likely to get hypertension. Okay. I mean, yeah. So what I want, protect certain,
certain vulnerable groups. Yes. But that also means there's a lot of utility. Well, first of all,
a lot of people don't follow it. But second of all, there are people who are not at any risk,
who are avoiding salt. And that's horrible because salt's delicious. Okay. On the other hand, I
have a family history of type two diabetes. Okay. And I never ordered dessert. That's fair. Okay.
So I have certain trade-offs. I mean, there's going to be some people that have high risk of
hypertension and high risk of type two diabetes and they're just screwed. Okay. Sure. Okay. But I'm
trying to say is the genome gives you trade-offs. It gives you your portfolio of risks. And imagine
that you had that earlier. Now, a lot of people aren't going to take advantage of it, but some
people will. You know, and in fact, like, you know, if you have parents, they might start pushing you
in certain ways. If, for example, it's computing that you have a high risk of alcoholism,
you know, I don't know. I mean, I don't. So I'm a social drinker. During the pandemic,
I didn't drink for a year. Because I didn't socialize for a year. I mean, I have an emcee in
my last name, so you can kind of infer where that goes. Yeah. I'm going to leave it there.
Don't want to get canceled by the green. I don't think, I don't think most of us get offended by
that stereotype. I think it's well-embraced. Okay. Well, you know exactly what I'm talking about
that. Sure. And so the point of generating, the point of my passion for genetics for the future
is actually to allow for human flourishing, allow for choices, to allow for, you know, kind of
maximizing your hedonic utility. Okay. Also, you know, obviously, we're going to target diseases.
I'll give viewers and listeners here. This is true. Okay. There's a certain subset of infants
of newborns that do not flourish. And since they cannot give you any information about how they're
feeling, it's kind of confusing to doctors. So one thing that they recently started doing,
because they could do it, they started whole genome sequencing these infants. 40% of the
time, they were able to identify something genetic that was causing that problem.
And is this stopping stuff like SIDS, sudden infant death syndrome?
Yeah, ideally, yes. Ideally, all of these syndromes, I don't know the medical, but
it's a cancer. Cancer has a lot of different causes. And it ends in cancer. Well, if you can target
some of the genetic causes, then you're going to reduce the rate of cancer. So this is why people
like Angelina Jolie are getting mastectomies. Now, in the past, it used to be, you would look at your
family history, but the issue is genes are random. Right. It could be you don't have that
risk gene. Maybe you don't need a mastectomy. Wouldn't that be great? You know?
Certainly true. I mean, I would say better safe than sorry, but you're talking about in the future
when it's like, no, we can be pretty darn safe about this. To a large extent, we can actually
all read further for the breast cancer genes. Those are well studied for those risk alleles.
There's still some that aren't studied. But for example, a lot of the listeners and the viewers
are going to know Bricka, the RCA. That's really common in Ashkenazi Jews, but it's not, you know,
it's actually found in Quebecois and Angelina Jolie's mother is a Quebecois. So in any case,
there's a subset of genes of genetic variants that put you at high risk and they're floating in
families. And so before the genetic era, okay, well, maybe like all the women will get mastectomies
at 40 or 30. Yeah. Okay. Today, you can look for that gene because you know that that's the
causal gene. And you can say with 99.99% that you're not at heightened risk. Okay. So those are
the decisions I want people to make based like actually, you know, so I think the term in Silicon
Valley is actionable. Like I don't want to be like buzzwordy, but it is actionable. Absolutely.
It's data, it's information that we now can have. And, you know, at my start of a generate,
we want to enable that. So we are, we're B2B, you know, we're kind of intermediaries, we're a
platform. We're not one of these precision medicine companies. We want there to be a massive
constellation, massive ecosystem of companies that are giving you information, tools, artificial
intelligences, like fed by machine learning and neural networks and all these things,
because we are already swimming in data. And in certain fields like marketing,
they know a lot and they can predict a lot. That's true. Which is great to get you to buy their
toilet brand. But we can do that with your help. Why aren't we doing it? Well, you know,
the American medical system is a little hip is tough. Yeah, there's all sorts of there's
blockages, even like something like electronic medical records, you know, they haven't really
changed things as much as you would think. I mean, they haven't changed as much as people
thought in 2010. I mean, some doctors offices are pretty efficient, but some of them are still
kind of primitive about the data sharing and stuff like that. So, you know, they're a human
bureaucratic cultural contingent bearers, but we're going to get there. We're going to get there.
Places like UK, where they have a socialized medical system, which I'm not a big fan of in
general, but they have skin in the game, in terms of they actually are motivated to start
sequencing people as early as possible, because they want the people to make the decisions that
result in, you know, less expense for them. So like hit the cancer as early as possible,
if there's going to be a cancer or modify your behavior. So I think right now they're going
to sequence, there's a project now in the next year to sequence 100,000 newborns in the UK,
whole genome sequence. Yeah, and they're doing actually a new longitudinal study.
So, which is, which personally I find both interesting and amazing, but of course,
devil's advocate here, how does this not turn into Gattaca?
Well, so, I mean, I think there's a couple of...
I mean, you're familiar with the movie, right?
Yeah, yeah, I mean, it's a very utopian feel good movie from the perspective of a geneticist. No.
So I think the issue with Gattaca that I would say is I'm talking about very specific things
that you can predict. A lot of things are quite noisy. Okay. So you're never going to get out the
noisy residual parameter that's due to environmental noise, genetic interactions, etc, etc. So
I don't know. Let's talk about intelligence. Okay. We know that it's heritable and heritability is
the proportion of the genetic variation of the variation in the population that it's due to
genes. We know this like looking at correlations among relatives, right? So correlations among
IQs of siblings is like, well, it's like 0.5 or so, right? It's not a trivial correlation.
So the heritability is depending on how you estimate it, because the heritability is a
statistic that's dependent on the environmental context. If you're going around randomly knocking
people in the head with a hammer, like a third of the population, the heritability is going to drop
because there's an environmental insult. That's true, you know, just to be clear for the listener.
But in modern America, we don't usually have nutritional deficiencies. There are libraries,
etc, etc. And so the heritability is going to be somewhat higher, especially in middle to upper
middle class environments where there's a lot of enrichment. I think most of your viewers and
listeners know that among siblings, there's sometimes a smart one and a dumb one. Okay.
That's not random. That's almost certainly partly due to genetics, because siblings vary in their
genetics. So siblings have an average relatedness of 50%. But there are siblings that are only 35%
related and there are siblings that are 65% related. Really? Yes. That, okay. So the standard
deviation is 3%. I was going to say this is shocking because most of us would consider like, well,
it's 50-50 from mother versus father. But it is. So what it is is you get 50 from mother and father.
Depending on, okay, if you're male, your white chromosome is much smaller. So if any of you've
taken 23 me, you're more related to your mother. That's because they don't standardize some of
these. But anyways, let's set that aside. You're correct. It's 50-50. It is deterministic from the
parents, but it's not deterministic from the grandparents. So what happens is there's recombination
in the genome. So the genome, the segments from each parent are swapping. And so you get synthetic
segments of your maternal and paternal grandparents. And so I can give you guys, I can give you a
concrete example. My daughter is, she is 30% my dad, 20% my mom, and like 28% her maternal,
like my wife's mom. And yeah, and the rest is the dad, right? So my wife's dad. So you can see,
and I can see this with the others, like my son is I think 30%. So it becomes 50-50, but it's not
necessarily, well, it's almost never that going a generation up. Yeah. So the standard deviation,
the standard deviation in like, so when you match the segments, so the expectation is 50-50.
And that's what we had before the pre-genomic era. Right. Okay. But before 20 years, actually,
look, because I was going to say that, that stereotype continued, or I don't know if it's
a stereotype, but that sort of perception continues to, it's an expectation. And that's
what geneticists had to work with. It actually reduced the power of their methods,
because they didn't know the real relatedness. They knew it was around 50, but they didn't know
that it varied from 50. So what geneticists are look, what are some, what they're doing now today
is actually looking at sibling pairs and how they're related and seeing how that differs
in their characteristics. So for example, height is quite heritable, like 80%. 80% of the variations
due to genes. Okay. And I think the correlation between siblings is like 0.7 or 0.6. Anyway,
setting that aside, you can do a predictor. So it's a regression model. You can do a predictor.
We have a bunch of variables. And those are the genes and the weightings of the genes that are
plus or negative and all this stuff. And it turns out those predictors predict which sibling is
taller. Okay. So sibling variation in height, as I think most people would understand, it's not
because the parents are feeding one sibling and not the other. It's because they're genetically
different. That's for sure. Yes. That's for my brother and I are a bit different. Yeah. I would
argue we got roughly the same IQ. He is an inch taller though. So bastard. He hit the six feet.
I'm only five, 11. Anyway. And yeah, no comment there. No comment there. I could get myself in
trouble just by making jokes. I'm not going to make any jokes. All good. I'm not going to make
any jokes. But yeah, so intelligence is heritable. Not as heritable as height, obviously. But the
variation among siblings is due to probably genes, actually. Probably it's not that the parents are
sending one to private school and public school or something like that. And so what geneticists
are doing now is like getting massive, massive cohorts of siblings. Okay. Because siblings control
a lot of the background variables, right? Once we have large enough samples, you could have
like natural experiments. An economist in the audience will understand what's going on. You
could have natural experiments where, for example, the parents go through a financial crisis and they
pull them out of private school. And so one sibling will have much more years of private school than
the other sibling and then start to compare what the outcomes would be. And if the private schooling
is what's predicting their intelligence or the genes, do you see what I'm saying?
Yeah. We will be able to answer many of these late night bull session questions in dorm rooms.
We are going to remove so many topics for bull sessions from people. If we choose to do so,
like we have the technology, if we choose to do so, we will be able to answer these questions.
And that's what your startup is effectively enabling folks to do.
It's one of the things. I mean, you need a lot of data storage, data access, data annotation,
data management. So the human genome, excuse me, the human genome is three billion base pairs.
I think if you reduce it down to just like the spare, like ACGT or like do it in some sort of
binary, you get three gigabyte. That's what something I was going to ask, like what is a
human sequence to look like? It's about three gig. About three gigs, like bear. But you know,
you add annotation and other things. That's also not the raw data. That's the sequence after you
pull it out of the raw read. So let me just get into that. I mean, it's not that difficult to
explain. Or do you want me to? Well, actually, it sort of leads into something that I was curious
about in this particular sense, which is we've effectively mapped the human genome for whatever
that means. But does that matter? And the reason I ask that is aren't proteins sort of the next step
or am I overstepping on this one? No, no, no. So most of the genome, so most of the genome
does not code to protein, but about a few percent codes directly to protein.
Okay, right. And so that's called the genic. That's called the exome, because exons are basically
what go directly to the proteins. And so the map is important, because you need to know. So for
example, okay, when we say we mapped it, what does this mean? We just know the order. We know the
order of all the genes, but we don't necessarily have necessarily codified this gene versus that
gene. No, but you can't know the function of the gene until you know its position.
Fair. That's fair. Okay. So you need the map. To go anywhere, you need a map.
So until we had a map, so before we had the genetic, I read an article from 1983 in The
New York Times, I think it's called like, Human Genetic Map, where genome wasn't in there.
And it was about like whether they could actually even do the genetic map. And it was like, you know,
really speculative. They had like, I think like 300 human genes that they do at the time.
And they thought, well, you know, there's probably 100,000 to a million human genes.
There's 19,000. Exactly. Well, not exactly, but very close to 19,000. Okay. So now we know,
we know the number. We had no idea what the number was. And we only had 300 of them.
300 human genes after 80 years of human genetics. Right. So we had to have the map. We had to have
the map to identify the genes, because the genes were ordered physically, right? So we know there's,
you know, all the 23 chromosomes and all that stuff. So you start chromosome one.
So it's ordered in size. Chromosome one is huge. Is it like three?
It might be like 300. It's like, I think it's like 10% of the genome. Chromosome one's big.
Okay. So and then you go to two. And so you start at one end at the telomere, you go. So these are
just like physical structures. You start at one end and you keep going. You go to the middle,
then you go to the other end, and then you do it like so. And it's broken by chromosome, right?
And you know, which genes are close to which genes that might affect functional interactions.
But also the position of the gene allows you to design probes that target part of the genome for
diagnostics and all sorts of other things, right? So it allows you to do, if you get a whole genome
sequence, a high quality whole genome sequence, I have one. Most of my family has one now.
You can actually find out new information every single week about yourself.
Where does someone go to do this? Is that a 23andMe thing?
Well, I use Prometheus. Prometheus?
Yeah. So you just put your raw data into there and it's like scouring the literature and stuff.
Okay. And so what I tell people that have money, you know, this was back when it was like a couple
of thousand dollars. And I would tell my tech bro friends like, look, the most expensive and like
the least valuable genome is ever going to be is the day you sequence it. Because you only
learn more and more. Now, you know, at some point in 2040 or 2050, we're going to hit diminishing
returns on a lot of these things, I'm assuming, but it's still a couple of decades to get more and
more information about the genome. Because once the raw information is there, you need to figure
things out about it, but you can't figure things out about it until you have it, right? And so once
we have a, you know, and genomics has had this issue for a couple of decades now of a numbers
problem, where the value comes in large numbers and well annotated, basically like phenotypic
information attached to genomes and large numbers of them. Well, it's just, it was too expensive
to have large numbers of genomes. Now it's cheap enough. Okay. I can imagine like for $100 a person,
you could sequence all of America if you had the sequencing capacity, we don't. But, you know.
So give me an example. Like what were some of the things you sort of learned in sequencing your
genome that you otherwise didn't know and like, is there actionable intelligence there? What does
that look like for folks who haven't done it? Yeah. So this is, I have some skills that other
people do not. So I'm not sure. Well, actually most people in software could do the things I can do
because that's basically like you just need to read the documentation. They're not really
technically that difficult. And you need to learn a little bit of genetics, right? It's just like
you need to learn a little bit about the domain. But I'll tell you guys concretely, excuse me,
I have familial hypercholesterolemia. It doesn't show up on any of the markers. Because I have
just a not a common variant. Okay, this means that it hasn't been discovered in the literature.
This is very common, right? There are a lot of diseases where mostly it doesn't turn up in the
genetics because they haven't discovered the variant. Okay. I'm curious, it's autosomal dominant,
which means I have one copy. If I had two copies, I'd be dead. But anyway, that means my children,
there are three of them, have 50% probability of carrying it. And you kind of want to know because
you know, with crest, basically like all the statins and stuff, you do them early now,
you do them in their teens, right? But you know, you would have to test them and all this stuff.
We just want to kind of anticipate if you want to anticipate, right? So when in the genome,
and I found a mutation in the LDLR, basically in one of the major genes that affect, because
there's many genes actually affect cholesterol. But this is the major one, LDLR, I think,
which you know, LDL cholesterol, that LDLR is like a receptor. So the way the way high
cholesterol works is the number of receptors on your cell surface determine the equilibrium
concentration. So if you have a mutation on one of the genes, you have like half the receptors
or something. It's half. Yeah. So I think it builds up on the outside. I think that's what it is.
I'm not as much of a cell biologist as I am a geneticist, but whatever, I think I got that right.
But in any case, so I can now diagnose, like, and figure out in my children,
which I couldn't before, right? Luckily, I don't have too many other issues that I can see.
But, you know, I've had friends that have discovered things. I used to tell people,
you're not going to discover anything. Like, most people don't have any problems,
but like 10% of people discover stuff where it's like, oh, okay, I'm good. I'm glad I know that.
This almost seems like medicine, basically, but from the data driven side with no symptoms as in,
hey, no, it's pre-diagnostics. Okay. That's an even better word. Pre-diagnostics. Yeah,
I think I just made that up. But that is what it is. It's like precognition,
like knowing before knowing, right? So a lot of diseases only present. So there's a bioethical
conundrum, like a lot of people in medicine and genetic and bioethics were like, you shouldn't
tell kids about stuff that might happen when they're 35. Like, that's too much like psychological
trauma. I totally disagree, but your mileage may vary. I'm a total transparency maximal informant.
Anyone out there can type Raseeb Khan genome or genotype. You can download my raw reads,
my raw sequence. You can also download my 23andMe, my ancestry, my family tree DNA,
my gene astrogeographic. I mean, maybe this is science fiction, but I'm a big sci-fi fan.
Are you not nervous that someone could, you know, someone in some rogue state copies you?
That's fair. That's fair. But that's very expensive. They should really hire a hitman.
Much cheaper. It's much quicker. So that's a fair question. And if I was ever going to be
president of the United States, that's totally fair. But I wasn't born in the United States.
Okay. So I could never be president of the United States. I'm good.
So I guess we're good then.
I mean, you know, or if I ever got as rich as Elon Musk, but that's unlikely. And if I got
as rich as Elon Musk, I'd have bodyguards and stuff. I don't know.
But they might know not to bodyguard you when they've sort of grown this doppelganger.
You know what? I'd be rich enough to become bubble con.
All right.
The billionaire in a bubble.
That's fair. That's fair. I like it.
So I wanted to ask a couple of different questions, but the first one is basically
kind of diving. Because we discussed some interesting things. I want to get back to you
as a person though. Why genetics? You seem like a very intelligent person. Obviously,
we've been having a good conversation. You probably could have gone into computer science.
You could have gone into mathematics, chemistry, all sorts of, you know, really interesting fields.
Why genetics? Why did this really float in your boat?
Well, so I did go into chemistry a little bit. I was biochemistry major. That's the
biochemistry department. And my dad's a chemist. And my brother's a physicist.
A lot of my uncles are engineers. My other brother major in math. So, you know, mostly
most people in my family that do stab do do more physical science, I would say. My grandfather,
my maternal grandfather was a doctor. So that's technically life science. But, you know, that's
a little different. So in terms of my skill set, yeah, maybe. So I didn't want to do, say, neuroscience
or organic chemistry, which I took. I'm actually pretty good at memorization, but I think that's
really dull. So genetics is a branch of biology that requires less memorization. It's actually
kind of a branch of, you know, like, so population genetics, what I do a lot of the time, that's
basically deduction from a particular model, Heidi Weinberg equilibrium p squared plus, you know,
plus q squared equals, you know, people know that, right? And so you have a model, you look
at the outcomes of the model, you test, you know, so it's basically, it's algebra for biology.
Quantitative genetics, which is another field, which is kind of related to heritability, what
we were talking about earlier, that's actually a branch of applied statistics. And statistics came
out of understanding quantitative genetics. They used to call it biometry, you know, the
biometrician. So, you know, Carl Pearson of the Pearson's correlation coefficient was, you know,
quantitative geneticists, really. And obviously, he contributed a lot to statistics, R.A. Fisher,
he's a theoretical population geneticist, as well as a statistician, if you did a NOVA,
you know, and a lot like the frequentist models, right? So that's the kind of, so it's kind of
like a quantitative, formal way. And you get, you know, the cognitive psychologist Pascal Boyer,
so theory is information for free. So population genetics, you have information for free,
you can look at the world, you can decompose things, you can try to predict things, right?
And that's not really like, if I studied some sort of molecular mechanism, I don't know, like,
a super important mechanism like the dystrophin gene, which is the biggest gene in our genome,
and is responsible for a lot of muscle diseases, is super important. But I couldn't wander around
the world and kind of draw inferences, right? So, and I'd have to memorize a lot of things and
visualize all these molecular mechanisms, which I'm okay at, but
anyway, it doesn't do it for me. In terms of the other things like computer science,
you know, that's a really interesting question, because, you know, I do do programming, I just
like learn programming at the end of college, mostly, I started with Perl scripting, I apologize
to everyone out there. And, you know, now I'm- Perl was the glue of the internet in the 90s.
It was, I know how to do, write CGI scripts, people. I think there are CGI scripts somewhere
on some websites that I wrote. But in any case, you know, now I do Python, I had a Java phase,
and, you know, I used to read, you know, I used to read Ivar Horton's Java books, and I read some
like Lisp and schema books, I'm into that, you know? But, you know, I really like history and humans.
So I'm a people nerd. I'm very extroverted. And I've always been interested in history, actually,
since I was about 12. I was interested in STEM, since I was about like six or seven.
Like I have very like precise periodization of my interests. And these two have been parallel
for a long time. And then in 1998, I got a copy of a book called History and Geography of Genes by
L. L. Cavalli-Fortza, probably the most eminent human population geneticist of the 20th century.
This was his magnum opus, his culmination of his life work used about 100 genetic markers
to infer the population history of the world. Wow, which I didn't understand was doable. Because,
you know, I was studying biochemistry at the time, I did not add the biology major until later. And
I was I was fascinated. I was like, this is what I want to do. You know, well, I actually,
I'm going to be honest, I didn't know that I would ever do anything like that. And I kind of thought,
how do I say this? I kind of thought this is too interesting to actually ever make a career out of.
You know, and I always liked population genetics, but I didn't like really get how it applied to
anything. And so, you know, I worked as a web developer, a database programmer and stuff in the
2000s for a while, you know, just like kind of bounced around. But I kept going back to genetics.
And as computational biology and computational genetics came to the fore, I was like, okay,
this, this is for me, you know, like working with a pipette, like I've done it, you know,
you know, I've like done PCRs and all these other Western blots and all these blots, okay,
like, I don't not very skilled at it, but I've done it, I know how that's worked. That's where
biology is not. I'm not skilled with my hands, okay, I don't have gold hands, you know, and but
I'm skilled at thinking. But I'm also not super interested in just being purely a theoretical
biologist. So I like massive amounts of empirical data. And so LL Cavalli has been
50 years collecting about 100 markers on 2000 individuals. Okay, was a 50 year career started
like 1950. He actually lived until was it 2018? But he retired in the mid 2000s. He actually
developed Alzheimer's so or dementia. So he wasn't active after about like 2010 as a scientist,
you know, but it's like 60 years career, right? And he published History and Geography of Human
Genes in 1995. It was like after about like 45 years. So it was a coalition of all this data.
So on my computer, on my MacBook Pro, I have many, many data sets where I have about like 600,000
markers per individual, as opposed to 100 genes. And I think I have like, just not in the cluster
or anything like that. I think I have like 30 or 40,000 individuals. How do you obtain those?
Are you are you sort of reaching out to various companies? Are you asking individual people?
Okay, that's awesome. I mean, a good high story. There's a lot of there is a lot of public data
that's open. I have consulted for companies and basically a license that I worked out with them
is like, I never share the data, but I can analyze it. You know, I mean, it's anonymous, you know,
I can analyze it myself for myself. So I can use it for my own training sets, but I can't share it,
right? So there's data. So I have, they're in different folders. So I have like public data.
And then I have data where it's like, Oh, these are like private things from consultancies. And
then there are people like, I have big internet presence. And I solicit I probably gotten like
500 samples from individuals, mostly of like rare ethnic groups, people just spit in a cup or like
how do they have raw 20? There are millions of people that have like raw genotype data.
They can send it to me. So if I want to answer a question, they just export from a site that
they've already done it with or something. Yep. Yep. And so I look for people that are from like
rare ethnic groups that aren't in the open data data sets for some reason. I mean, it's not
necessary really now, but 10 years ago, I was one of the few that was just reanalyzing things from
groups that have not been sampled. And I was just getting it from the private companies,
because they weren't doing the analysis themselves, because they had other priorities like making money,
you know? So yeah, I have all of these data. So I have the way I've set it on my sub stack is
I can do like I can run a principal component analysis in a minute on thousands of individuals
across hundreds of thousands of markers. And that's orders of magnitude more analysis
than Cavalli Forza could do in 45 years. Right. At a university. I imagine this is sort of where
that because again, another thing I read in your sub stack is where it's sort of that,
that Madagascar stuff came from where it was like, hey, this is actually
not as African as you think. It's actually where Africa meets Asia time. Yeah. Yeah. Well, so
there were a lot of conjectures that people had. So people knew, so let's, so I have a sub stack
piece on Madagascar. That's the context, you know, for the listener or the viewer. You can google it,
Rezib, Madagascar, sub stack, right? Like that work. But in any case, so, you know, Jesuits,
like, you know, I think they were Jesuits, you know, Catholic missionaries had gone to Madagascar
and they had noticed they usually go everywhere. So that's even if that's not right, probably
the key is high percentage of these were people from these were Jesuits from Malacca. Okay. Okay.
So they knew Malay. So they went to Madagascar, I think in the 17th century, because there were
Muslim traders and stuff on the coast, you know, and they were just, whoa, these people speak
something very close to Malay. Really? Yes. I actually speak something very close to Malay,
but that's a different topic. Oh, do you really? I lived in Indonesia for four years. Oh, okay. So
do you know Javanese? Bahasa, Indonesian? Bahasa. Yeah. So actually you read, did you read the
Madagascar piece? Yeah. Did you know where, do you know where the Malagasy are from? This is not
a pop quiz, but the, well, they would have been, they would have been Borneo, no? Yeah. They're
from the Burrito River Valley in southern Borneo. Yeah. So they're literally, this is, although
that's called Borneo there, it's Kalimantan, if I recall correctly, for Indonesians. Okay. So
Kalimantan, yeah, the island of Borneo, Kalimantan province, right? So basically it turns out that
the Malagasy languages, they're like languages from this south, is it like the southeastern area
of Borneo, right? Across from Java. So it's not like they're Malay, and it's not like they're
Javanese or Sundanese, you know, or they're Batak. They're like a very, very specific,
like C-Diac related language. So what's up with that? Because they're off the coast of Mozambique.
Exactly. Okay. So we knew that. We knew that. And if you look at the people, especially Highlanders,
like the Marina people, I think the Beticello. Anyway, so if you look at the Highlanders,
a lot of them look kind of Asian. Some of them look totally Asian. If you actually look at the
president of Madagascar and his wife, they look Southeast Asian. Really? Yeah. I mean, I haven't,
I don't, I don't think I've seen Madagascar people before. Yeah. Yeah. So they do. I mean,
just Google like Madagascar people, and you see some people that look totally African,
some people that look totally Asian, and most people kind of look in between. Wow. And so we
kind of knew that this was what was going on. So what did genetics do? What did genetics add?
There's a couple of things. First, you can look at the segments of DNA and look at the segments
that match all across the world. And there's just relatedness, right? So you and your brother,
about 50% related, you and your cousin have like, you know, like 6% or whatever, right?
Et cetera, in theory. But, but there's variants there, you know, but in any case,
so you can use these relatedness distributions to figure out what population
you are sampled from, right? And if you're like half Chinese, half English, you're going to get
two results, obviously, right? So what they did with the Malagasy genome is you can look at segments
that are Asian and segments that are African, pull out the African ones, leave the Asian ones,
and then run the relatedness statistic. And it turns out they are related to people from
Southeast Borneo. So the linguistics is totally correct. They are Southeast Borneans.
Also, a lot of their cultural practices or religions, it's some sort of they have,
they don't seem to have that much influence from Hinduism or Buddhism and definitely not Islam.
So this was a long time ago. Hinduism and Buddhism came to Java in that area like 2000 years ago,
but it obviously didn't penetrate much of Indonesia for a long time. And then,
I mean, Islam didn't penetrate much of Indonesia for a long time either. So it's just a big,
it's like the size of the United States, even though it's mostly water, and there's a lot of
isolated areas that are just not touched. And it looks like the ancestors of the Malagasy come from,
you know, I don't want to say more barbaric, but less exposed to outside influences.
I'm sure of that. Yeah. Yeah. So, so we now know that from genetics, but there's another thing going
on. There are large regions of the genome of Malagasy people that are much more African.
Okay. Right. And so what's up with that? Like really strong selection, adaptation,
and it's all due to endemic diseases to Africa.
Explain that. Like malaria. Okay. There's a type of malaria that Africans are much more resistant
to because it's called the Duffy allele. It's on chromosome one. And basically, you know,
most of your listeners know most genetic variation is within people or within groups and not between
groups. But this is not always true. Okay. So, you know, you say 15 for continental races, stylized
fact, but it's kind of true. 15% of the variation is between races and 85% is within races. Okay.
So that means when you look at like allele frequencies, they're kind of different,
but you got to look at a lot of them to figure out, they're easily separable, but you need to look at
many, many loci, right? You need to get many variables, accumulate their results, and then
you can separate people. But at some loci, they're totally disjoint, which means that all of the
variation is between races. So one of these is the Duffy allele locus. Is that just a sexual
selection characteristic that occurred there? It's malaria. Okay. It's extremely strong selection
for malaria. And I think this is a null allele, kind of like what I have for cholesterol, where they
don't have the receptor. No receptor pathogens can't get into the cell. And so this is an allele
where in sub-Saharan Africa, it's very close to 100%. This null allele and outside of Africa,
it's very rare. And so in the pre-modern era before genomics, they would look at this position,
and this was a diagnosis for African ancestry, okay, in people. Because if you saw the Duffy
allele, it's like, oh, what's going on there, right? And in the Malagasy people, so the Malagasy
are about like, it varies. Highlanders are more Asian, lowlanders are less Asian. But let's say
about like 40% Asian, 40 to 45% East Asian, right? The Duffy allele is like way above that.
So what's happening is the Malagases have been selected to massive natural selection,
because they arrived in an ecology that was similar enough to their old, because it's tropical,
and the highlands of Madagascar, rice, rice, paddy agriculture works, right? So if you look at them,
they look like Southeast Asia. But there's all sorts of malaria. Southeast Asia has malaria too,
but they're different. They have all sorts of malaria and endemic diseases there. Now these
diseases are probably brought by Bantu from the mainland. So it does look like the Malagasy are
the ones that pioneered the settlement of Madagascar, probably like 580 or so. But once they did,
the Bantu followed them. So one hypothesis is all they brought slaves. I don't necessarily think
this is true because a lot of the paternal lineages are Bantu. And usually when you have,
you know, like social status imbalance, it's usually the women that are assimilated. And so in
this case, it doesn't seem like that at all. So, you know, either they're matrilineal,
which could be true, like they assimilated Bantu men into their villages, or, you know, it's not
the simple slave story, you know? But in any case, these Africans came, they brought cattle,
they brought their pastoralist lifestyle to the lowlands, and all sorts of diseases came with
them because they're people, they bring their diseases. And the diseases like work in Madagascar,
the local fauna, even though it's exotic, I guess, you know, it can incubate some of it,
you know, maybe some of the birds especially. So you have a situation where these Asians are
mixing with Africans and there's all these African diseases. So what the African diseases
they're doing is sweeping through the genomes in areas where the Asians are vulnerable and
nixing it out, right? So it's a perfect illustration of the theory of adaptation
through natural selection occurring through genomic variation in the last thousand years.
It's actually like one of the strongest. I think until recently, it was the strongest example
of selection. And now we know another one, and that is lactase persistence in Europeans.
Milk digestion ability.
Oh, I was going to say basically people could eat cheese in Europe.
It's much more recent than people thought.
Really? I absolutely adore cheese, so it is a big deal for me.
Thank evolution, thank Charles Darwin. So it looks like it's been happening actually
in the last 2000 years, a little earlier in England, nobody knows why. It used to be,
they thought like, oh, it was like four, five, six, seven, it was like with a Neolithic maybe.
No, no, it's really recent. So nobody really knows why.
There's some model building of like, oh, like certain types of famines.
And so lactose is a third of the calories in milk.
Sure.
So if you can't access it, you get two thirds as much calories, which,
you know, we probably like want that, right?
I mean, especially, I mean, especially then, but even beyond that, I mean, you've got,
it's so tasty.
Well, I mean, it has a slightly sugary taste, right? I don't drink much milk, but I mean,
I'm not a big milk drinker these days. I was when I was growing up at like,
I mean, cheese is my jam. I'm just going to tell you,
you mentioned that you don't, you don't necessarily eat dessert very often.
My dessert is always a big fat cheese plate, which may actually be worse.
Wait, are you from Wisconsin?
Originally, St. Louis, Missouri, cheese is just a thing that I just love forever.
Okay. You're spiritual Wisconsinite.
Fine. To be honest with you, I'm more of a French cheese guy, but you know,
Wisconsin is not bad either.
Those are more lactose. They're softer. They're runnier.
I was going to say, even beyond that, I actually like French cheese from France,
specifically because it's not pasteurized.
What's your, what's your favorite French cheese?
Probably a Camembert.
Nice. So this guy is sophisticated. Cheese snob here.
Maybe a little Laplace, but I know Camembert. Those are nice.
Those are nice.
They're pretty phenomenal.
Yeah. Well, we can't talk about genetics, right?
Without at some point talking about crisper.
Oh yeah.
Where has this gone? I used to hear about this thing all the time.
Can we kind of start from like the base?
Like what, what is crisper?
And then from that matter, like where is it gone?
All right. I'm not a molecular biologist.
I might make some technical errors here, but like basically crisper is a way for bacteria
to actually like, I think defend themselves against viruses and stuff, right?
And so.
That sounds right.
Yeah. And so it's been in nature for a while.
And then in 2012, I think Jennifer Doudna, Carpentier,
those are two primary ones, Doudna and Carpentier,
but there's some others that came on later.
Basically, they figured, oh, well, we could like use this.
And so you can use it to cut and then you can also use like other, you know,
other technologies to like put things into the cut.
So you can use to cut out and delete, but you could also use it to put things in.
And it just turns out.
So technically, it's just really easy.
It makes it cheap and it's much more accurate.
So there were other technologies called talons and very times a recombinant DNA technologies.
They were extremely expensive and tedious and only huge corporations ever did it.
So the reason crisper is important is this sort of like bacterial
genetic engineering technology is accessible to, I mean, almost anyone.
So there's a guy in Austin, Joe Zanier, he's non-binary.
She's okay.
Yeah. So Joe Zanier, okay.
So used to be Josiah, okay.
Anyway, so Joe Zanier.
This person, there we go.
Easy enough.
But like they do, they do a lot of crisper, like biohacking themselves.
Like they have crisper kits.
There's just some, not some random person, but you know, biohacker.
There's people that do that.
I mean, I'm not going to like out anyone.
Actually, I think he's talked to.
But anyway, people that we know in Austin,
they go to other countries and they get crispered, okay.
So why can't I be an X-man?
Because I mean, that's, that's where I want to go with this.
Yeah. I mean, I think right now the main thing is off target effects, which is like errors.
So if you do crisper on animals or plants, not a big deal.
It's going to transform genetic engineering and GMOs, right?
Really quickly.
The issue with humans is, okay, like it's still 10 years in.
They're still perfecting it.
So what's going to happen in the next, next like, let's say before 2030.
They are now working on crispering out and crispering in.
You know, putting in, inserting good, good genes for cystic fibrosis.
We know the genes for that.
Amazing.
And ALS.
Those are the two I know.
And they just did malaria.
Now.
A sickle cell.
Now, this is, this is unbelievable.
But, but theoretically, you could effectively inject someone with this.
It will recombine their DNA and then they, what, they don't have ALS anymore.
Yeah. Yeah.
So.
As in like hawking would be fine.
Yeah.
Well, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
So.
Something with nature.
I have an acquaintance whose daughter was born with cystic fibrosis like three years ago.
And I told him straight up, because he's really stressed.
I told him straight up, like, bro, your daughter's going to live,
she's never going to be a marathon runner, but she's probably going to live like normal lifespan.
And so what's going to happen is in the near future,
they are going to have treatments where I think it might be a spray delivery.
I don't know how they're going to deliver.
I mean, I haven't looked at, well, I mean, it's in trials.
In any case, they're doing it in dogs and stuff too,
because the dogs are like big enough, their organs are large enough size.
And they will rescue function.
You need to rescue function in some of the tissue.
Yes.
Once you rescue function in like 10 to 20 percent, whatever,
you're just going to be able to survive.
You're never going to be able to be a runner or do strenuous exercise.
Sure.
But you're going to survive.
You're not going to die at 45.
Okay.
That's a good start.
Same thing with ALS.
I don't know as much about, but I know they're doing it in dogs.
And basically, I mean, again, you're never going to be a lifter,
but you probably are going to be able to survive and walk around.
Which is, I mean, that's a massive, obscenely massive improvement.
So I think that in these sorts of congenital defects, diseases,
CRISPR will transform our lives in the next 10 to 20 years.
Not you and me, but a lot of people out there.
But that's what I'm saying.
Let's go 50 years out.
I mean, can I grow wings?
Can I control metal with my mind?
Like, again, where can I X-man myself and make myself, you know, wolverine or something?
Yeah, I mean, I thought it was interesting that you touched your chest area,
because like there were certain things that can't be done then.
No, no, I'm good the way I am.
I'm just more along the lines of like thinking about like rapid healing
and all these goofball things that I am more marvels up about.
Gain a function and that is ethically more fraught.
I don't really think it's that big of a deal
if you want to take a risk as an adult.
So it'll happen probably in the Persian Gulf, China, somewhere,
not the United States probably.
But so gain a function.
So there are people who have a genetic mutation
that allows them to be very functional on four hours of sleep.
I've heard about this.
Yes, it's a real thing.
I think there's probably side effects that we don't know about,
but whatever, there's going to be people who want that as adults.
I think Da Vinci did that, something like that.
Yeah.
But I've heard of people from like yesterday.
A disproportionate number of very productive people are like this,
because they just have more hours.
Right.
Because like they have more hours to do stuff,
because like you have to like go to the bathroom, eat, blah, blah, blah.
Well, they still have more hours left over.
So I think people are going to get that.
But when you say gain a function, that's one thing.
I mean, could you end up doing, correct me here if I'm wrong,
but if I recall correctly, there's,
if you have a double copy of this one gene,
and I can't remember what it is,
if you have a double copy, you're immune to AIDS, but not HIV.
Yeah, I think Delta, yeah, Delta CCR.
And then if you have a triple copy, apparently,
you are literally immune.
Like you can't catch HIV or AIDS, whatever.
Yeah, that was the one.
You know, did genetic engineering, you know,
Chris bring on the, I think the babies, right?
Yeah.
Right.
Yeah.
And then in that case, you're, I mean, that disease is,
you are literally immune to that disease.
Yeah, that's a receptor issue.
Is that a, okay, so that's,
no, would we consider that to be gain a function,
or is that just a receptor thing?
Well, okay, no, it's loss of function.
Okay, it's loss of function because it's removing.
So I have a loss of function.
That's a loss of function.
Because you can't, because the receptors are blocked off now.
Okay, you're breaking a gene.
I understand.
So gain of function is a mutation where something,
gain of function mutations are often really bad, by the way.
Okay.
Because you produce like messed up proteins,
and then messed up proteins bind with other proteins
and start like interfering with multiple pathways.
When you have a loss of function, you just remove a protein.
Okay, so gain of function sounds like a good pathway to cancer.
That's, I mean, this is, there's been like off target effects
that cause cancer with CRISPR.
But in any case, let's like set that aside.
Okay.
Let's assume that there's no off target effects.
Gain of function would be that function that I mentioned.
I don't know the genetic pathway.
It could be a loss of function actually, genetically.
But there's other things like there was a little kid
named little Hercules that they thought that the parents
were like giving him steroids.
Yeah, he's German.
His parents were professional athletes.
So there's a mutation that like roids up,
like not literally roids, but they're just hyper muscular.
I think they do have issues with heart disease
and like heart attacks because whatever.
But anyway, so normal people,
there are like a non-trivial number of athletes
that have one copy, but it's really, really low frequency
in the population.
It's very rare for people to have two copies.
Very, very rare.
This kid's parents were both professional athletes in Germany
and they both had a copy and they came together in him.
So he was a jacked out little kid.
Right.
There could be people that are like, I want to be jacked out.
I mean, maybe I'll have a heart attack when I'm 50,
but I'll be, I mean, people take steroids.
Lots of them.
Yeah.
So, I mean, this is a gain of function that I can imagine.
Now, in the future, you want to go full Gatica.
And this is like legit, like positive Gatica,
not just like discrimination, Gatica.
You know, intelligence is about like 50,
probably more really genomically heritable.
You can imagine.
So it's like a lot of,
but like a third of your genome
has some sort of intelligence relationship.
So you'd have to go in there and change everything.
Right.
But if you want to do it, maybe sometime in the future,
every man a genius, you know?
So speaking of, for that matter,
if we just focus on the binary track of men and women,
I guess the question would be,
would this disproportionately affect men versus women?
And the only reason I ask is,
even though we all cluster around the mean of 100 IQ points,
it turns out that there's a lot more men
at the extreme low and at the extreme top.
Like it's sort of, it's disproportionate.
Whereas women, the sort of gradient at 100
is notably higher than the men
because we're a little bit more peanut butter smushed,
which is why we, you know, we...
Yeah, it could.
I think, so the male female genetic difference is just the Y.
So we have one copy of the X, they have two copies.
And then we have the Y,
which has like a few genes that do things.
Most of the genes that do things on the Y relate to sperm.
Okay.
But we don't know everything.
And there's interactions, blah, blah, blah, right?
If we targeted early, yeah, I mean, maybe there could,
you know, there probably be like same effects,
like more mentally disabled, I was gonna say the R word.
That's all right.
Maybe edit that out.
We kind of grew up with that.
But that, I mean, nowadays people...
I'm Gen X, okay, I'm sorry.
That's the thing, that wasn't like a bad thing.
That was what those folks were called.
I mean, I call my friend Dan and F and...
Yeah, it happens.
But the truth of the matter is, you're right.
It should be mentally disabled, which is, it's a better term.
So there's gonna be more females that might be like that
as well as maybe, I mean, if this is true.
And like, I think, I generally believe the variance hypothesis
as an empirical fact, I mean, I think it's hard to disagree with.
But there's different arguments for why, you know,
about the sex chromosomes or whatever, just in development.
If the development process is very early on life,
you can't necessarily change things, right?
So some of these things I'm talking about, like cystic fibrosis.
What you're really doing is, as the...
What you're really doing is modifying a small amount of the tissue,
and then those cells reproduce themselves, right?
And so you gain the function.
And when you think of something like intelligence, it's not a tissue.
It's an incredibly complex trait that emerges
out of many, many developmental processes.
And some of them probably shut off on puberty or at a very young age.
That's what I was gonna ask.
Isn't this more of a sort of an emergent property
as opposed to like a flip on or off switch type of deal?
Yeah, I mean, intelligence is basically like the normal distribution.
Intelligence, like law of large numbers and all these things
is basically the sum of like, you know, tens of thousands of variables.
Thousands of variables, technically, if you want to talk about just gene count.
I think it's like a third of the genome or something.
It can be assumed to be some sort of predictor, right?
So that doesn't mean that's just like causal,
like there's all sorts of details.
But basically, it's highly polygenic.
There's no IQ gene, right?
There is one IQ gene, but there are IQ genes,
but those are ones that make you mentally disabled.
So like, if you have like, you know,
copy on chromosome 22, 21, sorry, 21, right?
I think try something.
Yeah, try something 21.
So it's that down syndrome.
Right, that's the down syndrome.
Yeah, so there's like things you can do to like,
kind of like drop everything, but here's something.
I told this story.
So it's a fun story.
A friend of mine was doing work in cognitive genomics,
and there was a subset of his population that he saw.
This wasn't published because it was like,
outside the purview of the paper.
Subsets of the population that were predicted
to be mentally disabled, but had average IQs.
And so it was really curious about what was going on here.
They had parent information.
The parents all had super high IQs.
So they were mentally disabled according to their expectation.
So if your expected IQ is like 125,
and the mutation drops at 20 or 30,
you just go down to average.
That's fair.
If you're an average.
I mean, not fair for them.
Yeah, but if you're an average person,
then you really, you know what I'm saying?
Sure.
And so the issue here is like, he realized,
oh, there's a small minority of people who have these mutations
that say that they should be mentally disabled,
but they're actually just normal.
And their parents are probably thinking,
what is wrong with you?
Because their parents are probably professors,
or lawyers, or doctors,
and they are quite likely working at Whole Foods
as a manager or something, hopefully.
You know?
I know one or two people like this.
Yeah.
And this is, you know, like either.
So what you would say is like, oh, they're lazy.
You know, you're going to attribute that to their character
in some way.
I'm going to fall on their character
because they have the parental raw material.
They look like the parents, and you know,
the parents and their grandparents
and their cousins are all successful professionals.
But they're missing sort of.
They're missing something essential,
and no one knows, no one knows to check
because they have average intelligence, you know?
Because according to the population norm, they do.
You're not going to target kids until they hit around 70.
That's the threshold, you know?
That's the threshold that you can murder someone
and you're not going to get executed.
I had no idea that was the case.
Yeah, if you're mentally disabled,
you cannot get the death,
it's cruel on an unusual punishment.
I mean, I think a lot of people argue that
no matter what your IQ is, but I get where you're going.
Yeah.
No, yeah, but that's literally, that's literally,
so this is a little,
Stephen Pinker talked about in the blank state 20 years ago.
This is a situation where every person in prison
for murder is trying to argue that they're mentally disabled.
I mean, if you actually look at the male population in prison.
They are pretty low.
I mean, it's-
Yeah, a lot of them qualify.
There is a reason that the prisons are filled with men and-
Yeah.
And high time preference, like low, you know, rationality.
I mean, when you look at certain crimes,
I think one reason, I mean, I think it is evil,
but one reason that people think is evil and demonic
is it's also so irrational and cruel.
The combination of irrationality and cruelty.
So, I mean, I mean, if you're, I don't know, a McKinsey consultant,
maybe you're doing consultant, consulting for Libya
on how to, you know, run their prisons effectively.
That is kind of cruel, but you're making a lot of money
and no one's going to ever get,
no one's ever going to call you out on that.
You're also generating nonsense for a living, but whatever.
I'm just saying-
A bit of a bias there.
Yeah, no, that's fair.
Like, I mean, I think most of it's BS too.
But no one's going to, no one's going to put you in prison
and you're going to make a lot of money.
That's true.
So, you can rationalize that as like,
okay, like you're cruel or it's stupid,
but there's a rational reason to go through this fog and dance.
But, you know, some of the crimes, it's just like, what?
It's like totally nonsensical, you know?
But we don't put ourselves in the minds of those without minds.
That's a really good point.
I'm just saying, they can't think that far ahead.
And they don't have, they literally don't have the actual tools
to think the way that a regular person-
I'm not going to give you guys a concrete example.
I just saw this recently, like this was like in the news.
Guy goes, I think he robbed like $50
and the clerk was like, take the money,
sits down, turns his head.
The guy looks around and there's all on video.
He jumps behind the counter.
He takes the gun.
He blows the back of his brains out.
I think I saw that.
That's some crazy stuff.
And then he went to his parents' house
and was just chilling out there.
Yeah, see, I don't understand how you couldn't argue
diminished capacity in that scenario, if that makes sense.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, it's just-
I mean, like if you do something like that, you want to run.
Well, a regular person would be.
But he's just like chilling.
Wasn't me.
You're on video.
Oh, you do understand these stores have video camera.
He was actually looking around
and he couldn't find the video camera.
And he decided like-
Because like you could see actually see him looking around
and he couldn't find it.
So he concluded it, I guess it didn't exist
and he decided to kill the clerk.
Wow.
You know.
Again, this is the need for that startup
to come up quick and fast
so we can sort of map these things
and maybe turn on some genes for a couple of people.
Yeah.
And so, you know, I do want to like, you know,
on a positive note, you know, there's a geneticist here,
behavior geneticist Paige Hardin in UT Austin.
She wrote a book called The Genetic Lottery.
It got a lot of criticism from kind of the communists left
because they're, you know, no, nothing's irrationalist.
But I have some disagreements.
I'm not a liberal.
I'm not like super liberal, so whatever.
I didn't agree with some of-
Because her audience are liberals.
And, but she was arguing from the science.
Like, we do have a lot of science
that executive function is highly heritable,
that intelligence is moderately heritable.
Yeah.
That, you know, there are things that run through families
across many generations that are behavioral.
You know?
No question.
That's-
Autism, do you know how heritable autism and schizophrenia are?
Give me a number between zero and one.
I wouldn't, I mean, what, 0.25 maybe?
Yeah, that's a good, that's a good,
that's a good value for more normal behavioral things.
It's 0.8.
What?
Yeah.
That's high.
That's really high.
It is really high, but if you've known of people with schizophrenia
in the family, you know that it's in the family
and the same with autism.
That doesn't mean it's like inevitable,
even if the heritability is high,
the correlation between parent and offspring can be like 0.5,
which like, you know, if you do an R squared, whatever.
Anyway, I don't want to get into it
because it depends on how you model the trait.
But in any case, my point here though is,
now with genetics, with the tools we have,
we can prudentially actually predict
which of your children are highly likely to be
schizophrenic or autistic.
Or if you want to do pre-implantation genetic diagnosis,
do screens and only implant embryos
that don't have those risk alleles that you are carrying.
Yeah, that's, I actually know someone
who did something similar to this.
She didn't have it, but both of her brothers
actually have like a macular degeneration thing.
They're both, they're both incredibly,
like they can't drive cars.
They're incredibly visually impaired.
Yeah, it's common.
And they're only in their 30s or whatever.
And then what ended up happening was,
she was like, I'm going to pass this on.
It turns out that she ended up getting,
I don't know the full process,
but you get your eggs cleaned or whatever it is.
And now she's, she's got a kid,
he's doing grade, he has no signs of it or anything like that.
So it's amazing.
Science for a better world, people.
That's the idea anyway.
So you mentioned a word earlier called telomeres.
There has been some really notable things
that have happened in just the past year or two.
So I haven't actually, like I have,
you're talking about the anti-aging and senescence
and stuff like that.
Give me an update because like the telomere stuff
has been around for like 30 years.
And telomeres are super important.
I mean, these structures exist for a reason.
So is it turns, okay, I'll give you like, again, the,
you know, the general public nonsense version,
which again, I have no background in this,
but the idea was that, that these telomeres,
basically the length determines effectively
what your actual age is, not, you know,
random revolutions around the sun on the earth.
And so as these things shorten, right,
they end up basically not producing.
Over the, over the replications.
Right. Over X number of replications,
tons of replications, I guess.
You know, you, you end up being,
you know, they end up with errors
in various things, this nature.
Apparently there's some Israeli science going on
where you can, you can extend these
through various, various ways.
And they've actually gotten it to the point
where they grew them about 25%.
And I believe the treatment was pretty simple.
It was like hyperbaric chambers,
high oxygen content, et cetera, et cetera.
I think I heard about this.
Something of this nature.
Again, you know, you look this up,
don't, don't take my word for it,
but something of this nature.
I think I heard about this.
I will say like, I didn't look deeply into it,
but people were saying like, be really skeptical.
So like a lot of the anti-aging stuff,
the antisense stuff, there's a group of biologists
that are just like, I mean, I'm going to start up.
All right.
So I know, you know, and I come out of academia,
I know how scientists think
and I know how startup people think.
I know how discoverers think
and how innovators think.
Let's put it that way.
And you know, most science is failure.
Most experiments fail.
Okay.
But I have to be honest,
the people that stay in academic science
are kind of risk averse in some ways.
And that's fair.
Most people, most people don't take jobs where
if they, if they had any, you know,
they have any, any, any tolerance for risk,
they don't usually take jobs where they effectively
cannot get fired, tenure and whatnot.
Yeah. Yeah.
But you know, that's, that's, that's the right thing
for some people.
But this goes to issues within science
and how discovery and knowledge is generated.
And they'd have a lot of really strong status co-biased,
right?
I mean, we could have discovered CRISPR back in the 1980s
because it's been known in bacteria for a while,
but people never thought of applying it
in a more general context, right?
So why not?
Well, I mean, you know, these things aren't always easy,
but part of it is orthodoxies do get,
so I think the best case, but unfortunately about this
is that Alzheimer's research with mice and plaques,
and it turns out that some of the canonical research,
I think in like 2008 is, I mean, is allegedly for,
I'll say allegedly.
I mean, I've heard about that.
Like some of the stuff that we base like quite,
quite a large understanding and funding on the field is BS.
And like a lot of it isn't even,
a lot of this stuff isn't even fraudulent,
but like, you know, there's cancer labs where basically
there's pedigrees and there's lab groups
and there's coalitions and they'll block everyone
out of funding.
So the way the granting system works
is you have experts that sit on particular panels
for particular topics.
Well, if you know what the experts think
and you want to get a grant from them,
are you going to tell them that what they have devoted 30 years
of their lives to is wrong?
That's a tough thing to get out there.
I mean, ideally what would happen is there should be
a majority view and then people that are working
on minority views, but the issue is like,
nobody wants to not get that grant.
Everybody wants to get the grant for their lab,
you know, because they have people that they employ,
you know, it's like humans.
So there's this problem and it's to various degrees
in science.
So I think the startup world doesn't have as much
of this problem.
I have this problem in terms of like, oh, like, you know,
crypto is going to transform the world.
So there are, there's group think there, you know.
Definite group think in the crypto world, no question.
I'm just using that example because it's one
that people know now.
You know, this is not the first time it's happened.
It's not going to be the last time that happens, right?
But the point is you have people that come out of nowhere
that think that they are going to transform something.
And most of the times they don't,
but some of the times they do.
That's the key, right?
So, you know, like, so let's, let's talk about
Toronto, which everyone, everyone knows about.
It was fraudulent, blah, blah, blah, all this stuff, right?
But she probably started out.
I mean, she started out sincere and she's
still believed in it.
I mean, I think there was the actual real, like,
I think she was putting too much pressure on,
to be honest with you, sort of the tech and the mechanical
expertise that she didn't really understand.
I don't think she literally went in there and was like,
all right, I'm just going to like,
bulk a bunch of people out of money.
There's no way.
And so basically, I think the underlying impulse there is
still good.
Like sometimes even PhDs that are at the top of their field
are wrong.
True.
Okay.
Most of the time they're not actually,
and most of the time the startups are going to fail.
But my point is you still need to let people experiment on the
margins of the heterodox.
And this is why I'm coming back to aging.
Okay.
There's a lot of money that goes into anti-aging research
because of self-interest reasons because Peter Thiel wants to
live forever, you know, because he's running out of blood boys.
I mean, this like with the labor support.
No, I'm just joking.
I love Peter, by the way.
I love Peter.
I love hope.
And this is a joke.
Peter, this is a joke.
I'm serious.
Like I do love Peter and I know a lot of Peter.
I know Peter a little.
Anyway, but I mean, I'm joking.
But the whole point is there's a lot of money in anti-aging
because people with money want to live longer just like anyone else.
Okay.
But it's not an easy problem to solve.
And there's lots of different ways people are trying it.
And so I'm okay with hearing about these kooky things.
I mean, so do you remember?
I mean, you remember ulcers when we were kids would do distress.
Yeah.
But they're not.
I first of all, I thought that was like the only cause of them.
That's what people thought.
I will say randomly, slightly off topic, I apologize.
But they, it was one of the most common causes of surgery in the 60s.
And then what was it 80s or 90s?
Literally, it was like, no, no surgery almost ever.
You pop a pill.
I thought that was a pretty, pretty great leap forward that we made there.
Yeah.
Just on a positive note.
But my point is like, there was, there were people who thought like,
I think it was a Greek doctor who thought it was age pylori decades ago.
Really?
Yes.
And he could not get, because everyone knew.
By the way, do you know that, that shutting down borders does not prevent pandemics from spreading?
We do now.
Also, did you know, did you know that masks don't work because these sorts of things are not aerosolized?
I think they admitted that finally.
Yeah.
I think they said the N95s are pretty good to go, but everything else is.
But my point is they, they dragged their foot on aerosolization,
even though the Japanese knew almost immediately.
Right.
So the Japanese had a model of aerosolization in February of 2020,
and our CDC took, I think, a year and a half.
I mean, it's interesting if you're, if you're talking about COVID,
one of the most interesting things that I felt was that people don't talk about anymore is,
if I recall correctly, March or April, the Brits actually came out with a plan.
They were like, we're not going to do anything.
Yeah.
We're not going to shut our borders.
We're not going to do anything.
And they basically got shouted down on the entire world stage.
Well, they were going to go full Sweden.
Yeah.
They were like, no, we're just going to let it run through,
because this is what it has to, has to happen.
And they effectively got shouted down by the entire world.
It was the first time I've ever seen a nation canceled.
It was pretty wild.
Yeah.
So I mean, and just like, just so the listeners and viewers know, I,
I wasn't early COVID hawk.
I, you know, partly because my wife knows some Chinese.
She's not Chinese herself, but in the case, we were tracking on Instagram,
like in mid January.
And I was just doing back at the envelope numbers.
And I'm like, unless the Chinese are biologically different, it's coming here.
And so for the month of February, I was the crazy guy.
I like, apparently I talked about it a lot.
And I know that I talked about it a lot because it got a lot of appreciative texts
around March 10th of people who were like, well,
Razeem sounds crazy, but maybe we should stock up and prepare.
Like I literally, I was like, wait, I talked about that.
And I was like, I must have been insane because this is how I felt.
This is how I felt.
I felt I'm a biologist.
Most of my friends are biologists.
A lot of them are biologists, but they're not stressed and they're talking about
going to conferences.
What do they know that I don't know?
Okay.
This is, I was feeling insane.
Like, you know, and like, this is like known, like T.A.
Frank wrote about me in Vanity Fair along with another bunch of other early COVID hawks,
you know?
But I mean, my point is like, I was there early and then like all these people later joined on.
And, you know, then they're saying like, oh, well, we should not to get political,
but we should like go to the BLM marches because it's more important.
You know, all the people that were saying, oh, it's going to be like the flu.
You know, I'm saying people changed their, the consensus updated multiple times.
So one thing that the coronavirus pandemic did teach me is like, I just don't,
I'm not going to listen to public health people because they have no new information.
I mean, there's some things we know about germ theory and stuff like that,
but they're basically like group thinkers.
So you're not going to get much signal out of them.
But going back to something you earlier said, is that kind of like the salt content
warning labels in the sense of they're just trying to apply this to like the,
the, you know, the most vulnerable people.
Yeah, harm reduction, which is true.
I mean, that's a fair thing.
So sometimes you need to think like an economist, which Tyler Cowan and Alex Tabarak and George Mason,
you know, they had these fast grants and other ideas.
And I remember all my scientist friends were like, they need to stay in their own lane.
And it turned out that their fast grants were great.
Like they discovered like various things and they made,
they made a difference on the margin.
But, you know, all my scientist friends were like, look, the public health people do their job.
I'm like, you know, why does it hurt to have like attack this from multiple directions?
Exactly. And so that's what that this is.
We got here because you brought up the hyperbolic chamber and stuff like that.
It's probably, it's probably, it's probably not true.
Okay. Honestly, it's probably not true if I had to bet.
But if it is true, that's a big deal.
And we should hope it's true.
Okay. So when it comes to health stuff, we should let people be audacious on the margin
so long as it doesn't hurt people.
Yeah.
Right. So I mean, you know, there are certain things that people are doing or have done.
I mean, not again, not to get political where you were going, but like,
I think that is some of the issue that the public health folks have is,
well, you just gave the caveat of not to hurt people.
What's the definition of that phrase?
Because are you talking pure physicality?
Because maybe, maybe we need to extend that a little further.
Again, I'm not, I'm not them, but what?
I mean, so the public health issue is a little different partly because we read the same error.
Right.
Right.
Where as opposed to like Steve Jobs did a lot of like new age and diet stuff for his cancer,
that probably there is some, there is some belief that if he had intervened aggressively
with regular medication, met with regular chemo, he might have knocked it out for a while
and still be with us, you know, but he would want to do this diet stuff for whatever.
And so, but that's his choice.
It is.
He's Steve Jobs.
I mean, yeah, absolutely.
It doesn't spread to other people.
So, you know, I, okay.
So, I mean, like, I will get political.
Like, I'm not myself very liberal, but I sometimes say things about vaccinations or COVID
and like, you know, all these conservative people are like, you know, they use the R word.
Let's just say this.
They're like, you're stupid.
You don't think, you know, and I'm just like, look, I don't like, you know,
I've had conservative friends like laugh at me.
They're like, oh, you believe in vaccination.
I'm like, okay, like this is, this is really stupid.
You know, when, when, when polio was eradicated, it's pretty hard to argue
that Jonas Salk and vaccinations don't work.
Yeah.
So it's different when we talk about, you know, potentially, you know, new vaccines.
Yeah.
I mean, so there are arguments.
So I will tell you guys, and I've told this story before, so I can tell it and he's gone.
Anyways, my best friend from middle school, he moved away in high school.
So that's why I say Mexico middle school.
When I, in the, in like 2007 or 2008, everyone was getting on Facebook.
I was like, when is Dan getting on Facebook?
And he just wasn't getting on Facebook.
And so we talked, I talked to a mutual of my, of Dan, Dan of mine, Tom.
And he was like, oh, did you, so did you ever hear about what happened to Dan?
And I was like, no, because like I moved away and I was in California at the time, whatever.
I'm from Oregon, right?
Turned out Dan went to join the Marines when he was 19.
And he had to take a bunch of vaccines.
And he died of a massive like some sort of brain hemorrhage due to a reaction to the anthrax
vaccine. Wow.
And this happens every year.
But you're going to have to take the anthrax vaccine if you want to join the Marine, right?
So stuff does, I'm not denying that.
Okay.
You should have people, the issue is, the issue is like some scientists,
they want to deny that because it's so rare.
But the issue is like, we have social media today now.
The cases where it does happen are going to be elevated.
I mean, again, as you just mentioned, there's not one genome.
There's infinite genomes, well, eight billion individual ones.
It's like, you don't know how yours is going to react to a given thing.
Yeah.
And also, today, there's a lot of stuff now about, as we're recording,
about the Pfizer vaccine and how it was pushed through really early without the usual checks
and stuff like that.
And the complaints are coming from conservatives, quote unquote, right?
We're the side that wants less regulation.
And I mean, that's how I remember this a couple of years ago.
And when Trump did that whole warp speed, the people who were worried,
who were complaining, were the Democrats and the liberals.
And now it's all flipped.
And it's just like, do we want regulation or not?
Do we want safetyism or not?
I was going to say, in this country, I think pharma's gotten it from both sides at this
point, depending on what year we're talking.
They make a lot of money.
They make a lot of money so they can take it.
My point here, though, is like, it's just interesting to see my conservative friends
just kind of flip.
And I'm not here denying all of their objections to mandates
or to, should a 25-year-old healthy man actually take this?
OK?
Oh, it turns out that the vaccine doesn't prevent infection.
It just prevents mortality or morbidity, these sorts of things.
I think some of these objections are real.
The authorities, the powers that be, should not have lied.
They just admitted to lying about certain things like masks,
because of shortages and stuff like that.
But when you lie because the means justify the ends,
they're not going to ever trust you.
And so the trust is gone in a lot of segments, and it is how it is.
But that doesn't mean that there's no objective truth,
that there's no science, that there's not going to be innovation.
I don't want to be totally negative here.
But we are kind of in a situation in our society
where there's a lot of polarization,
and it's causing some problems with our ability to see clearly.
To me, it's like I have views about various things,
but the most important thing in the world for me is to see clearly.
And for other people, it's music or family.
Sure.
I have a family that's super important to me.
Just from as a kid to now, seeing the world clearly is the number one thing.
Not seeing the world how I want to see it.
Seeing the world how it is.
Well, you and I are both Gen X, so I would agree with you,
but I don't know.
I'm not sure other people feel that way.
Millennials don't.
Zoomers don't.
Some of them feel that they're...
Because they live in cyberspace.
Sure.
Because they're feel.
So I was actually arguing with a friend of mine about this.
But the truth of the matter is,
we're going to have to adapt to them, not the other way around.
Well, I mean, they might have to like adapt to the world.
Depends on how you look at it.
They're changing it.
They're literally changing things as things move forward.
And you know what?
Just like with genes, some's going to be good, some's going to be crap.
Sure, sure.
The United States could ignore science education till Sputnik.
Yeah.
All right.
There are other countries and other cultures out there that have different attitudes.
You know, I can tell you a lot of people in other parts of the world
are like, you guys are insane.
Like, what's going on?
I'm like, well, we're rich.
We're happy.
We do whatever we want.
We're the most powerful country in the world.
What are you going to do about it?
We'll see.
You know, nothing is forever.
You know, China is going through some difficulties right now.
And we're going through a bearish phase about China after a bullish phase.
I think both were overdone.
They still have 1.35 billion people.
They still have an incredible amount of human capital.
All of the stories about all the AI that's being done in China have disappeared
because people are bearish on China right now.
Do you think that they stopped working on AI?
They definitely did not.
No.
So chat GPT is out there.
OK.
But what is like, you know, chat Confucius like?
You never know.
Yeah.
So I mean, my only point is like, I think I agree with you about Americans.
And I'm mildly pessimistic and it is what it is.
But we kind of take for granted that we're number one.
We're World Reserve currency with what's powerful military.
We're the most innovative because of San Francisco and a few other tech hubs,
et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
But eventually all empires hit their limits, hit their end where they've run
through their human capital.
I mean, do you?
I mean, like, I don't know, like you've hired young people.
Lots.
And like, I mean, do you think?
Oh, yeah, I'll tell you, like, I'm not going to.
I'm going to tell you what I think.
I think sometime around the year 2000, something happened.
I think it was no child left behind to fight to pick where they were teaching
to the test for a while.
And these kids are like a fight intelligence, but they know nothing.
Like they don't know a lot of basic facts about the world.
And my hypothesis is that they stop teaching facts and they taught skills.
The skills often were geared towards passing certain standardized tests.
Right.
And this is Goodheart's principle where, you know, when you make a measure explicit,
it starts, stops measuring the underlying thing.
I would tend to agree with a lot of what you're saying, to be honest with you.
I'm not sure if all the variables necessarily add up exactly.
But basically, what you end up doing is you have to basically look at, you know,
varying teachers unions, et cetera, and understand one of two things, right?
One of them is what's working.
And the secondary thing is what's not working.
And of course, the what's not working, a lot of times they're misaligned incentives.
So.
Well, I mean, I have little kids.
I mean, do you have kids?
No.
That you know of.
But genetics will answer this.
But, you know, what I told my my liberal friends is like all the scare stories on Fox News.
They're totally true.
And I know that because it happened to my kids.
So I don't really care what you tell me about what you were at MSNBC or the New York Times.
It happened to my kids.
So I don't care.
Right.
So it's like I'm not I'm not going to disbelieve my lying eyes or whatever.
Right.
So, you know, I'm just saying this for effect.
I don't want to get into it.
But in terms of the future, I am worried about America's kids and America's youth,
because they're not connected to reality.
So we talked about history earlier.
They don't know any history.
OK.
So I'll give you a concrete example.
I mean, that that's proven to be dangerous on both a country and individual on almost every
level when we shall repeat.
Exactly.
So a friend of mine who will probably be a faculty in genetics.
He's from, you know, went to a good school, went to a good lab,
quantitative mind.
He has an undergraduate social science degree.
So he's more multidisciplinary than most people.
And he was talking about how, you know, the Republican court.
He's moderately liberal.
The Republican court is legislating from the bench and how it's super scary and stuff
like that.
And like, you know, this is like unprecedented.
And I was like, well, what about the Warren court?
He's like, what's that?
Yeah, he didn't know just as Earl Warren.
You're just like, how did he not know?
This is really very smart person.
This is a top one percent American.
He's he's going to be a professor at a top research one university, Shirley,
judging by publication record.
Well, people always they any time I say stuff like this,
especially to the younger generation.
A lot of times you're like, well, you're old.
And I'm like, not that old.
Almost every person I talk about was born like 50, 60 years prior to my birth.
So how do you not know them is is my question.
I mean, you know, like, let's talk about like, say, like racism,
which like Americans are obsessed with today.
And, you know, I'm just like, do you know, like America is like fundamentally white
supremacy.
It was it was kind of found, you know, 1790 citizenship as limited naturalization
to white people, right?
But do most people know that we had a Native American vice president in the 1920s?
Wait, I didn't know that.
Yeah.
Did we?
Yeah, Curtis.
I wow 1920s early.
He was Hoover's, I believe.
So that's 28 to 32.
He was three eighth Native American.
He grew up on the res.
Do you did not know that?
I genuinely didn't know that his country in the 1920s.
So you did not know that you did not know that Richard mentor Johnson,
the vice president between 30 1836 and 1840 was in a common law marriage
with a mixed race, like, you know, black, white, mixed race woman and had children
with her.
And he was the he was a candidate of the racist party then, which was the Democrats.
The Democrats were the racist party.
I mean, they're both racist, but I'm only bringing these things up because the past
is more complicated than people think.
And we have, we definitely do too much.
Everybody, but the current generation, they have a children's cartoon version of history.
Yeah.
And I am very definitely a bit too reductive.
I'm very passionate about the details because the details,
like history is like theory.
It's a theory poor field.
Like Peter Turchin and Cleo Dynamics, they're trying to add more theory.
It's a theory poor field.
You need to know the facts.
You need to know the details.
You can't go by theory because your theory is wrong.
All theories are wrong.
Right.
You need to know the facts to see what has happened as an empirical distribution
because we don't know, we don't have like a generative model, you know,
can't generate that, that pattern yet.
Maybe someday we could, we could create a theory, but we don't have it now.
And so you need to know the facts.
You need to know the history, you know, like when you say,
like when you say like, you know, white supremacist has been the cause of,
of everything.
You do understand that the ancient Greeks didn't view themselves as white people.
They viewed themselves as civilized people.
Like they didn't even think like us.
Like they knew that people in Ethiopia had dark skin and curly hair.
The people in India had dark skin and straight hair.
They classified everybody and they knew there were different races.
And they thought the different races had different temperaments.
Okay.
But their taxonomy was not our taxonomy.
They viewed the world fundamentally different than us.
So when you take your own understanding of history, your own understanding of America
after 1965 and you expand it to all of human experience, that is just an intellectual abomination.
I mean, regardless of any of this, I would advocate that at least for most people,
one of the most beneficial things they could do is spend at least a year or two
living overseas in-
Amen.
Somewhere else.
I agree.
Because the mentalities are extraordinarily different between the countries.
I've lived in England.
I lived in Indonesia.
I spent a pretty good amount of time in Colombia.
So like, you know, pretty decent smattering of places and wow,
very different mentalities, very different things, very different just about everything.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, that's, I mean, if you don't want to read a book, experience another culture.
That's going to give you, that's going to give you a different history.
That's going to give you a terminal.
Well, because this is what I was talking about genetics.
Like one individual is the terminus of a genealogical history.
An individual culturally is the terminus of a society's history to some extent.
You're sampling from part of the distribution.
But you get a totally different view and you get like totally different questions
and totally different starting points that you would never think about.
So with, I don't mean to keep going back again to your startup, but like, you know,
these thoughts are sort of permeating my head.
And one of them is, is this, are we effectively talking about like genetic archaeology
in some way, shape, or form?
Sure.
I mean, we are, we are excavating the genealogy of the human race.
I do talk in terms of populations, but populations are just cluster genealogies.
Right.
So for example, there's something, there's a project called Descent from Antiquity.
So the genealogy of the European nobility, you can trace it back to about the Merovingians,
back to about the 600s.
So the 7th century.
And that's the folks that came after Rome.
Right.
Sort of out of Israel and Rome and whatnot, or whatever you want to call that area,
and then sort of moved into France, correct?
You're correct.
You are correct.
Okay.
So actually they're from, approximately they're from western Germany.
They're France.
Oh, okay.
France, yeah, Franconia.
Got it.
All right.
So that's where the Frank, that's, so Franconia and France have the same root.
It's from the Franks.
And so the Franks occupied like.
I'm not sure France and Germany would like to hear that, but.
I think they're okay today.
Charlemagne, Charlemagne, this is what I read.
His native language was actually, was a Germanic dialect.
It wasn't German, because German's from Hessian.
Anyway, but it was a Germanic dialect.
It was like Franconian, more like Dutch or Franconian.
But he could speak, he could speak the Roman language, like, you know, vulgar Latin.
He could speak it.
It was the late, it was like his, his grand, I think it was his sons or his grandsons,
where the division started happening between people in, you know,
France that only spoke the Roman language and people in Germania, you know,
the German areas that only spoke the Germanic dialects.
Anyway, but so in terms of genetics and genetic archaeology, there's this project
of looking at genealogies and they haven't been able to really establish a definitive
descent from someone in class, the classical times, because within the classical times,
there are genealogies, like there are descendants of the Julio Claudians
that you can trace into the early 500s.
But then the sixth century is a total disaster.
Julio Claudians meaning Augustus and Tiberius.
So the Claudians, Tiberius was a Claudian.
And then Augustus was obviously a Julian.
Well, he was adopted by Caesar.
In any case, the two families that are married, so they're called Julio Claudians.
So Nero was the last Julio Claudian.
And he was descended on his paternal lineage, I think, to the Claudians.
Speaking of missing some genes or something.
Yeah, but there were other, there were other branches that weren't, most of the times,
like these elite, it's like a high stakes winner takes all game.
And they often tend to kill like the other branches,
but some of them managed to survive and they persisted down in the records.
We don't know if they're real lineages.
Sometimes people make shit up.
But in any case, so they persisted.
But then there's like a huge break during the Gothic wars under Justinian and stuff
and like the post Roman period when the Roman Empire went in the West collapsed and all this stuff.
And so there's a breakage in the lineages and they reformed these barbaric Germanic warlords.
So, you know, the lineage of the current House of Windsor, which was Saxe-Coburgota,
but I think through the maternal lineage, you can, what?
When I was in Cambridge, they hated it when I brought up the original name of the Windsors
because it was just like, you know, you're, you're under Germans, right?
Sorry to any brits.
Well, I mean, English, English is a Germanic language.
True.
But even on the, even on the, on the lineage that goes back to Alfred the Great and to the House of
Wessex, Alfred the Great, even though he was Christian, he, he traces his descent from Woden,
right?
And so they, these aren't going back to classical, the classical world.
They're not descended from the Roman elites.
And so I'm only bringing this up because with genetic genealogy, you will be able to trace
people to antiquity.
And there is one case that we now know.
It hasn't been extensively publicized, but people know about it.
And it's of a famous person because the famous people's genomes are public.
And ancient genomes are public.
So you compare famous people to ancient genomes and you can find a perfect match.
So there's a Y chromosome lineage passed from father to son directly over 2000 years.
There was one, I believe it was found in Rome.
It seems to be of a Syrian individual.
And this individual seems to have a descendant that's alive today.
Whoa.
His name is Nassim Nicholas Taleb.
Really?
Yeah.
I mean, this seems quite proud of it, I think, but in any case, he's not going to be the only one.
As more and more ancient DNA comes, you know.
But he's effectively got a genealogy date in 2000 years.
Yeah, back there was a Roman Syrian, like literally in Rome.
I think the samples are from Rome.
So this is a Syrian that lived in Rome.
There were a lot of Syrians that lived in Italy actually for a while, you know.
A lot of the early popes like in the 8th century were Syrian.
In any case, so it was Roman Syrian and like somehow his genealogy, you know, Nassim Taleb.
There's a lot of people that we will match over time.
And so we will solve descend from antiquity that way.
We'll eventually probably have like descend from the Bronze Age, you know.
But also, concretely, like my Y chromosome lineage is called R1A.
It's very common in the Indian subcontinent, Iran, Central Asia, and in Eastern Europe.
So 50% to like 70%, I think, of men in Poland have an R1A lineage,
but the Slavic lineage separated from the Asian lineage about 4,500 years ago.
Yes, I think 4,500 years ago.
And so when I meet a Polish guy, I'm just like, yeah, like we had the literally,
we literally had the same forefather sometime in the Bronze Age.
And one of his sons went east and one of his sons kind of stayed in that area.
And we can trace it with ancient DNA. I've written about it.
We can like look at the ancient, we can look at them moving these Indo-Iranians.
We can see them moving from Belorussia to Central Russia to the Urals to Central Asia.
And then eventually they show up in Iran and India.
That's incredible.
Well, I mean, it's really cold in the Urals, so I don't blame them.
It's just amazing what you're able to do with, again, with this modern day technology
and that we're able to move in these directions and trace, again, like,
you know, it's interesting because we sort of covered medicines and preventative care,
et cetera. But it's also, again, can be used as like history marker and archaeology.
It is our family tree and like, you know, it is the...
You think we'll ever get back to Adam for some definition of Adam?
Well, Y chromosome on Adam has, I mean, we know that he lived, I think like 150,000 years ago,
somewhere in Africa, obviously.
There's actually, okay, so there's... So Y chromosome only needs to have letters,
like, so I'm R1A. And so they're like this huge phylogeny and like half of them are in Africa
and then half of them are in Africa, not Africa, because we're sub-sampled from Africans, right?
And so the non-Africans are sub-sam mixed with some of the Africans, Northeast Africans, mostly.
We say that, but like, does this count the populations that are... We know that have been
like millions of years out of Africa, so for instance, like the Australian Aborigines, et cetera?
No, they're the same. They're non-African. They're from... Okay, so I'm gonna... Can I just
exposit... Please, please, yeah.
All right, so because we know this now, like 20 years ago, it was kind of like vague,
but we know this now from homeless genomes, like we know the truth. The truth is out there and we
have it, okay? So this is what we know. It looks like modern humans with like our flat faces,
high foreheads, tiny chins, they're like a little bit juddy, you know? That phenotype,
that morphological characteristics, evolved somewhere probably in Africa, three to 400,000
years ago. Multiple different populations, might have been ancestral. It's kind of complicated,
probably in Northeast Africa, but not sure, but it's probably in Africa, okay? We don't have enough
AGDNA to confirm for sure, but a bunch of them stayed in Africa and kind of, you know,
diversified into Khoisan, Bushman, West Africans, and East Africans. There's a lot of mixing,
a lot of things going on, but let's like take the story now to, you know, well, mine and your
ancestors, because we're not African, okay? To my knowledge, you're not. I'm not. Yeah, well,
I mean, think you're not. 23andMe says like almost down the board, like half non-specific
Celts and the other half German. It's very generic. Okay, okay. What I mean, maybe you think it's
generic, but generic, because you think it's generic. A lot of people think, oh, that's interesting,
you know? But anyway, you get like German beers and Guinness. Yep. Maybe I shouldn't say that,
but whatever. That's not even a joke, I do. But so what we know, just looking at the genomes,
everybody outside of Africa from Andaman Islanders, to Australian Aborigines, to Swedes,
to Chinese, to Native Americans, to Arabs, all of our ancestry goes back literally to like a point
60,000 years ago. And then there's like a long bottleneck, like we were on an island. It might
have been like, it might have been like a Delta, like on the edge of the Sahara and everything,
everyone else died. But we were separated from other Africans somewhere, maybe in the Middle
East, maybe in North Africa. But we were separated for like 10, 20,000 years. And so that's why when
you look at a genotype, like if you look at the 23andMe PCA and stuff like that, Africans are
separated from non-Africans, it's because there was this long period of separation and isolation.
And it was like on average, like around 1000 people. So we might have come close to extinction a
couple of times, but we didn't go extinct. But we were isolated and separated for thousands of years,
thousands, like maybe 10,000. Even when we say 10,000, how would you get all the way down to
Australia? It's really far from anything. I'll get to it. So we know for a fact that there's these
non-Africans, right? And they look like the Africans physically, they don't look like Neanderthals,
they don't look like Denisovans who separated from our genomes like seven, like about like 800,
900,000 years ago. They're an earlier wave outside of Africa, they're cousins to each other.
They split like 600, 500,000 years ago east-west. Denisovans east of Mongolia, Neanderthals west
of Mongolia, Neanderthals in the north, Denisovans from southeast Asia, all the way up into Mongolia.
Okay? So these are human populations that were around. And then our ancestors who are these
African non-Africans, called neo-Africans, they're isolated, they're weird, they're genetically
kind of inbred, we go through a bottleneck, like the signature is quite clear. Okay? Like there's
no structure in this population, this homogenous population of people, like a tribe, and it's
moving outward 55,000 years ago, and we know this from ancient DNA, it's quite clear now, it's 55,000
years ago, they absorbed some Neanderthals. I've seen that where you can sort of tell what percentage
every non-African has. Some Neanderthal DNA. Yeah, it has some Neanderthal. And so we absorbed
some Neanderthals, perhaps we were a coalition of tribes that absorbed a single Neanderthal
tribe, or perhaps like, they're badasses and they're evil and they like killed the dudes and
you know, I don't know, we don't know, okay? But they interbred or they made it, I would say
because I call them human, they made it, not interbred, with these Neanderthals, okay? They
mixed and then they just kept going, okay? Then like 50,000 years ago, people that went east
into Iran and then into South Asia and then into East Asia and to Australia, started mixing with
the Denisovans, okay? 50,000 years ago, you start to see signatures of Denisovan admixture, okay?
By at the latest, 45,000 years ago, probably a little earlier, you start to see humans and
massive megafaunal extinctions in Australia. Really? So modern humans show up within
5,000 years of showing up in maybe South Asia. I'm wondering how they even got to that island,
it's really far. It is, but there's two things. One is during the Ice Age, Southeast Asia was
actually called Sundaland and so the area south of Thailand, north of Borneo, Kalamantan, Sarawak,
actually Sarawak and Sabah, and Thailand, you know, like that, what is it called, the Gulf of
Thailand? Yeah. The Gulf of Thailand was land, it was a savannah. Okay. Okay, so there's a little
land bridge there. Yeah, some of it went east, but it didn't cross like the straits between like,
Lombok and Java were still, they're deep, right? So Malaysia is this transitionary zone.
Actually Bali's in between the two, but yeah. Yeah, okay, so I think it's Bali and Java. Okay,
I think that's what it is. And then Sulawesi was separate, right? And then you go east,
Papua was connected by like a flat, kind of probably like low savannah or maybe wetland
to Australia, and that's called Sahul. Really? Yeah, so it was a little narrower, but they had to
cross. Okay. Probably what they crossed in some sort of like boat, the issue is like we don't,
those don't preserve. Because Papuans look notably different than they do. Like just pure
appearances, they look notably different than a standard Indonesian or Malay. They did, and they
all diverged like 45 to 50,000 years ago. Okay, and then they didn't intermix too much. Papuans
have multiple Denisovan admixtures in them, it looks like, so multiple, so Denisovans were really
separated from each other. There's one type in Neanderthal, there's like four or five types
of Denisovans. To the point where like Denisovans are more different, like the northern Denisovans
are more different than the southern Denisovans, probably, than me and you are from the Khoisan
Bushmen. Wow. Yeah, so there was a lot of Denisovan racial diversity, and these Denisovans got mixed
into the various levels. In China, it's like 0.15%, in India, it's like 0.2%, in Papua, it's like
5%. Okay. All right, I've got two questions, one short, one long. All right. Short one is,
I want to make sure we cover this, we kind of covered this with your sub-stack, etc., but
I want to know where people can find you online. So obviously, Rezeb Khan, Rezeb Khan sub-stack,
I'm sure you've got a Twitter, etc., do you want to sort of give those out before I ask the...
Yeah, the first place is Rezeb.com, has a link to everything. I bought it in 2005,
because I thought maybe someday I'd be able to like say it.
I've got DavidMcKay.com, so I'm with you. Yeah, I also have RezebCon.com, but at points for Rezeb.com.
So I have a Twitter, it's RezebCon, at RezebCon. I tweet there, some of my tweets are pretty spicy
and mean, so just like fair warning there, Rezeb.substack.com, I have a blog called GeneXpression,
GNXP.com, I contribute to a blog called BrownPundits, BrownPundits.com, my company is Generate,
Generate.com, so G-E-N-R-A-I-T.com. I also contribute to Unheard, Unheard.com, and stuff like that,
sometimes National Review. So I write for various places, I don't have the bandwidth right now to
write for too many, and I haven't, but you know, you can see all the links and all the archives.
And also Rezeb.com has an aggregator blog, if you just go back slash WordPress, and that all my
content that's RSS-featable is actually fed into that. Excellent, outstanding. Now, if you could
manifest, and yes, I'm using that word, deal with it, if you could manifest a technology
into existence, you can't say teleportation, it's too easy. But if you could manifest something
into existence, theoretically, something to do with your field, what would that be? What would you
want to see out there? I mean, okay, I don't want this actually to happen because it doesn't make
any sense, it's incoherent, but I love a time machine. Okay. But I mean, I know that's not
logically coherent, you know what I'm saying? It's an all right one, I was more thinking about
something like to do with genetics or something where like this technology would explicitly help
you to do, you know, the work that you want to do, what does that look like for you? The work that
I'm doing right now? Time machine, by the way, isn't a bad answer. So okay, okay, so one thing is
this is probably going to happen at some point in the next 10 to 20 years. So right now to do
genomic sequencing, it's like we're in the era of mainframe computers, like you need a big box
somewhere, and you need like a bunch of workers that do like library preps and like a clean room
and blah, blah, blah, that's fine. The dream and some companies are working on this is that you
have like a small little device, and maybe you could spit into it or get a little pinprick.
You do have some blood, I'm sorry, Elizabeth, you know, but whatever, actually blood is not
often the best for amplification of DNA, but in any case, you know, cheek swab, I don't know,
but you could put it in some little cartridge, pop it into this, and you could sequence whatever
like a USB-feedable sort of deal. And so right now one of the issues technically about sequencing
is it takes the genome of three billion and smashes it into pieces of 200 bases length,
and then it reassembles it with parallel computing and clusters and all that stuff, right?
It's an algorithmic problem, it wasn't possible before the last 20 years, it's really compute
intense, I can tell you for a fact we do it, generate from people, it's just a common thing
people do, but it's intense. Are you using the regular CPU or is this more of a GPU type of...
It's more of a, if you want to scale, you could, you have to do GPU, but I have used CPUs before,
I have done it with CPUs, it depends on how big your genome is and stuff like that,
but anyways, for humans, you want to do GPU probably if you don't want to like wait a while,
you know? So, give me a number, what does this look like on like, you know, on sort of X number
of GPUs, how long is it going to take to sequence? For instance, my DNA or something?
To assemble it, assemble it, I think, I'm trying to think of something we did, I think we got one
of it down to like three hours on like 14. It's not bad, but it's expensive, I mean on 14 GPUs,
that's heavy compute time. I think that, yeah, it's not trivial. So, that's expensive because
it's 200, 200 length segments, to assemble it together and to do the tiling is really expensive
algorithmically. So, the dream is to have a technology that you have a little sample like that,
and then when it reads out the DNA, it reads out thousands, tens of thousands, maybe the whole
chromosome, and so then it can be assembled very easily and very quickly, right? And so, that would
make the sample collection trivial and it would make the assembly trivial, not the assembly,
but the alignment trivial. Actually, you could just assemble your own genome, you don't actually
need to align. So, I say alignment because you have a reference genome and you align it to that
to make it much easier, but if you don't have a reference genome, you assemble it, which is you
do the tiling. Well, if you have, if you have like whole chromosomes being sequenced, you don't,
you don't need to align it, like you got the whole chromosome, right? And so, that's the dream.
There's a technology, there's a company called Oxford Nanopore that has like, I think I've heard
like 150,000 base pair lengths as opposed to 200. That's a massive increase. That's a massive
increase. Their, their issue right now is like their accuracy is a little low, so they're good
for scaffolding and creating the reference, but not the, anyway, my only point is, I think in 10
years, we're going to get to the point where we might have that, okay? And that means that, you
know, a sequencer at every table, on every kitchen table, in every house, just be like,
Siri, can you sequence that? I mean, you could have like a, you could have a Roomba sequencer.
That'd be amazing. The Roomba sequencing everything. Oh yeah. The Roomba. Are you sequencing
that dog's vomit? Yes, I am. Outstanding. That'd be, that would actually be a pretty phenomenal
technology to have out there. Well, I mean, you would, you would, you know, so I give you like
two quick examples. Sure. One is Mike Snyder's geneticist at Stanford discovered 10 years ago
that he had type two diabetes and he didn't understand like what the trigger was because he
was thin, blah, blah, blah. Well, they, he went back and looked and he had a company at that time
named Personalis. I think he has like a follow-up company. Anyway, he was tracking his insulin
levels and he was tracking like cytokines and stuff for immune responses. And it turned out he
had a massive, massive infection and his insulin levels went out of control right at that moment.
So the infection trigger type two diabetes. Okay. And so my point is we can know a lot more about
the origin of diseases and the correlations of disease triggers if we have these data. Okay.
You know, personal genomic data along with these biomarker data and stuff like that. The other
thing is, like, as you know, with sewage data, you get like, you know, COVID sequences or RNA
from, you know, whatever, you get like, treat, you get knowledge of what's going on in COVID. So
imagine, I think this is going to happen in the near future, you have a toilet and the toilet does
like basically what the Star Trek's tricorder does every single day you got to go. Because the
issue is like, if you make it, just analyzing people matter. And like, you know, like 50%
of heart attacks, you have like no idea. You have no idea. And it's just like a surprise. But the
reality is there's often precursors. So imagine that you go to go to the bathroom and then it's
just like, go to the hospital right now, there's something going on with you. Could be a massive
heart attack in 24 hours, right? That would make a huge difference. Massive difference. So these
are these are the futures that I imagine. Instead of those, you know, weird smart toilets that,
you know, blow air in your butt and various other things. Oh, you mean a bidet? Yeah. Well,
let's call it a health bidet. Let's call it a medical bidet. I think there's some crazy ones
out there that I experienced in Europe, excuse me, in Asia. But at the same time,
you're talking about an actual smart one, like, hey, you have like, there is an issue here that
you need to go, you know, go tell someone about. Imagine, for example, like, I don't know, like,
colon cancer or something that you could imagine it would automatically detect very quickly.
That'd be amazing. Because it's near the end of the, you know, but there's other things like,
you know, I had a friend who died of pancreatic cancer. Well, I had multiple people that I knew,
but one of them was a friend who died of pancreatic cancer. The issue with pancreatic
cancer is like the pancreas is in the middle of your body. And it's probably like really hard
to catch it early. Right. But like when it's metastasizing early, it must be like shedding
cancer, you know, it's got to be showing up somewhere. We should be able to have ways to
detect it in the near future. And in that case, like, imagine again, because like,
stuff goes out of you with your stool, like it's a lot, it's a lot bacteria, it's a lot of fiber,
but it's also a lot of your cells. Right. Right. And so imagine that you can detect
really, really early stage cancers that way, like that's a dream. And we, and like, if we could,
we actually have the chemo technology, you know, because a lot of this chemotherapy is like, oh,
you know, if we had gotten it at stage one or whatever, instead of the stage it's at,
you'd be fine. It's just we didn't get it because, you know, we don't normally do biopsies on
healthy people. Sure. And there's reasons, false positives that you don't. Imagine you had the
information, and you have the technology, and you could act on it. It's not rocket science.
Like you're talking about rocket science. This is not rocket science. This is science that we
have the pieces, and we need to snap it together. And what's holding us back is, you know, people
want to do like design. I mean, I stopped playing video games in 94. But I mean, I'm just saying
video games are fine. But a lot of our mental firepower, you know, during the financial crisis,
you know, I had friends that were physicists who were financial engineers, and like, well,
they weren't adding that much value. I mean, I'm kind of libertarian, but like, let's be honest,
they weren't adding that much value with liquidity and stuff like that. They were just making money
of volatility, right? So this was like a brain applied to things to not like actually make
humans flourish into the future, but optimize their own well-being. Anyway,
that's all good. I think there's a famous saying in the tech, you know, specifically the software
world, which is most of the smartest minds of my generation have gone into trying to get people
to click ads as often as possible. Yeah, exactly. That is the 2020 version.
I mean, there's there's something to be said for, but at the same time, yeah, I hear you. It seems
like we could be, we could definitely be, you know, exploring more than we do. Well, I mean,
okay, this is really quickly, it's not just that like our interest rates are going up. This is not
going to be happening anymore. I know multiple people that were hired by a fang company, usually
Google, Facebook and Apple, to be honest. I think there's so much Netflix and Amazon doing this,
especially Amazon hired people and then tasked them with nothing. They were simply hired so
that the other company could not hire them. And that's only because they had a lot of money.
That's cheap money. That is definitely occurred. And that is like, that is like a detriment to
society in so many ways. Well, unless they work for a company, you know, evil, you know what I'm
saying, though, it's like a person with who's brilliant, who's hired to do nothing so that he
doesn't do he or she doesn't do something for another company. That it's a strategy. It happens
from time to time. But listen, this has been absolutely incredible. I love your answer,
especially to this to this. I mean, you've been great the whole time, but especially this last
question, just sort of these portable, portable sequels, sequencers and analyzers would be
unbelievable, get a tremendous amount of value received. Thanks so much, buddy. Appreciate it.
For everybody listening, we have been standing on the shoulders of giants.
Thank you. David Mackay and Razib Khan signing off.
