All right, today, on Standing on the Shrollers of Giants,
we've got Molly Curran.
And...
I was like, I would wave,
but I'm just going to sit here and accept that welcome.
It's on YouTube too, so it's everywhere.
Yeah, okay.
Molly, you've got a pretty amazing background
besides the fact that you're a poker shark,
as evidenced three weeks ago at my place.
You've also got a doctor of pharmacy,
I think from UT, correct?
Yes, from UT back in 2014.
Tell us a little bit about yourself.
So, I actually started in economics
and international relations as a consultant in business.
And then I moved to Austin because that's what you do
when you're like 22 years old
and you quit your nice consulting gig
and moved to a city where you don't know anyone.
And then got here, started looking for other things to do.
I think I figured out in college,
like right at the end of college, I liked science
because I basically waited to take the required classes
for graduation until the easy ones opened up
the last year of undergrad.
And then I was like, oh, I like this.
Why didn't I do this sooner?
But it was not the time to ask your parents
to pay for another four years of undergrad again.
Fair.
So, went back out into the world
and tried to figure out where I kind of fit in
in the science world
and looked at a lot of different medical degree fields
and found pharmacy.
My dad had a lot of health issues
when I was in high school.
And it's kind of one of those things
where a pharmacist actually caught
what was going on with him,
which was that he was experiencing
super low blood pressure from one of the medications
he was religiously taking
because he's a really good patient and takes his meds
like he's supposed to.
Not many people do that.
And so he ended up having to be re-hospitalized
while they retitrated all of that
because a few people were like,
is he having another heart attack?
Is this going on?
And he had gone into the pharmacy
and described some stuff.
So they're like, you do need to go to the hospital.
You do need to get checked out.
This is all symptoms of the blood pressure medicine
doing what it's supposed to do,
but they started like four new medicines for you
and your body just needs to be recalibrated and fixed up.
So it always kind of stuck in the back of my head.
And then in going to UT,
I got a job at a pharmacy here in town
and started night school,
taking just general science classes,
trying to figure it out
and really loved biochemistry and chemistry.
And then applied to pharmacy school.
And here I am today,
a wonderful doctor of pharmacy city in front of you,
having done some residency after pharmacy school
and now working healthcare at the acute care level.
Wow.
So that's just a little, little.
Little pearls.
That's great.
So that was your dad's health condition
seems like it was a potential catalyst
for going into pharmacy.
I think it was a catalyst for like health fields in general
because I had two family members go through
pretty major health complications at the same time.
And so it was always something
that I got exposed to at a young age.
And I actually speak about this with students
when I had have students come rotate
through the hospital with me.
Cause there's a lot of things you see at the hospital
that you don't see in everyday life.
And I think that came up recently
with the Buffalo Bills player and they saw CPR.
Like a lot of people that's the first time they've seen CPR
actually being performed in a non-Hollywood way.
And like people who are at the field close enough to see it
were some of them were like,
I was pretty traumatized by seeing all of that.
And so one of the things I always remember
is being like 15, 16, going to see a family member
and they had a feeding tube in
and the feeding tube fell out of their nose while it was there.
And they were like, we're gonna have to reinsert that
and to watch a tube that's like three feet long
come out of your loved one's nose
and then have to think like
they're gonna have to stick that back up there.
I like at 16 I was just like, ooh.
And then I'm gonna go walk out.
I'm gonna take a walk.
Like my dad's like, it's probably time for us to take a walk
so they can go ahead and do that.
So it's like, you see these things and then
like later in life learning about science
and then learning about various parts.
Like I took anatomy and physiology and biology
and biochemistry.
I was like, I definitely want to do something
healthcare related.
And then I thought about my dad
and that story of the medicines.
And so I was kind of drawn to pharmacy.
I think a lot of times they actually asked family members
to leave the room oftentimes when either a feeding
or breathing tube comes out.
They're like, you don't want to be in here for this.
No, no one wants to see this.
It's a tough thing.
Yeah, yeah.
Okay.
Yikes.
It's like a lot to digest there.
So just on an absolute fundamental level,
most of us think about the person in the white coat
at your local pharmacy,
who for some reason stands slightly above us.
I think Seinfeld has a joke about this.
I was like, I'm super tall too.
Correct.
That I'm extra above.
But I think a lot of us think of that,
but that's not really what it is you're doing.
And then on top of that,
I'm not sure that a lot of people really understand
sort of the fundamentals of like,
what the drug discovery, delivery,
and the entire process.
And a lot of that is in the pharmacy.
It's not just some random chemist
at wherever discovering a new molecule
and saying, what can we do with this?
Right?
There's a tremendous amount that goes into this.
Can we talk about sort of the basics there
just so we can all get up to speed?
By the way, including myself.
Definitely, definitely.
So I think it is really interesting to think
about how this whole process works
because there's a few different drug targets you see.
And I think we learned a lot more about it during COVID
because of all of the vaccine discussions.
But it's like pharmacology as a whole
is the study of drugs.
And then we break it down into,
there's these pharmacodynamic properties
that we have to understand.
So that's what's the drug doing to the body.
And I always think of it as like,
okay, so I have this molecule that does this thing.
What do I want it to do?
So like, you have high blood pressure.
I want to lower your blood pressure.
So I want to find a drug that does that.
But it's not as easy as just saying like,
hey, this drug, as like I saw in my dad's case,
like, hey, this drug lowers your blood pressure.
We're just gonna start you on this
and you'll be good to go.
Fixed, done, you know.
And if it was that easy, I mean,
I'd probably make a lot of money.
Sure, seems like they already kind of do make a lot of money,
but.
That is true.
I won't argue that point.
I'd like to see some of that.
But so you kind of have to end up thinking about things
like how is that drug that you take in your mouth
actually getting to where it's gonna work?
So I have to think about the kinetics.
So what is my body gonna do to that drug
after I ingest it or eject it?
And that's the kinetics part.
So like, kinesiology, kind of the body and what it's doing.
And there's four parts to that that you think about.
So the first thing is,
how is my body gonna absorb that drug?
So you get like an Advil over the counter
and it has that nice sugary coating on it.
I love that.
Love that.
I mean, it makes taking like,
that's my only way I want to take ibuprofen.
I'm like, I don't want any of this generic ibuprofen.
I want the kind that has the sugar coating.
Tastes so much better.
Way better.
But it also is gonna protect that from getting,
like from your stomach acid,
from chewing up that drug before it can get
to the part of the intestine
where your body can actually absorb it from.
So the sugar coating has a purpose.
I didn't know that.
I literally thought it was just a taste better.
I mean, I think the generic brands
don't have the sugar part of it,
but they still have a coating on it to protect it.
So I'm like, you'll hear it called enteric coated,
but that's what they're trying to do.
Cause your stomach's so acidic that there's a lot of things.
There's other things we want to get into your stomach.
Like if you're having indigestion and you need a Tums,
totally unrealistic situation, right?
But that's something that actually we want
to break down in your stomach
and coat that stomach.
But we're, so we've got the kinetics, right?
That's sort of the first piece of breaking down
like how this new molecule interacts with the body.
Right.
What's next?
Well, so the first part of the kinetics is the absorption.
The second part is the distribution.
So once it gets into my bloodstream,
where is it going to go to?
How is it going to get to where it's going to work?
Does it rely on like binding to something else
that's in my blood to carry it there?
Will it just become like a solute in the blood
to get it there?
There's certain drugs that we take
that you can only give IV
because there's no way for me to take it orally.
It gets absorbed by my intestines
and actually make it to my bloodstream
because of all of the areas
that needs to go through there before then.
And then we think about metabolism.
So certain drugs too that come through,
trying to think of like common ones that people know of,
but there's like plavix or clopidogrel.
It's something people take after a heart attack
to break down your platelets.
And that requires an enzyme to make it active.
So even though it's gone through all the steps,
got through your stomach,
got through the intestines in your bloodstream,
now it requires another metabolic molecule
to break it down and make it into that active form
to do what we want it to do to the body.
And then the other thing we think about
is how do these drugs get out of the body?
Because great, they're doing what they want,
we want them to do,
but we don't want to just take one every day
and just continue to accumulate
because you can have too much of a good thing.
That's for sure.
So we look mainly the two organs that do that
are gonna be your liver and your kidney.
And that's why their function is so important.
And then in my setting where I am,
the liver and the kidney are like what we look at a lot
in terms of how well are they working?
What's going on with them?
Like when you come in acutely sick,
your kidney might not be working like it normally works
because it's trying to filter out a lot of other toxins
or it might be trying to filter out a lot of like breakdown
or there's other inflammatory responses going on in the body.
And so because it's not working as well,
then I have to think about the other drugs.
I'm giving you and dose them in a way
that they don't accumulate too much,
but you still have enough of them
to get the effect we want to see.
So that's like the kinetics piece in a nutshell.
Okay.
So when a doctor prescribes something,
let's just say whatever this may be,
is it up to you to determine the dose
or is it they determine the dose
or is it sort of like a consultation or how does that look?
So it depends on the setting that you're in.
A lot of the references that our physicians
and prescribers use will look at those things for dosing,
but in my setting in the hospital,
we have a lot of protocols in place for pharmacists
to be able to automatically adjust drugs.
So we're not doing the diagnosing.
We're not necessarily picking out the agent.
We might have a conversation like,
hey, I saw you ordered this drug,
but there might be an option
that has some slightly better evidence out there
or a new drug that we really would be a better choice
for this patient given other factors,
but then once they've ordered it,
we'll just automatically adjust it
and every day that the patient's there,
we're looking at their renal function for changes
and then making adjustments accordingly.
So we make sure that those bad accumulations don't happen.
It sounds good.
It is good.
It's very good.
I like to think it's very important,
but not in a, I think it's like an environment
where every team member really has a strong role.
And I think oftentimes people don't realize the value
that a pharmacist can have in those settings
until they're actually in them and work alongside them.
And that's something that I don't think pharmacists
as a whole do exceptionally well,
is like get out there and be a good face for the department.
Like I think that perception of somebody standing on
the high tower or in the retail pharmacy
or in our case, the pharmacy is always in a basement
like a central location in the hospital,
but it's usually next to like the cafeteria,
the environmental services department,
and then-
You gotta take your food with drugs, right?
Something like that.
That's true.
I guess it makes sense.
It's very convenient.
They can pick up the drugs
and then they can pick up their meal
and then it's all, it all works out well.
But people will think we're like the people in the basement
who are just making like meaningless phone calls
about things or calling to bother,
but it's usually like for a good reason.
And I think the more people get out of the basement
and interact with the team, they're like,
oh, whoa, like you know all of this stuff.
But it's like, yeah, I do.
It's like, not all the time,
I sometimes have to have my cell phone and look it up.
I can't know every drug in the world, but.
One can hope.
But yeah, that's probably a good thing.
I would imagine,
actually I won't imagine, let's just find out.
Have pharmacists sort of adapted their methods
with technology a bit faster than sort of the,
I guess other parts of the medical industry?
It seems like at least from my, again, anecdotal experience,
it seems like that's probably the case.
I think from, there's a lot of like automated
electronical things that we've used and incorporated earlier.
So in the hospital, we have automated drug dispensing
cabinets.
We're really removing ourselves from that,
like the people who are literally counting pills
and giving them to people.
Cause there's a lot more efficient ways to do that
than pay somebody tons of money to like be counting by fives.
I mean, we're still doing it in certain settings, but still.
And then as far as like drug information indexes go,
like there's a lot more of those available online
and they have really great features.
I think that it's interesting
cause our whole hospital has access to a couple
really, really well referenced and like very,
they're kept very up to date.
There is something called up to date.
So it's not what we're using at our hospital.
But that have really good evidence and they cite literature
for why they're making these recommendations.
And pharmacy is probably the only department
that uses that reference.
So a lot of times you come and you get like this order
and you're like, where did this dose come from?
What's going on here?
And then I'll go find the doc and they're like,
oh, this is what like my medscape article said to do.
And I was like, okay, so that is dosing is for,
it's not usually like totally wrong dosing.
That would be very scary.
Our doctors are like totally off base.
But sometimes it's like, oh, but that's just for like
a procedure that you're doing versus this is something
you want to continue on for a couple of days.
Like we got a decrease cause we loaded you up
with whatever was, you know, if it takes five cookies
to get to a nice sugary state and then it's like,
but now I don't need to eat five cookies every minute.
I can go down to like one every couple hours
and probably still stay at that same kind of area.
So weird analogy with cookies, but it kind of helps.
I dig it.
I dig it.
Recently, obviously, I mean, I don't want to harp on
this subject cause I think everybody wants to leave it
in the past, but what happened with COVID-19 in pharmacies?
It seems like there were some pretty radical changes
sort of in place and a lot of, I mean,
talk about front lines.
I mean, people were literally coming in there
and being like, you don't know if they have,
you don't know what they have.
And they're in pretty darn close contact mask or not, right?
And you're giving them a shot, not you, but like retail
pharmacies were giving them shots, et cetera.
But even still, I imagine the hospital setting,
there's a lot of stuff and on top of that,
it seems like there would be a pretty large impact
in the pharmacy and pharmacological world.
What did that look like?
It was nuts, like completely nuts.
For my friends who worked in like at Walgreen CVS,
I was like, I don't know how you guys are doing this
right now because you are inundated with folks coming in
who are sick, asking questions.
You're expected to keep up with everybody's,
I mean, that was another scary thing was,
you know, you weren't able to go see your regular doctor
and people were getting behind on their regular medications.
So they're trying to keep up with that
and call doctor's offices and everybody's working remotely.
So there was lots of phone calls.
So it was like phone calls, people,
and then when the vaccines came out,
it was like, now I gotta vaccinate you
and I'm expected to do all of this
in like an eight hours shift or you're gonna cut my health.
So I was just like, that is a nightmare.
And when I had the physicians,
so I worked in the emergency department
for most of the pandemic as a pharmacist,
which was a very, very eye-opening experience.
But whenever the physicians there were trying to call
a pharmacy to like see if they had Paxilvid
or one of the COVID drugs,
it was like they'd be on hold forever
and getting super frustrated.
I was like, well, they're probably trying to like vaccinate
like 10 people.
There's probably like three other doctors on hold.
It's like just have a little patience
or tell me which pharmacy you're trying to reach
and I'll see if I know someone who's there
and I'll just text them a question.
Did you ever have patients being like,
I want the ivermectin or the hydroxychloroquine
like the other stuff?
We had patients who'd be in the ICU
and their family members were insistent
that this is what was gonna cure them.
We actually, it was interesting when
they were talking about hydroxychloroquine
before all the evidence came out
that pretty much debunked its use.
We were at the hospital,
we're supplied with like government stores of this.
So we had like thousands upon thousands
of hydroxychloroquine tablets sitting in a room.
We had a COVID room of meds like those.
We had a whole bunch of inhalers.
We had like, we didn't ever stockpile ivermectin
because that data was like the amount of ivermectin
you had to take to inhibit the viral load
was pretty much toxic.
And so when you actually like dig into the literature
behind it and so people thought maybe you can get
a small dose but it's like, you're never gonna get
to the amount of drug to that virus
that would actually inhibit the...
So it may have had an effect but it was irrelevant
because you'd have to load yourself up
to an almost ridiculous level.
Okay, okay.
And then there was, there's a bunch of other drugs
that have come out.
It was really unique cause like as drug experts.
Well, we're the people who like spent all of this time
studying drugs and here you go in like six months
we're gonna introduce like six new drugs
with all these new mechanisms action
that like had never really existed before
or had like the mRNA technology had been something
that had been talked about for a while
but the idea of and the practicality of it
which is something I always talked to friends about
during with like vaccine hesitancy with mRNA was like
this technology isn't like brand, brand new.
Like there's no way the speed at which this was developed
nobody had the idea of it but that cold storage portion
like how are they ever going to mass like produce a vaccine
that had to be stored in like these crazy negative temperature
like we had to buy a special freezer at the hospital too
and then we became the depot for the vaccine
and then you had to figure out how to pull out vials
and then...
And apparently the way it was shipped
like when you broke the seal on one
it was breaking the seal on five
I think something like that
at least that's what the guy at CVS told me.
Well once you break the seal on the vial
yes you have to use all the doses that are in that vial
and so that became a thing
so when we got our first doses of that
we were having like vaccination
because they mandated everyone who worked at the hospital
had to get vaccinated.
I think that was most healthcare workers.
Yeah, most systems
and there were very few exceptions at that time
and so we were holding these mass clinics
and then you had like extra doses
and then it was like well we can't get rid of the...
Like at that time was when it really wasn't readily available
I think that December
so then people are like calling random people
and be like do you want a dose of vaccine
because we don't want to be that healthcare system
that wasted doses of this.
Of course.
And what actually ended up happening
and it was kind of interesting
was that Austin EMS
and some of our emergency medical services
actually weren't in the first groups
who when they were distributing vaccine.
The ambulance drivers, okay.
And so we would call them in
and we would have them come through
and we ended up vaccine.
So that was part of the...
Yeah, paramedics.
Yeah.
I mean I would probably do paramedics, cops, fire,
firefighters, et cetera.
Well, I don't know.
Good thing I'm not in charge of this, but whatever.
It's like, it's good for all of us
that the hospital will have this
because we're coming in contact
but they seem like they really need to.
And when we found that out
and it was a very...
I think it was within a week
they were all had it available to them as well.
So, but it was that panicked period where you don't know.
I mean, nobody, I felt like new.
Is it gonna be a week?
Is it gonna be two weeks?
Is it gonna be...
How long is it gonna be
before we get the next batch of these in?
And in working in the emergency department
and seeing what those paramedics were seeing daily,
it was like, how can they not be?
There's in this small metal van
with somebody breathing COVID on them.
And they, yes, they have all the equipment
but, and then it always felt like you're in an episode,
some kind of sci-fi thing
because everybody has respirators on
and they're trying to ask you for things
and you're like, I don't know what you're saying.
And so then I'd bring like six different items
because I was like, it was one of these six things.
I'm pretty sure you said.
And then they'd be like, no, it's none of these.
They were in full, like,
I don't know what it's called, hazmat gear,
whatever you would call it for.
Like, you know, I think of that movie Outbreak
where they're in those plastic suits, like in the level.
It was almost like that where they had,
and I can't believe now that I'm even blanking on
what it was called.
But it was like this plastic helmet thing
that had oxygen going into the back of it.
And they would like bring these down.
And then-
I think that was just like Outbreak.
Yeah.
And then they were wearing like a whole white gear jacket.
And so, I don't know.
And I'd be like, oh, I have my reusable N95 mask
that I just had to keep in a paper bag
because it got assigned.
Seems like you were fine.
Yes, I actually have not ever had COVID as of yet.
Wow.
So, I might be one of those people with an immune system
that just doesn't let you get it.
I don't know.
But, or I might get it tomorrow
because I just said this.
You never know these days.
Are there differences?
I don't, maybe this is a silly question
because I'm not sure if everybody has access to these,
but I know there are differences
between sort of the Pfizer versus Moderna.
Are there differences between the other ones
that were developed?
I think there was a Chinese one,
Sinovax and something else, somewhere else.
So, an AstraZeneca had one as well.
Easy.
And I think Johnson & Johnson at one point had one.
They did.
But they may have pulled it.
They did.
It was always made fun of because of the thrombo-
I mean, not made fun of, but it was the one shot
which was really nice.
But then there was a risk of thromboembolism
and we were seeing higher rates of like
heart attack post-administration
or developments of blood clots after it was given,
especially in younger people.
Sounds like heart attack or stroke.
Yeah.
Not good.
Not good.
So, and all of these all got just emergency use
authorization which goes back to the whole trials.
Although they were tested on lots and lots of people
before they were, obviously at this point,
we kind of know more about that process, but...
I think it'll be interesting to see like
if there are any sort of lasting issues or whatever
going 10 years from now.
It's just gonna be honestly interesting to see.
Yeah.
Okay.
Potency and efficacy.
So...
What?
I guess that's just the question.
What?
I like it.
You hear these sort of,
you hear these terms thrown around
when it comes to drugs, potency and efficacy.
I have no idea what either one of those two mean.
Okay.
Help a brother out here.
So, let's go to a class of drugs
to kind of give a good example of it.
So, we're gonna go to the opioid field.
Not that I'm taking them a lot,
but I use them a lot at work
in terms of giving them to other patients.
I think you mean you distribute them.
Yeah, yeah.
I distribute to other people to administer to patients
for their use.
And so, you have like morphine,
which is older, painkiller and fentanyl,
which now you hear a lot about in the news
because it's mixed in with a lot of street drugs as well.
So, both of them are gonna work on your opioid receptors.
Both of them are going to like from an efficacy standpoint,
treat pain and help you out there.
But from a potency standpoint,
I need way less fentanyl to treat that pain.
Like fentanyl will be measured in like microgram dosing
versus that morphine,
where I'm gonna have to give you milligrams.
So, a thousand folds difference
in the amount of drug I gotta give to you
to get that same pain effect.
And so, and that happens in all sorts of classes of medication
where something can be way more potent
and then but equally efficacious.
So, it takes a lot less of it to get you to the place
you want to be, pain, not necessarily totally pain-free,
but a lot more comfortable.
And then there's like therapeutic indexes.
So, with things that are more potent,
are like index between like go back to cookies.
I love cookies.
I really love cookies.
These are good analogies.
So, if I like, I'm like five cookies,
it can take, it can eat five cookies
or it can eat 10 cookies.
I eat a whole sleeve of Girl Scout cookies
or I eat two sleeves of Girl Scout cookies.
Still gonna be five.
Sounds good.
Or you have something that's like a narrow therapeutic drug,
therapeutic index drug, and that's like I eat a cookie
and then if I take one bite of another cookie,
I might die because that's like too much.
So, a lot of potent drugs have like a very narrow window.
So, I have to be a lot more careful
in dosing those drugs than other things.
And so, that's something else that pharmacists
can or have been involved with is like monitoring
of those super like we have a really small window
that we have to hit to make sure we're like
getting the effect we want without pushing you
to a place we don't wanna push you to.
So, it seems like the drug you would want
is something with a tremendous amount of efficacy
and very low potency.
Like, it's a generic statement.
Yeah, or it could be efficacious,
it could be fairly potent,
but have like a lot, like you want something
that doesn't affect other parts of the body.
You're like, you want it to be able to get its job done,
get like slip in wherever it needs to get to do.
It's area of action without causing many effects
on the rest of the body.
Are there examples of the opposite?
So, something that's extraordinarily potent
and very low efficacy.
And if so, why would one take that?
I can't think of one off the top of my head.
Okay, that's good, I guess that's good, right?
I was like, there probably is something out there
that's like that, but I-
There would probably be something
for something unbelievably specific.
Yeah.
And like, it's like there's,
you don't really have a choice,
this is it type of deal.
Yeah, I'm gonna have to just curious.
Think about that one.
Just curious, I like doing polar opposites.
A ponder on that, yeah.
Like doing polar opposites just to see where we go.
Yeah, I was like, wait a second.
It feels like it should exist, but I can't think of it.
So, you mentioned therapeutic index.
Is that, does that somehow affect the safety
and effectiveness or?
So, that window is like the window we wanna hit
to make sure we're getting the effect
we wanna get from the drug without causing too many,
like bad detrimental effects.
So, when they do drug testing, like the initial,
so when the FDA is, they find a drug molecule
and they wanna start testing it
and they do animal testing,
which like obviously there's some FDA modernization act
where they're trying to move away from that
and start in humans.
But there's something to be said for the fact
that they'll do animal testing to find like,
at what point is an effective, yeah,
an effective dose versus a lethal dose.
And then they'll have like those kind of two dosing things
and then they'll look at that effective dose
and that's the dose they're gonna take
to your first round of studies,
which will be humans that don't necessarily
have this disease state.
But just to make sure that this medicine's still safe
at that effective level.
And then they'll expand it to people with that disease state
or without a lot of comorbidities,
which will be slightly larger.
And they might say, oh, while we've seen it's effective,
the cookie, going back to my cookies again.
Like it could be five cookies seems to work
or 10 cookies seems to work
and doesn't seem to cause a lot of harm
and like people are perfectly healthy.
So let's take it.
I mean, for a state with cookies,
it doesn't cause diabetes or whatever, okay, yeah.
All of the people who participated in this trial
got diabetes.
I mean, with your cookies, clearly.
Okay, okay.
There's another word.
Another drug word.
There is affinity.
We hear this one tossed around quite a bit.
How does that relate to the other two,
sort of efficacy and potency?
So affinity is kind of a more,
is a different kind of concept
as far as those three play together.
So affinity is usually drugs,
refers to drugs that have specific binding sites.
So this is pharmacodynamics.
So this is pharmacodynamics.
Okay.
Where we're talking about what the drug's doing to the body
and we have various types of drugs that do different things,
but there's some that are really particularly designed
to bind to an enzyme.
And so some perfectly match.
Like when we talked about,
when people talked about COVID,
they were designed to find that spike protein
and like bind and adhere and mimic that
and facilitate copies so then your body could,
the immune response to your body could find
that spike protein and locate it no matter where it was
and then stimulate that immune response
so you wouldn't get COVID.
But there's other drugs that like maybe have a high affinity,
like alcohol, one of the most commonly,
probably most commonly used,
one of the most commonly used drugs, caffeine,
I think beats it out.
Not a fan of caffeine, big fan of the first one.
So alcohol is a big affinity for your,
I mean, it has that relaxation effects
because it has a big affinity for a neuroreceptor
in your brain, they call them GABA receptors.
And so.
Probably my favorite receptors.
Well, then it uproculates.
So as you get more exposure to that,
your body like tries to make up for that.
It's like, I'm not gonna get this
where you develop tolerance.
I was joking, I couldn't name another receptor, so.
I have another one, NDMA.
Sounds less interesting than the GABA receptors.
So that's kind of your like, stimulant receptor.
Okay, maybe I was wrong.
You're like, wait a second,
I don't know which one's my favorite now.
And alcohol is an interesting drug
because it's like actually probably of illicit drugs,
one of the most, I mean, not illicit, but abuse drugs.
It's probably one of the most deadly for people to have,
we talk about opioids all the time,
definitely not a safe drug to be dabbling in,
but of commonly used things.
Alcohol actually like abusing it
and then just cold turkey stopping it
can be one of the most deadly things people can do.
And it all has to do with this receptor affinity
and regulation that your body does.
I mean, that's just in the imbibing of the drug itself.
But even beyond that,
you've got silly behavior that's going on,
dangerous behavior that's going on, driving while drunk,
committing all sorts of crimes while drunk, et cetera.
Yeah, I mean, I don't think there's anybody
who would argue with what you're saying.
So from a pharmacy standpoint, then on top of that,
so you stop drinking and you have all of these receptors
that are now out of balance,
so your body tried to balance out for it.
So you have a lot, they tried to get rid of those
kind of relaxation receptors
and now they've given you way more
of those excitatory receptors.
So you don't have that even balance.
And so when people stop drinking,
you hear about like delirium tremens
and let's see in pink elephants and hallucinating.
When you go cold turkey or having seizures
and it's because you have so many of these
stimulatory receptors that are firing
and they don't have enough GABA receptors
to kind of balance them back out.
And so there's usually like up to a week period
and somebody who's got a significant alcohol problem
where they really need to be, excuse me,
I've been drinking bubbly water.
But they really need to be seen
and watched by health professionals
because that can be extremely deadly.
Sounds like what you're saying is wean.
Don't cold turkey.
Yeah, yeah, definitely wean.
I'm fairly sure a number of relatives know this quite well.
Okay.
What are some of the differences,
sort of like there's individual differences
in like genetics, at least as I understand,
metabolism, maybe other things I'm not thinking of
in sort of pharmacodynamics.
How does that affect people?
So the metabolism piece is really,
so when I think about pharmacodynamics,
I think about what the drug is doing to the body
and then the metabolism piece comes into the kinetics
because it's like what my body's doing to the drug.
But there's all sorts of, usually there's a lot of enzymes
in your body that are breaking things down.
There's a really complex system of enzymes
that your liver makes.
When your liver's an amazing filter for your whole body.
Yeah, I've been like totally amazed by it,
how much it can get rid of and take care of,
but it has a very advanced like secondary system,
which is called the CIT Cytocrome P450,
which is a totally, probably overly technical term,
but it's an enzyme.
And there's all sorts of like variants
of flavors of this enzyme.
So you have the like CIT 2D6 and the CIT P450
and the CIT 2C1.
And so all of these people will have in varying levels.
And then metabolism can also be affected
because you could take a drug
and it could induce one of these enzymes to work better
or you could inhibit it, make it work,
not be able to do its job.
And then for people taking a few different drugs
that can end up being a problem
and something we need to think at
from like an interaction standpoint.
And then just from a personalized medicine standpoint,
because everybody's body is gonna have varying levels
of these drugs, there's certain drugs
that may not work for you if you don't have this particular,
it's not so much in the liver,
but some of the like immunotherapy
and new oncology drugs.
And this is not a field that I like have super expertise in,
but I also think is amazing and interesting
is that they'll look for certain mutations
that you have in your genes.
And so if you have like a certain type of mutation,
I think it's like jack, they call it jack two mutation
for lung cancer patients.
It makes you a candidate for this particular therapy
because it acts on that particular mutation.
And that's the level of specificity
we've been able to get to with therapies, which is awesome.
I mean, it's unfortunate when you have these
really specific therapies that you don't have that mutation
because then you're like, well, yes, that one's off the table,
but it's really cool that that science
is moving in that direction.
And that's something that they've actually said
about mRNA vaccines is there's some technology
that in being able to isolate that part of RNA,
they might be able to do that for cancer cells
and like personalized treatment that targets certain areas
like certain RNA streams of cancer cells
and would allow more targeted therapies
so you don't get like the major adverse effects
that you can see with a lot of the chemotherapies
that are just targeting every cell
that rapidly divides in your body.
Wow.
I mean, this is one of my favorite topics,
personalized medicine.
I love this, that the science is just moving,
even at all, even at all that it's moving.
That's amazing.
Do you have particular research projects
that you're involved in right now?
I don't know if you're able to discuss those,
but like, maybe we could talk generic terms.
Pun intended since I'm talking to a pharmacist.
Well played, well played.
Horrible, horrible.
I liked it, but I'm a pharmacist, so I should.
So from a like drug, kind of the large, I guess,
drug discovery phase standpoint,
I'm not as involved in that type of research.
We will be study centers for some of those projects
and we actually have a pharmacist whose role
is an investigational drug pharmacist
and he like oversees the pharmacy part
of all of our studies, makes things sure,
things are blinded and randomized.
And so he does that for several chemotherapy,
cardiovascular, we have some maternal health studies
going on at some of our sites.
Me and my role, because I'm more on the clinic facing side,
I do a lot of retrospective data and studies.
And so I work with some of our residents
after they graduate pharmacy school,
they'll come and do a year or two
of postgraduate residency.
And the reason that's usually recommended
if you wanted to be in a more clinical setting is just,
it's like an extra two years of intense learning
where the pressure to do a bunch of other stuff is synonymous.
You make a lot less money, but like it's a,
and you work a lot, but like you have the resources
of getting to spend four weeks at a time
with somebody who just does cardiology pharmacy
and four weeks of somebody who just does oncology pharmacy.
But as part of that, they're required to do research.
So I've worked with several of those residents.
We published two articles this past year.
One, we were doing a new novel drug therapy for stroke.
So not totally novel.
Novel is probably the wrong word,
but it was not the guideline preferred therapy.
We were an early adopter for a drug called TonectaPlace,
which can be delivered as a one,
like one IV push bolus versus the previous drug
where you had to do an IV push
and then you had to run an infusion over an hour.
So this was like slowing down and making it difficult
if you presented somewhere out in the Hill Country
or really a rural hospital.
A lot of the ambulances didn't wanna bring somebody
on an infusion because it's like a bloodthinning infusion
if they had a bad reaction, which it can cause anaphylaxis.
Not, it's very rare, but it could happen.
They didn't wanna be dealing with that
and have the patient on a blood thinner
and having a stroke in there.
A lot of stuff going on at the same time.
So this is like, we give it to you, it's a straight push
and then we can transport you,
which is one of the reasons we move towards it
among a lot of others.
And so we discussed dosing errors.
We looked into the errors and ways to prevent that,
ways to move to a protocol with that
and provided a lot of kind of firsthand experience research
based on what we saw from that
and published that for other hospital systems
that might be looking to go in that way.
And then we did another study, another resident
about various sedation strategies
and people who were paralyzed,
which is totally, totally, totally different topic.
But I've always been interested in my training
and backgrounds in emergency medicine, critical care.
So the ICU is where I feel most at home.
I don't know what that says about me.
You're talking about basically putting people
under who are paralyzed or disabled in some fashion.
So one of the treatments they have,
and we did this a lot in COVID,
for people who are having trouble
like keeping their oxygen saturation up was,
I only know this at a very probably basic level
from the point of a treatment perspective.
But if they were failing to saturate
one of the ways that we can maintain O2SATS
is you'll intubate and put somebody on a ventilator
where we can control their respiratory rate
so we can get you breathing off CO2.
They can provide positive pressure
so it'll keep your avioli open
so you have more space to get oxygen in.
Seems like doing this in the long term
is not a good thing though.
No, not the best.
You usually have to have a lot of recovery
and therapy afterwards.
So for patients who are not on that conventional ventilation
still having trouble because their body's
just naturally fighting,
those settings will paralyze them
for temporary periods of time
to help their body just comply with those settings
that are gonna make sure we're maximizing their oxygenation.
But obviously, if you're completely paralyzed,
I don't know about you,
but I wouldn't want to remember that experience at all.
Nope, that would suck.
So we looked at the different types of sedatives
that you can use to make sure
that you're achieving deep sedation.
And then after extubation,
like how quickly can you get a tube out of somebody
depending on which sedative you used
because of the way they're metabolized
our hypothesis was like one would be preferred
over the other because you'd be able to get
out of the system quicker
once the person's ready to come off the bench.
Because again, like I said,
it was gonna drive that like respiratory depression
and make it harder to breathe.
And so we didn't want them to have lingering effects
from that.
So we decided to look into that question.
I don't think we had enough patience
to really find the answer,
but it was an interesting study.
I love that people like you are in this field
and I'm really glad that I'm not.
I'm just gonna be honest there.
That's fine.
I don't know how you can deal
with this stuff on a day-to-day basis.
It's tough.
Have you ever had some tough days?
I mean, I'm sure that's a silly question.
I'm sure the answer is yes.
What does that look like?
I think so there's been a lot of tough days
that are different.
I think there's-
Does one stick out?
I mean, I think like when COVID hit,
the first patient we had to intubate
and then he was in his 40s,
like that was a rough day
because nobody really knew what was going on.
We were trying to like deal with this containment
that nobody knew how contained it need to be.
And then you're not used to having a closed door
and people are trying to scream through the door
and it's just kind of all chaotic.
But when I was a resident in training,
I worked at a trauma hospital
and I think those days were some of the hardest days
because you'd work in the emergency department
and we were part of the response team
for any of the major traumas that came in
and we were also pediatric trauma center.
So those are the cases that are like the ones
that I remember that stick out probably the most.
And you're in the moment in time,
you are able to compartmentalize these things
to a point where it's like,
you don't really think about what's in front of you,
but rather like, what do I need?
Solve the problem.
Yeah, and you go into this micro management zone
of like also trying to anticipate
what's the doctor going to want is the next thing.
Like this person was in a massive car wreck
and they're losing lots of blood till the blood gets here.
We need fluids to keep their pressures up
and like trying to be one step ahead.
So you kind of can take that off their plate
in that situation so they can focus on the other things,
which was a skill that was,
I remember my first day as a pharmacy student
being in that situation.
And my preceptor, wonderful man,
he was like, can you make this vasopressor?
Oh, which is one of those,
maybe to like help increase their blood pressure
because his blood pressure was just tanking
because he was bleeding from somewhere.
And he's like, you take this vial
and you put it in the IV bag.
It's like, cool, this shouldn't be too hard.
Man, I was shaking, I was like red, I was flustered.
I kept looking in the room at the guy
like tearing up a little bit.
You could tell like the resident who was with me was like,
I could just do this so much faster than she can do it.
And he's like, no, this is how you have to kind of learn
to be able to function in these situations.
And he's like, not everybody's, this isn't for everybody.
He's like, this is kind of like a trial by fire thing
because he had actually secretly already mixed it
and given it to the doctor, it was more,
but he hadn't told me that part,
which was probably good
because it took me so long the first time to do it.
But I was like, I also, when I got to see it being given
and see the difference it was making,
like in that moment for that patient's blood pressure
and like being like, okay, so he's getting enough blood
to major organs right now.
So we're not losing heart tissue.
We're not losing brain tissue.
And I was part of the reason we were able to get there.
Part of the life saving process.
I love this.
And it's a little bit of an adrenaline rush
once you get used to it, even though it can be extremely,
it can be extremely sad though.
I'm sure, I'm sure of that.
Yeah, still don't understand how you guys do that.
I don't, I'm not sure I could handle that.
I remember being at any number of the places
that I've worked in, something, you know,
server went offline and we're losing a ton of revenue,
blah, blah, blah, it's just like that.
It's just so insignificant.
Well, and that's where it's funny now.
Even though you feel pressure, it's just like,
there's just, it's not even close.
It's a different kind of pressure.
It's not even, you wouldn't even call it pressure.
You can't compare them.
No, you can't, but the thing now is like
in working in healthcare, that's kind of frustrating.
And I think you see this coming out in the news more is
you have your frontline workers who are seeing this,
dealing with this, having to cope with all of these things.
And then you have the bottom line dollar
that the hospital system's making.
Not that it makes a difference there,
but it has made a difference in wages and hours
and conditions.
And like there is the jokes and I will say,
definitely participated in the jokes about like,
oh, we're getting pizza for all of our hard work.
You know, good job.
Like, okay, they like intubated four people
on this floor today.
You're going to give all these nurses pizza.
Thanks.
I mean, it was, it was, it wasn't not appreciated,
but it was just kind of like come,
why don't you come down here and like help us instead?
Or they gave us a little packet of like,
you're a star and it was like a starburst,
but it was literally a starburst.
Sugar and pizza can cure a lot of things.
I'm not, I'm not in medicine.
I'm just saying.
It's also a miracle we don't all have diabetes.
Zero question there.
We were talking a little bit earlier
about sort of the different copies of genes
and various things like that.
Has there been some gene editing work going on
in pharmacology and whatnot?
You know, how has gene editing and the like
affected your field?
So for me personally, I don't,
I haven't seen that technology really.
Okay.
In my day to day work, cause a lot of the stuff
that's probably where they're looking at that is,
I think it's, I mean, I could be,
there could be something out there that I don't know of,
but I think a lot of it is probably still
an exploratory kind of laboratory phases
in terms of trying to figure out.
And I think this will go back to personalized medicine,
we'll be trying to figure out like,
how can I look at this genome sequence
and like maybe insert something in there
that causes this not to replicate in a certain way.
Or, and I think they're just trying to figure,
they're at the point where they're trying
to figure that kind of stuff out.
Like what can we do with what we found?
It exists.
So it'll be exciting to see what happens in that area.
There are some like, there's a drug,
and I forget, I wanna say it's used in prostate cancer,
but I'm not 100% on that, so don't quote me on it.
But they do take like somebody's blood and they spin it
and they take certain components of it
and then they put the drug in with those components
and they infuse it back in to your system,
which is kind of interesting and probably getting closer
to some of the possibilities that you could see
with like gene editing and some of the stem cell research
as well for therapies, but that'll probably be handled
more by physicians in those fields
where they'll give those therapies without
as much pharmacy interaction,
which is also an interesting thing.
It's like the OR, the OR to me is this place,
I don't know what happens there,
I give them a lot of drugs
and then I don't know where they're giving them.
Okay, so we touched a little bit earlier
on some of the opioid crisis.
What does this look like from your perspective?
I mean, is it the doctors prescribing this
that's like an actual issue?
Is it the pharmacists doling it out?
Is it going out of the back of these factories?
What the hell's going on here?
So there's a lot of things that fed into and fueled this.
The first was the physician prescribing
and this came about probably like the late 2000s,
early 2010s, maybe even a little earlier in the 2000s,
but they started calling pain the fifth vital sign.
And so you had to treat your patients vital signs
and pains one of those.
So you need to make sure your patients are satisfied
from a pain perspective.
Isn't that a little weird?
It's totally weird.
Like when you hear someone say that now,
you're like, no, it's not a vital sign.
I mean, if you're experiencing pain,
it's literally a side effect of something else.
I mean, am I saying that wrong?
It seems like that's what it is.
Why would you treat the pain
and not the thing that's causing the pain?
Well, you treat both, right?
But you're like assessing the patient's pain
throughout their stay.
But the problem is then you're gonna start
to build tolerance to these pain agents
or you build the expectation.
And in some of these syndromes
where you might have chronic pain,
you're never gonna be pain-free.
You're always gonna have some semblance
of probably pain, unfortunately.
And there's probably a lot of other things
you could do for it that are not related
to taking a medication at all
that would help improve it faster,
or not faster, slower,
but may overall help it go away more.
And so, it's just becomes a thing
where they become more tolerant to it.
And then the dosing just gets higher.
And then the expectations given
that I'm gonna be pain-free all the time.
Even the surveys that like hospitals
were asking patients after they left
asked like, how well did you feel
your pain was addressed during your stay?
So they were, and that was going into like,
what we call an H-cap score,
which is something that healthcare,
like they'll report out for like,
is this a good hospital?
Do they have good H-cap scores?
Because it's like looking at patient satisfaction.
Patient feedback, got it.
I'm various areas.
And I think all of a sudden people realize
this is where we're heading with this.
So that whole concept kind of got scaled back.
And now it's pretty much not a standard of practice.
There's a lot of things with pain
and assessment that are still,
but we're not calling it the fifth vital sign anymore.
And then the other thing that happened probably
about the time I started getting into pharmacy
and I think back about this and it's wild
to think about were pill mill pain clinics.
So there's a lot of money to be had
when you prescribe narcotics and dispense narcotics.
And so if you have a lot of people who,
if you can see a lot of people in a day,
you can charge for all these patient visits.
So you had these pain clinics popping up
and they would prescribe, they'd be like known to,
hey, we'll just do an x-ray.
Oh, you have this diagnosis.
Now I'm gonna start prescribing you 120,
Norco 5, 325s, 60 Somas, 60 Xanax.
And they're allowed to do that?
They were doing this like in Florida.
There were places in Houston.
When I was working, there were certain doctors
we would refuse to.
So pharmacy kind of became a part of this
because there were pharmacies that were pill mills
and the pill mill term came from pharmacies
who just were like, hey, this is a prescription.
I'm not gonna ask questions.
Here's all these pain medications
because we weren't being closely regulated.
We were being regulated for these drugs,
but not to the same extent that I would say
regulations have come down on pharmacies since then
for your responsibility and your monitoring
and the diligence of monitoring that happens
and information sharing.
Cause also like if I, the pill mills knew oftentimes,
but like when I worked as a technician
at a Walmart pharmacy, which I did,
every time I tell someone I worked at Walmart,
they're like, you were one of those door-graders
that smiled, I gave the cart and said,
I was like, no, I worked in the pharmacy,
but it was right next to the door-grader
and he was an awesome guy.
I believe that there was a door-grader
who retired with a million dollars in his account.
Oh, I'm a shoulder.
I think you can Google that.
Walmart, for all the crap that it gets,
Walmart's not a bad spot.
No, this one had its moments.
But we would occasionally get these prescriptions
for like these wild quantities of pain medicines
and occasionally we would have filled one.
And once the word got out that this pharmacy had filled one,
we would have a line of patients
where it all have come from the same doctor
in Houston with the same prescription.
They always threw a multi-vitamin on there too,
you know, just making sure.
While you're stoned up, but Jesus,
you still need vitamin C.
In case you forget to eat.
In your iron.
In case you forget to eat today,
let's just make sure you get your vitamins.
I always found that like, I was like,
if I'm going to find some humor
and this person being wildly addicted to opioids,
I'll find it in that they still are taking
their multi-vitamin, or at least they're picking it up.
And they'd pay all cash for these medicines.
Sounds right.
There was even like people would call and be like,
do you have the yellow ones or the white Norcos?
Cause they had like a favorite manufacturer brand,
even though generic brands should all be within
like a 10% amount of drug that's in them.
That's the same.
Apparently, at this point in time, in 2008,
the yellow Norcos were the thing.
So we'd always tell them we didn't have them,
even if we didn't have them.
Cause we're like, we don't want you showing up here.
But so this was kind of a phase that things went through.
And I think because of this,
then we started seeing this crackdown of prescribing.
There was a development of these prescription
monitoring programs.
So anytime anybody got a controlled substance now,
we, the pharmacy sent data to the state here in Texas.
And this was like probably about 2014, 2015
that started happening.
And then that data now is like a nation, almost nationwide.
So almost every state shares that data amongst themselves.
And now there's like legal requirements
before you're even dispensing a prescription for an opioid.
I'm checking to see what's your refill history on this.
Do you look suspicious?
They have suspicious, like a,
I forget what they call it.
It's like a NARC score or something.
But that is definitely not the name for it.
But it was a, who's assigning that?
The state board of pharmacies.
Oh my, okay.
But it's a like probability of risk
based on the number of different prescribers,
different pharmacies and different areas
that a patient has gotten narcotics from
in a certain period, in a short period of time.
So that's been some things that have kind of helped maybe
and providers are now as of last year required
to also view the state of before
they even write the prescription.
I think because of that, though, that fuels people
obviously who have drug addictions now
are looking for alternate ways to get to that.
And so it's been interesting from the pharmacy perspective
for people who work in community pharmacies
because they're seeing people come in
for those new medication assisted therapy treatments
that we have.
And then we can also hand out Naloxone,
which is the reversal agent
for if you have an opioid overdose.
Does that still work on fentanyl?
It works on every opioid to reverse its effects.
Fentanyl, the issue can be that it, because it's so potent.
As we talked about earlier, all those cookies,
it won't last very long.
And so usually the boxes that you get,
you get two nasal sprays in them.
And sometimes these patients will need like four
before they're able to reach emergency services,
like an emergency department.
But the biggest thing has just been getting that out
into the community and providing the education
about when it's appropriate to give it,
like what's the difference between just a great high
and an actual overdose is what my friend Lucas would say.
He's like...
What does this mean for our country?
Or for that matter, the world or humanity, right?
Like what does this mean in terms of like this crisis
like we've never seen before?
I mean, I think it's a function of just like the...
A function of different things that people have,
you have seen addictions to in the past
and an idea of a society where we're always looking
for something that's going to satisfy
that like dopaminergic fix.
And so, yes, this is a dangerous way, obviously, of doing it,
but there's always going to be a substance that comes along
and people are like, this gives me this great feeling
that blocks out a lot of the chaos in my world,
whether it be true pain, whether it be emotional pain,
whatever they want to be numbed from.
It's all true pain, but physical versus emotional versus,
I don't know, spiritual, whatever it would be.
And I just think like right now in the world,
the way it is where you have a 24-7 culture.
I mean, even I sometimes I'm like,
why am I checking my phone like first thing
when I wake up in the morning?
Like I have other things I could be doing.
I never do that.
I'm a terrible at it, although I've been getting better lately.
I try to like, I have a little routine where I journal,
then I go to the gym and then I look at my phone.
Reward, you did your things, then reward.
I'm a big fan of the sort of the workout in the morning
and a little walk, get the dog out there,
no sunglasses so I can get the morning sun, et cetera.
And absolutely do not touch the phone.
But I think like so many people do,
because that's another addiction that we all have.
And it causes a lot of distress that you see.
It also promotes a lot of things that I think
like people weren't aware of and it's made like finding
and getting a hold of certain substances
probably easier than it had been in the past,
substantially in a lot of ways.
And so like from just what it says about culture,
I think it just feeds into the kind of culture
that we see today, which is like a very fast paced culture
where people are looking to kind of ignore
anything that isn't pleasant and immediately
like giving you some kind of good fix.
Even if it's at your own detriment in the long run.
I would argue that's a,
I would argue we don't need to take a breath
and that people should realize that again,
just one man's opinion, but I think hardship
oftentimes is a good thing.
It's a character builder, right?
And I think a lot of times that we take these things
for granted, the reason I'm bringing this up
in particular is I can't remember
where I should have looked this up beforehand,
but I can't remember where I saw this,
but I want to say it was like a Times article.
Maybe it was a Washington Post.
I can't remember.
It was a few years back and this woman
got into some sort of accident in Germany.
She wasn't critically injured or anything like that,
but she was in a lot of pain.
They wouldn't let her have almost any pain drugs.
I think they let her have it like the first day or two,
then once they did all the stuff, when she came out,
she was like, what the hell's the matter with you?
I mean, tremendous amounts of pain.
And they said, you can still talk.
You're not in tremendous amounts of pain.
You're in a lot of pain, but you could still talk.
And she was like, what does that have to do with it?
And they literally said to her,
you can tell us if it gets worse.
That way we know if the surgery was successful or not.
If we numb everything, we're also numbing
your responses to us.
And she wrote this whole article about it.
And at the beginning of the article,
it was almost like she was like, you know,
what the hell's-
And disbelief about it.
Yeah, just like what the hell's going on
with these crazy German doctors, et cetera.
But by the end of the article, of course,
as you read through, she was like,
this was absolutely the right way to do things.
We do a lot of pain medication,
way too easy in the United States.
A lot of times, yes, they weren't withholding it
and saying, you never need pain meds,
because I did have it the first couple of days.
But after, I can't remember whatever surgery she had,
they were like, no, we need to know if the surgery,
like it's supposed to hurt.
You just had part of your body open and stitched up
or whatever they did to her.
They're like, it's supposed to hurt.
If you can't talk, we know how bad it is.
You will get pain meds.
You're able to talk.
And when you wake up tomorrow,
you're still gonna be in pain,
but you're gonna be in less pain
unless we didn't do something right.
In which case, you can tell us,
but you won't know that if.
Anyway, that always sort of stuck with me.
Does that make sense?
It does.
And I think that's one other thing
that we also fail to appreciate a lot
is like non-pharmological things that we can do
to help treat pain.
So myself, I had a major surgery.
So I had a craniotomy like four years ago.
You can imagine 50 stitches, staples, staples,
not stitches, they can't stitch up a skull.
Yikes.
That would be very interesting.
But 50 staples in the back of your skull
causes a little bit of discomfort.
A little bit, a little bit.
And one of the things for that
that actually was the best
and it wasn't pain medicine.
I mean, granted, I did take pain medicine,
but was ICE, like having cold therapy on it.
And they actually now have a lot of study and data
into cold therapy and the effects it can have on pain.
And just like numbing, but also the effects it does
to the circulation in those areas
after you've had that prolonged cold exposure.
And so it's just interesting
because I think we overlook that a lot.
And before I went in,
I probably would have overlooked it too, to be honest,
except before I had it,
a friend of a friend who had had the same procedure done,
that was one of her biggest tips was get an ice pack.
Make sure you have an ice pack on your head at all times.
She's also surprising that your scalp
isn't that innervated back here.
So it's not gonna feel as uncomfortable
as you think it would.
So I don't know.
I think that's just something that we overlook.
And I feel like it gets overlooked sometimes
when we're at work.
It's like, have we thought about this?
Have we thought about trying to bring a more soothing
environment?
I mean, having things beeping in your face all the time
isn't the most.
You're like, I've been pain, my head hurts,
and now this monitor is gonna beep every two seconds.
So you're gonna wake me up and ask me
to touch my nose every hour.
I mean, I know you're not an MD,
but even still you're in the field.
I've kind of always wondered that myself,
which is, isn't there value in getting a good night's sleep
and turning those ridiculous halogen lights off
around the whole hospital?
And you know what I mean?
There seems to be a lot of stuff there
where I'm just like, I know that you're trying to do good,
but at the same time I question some of the things
where I'm just like, doesn't it seem like
maybe a good night's sleep and the monitor not beeping
and various things of this nature,
just like you were saying, have we overlooked
some things with Western medicine?
I think that they're, I feel like there's a lot of folks
who are trying to realize that more,
move in that direction more.
There's like quiet hours, a lot of facilities now.
One of the reasons they restrict visitors
is to get that quiet time in place again.
And then they do like turn off the beeping.
Like I got my, my heart rate monitor
kept beeping every night when I,
so when you're in the ICU, I understand I'm like beep away
cause it could be that I'm like having some critical
thing that needs to be treated immediately.
The biggest thing though that happened was I was messing
with my, I probably had too much pain medicine.
It was messing with the button on my bed
to try and adjust the angle I was at.
And I somehow adjusted it and I was like a little V
like this, like the, the feet and the, and her up.
And I was very out of it.
And I was like, so I called the nurses station
and I was just said, help.
They're like, what do you need help with?
I was like, I've been messing with the bed buttons
and I can't figure it out.
And I'm very like in a bad way.
And my sister like hears me cause she had sent the night
she got up and she was like, oh God.
And I went in the hallway cause I was like,
I tried calling and no one's come because there was
someone really sick next to me.
And some other nurses aid came in and she comes rushing in.
She's like, oh no, this is not okay.
And then, but she couldn't figure it out either
and made it a little bit worse.
I don't know what was so complicated about the bed buttons
cause they really don't look that complicated at other times
but the third person came in, they figured it out
and it was much more comfortable.
Good.
That's good, I'm glad.
And they probably backed off a little on my pain meds
after that incident.
I'm glad someone got there.
Jeez.
Well, when you're,
we sort of talk about these big existential crises
that we've got at the opioid crisis, et cetera.
What are some things, cause that, I mean, unfortunately
that's sort of like been in the news a lot recently,
et cetera, so that the industry's had some negative press.
What are some things that are sort of on the other end
of the spectrum?
What are some interesting things that are coming
or interesting breakouts in your field
that the rest of us don't know about?
Breakouts that we know in the field
that no one knows about.
I feel like the problem with pharma
is when we have a breakout, we're really good
at announcing it to the world and they have
a really good marketing budget.
So you'll probably hear about the next big thing
during the Super Bowl on Sunday.
As well as all the side effects you will expect
to see with the next big thing.
So I think they've made some really great strides
in terms of understanding and I have mixed feelings
on this and it's from more of a personal standpoint
than necessarily the pharmacist in me standpoint.
I think the pharmacist in me is thanks, hey,
like these GLP-1 agonists and some of these new weight loss
drugs that you've heard about, like Ozempic,
that are working kind of in more novel ways
to help stop that like hunger response
that's naturally generated by the secretion
of certain hormones from the stomach.
I think that's like a really unique and great thing
for people who are having trouble losing weight.
But I also find that like at times
by looking for that next new thing,
we also overlook the fact that there's a lot of things
that like you could be doing where you don't need
medication at all.
And I always get conflicted about this
because there are certain people who regardless
of what they have going on, the medications
that have been discovered are great and very necessary
and they probably need them.
Or I know they need them.
Shouldn't say they probably, I know they need them.
I take my medicine, I know I need to take it.
No matter how healthy my workout is,
how good my diet is going to be,
like I can do all those things.
But I'd still need to take this
because I could still have a seizure
and there's not like a good way to tell my brain
to like knock it off without having the medicine in there
to work on those particular receptors.
But I think with some of these like lifestyle drugs,
I think there's a lot of positives to be said
but I also think that it negates a lot of the other things
that our bodies can do for themselves
that are naturally shown to probably improve longevity
and like overall health.
So it's also been interesting in one of the areas
that you see growing pretty rapidly is functional medicine.
And there's actually a group of pharmacists
within functional medicine
who kind of blend these two things
when people have to take drugs
and also like looking at herbal
and more natural ways of treating certain conditions.
They've done some pretty amazing stuff
as far as I've seen.
Like I think they're doing psilocybin and whatnot
for like PTSD patients
which I don't know why we ever stopped that
but apparently it was a thing around the 60s and 70s
and then we like cold stopped it
because it was apparently bad or something
but then it turns out it's not bad.
It turns out that again from some of the studies
I've seen that like people are having tremendous strides
with psilocybin, I think MDMA various other things
where they're really addressing some of the mental traumas
that they've gotten their lives.
One of the things they've been working on it with that
with regards to that is usually the use of ketamine.
And so when I was a pharmacy resident
we had started a low dose ketamine protocol
for like people with extreme depressive episodes
where it had been shown to have some benefits in.
So that's been kind of an interesting area
that's been popping up more and more lately.
I don't know of like what the next big thing
in terms of mental health drugs is
but I also think the treatment
and some of the medication assistance therapies
that they've developed for patients
who are addicted to opioids as we were talking about earlier
where have been developed in a way that they
don't have like abuse potential
and they have less dangerous.
Like if you take too much of it, it isn't as dangerous
as we were previously doing
when we were giving people methadone.
And while methadone is still widely used
for treating opioid addiction,
it's like you have to go in person
and get your dose every day.
And if you don't show up,
they're like can kick you out of the program
and they give you these massive doses and ketamine.
Methadone, all my controlled substances here
get in the mixed up, real good pharmacy.
It would be a very interesting pharmacy.
Just one bowl of methadone and ketamine.
Yikes.
But methadone has this extremely long half-life
that sticks around in your body a long time
and requires all of those enzymes we were talking about.
It can inhibit and induce them.
So it has lots of interactions with other medications
you can retake in.
It just isn't a very clean drug.
So the newer medications,
some of the sublingual films are able to use
to treat opioid disorder
that also have a little bit of naloxone in it
to prevent that high,
but hit those receptors to prevent the side effects.
I've heard about this.
It's almost like taking morphine without the actual high.
The high, yeah.
That's interesting.
Is there not a way to, I don't know,
push this particular drug in a direct,
I don't know, I don't know what I'm even saying here,
but push this drug in a particular direction
so where it's got all the positive so-called side effects
and none of the addictive properties, et cetera?
I mean, I think they'd love to find something like that,
but I think anytime you have something
that's gonna give somebody lots of positive effects,
then it becomes something that has addictive potential.
Because it's also interesting
when you look at controlled substances.
So anytime we talk about controlled substances,
there's different levels.
So you have like one, two, scheduled twos are things
like opioids, schedule threes are things like Xanax.
And schedule one, of course, is marijuana, which is-
And cocaine.
I think cocaine's scheduled too.
I think they still use it in dentistry.
They do still use it in, they actually have eye drops.
When eye drops, yeah.
But I don't think the recreational form
would be still considered schedule one.
But there's like some seizure medicines
that are considered controlled substances.
And when you ask the drug reps about,
cause I'll grill them when they come in
to tell you about the next new drug.
Cause you wanna know, it's great to look at this study
that tells you, hey, this drug does this
and it worked really well.
And it was 10% better than this other drug.
Well, how many people did you look at it with it?
And what kind of comorbidities
and why did you design this study to actually do?
And I think a lot of times people ask those questions
and then you see those drugs that later after the fact
you're like, oh wait, hold on a second.
Maybe this isn't doing what we thought it was.
Or maybe it isn't, like then you get like those warnings
that come out after the fact on certain drugs
because we start to notice increases in
some bad effects that we weren't necessarily,
was it highlighted in that landmark trial?
Right.
Do they, are they obligated to add that side effect
that you've sort of collected data on
or is that left up to them?
No, if there's been so, it's interesting
when there's like major adverse effects.
We actually are, I like at the hospital
we would report this directly to the FDA.
So the FDA has firsthand reports
from all the healthcare institutions
in the system, in the, not system, in the country.
And so if you have all of these healthcare systems
reporting adverse effects like that,
they'll look for trends and then they can reach out
to the drug company and be like,
hey, we're noticing a lot of this.
How's your post-marketing surveillance going?
And cause a lot of times even after approval
they're still following up on those original trials.
As I understand it, the drug trials that they do,
that raw data is never released ever.
As I understand it, the drug companies have the raw data
then they literally blanket that raw data with themselves.
Like they package up that data for some subset of data.
Like the actual 100% unadulterated trials
are never actually released out there.
It's a secondary version.
I'm not saying they're doctor,
but I'm just saying like,
I don't think actual raw studies are out there.
You get this sort of packaged up version,
then it goes to the FDA, so on and so forth.
But it's good to hear at least from what I'm hearing
from you is, yeah, but the raw data does come back.
It's just unfortunate that doesn't come back before
it goes into the field.
The one thing that is usually,
and that you can inquire about,
I mean, this requires me going and asking
that a study author for it,
is when they'll have the major study that's printed.
Like large cardiovascular studies
usually actually print a study before
that outlines their entire study protocol and trial design
so that you can really dig in to see exactly
how they were handling all X, Y, and Z scenarios
and what they're planning to do with patients.
Like if a patient had to drop out because of a side effect,
am I still including them in the final analysis?
Or am I, if they're getting dropped out,
are they now out of those final numbers?
And then a lot, some of the larger studies
will also publish what they call a supplementary index
or a supplementary appendix.
And those can be like hundreds of pages long
with lots of data and analysis
that didn't make the major trial.
And sometimes those can be very interesting
to go back and see, like if you see things
in these baseline characteristics of these groups,
like they don't look exactly the same
or it looks like there might have been
a little bit more of this.
I wonder if they dig into it somewhere further
and I can go and kind of look at it.
And that was a role for a pharmacist during COVID
when we're getting all of these new drugs
and these new drug trials.
And it was a beautiful time
in terms of sharing scientific knowledge though,
because they weren't hiding very much stuff
because it was like, hey, I might learn something here
and you might learn it.
And we're trying to like accelerate things
beyond a timeline than we've seen before.
So like the more sharing we have,
the better it is for everyone,
which was like a really beautiful thing about humanity
during a time when like sometimes I'm like,
what are we doing to each other in terms of COVID?
Like why are we fighting over masks?
Like not fighting over them physically,
but fighting over like whether or not
you're gonna wear one or whatever the debate's going to be.
But to see the scientific community
and how they were sharing knowledge during that time.
And then as like a pharmacist,
we were oftentimes like tasked with,
look at this trial, tell us what you think,
because we're trying to figure out
from a treatment standpoint
for all of the other kinds of treatments we're doing
that are not medication related,
which was almost more important than the meds,
generally speaking.
When someone's in the hospital,
y'all analyze that and tell us your thoughts
and when we would come up with the criteria,
like who were the patients in these trials
that were really shown to benefit from it?
And who shouldn't we be giving this medication to
because it didn't show a benefit and it's emergency use.
So we don't know the harm of it.
So probably like just avoid giving it
to these certain people.
It's encouraging to hear sort of
that there was a lot of sharing going on though.
It's exciting stuff.
Molly, where can people find you online?
So as far as online, I do have a Twitter.
It is my full name at Molly Curran,
which is spelled Z-U-R-R-A-N, very Irish.
I will say I'm not a religious Twitter poster,
but I do repost things that I find
that are very interesting and occasionally post memes.
Nice.
And then I work for a large healthcare system
here in Austin right now.
And then it's part of a larger national hospital chain.
So it's a day to day.
Awesome, that's good stuff.
So if from your field, you could manifest
a technology, for some definition of technology,
if you could manifest something into existence
from your field, what would it be?
I think a drug delivery system that was like,
I'm gonna say cookie.
So we could just eat cookies as bugs?
So you could just have all of your,
so let's say you take four or five medicines,
have some kind of drug delivery system
where I could put them all into one thing.
They're all baked into the chocolate chips and the cookie.
No, but they're like all kind of,
it usually would be a liquid, like some type of liquid
where I'd get all of those drugs
and it's like I only have to drink maybe
two or three sips of something and it tastes good.
And it's something people have been working on
trying to figure out.
I have a friend who does some work in
pharmaceuticals and she was talking about it,
but the closest they've ever gotten is like,
you would have to drink three gallons in the morning
to take your drugs in the morning and three gallons
in the evening and she's like, it's just not,
like we haven't gotten to the point where it's feasible.
But if you could get a delivery system
where you could deliver multiple drugs
and some kind of tasty, I guarantee compliance would be
so much better, like so much better.
People would be taking what they're supposed to be.
Why is it three gallons?
What stops us from doing this?
I mean, obviously, like we need the tech
to advance tremendously, but like is there,
is it just you need so many enzymes,
certain things are gonna have to cross
the blood brain barrier.
You gotta figure out a delivery
to get it into the bloodstream.
And I don't know, you tell me.
I think it's just having the volume necessary
to prevent the drugs from interacting with each other enough
because things could bind together
or I'm sure there's other more scientific complications
that I'm not as aware of
because I'm not in the pharmaceutical science fields.
But I do know that like,
making sure that they're not interacting
before you actually ingest is a huge thing.
It's a huge thing when we crush drugs
and give them down a tube.
We have to make sure we're like separating them
with water so they're not interacting.
And so that's why I think like the large volumes
are what they found to do that.
Okay, sounds good.
I dig it.
But if I could put it in an Oreo, that would be like.
Right, okay, an Oreo.
So an Oreo drug, all right.
I know it's stopping us from getting there.
And that is quite a lot.
But I would- Bisco mainly.
They're probably, I don't know.
That would make them probably
the most profitable company in history.
If they were, they were like, yep,
here's your Oreo, do this.
That'd be pretty awesome.
Well, this has been awesome.
Molly, thank you so much for coming on.
No problem.
We've been standing on the shoulders of giants.
And this is David Mackay.
Thank you.
