Well, today on Standing on the Shoulders of Giants, we are here with Professor Lee Cronin,
who is currently a, I believe you hold the Regis Chair of Chemistry at the University
of Glasgow among many, many, many other things. Lee, could you, could you just give us a quick
breakdown?
Yeah.
Your background, if that's even possible to break down in a reasonable amount of time.
I'm, I'm, I'm English living in Scotland in the UK. I, I suppose I've been a chemist.
I'm still a chemist and I love doing science and my research group in Glasgow is, I suppose
the intersection between robotics, chemistry, origin of life, alien life, chemical AGI, chemical
computation, computing, basically being a geek with electronics and also setting fires
to stuff with chemicals is probably the way I describe myself at the moment and, and trying
to understand what reality is. So I also want to be a philosopher, but I'm not qualified
to be a philosopher or, or actually a scientist actually, but blagging it's thus far.
I mean, given what you've done, I would say it's a, it's, it's, you're doing at least
a reasonable job blagging it. So fantastic.
I do like occasionally having a good idea and you're like, I don't think people give
themselves much credit here and there. I keep trying to, I keep forgetting because I want
to do the next thing. Sorry, I was interrupting you.
No, not at all. Was, was there sort of a defining moment in your career, in your life
that, that took you down the current path that you're on? Was there, was there a reason
you wanted to get into sort of the science field and, and, and what was that moment?
I, I don't think I can ever remember a time where I, I never really decided to be a scientist.
I just kept asking everybody how everything worked and they would, they wouldn't give me
satisfactory answers. And so I would say, well, why does that work because of that? Well,
why does that work because of that? Why does that work because of that? And then I just
took everything apart. I had a very, very, very, I got bored extremely easy. So I just
took everything apart and tried to got into everything, you know, building chemistry sets,
citizens band, radio, wind tunnels. But I, I suppose when I was, I, it's really difficult
to remember your earliest memories, but I can always remember when I, I must have been
just, just, you know, just toddler, I don't know, whatever age, maybe four, five, maybe
earlier, just at a seaside. And I cut my foot on a jet on a broken piece of glass. And it
was painful when I remember looking at my foot in the blood. I was like, so how does
this work again, this stuff coming out, remember taking coke bottles and turning them upside
down and liquid coming out, and there's liquid coming out of my foot. And I know that's
a bit bad, but it's not too much. And so I, and then it kind of struck me there that
it probably wasn't that normal to pond, look at your injury and go, why is that working?
So that's always, I've been, I spent ages playing around with marbles and refracting
light. I tried to build my own CO2 laser once I set fire to the shed, the garage, because
I didn't have any CO2. And I figured if I start a fire and I trapped it in a cylinder,
it will be fine. But yeah, the cylinder was full of soot. So that didn't work. So I guess
I've always been creating breaking things. And I'm just fascinated by the fact I could
ever put them back together. So I guess I couldn't be an engineer. So I had to be a
scientist.
Why couldn't you be an engineer? That's sort of the path I took. So I'm curious why science
versus engineering, not that it matters.
Well, actually, I'll take it back now. I have to be an engineer, do a lot of science, but I
think I'm a very good engineer with teams. So I tend to kind of break things and say, right,
let's reconstruct it minimally. And then I love working with people that are good designers
and good builders, and we kind of interact together. So I wouldn't say I'm not an engineer,
but I think I'm better on the deconstruction than construction. So I love working with
people to constructing things, then say, all right, let's take it apart again and remove
bits. And I'm a minimalist. I like to, I like to basically, you know, do the minimum amount
of work to get the amount of amount of function. And that's something that's always obsessed
me. And I think that's probably why I got to Origin of Life, because I was just like,
how does this stuff work? It's kind of like, you know, you only have to plant a seed and
you have something you have a plant or a tree. And it's, so I kind of always got fascinated
by the intersection of how things worked, how things grew and how to build stuff. But I was
poor at building stuff because I couldn't get anything back together.
Okay, I can definitely relate. I mean, I took the telephone off the wall when I was like,
three or four years old disassembled it across the kitchen floor. And I got a,
I actually got a reasonable response from my dad on this one, which was, if you can put that back
together and put it on the wall, because they were not happy, of course, when they saw it on the
floor, and it works, then we're going for ice cream, if you can't, you're in trouble. So it was
actually a pretty, pretty decent way of motivating and onto engineering ever since then. So that
makes sense. So I can definitely relate. So as we were speaking about before we got rolling,
you have something called the chemputer coming out, or potentially already out. What, what is
this? This is, this is a, I've read some things about this, but I'd love to hear it sort of from
from your perspective. You know, where did it come from? What's it going to do, etc.
So the chemputer was a concept, actually, that came up with years ago. It was just the idea of,
I wanted to build an origin of life machine. Well, we'll go back before that. Before that,
I wanted to crack the origin of life. And I figured the origin of life was nothing more than a search
problem in chemical space. You go back to the beginning of Earth, there's chemistry everywhere,
it's very simple chemistry. How hard could it be just get a bunch of chemist labs and test tubes,
mixing random stuff together, not asking too many questions. This is when I started getting
into trouble with my colleagues, you know, where I wasn't allowed when I was saying, no, no, no,
no targets, just random mixing. And then obviously you can spend PhDs are, you know, they're very
relatively long, not as long in the UK as they are in the US, for three, four years.
And I was thinking, the labor required to do the experiments wasn't going to work. And I said,
well, I need some automation for this, but I can't afford the robot. So it's about 2010, 2011.
So I started to put together a very basic kind of digitally controlled chemical
reactor. So I had some, some pipes going into a into a chemical reactor, and I could pour
rather than pouring the liquids by hand, I could pump them in, I could turn on the stirrer remotely,
so it would stir, turn on the heater and so on. And I remember being interviewed by a magazine
called New Scientist. It's kind of scientific American. Yes. So in the UK, and the guy kind of,
you know, was kind of discussing what I was doing. And then I got that interview led to another
interview with a newspaper called The Guardian. And then the, and so there's all these interviews
happening because everyone got really excited about this mad chemistry professor of making robots
that didn't really work. And the reporter read the New Scientist article and said,
you're making this origin of life machine. I don't really get what you're making this other
machine. It's kind of like a chemical computer or a computer. So he actually invented the term.
But then in that, in that way, or just characterize what we were doing,
but really, in my head at that time, as I wanted to be able to write code, and that code was to
control a robot to put in chemicals, according to a recipe. So you have kind of chemical code.
So one had you have like a Python code, if you like, back then it wasn't in Python, it was in
LabView, believe it or not. LabView code that would turn on pumps and valves and the abstraction
that that led to was those chemicals going in and I could draw my chemical scheme.
And so you had this LabView code and this chemical code and they mesh together. And so
a computation is the act of taking, you know, a computer architecture that's well designed,
the Turing machine or almost a Turing machine, having some kind of programming language,
writing some code, you know, whatever it is, a well understood kind of data analysis algorithm or
maybe just printing some stuff, I don't know. And it works every time on any platform on the
same machine. And I figured this was what was happening here. And it took me really five or
six years to realize how to explain that because what do computers do, they do computation.
Because I kind of thought this was a bit of a bullshit term. And actually, the reason why I had
to, because one of my, I started a company many years ago, the trademark, the damn word, and the
computer, even though I was going to make the computer, but they were never going to make it,
they trademarked it. And every time I used the word, computer, they told me off. And I was like,
oh, screw you, you can't trademark a verb. So it's computation. And I was like, oh my god,
actually, what is computation? It is this specific, mathematically precise thing.
But now it's different. Rather than be embodied on silicon, it's embodied in chemistry. And then
I became more and more confident about developing the formal methods and the labeling and so on.
And this is something I've been trying to say for 10 years and actually been falling on deaf ears
for six or seven years of that. And what I was trying to say, is that it's something that's
I was trying to say, chemistry is great. It can be encoded chemists have,
they have a schema that they haven't on what's called ontology, they have a relationship between
what they've atoms and bombs representation and mixed molecules together, get a reaction,
make a drug, make a new material. Excellent. The problem with that is the individual has to
have a certain amount of expertise. So the certain amount of knowledge and then can be ambiguity.
So not anybody could read that recipe and make that molecule. And I thought, well, why don't
we just remove the ambiguity and by specifying, you know, everything like a good engineer,
good chemical engineer, good scientist, because to help make things more reproducible. And then
the chemists kind of started to say to me, no, that's, that's completely silly.
You can't encode chemistry chemistry is too hard. It's not uniform. It can't be standardized.
And I said, okay, that's fine. But let's pretend it can. And I can continue on to build this base
layer, because I was convinced the only way I was ever going to be able to do what we now call
was artificial intelligence, do some kind of learning or understanding is if we have cleaning
context data. And this is exactly what Alpha fold has benefited from, where you say you have
protein structure. And why was that possible? Why is Alpha fold so magical? Well, it's not
magical. It's just incredibly good machine learning, incredibly good architectures. And they
benefited from two very important things or three actually important things. Number one,
protein sequence, number two, protein structure, and number three, some constraints in the physics
to basically go from sequence to structure. And what is Alpha fold? So Alpha fold is a program
where you put in a protein sequence you could get, and it would predict the structure without
you having to do a kind of imaging technique that requires crystals or what makes kind of
expensive machines, you can kind of guess the structure. It's a bit like if you were to make
some origami in paper, but not fold it up, just cut it and make the creases, it would predict
what the origami would look like because you you've cut the paper and you know where the creases
are. Alpha fold doesn't replace what's called protein structure elucidation, but it accelerates
that idea dramatically because of the clean data. And so, so biology was programmable because
evolution invented the genetic code and the ribosome. Chemistry is programmable from the
periodic table, but chemistry is a mess, which is not bad, it's great, and we can do far more,
but biology is really constrained, chemistry constrained by the ribosome. So that's kind of,
so in a way the challenge I took on was ridiculous, but I think it's working.
Okay, so and also as we mentioned, is this being actively built?
Yeah, so the first computer was kind of, well, it happened in many different sequences. So what
happened was I designed the computer in my head. I love designing things in my head, it's so easy,
I can imagine it's there, it works. I went into a lab and I said to the lab, look, I've got this
programming language that's going to run on this fictitious robot, can you all start to play with
the programming language? And they said, no, we don't see the benefit. And so I said, okay, and
then this was in 2011-2012. So I went away and went back and said, right, why don't we build some
robots, and then we'll think about the programming language. And once that sounds really cool.
And the robots were quite expensive, though, and they're quite modular and not modular,
they're all vendor locked, you have to buy software and other software and one thing
went all to another thing. And at that time, people started to play with, you know, cheap 3D
printers controlled by Arduino's typically started to think, ah, 3D printer has an STL code,
which basically allows you to print the structure, the three dimensional structure.
Could I turn my motion into a static print? And everyone's like, what? And it's a bit like why
I'm like, I'm going to take my, my, my, my momentum space and put it into a position space. And so
we have no idea what we're talking about. Okay, look, if I 3D print a, a retest tube of this size
and bolt it to another print of the test tube of this size and this size, I can pour my liquid in
this end, fill it up, then pour more liquid in, it pushes it into the next one, pour more in,
pushes it into next one to next one. It's a bit like mousetrap, that game is up, right?
We have all these things linked together, a bit like a fairground variety, even where you would
go from one thing, connect to another one automatically, and you're on guard, it's, you're
literally on rails. So 3D printing the test tubes in the row, puts you on rails. No one understood
it was terrible explaining it, but my group were like, you bought us 3D printers, we're gonna,
we're gonna 3D print Yodas, we're gonna 3D print, you know, all sorts of great fidget spinners.
And we might even 3D print the odd reaction. And, and so that got them thinking. So that was kind
of first genesis of the computer. I then basically started to think about commercialization. And
the process commercialization I went through, I got some money in the UK, it's really quite hard
back then. It's hard everywhere, right? I don't want to make excuses. I was lucky enough to get some
investment. And the investors were like, you're completely insane, we're not doing this. But we
like the word. Thanks for the word. And, and then, and they didn't believe I would make the
computer work. So I raised money on grants. And I built it in my lab. So I learned to do software
engineering, I learned to do electrical engineering, I learned to do mechanical engineering, I learned
to chemical engineering. And then by 2017, 2018, we had a working prototype. That was the first one.
Wow. Yeah, that was in five years. Now we have 50 in the lab. That's incredible. And so
this is this is formally commercialized at this point. I think I think I believe your, your,
your company is, is, is doing these, correct? Yes, I have a company called Kemify. So I kind
of started that. I realized, you know, in the previous company was great, they did a great
job. They're still doing stuff. So, you know, it's like, when you start come, come, having companies
like having children, you don't wish you many, you know, you want to look after them, you know,
but what I wanted to do, my vision was really, although it's great to have a company, I really
wanted to get the art, the architecture out of the lab, because I believe it will check,
it could make the difference to chemistry, that maybe, I don't know, this is sad, this is somebody
arrogant. I don't mean that, but I don't mean to be arrogant. I just want to be, it could have
the same difference of chemistry that the gene sequencing has had to biology. And that's pretty
big. That's aggressive. I like it. No, it's not. I mean, but basically gene sequencing just allows
biologists to make sense of proteins and things. And all I want to do is stop the chemists having
to do manual labor and actually take a bit of code and run it. And gene sequencing and molecular
biology is no power seer. Still, you know, you still have to do some stuff and still fails.
But I figured, I needed to find a way to create the architecture and then work out. And this is
the thing where commercialization, I'm still on that journey, right? I mean, I'm middle of that
journey right now. And, you know, and a chemistry professor at the same time. So I'm kind of like,
you know, kind of got the benefit of both worlds in a way, or the misery of both.
I guess it's not misery, but it's like, I could it's challenging to say the least.
Yeah, yeah. I mean, look, in academia, it's great to get concepts, what might be possible.
And if you want to innovate, it has to work. But, but actually, I really like innovating
in industry or commercially, because that requirement for, for practical implementation
at a reasonable cost is what I need for chemistry anyway, because I saw all these really expensive
robots being built around the world. And so all these robots will run off. And if they're one
off, there is no incentive to write programming language and make a standard. It's like building
HTML for what for when there's only one computer on the planet that can run it. As soon as you
could run HTML on everything. And so I made a series of decisions when I was inventing the
computer. First decision, I said, okay, it's going to run at the scale of a human chemist.
So the scale that human chemist works at, I'll make it work out because they will interact with
it immediately. So like, so it wasn't the huge VAT or a nano thing, it was basically, you know,
good, you know, cut size, right? And round one. So that was the first decision. Second decision,
it was a what's called a batch, where you turn a reaction on, pour liquid, it would turn like
pour liquid into the reaction on, stop, do the next step, do the next step. And I always wanted
to do it this way. And one of the reasons why I got kicked out of mathematics at primary school,
I think, was because I was obsessed with binding, basically developing programming languages to
cheat in math. And so I invented the, invented the computer like a kind of lambda, with a kind
of lambda calculus in mind, I don't know if it's exactly equivalent, but I ended up in the kind
of the learning difficulties class, because I couldn't do maths. But I, I invented my own,
my own way of doing maths and programming. And actually through the computer, I say,
Oh, I remember what I used to do this and how this works. And so I had this kind of
architecture in mind, which was a state machine. So you have this, first of all,
then robot was the size of a human or not compatible human hands, right? Not the size
of human. Just, it was like a, just a little contraption in a fume hood. Number one. Number
two, it's a state machine. So you well defined on off-states, Booleans and all that could work.
And number three, I only use the glassware that every chemist on the planet has access to with
some minor modification. So the cost of the robot is literally probably not much more than the cost
of what a chemist would use right now in terms of hardware. And that actually turns out to be
really lucky if you want to scale the technology, because immediately all the chemists on planet
Earth could potentially use the system and also take their existing lab notebook where they've
been manual for the last, you know, whatever years and run it in the robot. So that means all the
data they've been collecting, all the literature that was out there works. And what we've been doing
in the company is kind of making like a, I shouldn't call it a large language model, it's not chat
chem. It's like a large chemical model, which is able to basically, because I've taught it clean
ways of doing operations, a bit like protein sequence, protein structure, magic bit in the
team, do the same thing. Okay. So like for instance, if I wanted it to make me X and you had the sort
of the ingredients for X, it would effectively tell you this, this, this, and this, and then it
would sequence it for you. That's effectively what we're talking about. Yeah. So the way it works,
you have to, so I don't like to use the word train because then people think it's a neural
net. It does use neural nets, but let's, to before the neural net, you actually have to deal
about up the architecture. I'm sure there are lots of people who might even be watching this or
listening to this guy who are experts in deep learning. And all of us use the current infrastructure
of the Silicon, the Silicon revolution. So I would say, you know, no Silicon chip, no, you know,
no machine learning, it doesn't, you couldn't just happen magically, you need that architecture.
So the temptation in chemistry and physics and in biology is to use machine learning on stuff
when there is no architecture. And that means you're learning on weird things because you've got no
standards. By having this system, we could then, because each chemical reaction has a sequence of
turn the reaction on, when you turn it off, then you do a thing called a workup where you separate
the components. Then when you got the workup, you do what's then an isolation. And then after the
isolation, you do the final steps of purification. And this is almost like your Turing machine,
the chemistry only has four steps reaction, workup, isolate, purify reaction, workup, isolate, purify.
So with that in mind, then you can teach it or rather than teach just do chemistry in the literature
in different classes. So chemists have taught lots of different reactions that will change
particular types of atoms and bonds into other forms. And we get taught that. And there's like
a finite number, it's a bit like learning a language where you learn a certain number of verbs.
There's a certain number of actions in chemical reaction space you can learn. So what we decided
and you learn how to position them. So what we learned to do is we taught the robot, we taught
the system those verbs. Actually, it's quite a good analogy. It's not the chemist will be shouting,
oh, no, it's not a verb, it's a reaction. But it's a kind of, it's a, it's a particular
circumstance we turn the reaction on, turn it, add the reagents, heat, and then do all the extractions.
So we did those. And then when we know had a minimum coverage of chemical space,
so we could go, it's almost like a maze. Can I go from here to here to here? Just needed to have
enough knowledge so I could go through the gaps. Then when someone brings to me a molecule that
has been made before, I can determine the route like on Google Maps. Oh yeah, no, or if I don't
quite know it's been done before, I can guess the route and join up the dots through things I do know.
And so you're right. And then you just put in that code and the robot just makes the molecule.
That's outstanding. I'm a big fan of that. Send me one when they come out. I'll try and figure
out something to do with it. It sounds really interesting. We have a portable version as well.
I kind of, the problem is I show, when people come to the lab, I show them the big one because it's
really easy to explain. And it chemifies building products, right? And building not just software
products and molecular dreaming products, but actually the hardware needs to look,
even if we're not necessarily distributing the hardware yet, we might be running it inside,
in-house, right? Who knows. But it looks fairly like the ENIAC might have felt. Look,
that first electronic digital computer where there was probably the size of two warehouse
and everything was blowing up. And it's not quite that bad, but it does, it does look formidable.
But what I've also built is a small version called the mini-puter. Well, actually my student and then
my, in the company, we call it C3PU, which is, but it's this big. And it's much more tractable.
And so it has a minimum set of infrastructure for pumping, for adding solids, for adding gas,
for temperature. And you can basically fit in a, in a roller case, take it on the airplane,
anywhere in the world and make stuff. Why would you want to do that? I don't know, but hey.
I mean, my product brain is going left and right in all sorts of different directions
while you might want to do this. You could do almost like lab as a service type of deal,
or you could sell these. There's a number of applications, at least in my own limited
understanding of this. Sorry, go ahead. I was going to say so exactly that. So there's,
I imagine that what we're going to do to chemistry in the end is we're going to go to
server farms, right? So the other thing is, the other thing that everyone, because I'm in this
middle, because I'm a really bad chemist, I'm a really bad programmer, I'm a really bad engineer.
So when I go and talk to the chemist, he'll say, you're just shockingly bad at this. And I'm like,
yeah, yeah, but look, this is cool. And you talk to computer scientists like you're like, you're
terrible. But I kind of, in this intersection, where I was trying to explain to the computer
scientists why I needed to turn, I needed to take the description of the recipes and make
a programming language, a Turing complete programming language. And all the computers,
I was like, yeah, course is Turing complete. Of course you can do this. And I was like, but no,
no, no, no, what you don't understand is Turing complete with respect to what? And what I meant
is that people were taking hardware, hacking on scripts, those scripts were only reproducible
in that particular instance of hardware. And you get back to the days where you've got ambiguity.
So because I wanted a uniform standard module, a standard operation, a standard library that I
can reuse, I can start to build this hardware. Now, if I could then make it recursively innumerable,
I can suddenly make I have programming logic within the, within the programming code. So
suddenly I can write loops and conditionals and say, right, if on this, do that. And then when
that happens, do that and have multiple resources and solve the combinatorial graph in real time.
So I could basically say have one computer with four reactors, one separator, one evaporator,
one purifier. What you do is like, the reaction starts one hour, one hour later, the second
reaction starts, third hour later, third and fourth. Why? Because after one hour, the reaction is done,
it goes to a separator, leaves one hour to do the separation and all the other stuff. And when
that's done, goes to the next one. And you're sweating the asset. You're able to use all the
resources in your, and you have to write software to do that. In fact, you probably know yourself
that scheduling software and synchronizing things for job running is actually really important for
the utilization of digital and physical robotic resource. And so if we can find a way of scheduling
that for making more compounds, the chemists can make more molecules per day than they could ever
dream of before. Yeah, I mean, it's effectively pushing the machine and putting the machine into
overdrive, utilizing it almost to full capacity. And then secondarily, again, in my own head,
I'm thinking, yeah, but if you perfect this, you wrote the software for that, it's reproducible
on all the machines, you effectively open sourced, here's how to make X or here's the experiment I
did. Literally, you can set it up identical, you know, and the paper is almost in code format at
that point. It's very interesting stuff. Well, one of the things I did before I started the company,
and I don't know whether the company likes me for this, but we'll find out in the end, is with
the programming language, I've decided I would release the programming language to the entire
world. I'm in the middle of doing this right now. And in fact, MIT Futures gave me some help,
not just money, but just mentorship and because they try to make me more user friendly. So you
stop arguing with the chemist, be nice to them. I'm like, okay, I think it's good to do that.
And because you want to actually enable people to adopt the standards and chemistry, you know,
there's like any academic discipline, there's lots of competition, people want to be first,
people want to do this. But so the, and also the programming language I developed is obvious, right?
Like it's obvious to everybody that that needed to happen somehow. So I think that people beginning
to lower the barrier there and like, there's no ego in it, say wouldn't it be great if we just
adopt a common language, you can call it whatever you want, you know, you could insert your surname
here, just use the same language, right? You know, because then people can start to write their own
code to make their own molecules and exchange them. So what we've done is we've been able to
read the literature. Well, what I did actually, first of all, is I used the summer school, the
money I got from various organizations and CUNY Schmidt Futures and in the UK. And so I had some
summer schools where I got students to read the literature and then encode it into the programming
language. And then to basically make and start to make take really popular recipes and encode them.
And we've made a series of translations that they're using hybrid models. And we're going to start
releasing these KIDLs to the world, probably about 1000 a week, we have about 40,000 in the
database. Releasing what every week? About 40,000 chemical codes. Yeah, I think you said
KIDL. Yeah, that's what we call them. So the chemical programs are called KIDL. So that's the
Greek letter KIDL. But we just call it XDL, because it's like on a normal keyboard into XDL.
And it stands, so it's chemical description language that runs in the chemical programming
language. And so there's a KIDL for the each transformation. So you should say, I want to
make, I don't know, the drug lidocaine. Right. And where's the, where's the KIDL for lidocaine? Oh,
great. I just run that on my robot. I can, there's actually some, a company that makes lidocaine in
Denmark. And they came to me and said, Oh, we saw your paper where you made lidocaine using this
KIDL. Can we, can we adopt it and use it as a fine? And that, because it's a more rigorous way of
expressing, you know, like what it does, it expresses the conditionals, expresses what reagents
you need. You have a way of putting the batches in there, looking at the quality of the materials
in, looking at the process parameters, checking that everything is gone as, as, as you expect,
checking the hardware is working as you expect and so on. And the other thing about KIDL,
it's really cool, is you're basically human being could take their lab book,
where they've just been writing all their chemistry, scribble, scribble, scribble, and they
think they've written the perfect representation to publish. And what we're going to help them do,
and this is the, this is the nonprofit version. And I think Chemify will also help academia do
this because it's in everyone's interest. It's a bit like, there's no point in one company trying
to own like all the knowledge in any discipline, it's not going to work, right? What companies
need to do is add value and sell products and sell services to people. But there needs to be an
underpinning enabler. And, and that's why I'm kind of in these two roles. And the underpinning
enabler is, if I could take everyone's lab book in the world, convert it into KIDL, error check,
and say, oh, temperature is missing, pressure is missing. Oh, your hazards are missing. This
looks like it could blow up. You may want to put something in there. And, you know, and then
from the KIDL, that's like a standard representation, human readable, you can then read it back,
but not just in English, in French, in German, in Spanish, in the incredible,
we made one actually that goes from English to Russian, English to Chinese, we're given the
current geopolitical tensions. And we have to have German in there as well. So this leads to
sort of sort of two, two sides of my brain thinking of this one is you, it's this is almost
like democratizing chemistry as a whole, which would be pretty unbelievable, pretty, pretty
incredible. But then there's the other side of the brain, which is going, yeah, if you get certain
rogue chemists publishing these, these KIDLs for download or whatever, and you can all of a sudden
make cyanide or ricin, I don't know, something that you shouldn't, most people would be,
it'd be scary if it was out there, it sounds like this, this would be also kind of a scary thing
on that front, I guess, sort of depending. So my mind definitely goes to the two opposites there.
Well, yeah, I've thought about that a lot. And I think there's a quick answer to that. You can
already make it, I'm sure there, well, that's true. You can, I don't know if there are any
YouTube videos of making ricin, I doubt it, I guess they'll probably take them down, but there's
certainly the terrorist handbook out there, everyone used to download, right? And probably
shouldn't say that now. But, and you know, it's like, when I was a kid, I was always setting
fire and blowing things up. I just saw actually a news report of some poor kid making an
improvised explosive with a soda bottle and getting incarcerated for it. I was like, wow,
I would have been so imprisoned. But let's get back to, so, so yeah, so right now,
there's nothing stopping anybody getting, going on the internet and finding out how it makes
stuff go and make them. That's true. Now, what we're doing, I think, in the same way, I suppose
you can get a drone and attach explosives to it and make come some kind of, you know, weapon.
What I think is really important is, is to think about why we would be automating these things.
You that you don't want to be making recreational drugs necessarily using this technology,
because it's not going to be pure. And you have a very high chance of doing harm.
But what, but what it will do to speed up the chemist in the lab, in the same way that
biologists do protein synthesis, and they do gene sequencing, and then they do gene engineering,
there's potential for great misuse there, but we've got tremendous potential.
And there's, there's quite a good way of securing that. So I imagine, then the following scenario,
academia can always do dangerous things, right? We're doing chemistry in the lab all the time.
It's super dangerous stuff. People could die. You have to take a super serious
You have to take a super serious. You have to have proper protection, body protection, eye
protection, you know, face protection, hand protection and all that. You work with the
human hood. You hazard assess everything you do. You know, you have to, you have to
adhere to safety protocols that you learned over many years when you have training.
So that's the first point. So these devices will be in those type of laboratories whereby
you are, you are trained, but just think about it. Imagine 20 years time in one lab,
you've got a computer or the equivalent, rather than having, and they're about to just
try and design a new drug, and to design that new drug, and they think they've got a killer idea
that's going to, well, a saving idea to save a load of people, but normally to make the molecule
would take them, you know, two years, because it's just takes too long. Instead, they could use a
the system, a system to do it automatically, sequence it so the molecule's ready on demand
because of the code, and they could do the biological assay and then make the discovery.
So suddenly the positive impact on human health just goes off the charts. So that's one point.
No question there. I mean, even fairly recently, I would imagine if, if, if the computer was out
and we were able to mass produce, et cetera, I would imagine that would have been pretty great for
sort of like the COVID-19 vaccines or all the stuff that we were trying to,
trying to get as much as possible of in a very short period of time. So no question that's got
tremendous potential. Actually, our mini robot, the mini one we made, can make RNA.
Really? It can do RNA? Yeah, RNA synthesis. So we could actually, I was joking with the team,
we could actually make the Moderna vaccine in barista bot, as we called it, but we were like,
yeah, you probably wouldn't want to take it. It's probably quite impure. I mean, you know,
the standards that people go through in these manufacturing facilities is tremendous, right?
And nothing is left to chance. I know lots of people like to talk about, you know,
questions about how, what the vaccines do or don't do. But in terms of human health and statistics,
you know, we take this very seriously. And I know there's a conspiracy everywhere, but,
but it's just, you know, it's just physics, right? The problem with physics and chemistry is hard to
do conspiracies with data. Sure, you do something that you statistically, something happens when
it happens to you as a conspiracy, when it happens to a population, it's a, you know,
it's a population effect. But not going there, going back to the point in the future,
when we have these machines, let's say the chemify basically is like the apple for
typical chemistry. Have you tried taking an apple machine apart? You know, they got the
wrong screwdrivers and all this stuff. And it's all, it all, you know,
this is really hard to take apart. Actually, I actually haven't tried, but I've seen people,
it's brutal. And not only that, you have Tampa mission, you know, you take some iPhones,
they've stopped that now because people got stroppy, you know, because everyone's smashing
their phone, take it out, you get a cheap, they would say, no, this is not an apple approved
phone and it bricks it. Of course, what chemify is going to be doing is making sure
that KIDLs are digitally encrypted. And, and you get user rights management in the KIDL file,
you probably can even put GPS coordinates, right, or require. So if you're not, if you don't have
a license to run it at that GPS coordinate, you won't run. It just won't, you won't have,
so there's a digital rights management in the same way Netflix are turning off people
exactly sharing the password. So it'll be actually relatively trivial to protect right now. We don't
want to protect it. We want to make sure all the chemists in the world can basically, you know,
publish and exchange and talk and build on each other's work. I don't, I don't know if I like
the word democratization. I think what it is is actually just fair exchange, right? Because
democratization is kind of like this, like everyone has a right to do it. No, you do not have a right
to make a molecule right now if you're not trained. I'm sorry, I'm not going to be an elitist. I'm not
being, I'm not saying you can't do it. I'm just would like you not to be making those molecules
because they could kill you, they can explore, they can do stuff. However, but me as a chemist,
if someone has published something in the literature and they've got, they've had the glory
from let's say their nature publication, say it's on the front cover of nature or science or
somewhere or sell or the larger and I want that molecule. To get that molecule, I have to read
it a PDF and the description is not complete and it takes me a year to work it out. That
is absolutely unforgivable. You wouldn't go to GitHub and just say and just and just pixelate all
the stuff and just you wouldn't come out, right? Everyone be on Reddit go, that doesn't work.
So my vision for computation for academia, standard programming language, standard description
language, people implement it in their own modules in their own way, but adhere to the standard.
Then when they publish, they publish code that's executable on any device that adheres to that
standard. The same way an MP3 is portable on any MP3 place, although they don't exist anymore
because I use Spotify. It's when it starts, but you know what I mean. So there's maybe USB
as a USB plug or something like that, but even then going now, because why would you use USB?
I think it's moving to USB-C, but I don't know, it just really depends on whatever it's moving
towards. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, Wi-Fi. I was like, kind of like, was downloading something
onto USB stick on main computer and putting it on my laptop and I was like, why am I doing this?
Connect to Wi-Fi shift. And also, most of the USB disks are made in a certain country and they
all got spyware on the headers anyway, right? Some of them do. I think USB is actually pretty
fast. It's usually the drive attached to the USB that's pretty slow for the solid state.
Well, I know one of the, I know the person who makes those actually is a Glaswegian electrical
engineer who made a lot of those, very famous. His marriage, his partner's Taiwanese,
they now live in Singapore. And he's like, he's really nice to me. It's called FTDI chip,
Future Technologies Devices Inc. And yeah, yeah. So I blame him, your drivers are too slow.
But what they did is when people started to rip off their drivers, they made a bricking
mechanism and everyone was complaining that their Ripple for Android, whatever, was getting
ripped because FTDI was like, please don't steal our IP. That'll happen. Earlier, you mentioned
sort of AI and we've been talking about the computer. And I think there's a particular,
there's definitely a divide in the field right now as to whether or not AI is actually able to
help do molecule and drug discovery. But I think you might have a pretty sharp opinion on this one.
What does that look like from your perspective?
Okay. I mean, so I think that AI is very good at finding hidden relationships and data.
And if the context is known. And so what I would say is that drug discovery appears to be right
now, very, an act of serendipity. And that means that something outside the known happens.
So if you're relying on training on the known, you are not going to absolutely predict something
in the unknown. You're not because you don't have a training data. It's just like AI is not magic.
What AI is good at, I would give is a kind of interpolation. It will allow you to get new
combinations of things that are, you know, so you might be able to twist together some molecules.
So you might be able to do something, but I'm not convinced. And I think that this is a,
it's not against AI. I have a very, I'm very suspicious of the way that physics describes
reality and the way that computational physicists describe reality with computation.
So there's this description of reality that physicists say is this reality. Then I think
it's the first time I've explained it this way, actually. I've only just come to this conclusion
the last few days. So physics reality, great. Computational physicists describe that reality
in some kind of simulation. Great. So you've got that, that looks good. Then suddenly you extrapolate
up and that you think that basically that computation actually can invent stuff. And what
I've been trying to do, and actually you won't see it on here, I'll move the camera. You can see
that cube in the background is actually a 3D cube playing Conway's game of life. I like Conway's.
I can see that. Yeah. I'm fairly familiar with Conway's game of life. That's interesting.
And it's running in 3D. And one of the things I have that I'm running in the background is I'm
hoping that one day it will actually become a proper life form. It will start to do things that
it's not predictable in a normal length of time that I would expect it to do the computation.
So there is this kind of question that I have. One of my dreams that I know of some,
the very inspiring computer scientist I know in New York, a lady called Susan Stephanie,
or I just think she's a total genius. And I remember telling her that I want to make an
artificial life form in the consciousness. She's like, I want you to. I want to do it in a computer.
And I was like, oh, that's not going to work. You've got enough resource. And she kind of
said, look, all I care about is open-endedness. And I want to write a program that basically
does things that is so shocking to me that I just never turn it off because it's just so novel.
And so one of the misgivings I have about AI as opposed now that we are falling ourselves
at this novel, right? Because chat GPTs, they always just literally make stuff up,
which I think is quite good, actually. It elected me to the Royal Society in the other
one I did it last time. And it gave me a prize. And I was like, oh, thanks, chat GPT.
I'm not in the Royal Society. And I don't have that prize. But thank you for telling me I had
that. That was awesome. And it also made up a few niche from science papers I didn't have.
And so now how did it do that? Because you argue that's novel. Well, it just took stuff that was
in the corpus of knowledge and joined it together rather randomly. Is that new knowledge? And this
for me is a fundamental question that I'd love people to debate. I would argue it is kind of,
if it's new to you, it's new, but it's not new to the entire data set. That matrix multiplication
was always going to give that. If you went to chat GPT and say, please, chat GPT, tell me this,
and you store the random seeds and all the way it runs through. If you recreate those initial
conditions with the same training set, nothing changed, you should get the same outcome each
time. Okay. The thing is, it has some variation, has some random numbers in there or have some
a way of sampling a model, right? There will be some, unless chat GPT has some kind of physical
random incorporation. And that'd be pretty cool. That would be mind blowing if they do that. I
don't think so. I don't think they do physical. I think mostly it's based on transformations
or transforms, which is a deep learning mechanism for NLP as opposed to some of the other ones,
which are fairly different. The question is, when chat GPT does something that looks novel to you,
is it really novel? That's an open question. I think it's provably no, but I think many
mathematicians would argue. What I would like to do is to make genuine novelty, which is something
outside the set that's never, ever predictable from the members of the set. And I would argue that
chat GPT is predictable. It's just a very large database where you can keep recombining. And so
for me, now if you take that to drug discovery, what does that mean? That means you take the known
molecules, known drugs, you encode them, you mix them together and somehow ensure you could make
new chimeras. And actually, you might invent a drug that way. And I might concede the AI has made
a drug. But I think it's more likely because those motifs have been that if you have a system
that could sample members of chemistry way out of the set, they're not even in principle
generatable from the membership that you would have a much larger chance of doing something new.
And I'm kind of, I kind of changed my mind about the hardness of the stance, because I'd like to
take hard stances to learn from people, right? I'm very good. And I was like, I've kind of almost
changed my mind that it's in chemistry that you might be I get some really good candidates out
from an AI system as long, and this is where chemistry comes in, and my lab and the rest of
chemistry, as long as you can make them. So if you generate a load of galore, so let's just say you
train, you take known molecules, you encode and you train the transformer model, and then you
generate lots of other molecules. If you can't make those molecules, you're back at square one.
So my dream, initial dream would be my dream, kind of, I have this joke lecture, it's not a joke
lecture, it's real lecture, so we should do computers dream of electric drugs. And it's like
the Blade Runner like do androids dream of electric sheep are they are androids really conscious,
right? So could a computer really come up with novel chemistry that could basically be a drug?
And I think yes. And how do you do this? Well, you do it in three ways. First of all, you basically
generate using quantum mechanical methods, and your known building blocks, a space of possible
molecules, then you only select from those molecules, molecules you know you can make.
But in addition to that, you allow yourself to not be target driven just to be follow the reaction,
just mix stuff together randomly, you blindfold the robot, and say, and so it goes, what happened
there? What happened there? What happened there? And then you have a chance to describe finding
new molecules and new reactions you didn't know could even be generated. And I think those three
approaches together will allow us to make AI drugs work. And it's super exciting. So I've shifted by
opinion, because I think there's a lot of smart people doing this thing I think is dumb. And I
must I'm thinking, they're really smart. And I'm saying that they're that's a dumb thing they're
doing. I think I'm not understanding what they're doing. So I've got their approach and probably
and I don't mind being dumb if I learned something. So I kind of been poking them just a little bit.
I think we all start dumb until we learn something. So that's not a not a bad approach to take.
You mentioned physicists have a certain model of reality. And something that was sort of weighing
on my mind these past couple of weeks since we last spoke was you mentioned that you had a theory
around time, the fourth dimension and the emergent properties thereof. Can we dive in there?
Okay, yeah, that's good. That's good. It's completely crazy. But I don't think it is.
Yeah, so the traditional notion of so I think that yeah. Yeah. I have a really interesting
view on time because I actually think I can remember when there was no space for me. And that
was like a like, you know, and then there was space. It was kind of, I think a very interesting
thing that scarred me for life, right? I don't know. So, so right now the traditional view of
the universe is we have this three dimensional universe in space, we can move in space, right?
And so if I've got my two hands, I can move my hand here and with my hand here and with my hand
here, do that, cross over so they're moving in space. And they can go back. So I can go here,
okay. So in locally, I can go back to the same place. And to move there, I just, I use time,
you know, I action in time. And if you talk to a physicist and they say, yeah, time doesn't exist.
This is something you measure. Time tells you about ordering events. It tells you about,
you know, you have to, it's just measuring dissipation of energy, things happening, things
happening, you generate time. And for the longest time, forgive the pun, I've always felt that there
is, that doesn't feel quite right. And I wasn't able to put a finger on it. And I think this goes
back to me trying to understand where life comes from. Now, there is a view of the universe whereby
the universe has a beginning, the big bang, or this order at the beginning, big bang, time,
everything goes out. And then there's a big crunch. No, you don't miss again, you just go.
And maybe you can even take those points and fold them around and like the same. So you
go that way, go all the way back in the universe, right? So you, so you kind of, you have, so what
it kind of says, if you really do the mathematics and the logic properly, it says, there is no free
will. There is no free will, free will. There is no agency. There is no consciousness. There is no
anything, really, it's just stuff is happening. It's all, it's a Laplacian, like so Laplace was this
French physicist, I think, who basically thought the universe entirely deterministic. And you know,
if you in principle knew the position and momentum of your particle in the universe,
you knew the universe, you knew what the universe would do forever. Then they said, oh, thank God,
quantum mechanics has solved that because quantum mechanics is actually random at the bottom.
But it's not quantum mechanics isn't random. It has to be, you have to sample things at that
size probabilistically. So there is a probability distribution. And it's, you have to accumulate
statistics. But if you really went down and tugged on the individual atom, yeah, I'm not doing something
magical is completely controlled by deterministic equations. So how is a deterministic universe
capable of all this novelty? And the other thing that I find interesting is for me, my experience
of the universe is that the universe is continually generating new things I couldn't predict beforehand
at all. You know, although I did make a conjecture for a retreat I'm going on in a few months,
that they said say something non obvious that you think would happen by in 2028. And I was like,
Vladimir Putin will be on a witness protection program in the US. Let's see if it comes true.
I don't know what was the principle best it would take. I think, I think for that, you know,
interesting, interesting production. Well, look, let's imagine the flat. Well, the reason I said
that says that everyone sees that Vladimir Putin is a bad guy and he's doing bad stuff.
Sure. But he's not a single individual. There's lots of individuals going. So why is he doing
what are you doing? It there must be, he must, there must be a series of pressures people don't
just act, you know, alone. So then, if actually, Vlad says, Oh, my God, I don't want to be doing
this. I'm being forced by this other set of environmental circumstances. I don't want to
be at war with Ukraine. I'm going to actually tell you what's going on. And they basically,
then I, I don't know. I'm just like thinking, you know, our individual people doing stuff. I
digress time. So, so I think that so I'll cut to the chase. I think time is the only thing that
exists and there is no space. And people will like, this is just insane. Well, hear me out.
I move my hands in space, but are they are they in the same space? Think about it. I'm on planet
earth. I've got spinning. I'm going around the sun. The sun that is the solar system is moving
through space through the universe. So this is actually physically new space right here in front
of me is new space. That's space. With respect to the rest of the universe, I'm traveling through
new part of the universe. And then we go back to the old part of the universe. I have local
reversibility. I go back and, and so what we can say is that every event is unique in space and time.
But if you only think about time as being a thing,
then space is not, doesn't really need to be a thing. Sorry, you're going to say it for me.
Oh, I think, I think we were talking about sort of the local relativity just, just so
for people who are listening, it's effectively given that we're hurtling through space on this
blue marble. The blue marble is being whipped around by the Milky Way. And then on top of that,
the Milky Way is actually expanding itself outwards every, every moment is effectively
brand new space. But locally, it appears to be the same space, even though it's, it's not. Is that,
is that about right? Okay. Yeah. So space is not reversible. And the physicist's model is locally
reversible. But the problem is that we, and so I, I, I do agree the measurement of time
could be deemed to be emergent. But I'm saying there's another fabric below space that we call
time. And what that is, it's kind of like think about it like a chessboard that's expanding
into the infinity of states. And that's, and that's just not this novelty space that basically
there is this, this series, this, this kind of imaginary physical matrix of, of boxes,
where there are continually generate the unit for existence, more boxes are being generated.
And when you happen to move between those mocks, boxes, you do a measurement and that's what you
call emergent time. But actually the box, if the boxes won't be generated by this mechanism
that produces the universe, you wouldn't even be able to measure time between them.
So why am I saying all this nonsense, right? I'm not qualified to say this, right? I'm a,
you know, I'm a chemist. It's pretty bad at chemistry as I've just explained. I'm not particularly
bit engineer. I'm a pretty bad programmer. And I'm talking to you with authority about time,
insane. Well, yeah, but I want to understand the base of the universe and, and I want to understand
how novelty comes in because novelty somehow gets invented by the universe and gives origin of life.
But if you go back to the origin of the universe, you have this problem where we just don't understand
where the, the, the, where the arrow of time right now is a statistical arrow. We observe
that if you put some cup of hot water, it will cool down. It's just statistics, it bumps into
things, you know, and, and what the physicist says, like, look, at the beginning of the universe,
it was all this energy and all this really low order was always really low order. And ever since
the universe has been unwinding that, and we're going to dissipate into a heat death. And I
don't think that's correct. I think the reason why this is you need four things. You need to have
origin at the origin of the big bang. Where was the little, you know, origin thing you put,
sorry, you need to order the big bang. So where was the ordering machine putting all the order?
Then after the big bang happens, you have to have the second law. So this is asymmetry in time,
which may be best represented by the fact that you then have this kind of statistical kind of
observation of if you have order at the big bang, the second law kind of comes out. And then
thirdly from that, you have time and then from they have causation. So time and causation actually
come out at the top. And so now now if I so me if I act on myself and I'm a macro state, and I
actually, I don't know, able to get the lab and make a drug at atomic scale and take that drug,
maybe you shouldn't bad way to look at it, you know, I'm not Heisenberg or anything. But if I'm
able to do something to myself at the microscopic level, the macroscopic level, that kind of breaks
some kind of conservation, right? Physicists and philosophers don't really understand this top
down causation. So they're coming up all these things, emergence and all this. And I think the
simplest thing is to say, we never see time frozen. So what I think could people might agree with.
So, and I know that, you know, people like Eric Weinstein just kind of like to say, you know,
nonsensical things, because they're outside of academia and their heretics, and we ignore them.
No, we ignore them because they're generally just making stupid statements. Okay, like the
entertaining though. Yeah, but yeah, but that's fine. But pretending to do it with authority
is not fine. And then pretending to kind of go on to zeitgeist and, and then have these arguments,
I really makes me angry, because really, everyone knows as conspiracy theorists.
And I don't know, maybe I'm again, I'm way out of my depth on this. But what I was saying is that
speed of light seems like it's constant, great, because that's the speed of causation in the
universe. So, you know, so that's one important thing. And the other thing that we can see is that
you can't go back in time. Everything has to go forward. Every measurement you make, everything
you do, you, it's not this reversibility is borrowed. And so I think that because you can't
freeze time, and you can't go back in time and physical processes occurring all the time,
that there's a lot of, there's a lot of evidence, I think, if you shift your viewpoint to argue that
time is fundamental, and from time comes everything else. But it's a fun, you know, it's a fun thing.
At the end of the day, it's a crazy conjecture. But it's not any crazier than the current
constructed the universe. It doesn't violate, I'm not saying that you could go faster than
light, absolutely not. So you can't, there's no reason for that. I'm just saying that basically
you don't need order at the beginning of the universe. But here's a wacky thing, right? So,
I think space is not space, it's time. It's like, what are you talking about? It's like,
take the voyage approach. They're so far away. They're far away in space. Sure, we can measure
them far away, but they're actually just far away in time. We had a limited amount of energy.
We fired them out there, they've gone away, but we could catch up to them if we could,
you know, we had enough energy. So that's really interesting that time has really
stretched them away. And if you imagine if you're walking, if you drive down a highway,
and you imagine that highway, the highway you're going in a spatial dimension,
but you're driving down takes time. It took time to build that highway in the past.
That highway will not exist in the future when it erodes away. That highway is a
temporarily defined object. And so I wonder if the universe having the size in space is an illusion
and it's really just got size in time. And so time only has meaning when you can see
effect, cause and effect. So I'm wondering if the universe goes around something along the lines of
you have this big bang, everything interacts, you know, there's a lot of interesting stuff happening,
you know, stars, galaxies, planets, consciousness, GPT, tick tock, and then the universe expands,
expands, expands, and then when all the particles in the universe is so spread out,
they lose synchronicity, then space sequences fail to have any meaning and you find yourself
back at the beginning. Which begs the question, of course, if everything is deterministic,
that means you didn't really have a choice but to do this podcast. You're sort of destined from the
some type of beginning of the universe. Yeah, so do the initial conditions describe what we do?
Yeah, I mean, it's completely nonsensical. It can't be the case. Now, well, why is that? We have to do
experiments. So I was going to say, right, we can, I can come out with a lot of these outrageous
statements, but really they're just outrageous statements if they're not falsifiable. And so
and that's one of the things I like to do. And I, you know, I can falsify some things. I'm not sure
how easy it is to falsify things about time, but I think we might be able to do things with causation
and understand how life got started by generating kind of causal structures,
making complex molecules, making memories and substrates. Those memories allow, allow
the universe to then turn into an evolutionary system. And that evolutionary system that acts
on itself in some non-trivial way. But I would really love to just do one thing in my life,
if I can do anything, that is build a machine that will generate novelty, where you put boring in
and you get novel out, novelty bot. And, and, and I still haven't yet. It's like kind of almost
like the paradox that I don't, that there is an incompleteness theorems and in computation and in
evolution and in the, in quantum mechanics, whereby humans can kind of imagine proofs and things,
but they're kind of seen beyond the current event horizon. And I wonder if
our ability to imagine things that don't exist yet actually help us construct things into existence.
So this is a very weird thing that humans can do that I just don't understand. And it might be
that I just spent the last 10 minutes talking complete gibberish and from that I'm potentially
sorry, but there might be an experiment in there somewhere where we can measure. And then we might
actually get to grips with what dark energy and dark matter are from rethinking this, because all
is not well, you know, gravity and quantum mechanics aren't playing well together. So that says
something's wrong. There's extra mass in the universe that says every single time someone says
dark matter to me, I always say, why don't you just use the word MacGuffin? Well, they're describing
something that we can't measure, we can't see, we just think exists because our math, our math
basically isn't strong enough to prove otherwise. So it's, it's literally like the ultimate physics
MacGuffin. So I think the dark matter might have, yeah, well, so I think it's, it's missed it. There
is all that they're calling this thing because 96% if you're gonna, I'm probably gonna say this wrong,
but roughly, I think 90% of the mass in the universe is unaccounted for something like that.
I think I've heard that somewhere around there, a large amount. And the reason why it's unaccounted
for, because on the large scales, we don't understand the gravitational structures.
And so, and cosmologists have been building pretty convincing computer models. And why I'm
saying at the same time, you can't, you can't predict the future precisely or novelty on the
cosmological scales, you can predict some features of and also predict how gravity will form and
black holes and all that. So, but yeah, I don't, the dark, I think there's more evidence for
dark matter than there is dark energy. But even so, it might be that this dark matter is this thing
doesn't interact with anything that we know of yet. And that it's just, it's just, it might be
something that is associated with the substance, the fabric of space, if space exists. But yeah,
it's, we need more observations. And I think we need to basically be able to, to get to grips
with those experiments and lab. But if there's MacGuffins, don't interact with anything that we
know, they only interact with other MacGuffins, and it's like MacGuffins all the way down.
As far as, as far as your, this theory, right? Meaning, meaning time, time being the fourth
dimension. Let's just assume that it's true. Then what, what does that mean for humanity?
Or what would it mean? Well, I mean, so, I mean, I think what I would like to propose is that time
is, is the fundamental thing from which space emerges. I mean, I'm not saying that space doesn't
exist at all. I mean, I know I can get my lab in space and come back, but it's kind of interesting
that I'm not going to the same lab. It actually, if there's all these layers of space, you have
these concentric circles going out, it's going in a different place. So what it, what I think
it means is that there's no going back, right? So you get rid of all these paradoxes, no going
back in time. And also what it means is that when the universe is expanding in time, and I'm really,
this seems to be the mechanism by, there's some way that we can interact with that mechanism
to generate novelty in the universe, new objects. So every time, you know, computationless and
physicists would argue that there is nothing ever new, that you could always predict something is
new from what's gone before. Here's an interesting thing. When something, you've got this set,
so you've got this known universal, a set of known things. Whenever something exists outside the
universe over here, or comes into being, that you didn't predict from in here, you can always
encapsulate it into your, you expand your knowledge, but you know, because it doesn't break the laws,
it's consistent with it. So there's always this event arising in new things happening.
Who would predict, you know, that whatever meteorological event or whatever this, and everyone
say, well, it's, you know, lack of understanding of initial conditions or that, but is it, is it
because the universe has more states available to generate things, and it's scaffolding on stuff
that's happened before, the universe is intrinsically open-ended. And so I guess I would like to come
up with a conception of that would allow me to do a test where I almost could have two different
mini universes, if you like, or two different experiments where I could generate novelty at
different rates and see systems that had ostensibly the same initial conditions. But as I, as I
manipulate them, they, one is more unpredictable than the other. And that would be kind of cool. So
I can imagine experiments like that. But what it would say for the humanity, what it, I guess it
would say that, you know, the future's open, genuinely, it's the way the universe is deterministic
but undeterminable, which is kind of nice. So that means that the universe does behave
relatively uniformly, it is deterministic. But because the universe is expanding in time,
you literally have to have a breakdown of, there's a, there must be some breakdown of causality
at some level, because you need to, because you don't have all the mappings. So that's maybe why,
so I'm really interested in breakdown of causality. That's, I think, how we can measure it. So that
might help us understand origin of life, intelligence, consciousness, and kind of, you know, an evolution.
And they all seem to be related to this same novelty generation problem, or what I would call
very simply open-endedness. By biology starting on Earth, it started a sequence of events that
connected the very first cell with, you know, with GPT, chat GPT today. Why? Because it wasn't for
that first cell becoming, you know, going through evolution and then basically undergoing a transition
to animals in the sea, and then to mammals, and then all the way up, and then human beings, and
mathematicians, and so on. That lineage in time is what, when you see chat GPT. So when someone says
to me, oh my god, the cell is so complicated, how can you justify it? What do you see when you see
the cell? I say, I see four billion years of an object. And objects extend through time, and time
is just another dimension for objects. Because, you know, you have parents, grandparents who did it
all the way back, right, to, you know, our last universal common ancestors there. So I think that's
something that humans, scientists, philosophers forget. They think that they're the only instance.
But if it wasn't for their history, and the history of their cultural artifacts and technology,
they would not exist. And that's really interesting.
Makes sense. Speaking of those other sort of humans, and, and, and whatnot, and going back in time,
intelligence was invented by selection. And therefore, there won't be any super
intelligence without super selection. I believe this is a direct quote. Help me out on this one.
What are we talking about when we say this? I was trying to, I mean, I think there are people
up there trying to crack intelligence. And I think that they're, I think what they mean is they're
trying to understand enough about how intelligence works to use it in a modular way to solve other
problems. And I might even buy we could do that. But I don't think we really will be able to get
sentience. I think if you think about the brain, the brain again has gone through this linear
evolution. You've done four billion years of evolution. Then the first brain, first brains
were evolved, trial and error, trial and error, trial and error. So your brain isn't just your
brain now. It is the lineage of all the brains that existed. Whoa, that's a big depth in time.
And it's a function of the fact that you, you, your brain grew in the womb. And then
during childhood, great, you've got all that stuff. I don't know whether you're a fast myelonator as
a teenager or ask you about how crazy you were or not, you know, later. And then, and, and then
you're teenage, teenager, crazy. I got boring later. Right. I was boring. I'm making up for it.
And then, and then your brain works in real time. So you've got all these different things that your,
your, your, your brain has been doing. Now, if you want to invent intelligence,
do you need to have create four billion years of evolution?
And, and in selection, because selection, you survived your brain survived. How many deaths
have there been so you could survive both how many bacteria have died so you could survive, right?
In the trial and error, at every level, death is a default in, you know, it's a struggle to be alive
and survival through selection creates, you know, innovates things. Your survival has been due to
something in the environment. So when you look, when you go from a transition to single sales
and multi cellular systems, and then onward selection, it's got supercharged. And now,
if you think about the way that we're using, we take, let's go all the way to mammals. So
suddenly we get to mammals and we, we start to make tools and we start to maybe be able to
produce language. And, you know, when we came to Neanderthals, homo sapiens, whatnot, our, our
thumbs become the right size, we can make tools and then basically encode things. And now we
start to bootstrap. So that's the first tool makers were like, wow, I have an advantage over you,
I can, I can use this tool to live longer, get more food, defend myself. And this, what selection
allows you to do is invent tools, invent language, invent abstraction, and literally the invention
of consciousness if you like, a conscious sport is through selection. And when you're making decisions
down the street, when you're basically working out who to talk to, what to go by, it's all the
selection experiment, right? You think you have autonomy, but selection is in control. And there
is a way we can rise above it because we build abstract machines. But I'm just wondering if the
architecture of our intelligence has been produced by selection. And until we understand that we're
going to get any super intelligence, I mean, I think it's nonsensical, like, oh, we're going to
build a super intelligence that understands things about the universe that we don't know.
Really? Okay, give me an example. And it's just like people generating nonsense above a horizon.
It's like, it's going to be able to solve mathematical, you know, conjecture as fast. It's
like, well, yeah, but that's a combinatorial search is going to do that. It's going to,
you built it. It's a bit like saying, oh my God, with a super test tube, we're going to do super
chemistry. It's like, it's a test tube. So when people say to me is AI going to get a Nobel Prize?
I'm like, no, the person invented the AI will get the Nobel Prize. You know, you don't give the,
you know, the chemist who used a test tube to get a Nobel Prize and discovering a new drug,
the test tube, the Nobel Prize. So people don't understand bootstrapping. And so what I think,
I think I'm saying about intelligence, which I think is very nuanced and maybe a lot more
mainstream somewhat boring is to say that the tools we have are not intelligent on their own.
When we interact with them, we get them to be intelligent. The question is, can these tools
be intelligent on their own? No chance. There is no prospect. Have you tried, although I can't
wait to get barred, is it barred or whatever with you're talking about Google's new AI? Yeah, yeah.
So I want to get, I want to, I've been playing getting these chatbots to just talk to each other.
I think at the end of the universe, the internet will just explode and be non usable within about
10 years. You mean the chatbots basically going to war with one another for some definition?
Just nonstop chatting. Yeah. I think that's happened. It's interesting. Facebook actually
did that a long time ago. They had two chatbots that they got to talk to each other. And it turned
out they thought there were emergent properties and they thought, oh my god, they're inventing
their new language. And it turns out it was just bugs. It was just bugs in the code that they
eventually degenerated into no longer speaking English. But yeah, chat GPT is interesting
for a number of different reasons. But yeah, that versus barred. And then I think the Chinese have
invented or are working on one for Baidu as well. I think it's, I think it's everybody's going after
this sort of new technology. But it's going to be a bit like, I don't know if you've ever done
this for fun. You take a YouTube video, download it, re upload it, download it, re upload it,
download it because it's the way the compression works. You only need to do it 10 or 20 times
before it's just noise. And so I think that we really don't understand the causal structures
that give us intelligence. We really don't understand this kind of scale event, the scaling,
right? I can give you and everyone all computer scientists take this as like every time I say
at any public forum, they take me a task. But I would make the I would say the following
that make the following statement that there are more connection, there are more possible
connections your brain could make by reorganizing the neurons and the connections in your head
than there are atoms in the universe. So, so there's like, so, so that what that mean of the
you don't you can't access them all at once. But because you can shift around plastically,
you can basically got all this configurations, you've got all this state space available.
On us on a microprocessor, it's always going to be compressed version. So these large models
always going to be compressed representations of reality. They're not reality. This is the same
reason why the simulation hypothesis is not a hypothesis. It's just nonsense. And the reason
why it's nonsense. Yeah, say more about that one. So the reason why the simulation hypothesis is
nonsense is that you, first of all, if you're in a simulation, you're going to be existing in another
simulation, another simulation, another simulation. And what Nick Bostrom does, he says, well,
I'm going to assign the probability that we're, you know, we're a normal person here. And I'm
going to do all this probabilities, conditionals and bum, we're all in simulations. No, there could
be one confounder there that actually it's not possible to make a simulation that could represent
a human being. Now, here's the thing. And this is where selection got there to before us. Let's
just imagine the following. If again, this is, I mean, there is a get out clause in here that
again is incompleteness, incompleteness theorems for simulations and mathematics may be similar.
So let's just say that basically biology is pretty efficient. And all the computational
capability in my brain down to the tens of molecules have been utilized. And then, you know,
you've got DNA in the cells and all this stuff. So basically, if you want to replicate,
replicate all of that faithfully, right, not just statistically make a make an average,
the computer needs to be the site at least the size of the available universe.
And that's with no time. And as soon as time inflates the computer needs to get bigger.
So the fact we cannot predict the future is probably a very interesting piece of evidence
that we can't possibly in a simulation. Because when we go right down to the bottom,
if causation is really holding, we the infrastructure required to simulate the
infrastructure we see is always bigger. So if the thing is always bigger, you're never going to do it.
That's that's an interest. That's an interest. I never thought about it in that in that particular
way. That's an interesting way of putting it. Well, let's say, well, no, you're in a simulation.
And really, there's this stuff below atoms. And, you know, as the plank and all this, I'm like,
okay, you can always invoke the simulation and simulation. But and and then maybe a really
good philosopher. Well, I mean, maybe Nick Bostrom is a really good philosopher. And you can tell
me why my argument is flawed. But, you know, I was always inspired when I wanted to make a
computer. So I'm making chemical computers in my lab for fun. I think the only way to AGI and any
real timescale is to just make a make a make a facsimile of a brain, make a gel, make a brain
gel. I don't think consciousness outside of so they can outside of the human brain is impossible.
I just think you need to bear in mind the lineage going back to Luca. And somehow you've got to
fall that jumpstart and you've got to have the configurability of human brain because that's
why it's consciousness now. Let's start there, right? And then when people say, oh, you know,
things might be conscious, well, a large language model that's trained over many GPUs,
over many hours, many days using many megawatts of energy, that object when it's
instantiated, is that a conscious entity? No, because consciousness needs to integrate information
in real time from from one side of its compute to the other. Whereas these models are like
infrastructures built over time. And I'm really describing that super badly. But coming back
to the computation, ages ago, I wanted to make a simulation of mayonnaise. And so I thought,
I'll make a simulation. So mayonnaise are really interesting material, you know, you've got all
this, this, this food and these emotions, and you whip it up and you get this lovely white
pattern is your mayonnaise, and you could compute, you could simulate using a good physics engine.
And the physics engine could never quite go this symmetry, you can't get the quite consistency,
it doesn't faithfully reproduce it, you have to put in lots of information.
I thought, rather than could spend all my energy with my, you know, my GPUs,
burning all these megawatts, why don't I take the ingredients from mayonnaise, put them in a jar,
put a very fast video camera next to it, and where were the blades so I can make the mayonnaise
and actually video it using fast video and watch it. And I wonder if that's a physical
computation. And then, and I'm like, oh, that's kind of cool, because I'm actually physically
watching, I can then use a high speed video to work out what's going to happen next, I can maybe
do it different scales and get some idea. And therefore I don't need to do the compute in the
GPU inverts and matrices, I actually just watch it happen. And I think that's a super interesting
idea, because what that then does, you can then start to do what's called embodied computation.
And embodied computation is what I think we are not using enough of in our current revolution.
And so it's like literally doing compute with stuff. And, you know, and so that's kind of a
very long answer to the simulation argument, which I don't think is satisfactory to some people,
because like, look, you know, I think Nick Bostrom had three criteria, but I think one of the
criteria that is like, you know, whether you're in a simulation or not, I think you missed the
zero off one, which is, it's just not possible to make a simulation. And if you, if you are a
simulation, what substrate you are, where are you, is it simulations all the way down? And then,
and then is the universe computationally the computation at the bottom? And I think one of
the things I will have to do, I want to do an experiment is I want to prove, and I don't even
do this, that the universe is suffers from computational irreducibility. Now, this is
not exactly the same thing that Stephen Wolfram talks about. But it's, it is similar. And I'm,
I'm working on some experiments for that. What's, what's the high level there? I mean,
you don't have to go through the whole theory. I'm just kind of curious, what's, what's the
high level on between, between your definition versus Wolfram's? And mine is much more physically
based. I'm not basing it in a kind of a, that there's compute all the way down. And there are
just some solutes, some things have solutions, some things, though, what I'm saying is the
universe is not computational. It's physical. And from the universe, you can emerge computation.
And some, some of the universe, you can do computation and reversibly with reversible
computation allows you to make Turing machines, right? You can do super interesting things.
You can imagine going back in time, you can imagine the simulation, you can imagine the metaverse.
But it's kind of a, it's all about substrate and the substrate dependency. And I think that
that's very analogous to lineages in time. And so in the same way you need to basically
layer things and substrates, if you take a cellular automata, the cellular automata just
isn't, isn't kind of occurring on its own. It's incurring in a computer substrate. And,
you know, you can erase the squares effortlessly just by basically just turning everything off.
And you can then start it again. But that is not a faithful representation of reality and
infrastructure required to make that. That is something that you are able to emulate, simulate
rather in a, in a silicon substrate. Okay. Well, given, given that we've gone to the universe models,
given we've gone through some universe models. What about aliens? I know you've got a couple of
theories around this. And I know that there is something called assembly theory, which, which
I think, I think does relate to sort of extraterrestrial life, at least in the, in the, in the physics
world, I think, I mean, there's assembly theory and computer science as well. I think it's in
mathematics. There's a number of different things, but I think I believe you have a very particular
thought on this. And I'd love to hear, are there aliens? Are they here? What's going on?
Are the aliens here? Yeah, according to why don't. So life on earth, it seems to be very
special, doesn't it? We don't really seem evidence of life anywhere else right now.
And so that puzzled me a bit. And so given that the chemistry that is in life, isn't that special?
It is, well, it is special insofar as it's contingent, right? So it's like dependent on the path
it got there. But there are no special atoms. There's no, you know, magic. It's, there's no vitalism.
It's just chemical reactions. Well constrained. The, the, it's basically the chemist life on earth
is a result of a four billion year curated chemistry experiment. All right. That's like four
billion years of curation in chemistry gives you biology. It was amazing. And actually,
it actually was less than that. It was only maybe a hundred million years. We don't know.
And assembly theory was a probably, it was a theory that I, I built a mathematical theory that
I built many, I don't know, ask me on a different table. I'll give you a different story about how
it came about. But it's kind of, kind of, kind of always troubled me, actually, that I had this
kind of description of the universe in my head. And I, some days I kind of saw it very clearly.
And other days it was just like, I have no idea what I'm talking about. And it would go away.
But now it's pretty clear what it is. And the way I got there was to ask a question. And again,
I just got in trouble with the chemists to say, what is the largest molecule that I could imagine
that could be made naturally, whatever that is, without, without information, maybe without
intervention, maybe with no life, if I could even imagine that. And, you know, could it be possible
to, to, to make, you know, wildly outrageous molecules without life? And my intuition was
like, no, it's not possible. And when I started talking to people about this, they just said,
no, you can do that. It's you're talking rubbish. Of course, you just do combinatorial chemistry,
molecules get bigger and bigger and bigger, it's natural processes. And then I realized for many
years I was misdescribing what I meant. It's like, well, I didn't just mean making a very complex
molecule, just one urge, I mean in a detectable amount, because I'm a chemist, if I can't detect it,
if I can't do an experiment, it doesn't exist. To detect a molecule, you need to have thousands,
millions, trillions of copies. So, and so I was really like not communicating correctly. So my
conjecture is really, if I thought, are there any molecules that you can make trillions, trillions
of copies out there that aren't made by biology? And the answer appears to be no. I was like, whoa,
that kind of blew my mind. So I started to play with the theory and say, okay, can I even tell
if a molecule's complicated or not? And I started to think about this. And I went to the computation,
they said, oh, yes, we can use all this information theory and entropy and blah, blah, blah, blah,
we'll just count it and we'll look how compressible it is. And look at these statistics, I was like,
this doesn't seem very right. And they were like, and it's kind of like this,
let's say I ring you up and I say, okay, hey, I've got, I've made two new drugs.
And you're like, okay, tell me, tell me, what are they? You know, let's say you're about,
you're, you're working with like a biology, you want to test them? And I say, right,
well, what I'll do is I'll just tell you how to draw them. And you say, right, and I give you the
coordinates for one molecule and say them, say you have to give you 25 coordinates, you write it
down, you're like, and then give you the next molecule and then give you to give you 50 coordinates,
you're like, and I say to you, okay, which one, which molecule is the most complicated?
And you're going to go the one with 50 coordinates. It seems fair. And they'll say, and you're like,
well, Lee, look, I don't care about the coordinates, how do I make them? And I say, okay, now I give
you the same, and they say I can make both molecules from the same selection of styling
materials. But the 50 coordinate molecule I can make in two steps, just by mixing together
the chemicals in two steps. And the 25 coordinate molecule, I have to do six steps,
which is the most complicated molecule now.
There's a paradox there. The molecule that just, well, no, practically speaking,
it's the one that needs six steps, because the coordinates go through your eyes,
they're Cartesian, you draw them down. In terms of practical steps, it's like cooking. So then I
suddenly realized like, ah, I, information theory is only good for information theorists,
so trying to categorize things on an, on an equal footing. But if the molecule is being made in a
random gommish in a, in, you know, in a volcano or smoke, maybe something else is going on. So I
kept playing with this. And I, and I realized if I take a molecule, a big molecule, how do I,
how do I know it's evidence of life or not? Well, what I did is I imagined just cutting
the molecule up randomly and then putting the parts together in some kind of order and ordering
them. And the way I do it is like, if they take like the word abracadabra or banana, they have
recurring motifs. So we do is you take abracadabra, just cut, cut, cut, cut, cut in the bits,
order the bits and you can go from abracadabra and the abra is you is, is already been produced
at the beginning. So you can use it again with no extra information. So what that means is like,
you're able to take that, that, that word and compress it down and you do that some molecules.
So what I basically would say is like, okay, what I'm, what am I saying in very simple terms,
take a molecule, break it apart. The more steps it's required to put that molecule together.
Okay. And, you know, maximizing re reuse. So you could basically use bits again to compress it,
if you like, to take the shortest route tells me something about how complex it is. And that's
how assembly theory started, right? It was a mathematical formalism. So how do we translate
this to aliens? Well, I'm getting there. It's a long way, right? What you wanted to do is the,
the, the reason for look for aliens, right? So the way people look for aliens right now,
the way that NASA looks for aliens is to look for evidence of biology on Mars or in,
on cell illness, right? You want to look for proteins, DNA amino acids,
but what if the alien used a different chemistry? What if the life is different?
Silicon based. Exactly. Anything for, you know, just crazy stuff. And you wouldn't know. So what I
wanted to do is to say, ah, well, actually is complexity, assembly complexity, the universal
alien detection signature, because I could basically ask, is this object complex enough?
I wouldn't need to go with any assumptions about its chemistry or technology. So what assembly
theory is the ultimate alien detector? Because all it does, it says, I don't care, you know,
it's agnostic molecule detector. I don't care where you come from molecule. I just want to know
how many unique parts do you have? And if you have more than a threshold, that it's more,
well, the more you have, and the more of you I can detect, the more likely it is that you've
been produced by some evolutionary selection or technological process. And that is a kind of
how assembly theory was born to go and look for alien life. Now, in the solar system, we could
look for alien life using a thing called a mass spectrometer, which basically allows you to
cut the molecule up and weigh the molecule. And what we also found that the weight of the molecule
is very, very good signature for how well it's made by life. So I think the first step is the
first question is, has this molecule been made by life? Yes or no? Can you do that? Yes, we can
do that. Great. Right. Is this molecule made, is an alien life? Well, in most, on Earth, I feel
like, well, I don't know, there's lots of life everywhere. So the further away you go from Earth,
if you detect alien life on Mars, you'd be like, wow, I've got life on Mars. That's first step.
Now, is the life the same as Earth life? That's the second step. Then you can then determine
alien or not. But I would say rather than looking for aliens, you should look for life first.
Is there, is there not a philosophical question inside of there to, to, to the point where it's
like, well, let's just say, okay, it's not like human life in the sense of it's not even carbon
based. How would you know to classify it as life at that point? Just by the number of parts in it,
that's a beautiful thing. We just say, okay, we completely don't care about what you are stuff
wise. All we care about is, are you so complex that you couldn't have formed by chance? Because
if you think about it, if you say you take a coin and you flick your coin, and you get heads,
you're like, okay, cool. And you flick it again, you get heads, you're like, that's cool, lucky.
And you keep going, how many times do you flick that coin to get heads each time before you go,
there's coins, there's a cheat, there's someone that's actually rigged this, right? This coin is
weighted, maybe 10, maybe 20, maybe 30. If you're, if you're, if you're, you know, it depends on your
standards, right? So I mean, every time you flip it, the chances are still 50 50, regardless of
what happened before, but you're right at a certain point, you're going, this is ridiculous.
That's exactly right. That's exactly right. As long as the coin isn't weighted, so it's not, you know,
99, you know, 0.001, you know, it's 50 50. So if you keep a tally, you're absolutely agnostic
each time, like, I've got a coin, I know it's probably work, boom. Okay, oh, okay, heads, heads
again. And you might not, you might be in the stream of good luck of getting heads in a row. And
then you then, when you get to your 21, you get heads, tails, tails, tails, tails, tails. So what
you need to do is you need to accumulate enough data in population. And that, so that's really a
nice way of looking. So what assembly theory allows you to do is to determine if an object has been
created by selection or not. And then we then started to think about it, not just as a diagnostic
tool to measure a liveness, we started to realize assembly theory tells us about causation at the
bottom, and how causation emerges from interactions all the way up to create objects, and how those
objects interact with each other. And we're, I'm working with a team at ASU led by Sarah Walker,
with her team, and also some people at SFI as well as in Glasgow. And we're beginning to realize
that assembly theory appears to tell us about order at well, not come, sorry, complexity
and propagation of causation or dependency on the past. It tells us about how to quantify
initial conditions and understand that. So that means assembly is actually superior to entropy,
because entropy only tells you what you lost and you have to label it. Where assembly, you don't
have to label things because you can see when you count disorder, you know that that's produced in
time. And what we, and this is what got me crazy about time is I realized that a set highly assembled
objects, the higher the assembly index, the more time was required to make that object in the
first place. And that's how it's become a theory of physics, of aliens, and kind of thinking about
time. And given that we, I'm not a physicist, I don't know anything about time, we haven't found
any aliens, there could be a really, really, really poor theory, but there's a really interesting
thing, which is kind of cool. In the, I've got this abstract theory, a number of parts, I was able
to go to the lab and measure the assembly indexes of all the molecules in the lab using
what, in chemistry spectroscopic techniques, so by counting the parts of the molecule, we get
a very good correlation. So I'm like, oh my god, I'm talking crazy stuff about this theory,
but actually it's measurable. Molecules have an intrinsic complexity, you can only measure
using assembly theory or assembly theoretic approaches. And it's, it's there. It's like
measuring the force of gravity between two objects. So is it, is measuring the assembly
and like measuring the selection is undergone in time? Yeah. And that's why my brain is short
circuited because I don't know what to do with that right now. That's fair. Assembly theory and even
science aside, do you think aliens have ever been here for some definition of alien?
I don't know. I think it's,
yeah, I don't know. I mean, I do not believe in aliens. I've seen no evidence. So if I'm being
honest, I mean, it's like, you know, I felt like saying, just for fun, see how many extra Twitter
followers I could get by saying, yeah, aliens definitely exist, right? Because, but I haven't
seen any evidence at all that suggests that aliens have been here. Now, sort of leads us into the
Fermi paradox of, you know, if, if they are, what, why haven't we seen them? Or is it just too far
away? There's, there's a number of different things inside of there. But yeah. Well, yeah, yeah,
but let's, I'll come back to another thing. And I don't know yet. So I actually started to map
all life on earth using assembly theory, which is kind of cool, because that means we can not,
we don't just use standard taxonomy or gene sequencing, we can use assembly theory to map
tree life. We might, it's not unhooked because we haven't looked for life yet, right? So the
only way you can find life on earth is use your eyes and microscope. Does it grow? You know, kill
it and so on. Can you sequence it? Can you draw it? Now, there might be other molecules, other
versions of life that we just can't interact with. I'm not saying hyperdimensional aliens,
but there might be, it's conceivable, but not, not likely, I would guess. It wasn't a bit on it,
but let's say it's conceivable. There are alien microbes online on earth or microbes on earth
that we have never seen before, because we can't gene sequence it, we can't be in the
Earth's crust. And could it be that, I don't know, Earth was formed from the death of another star
on other planets, and they could have been the life beforehand, and some of that life was in
the Earth's crust somewhere, and we could detect it and find it. Maybe. Or maybe that's the reason
that the two amino acids decided to form a protein X billion or 100 million or whatever it was years
ago when life actually evolved. I think that having life dependent on life gets very, it gets you
into this crazy book I've got, which I've got here, which is this crazy book, which I bought,
I found in Paris and bookshop, which is like the intelligent universe by Fred Hoyle, and Fred Hoyle
was basically an alien micro-creationist. And Fred Hoyle always got the Nobel Prize for physics,
right? He was able to, he was a brilliant physicist, but basically hated the Big Bang,
and just saw that life was here everywhere, and there are microbes everywhere in the universe,
and we see no evidence for that. So to answer your question concretely, I have seen no evidence for
it, but however, before I started to think about assembly theory, I'd seen no evidence for complex,
hadn't worked out, think about it. So I think there are three answers to your question.
I haven't seen any evidence for aliens on Earth, but I've now got a way to go look for them.
Well, super cool, right? We can go look. And the thermi paradox isn't, I don't think,
it's just basically because thermi had a limited imagination when it came to chemistry and complexity.
And thermi assumed that basically, rather egocentricly, that aliens would be broadcasting
radio waves and doing all sorts of random stuff that we would detect. And if assembly theory is
right, the way that the content that we are so contingent on our past, aliens might not even
know what prime numbers are. I, you know, our prime numbers, you know, one of the things I'd
love to do, right, if I can actually ever take a day off, I want to find a physical
process that gives me primes. Wouldn't that be cool if there was some physical process
that just gave you prime numbers? Be impressive. I'm not sure. I don't think there is any physical
process that gives us primes. Primes are evidence of abstraction. And I would probably, I would
probably hazard a guess that probably aliens have got primes. They might not have got all the type
of mathematics that would have mathematics as kind of consistent with ours, but not the same.
And so I think the mathematics is invented. And because we all share the same universe,
right, we are all part of the same origin story, we have some overlap in our, what we call our
assembly space. And therefore, mathematics at the very core would share some origins,
but I don't think in math, of mathematics, all exists. It is continuously being created by process
in time. So what I hope to do in the next few years with assembly theory is basically map Earth
and space and other planets in the solar system, using mass spectrometry
to find, see if we can find evidence of alien microbes. But what we can now do
is because we use mass spects, the mass spec is about weighing molecules. We can also use infrared
and infrared is like, you know, looking at heat signatures. But what we've found is the correlation
we get with mass spec, we also get an even better correlation for infrared. What does that mean?
When you take a molecule and you shake it with some energy, it absorbs in very specific ways,
a bit like if you went to piano and you typed a bit of chord, you'd get a particular sound out.
So molecules are like pianos. If you hit them with a particular wavelength of energy, you'll get a
particular wavelength back, right, characteristic of the bond, or actually more correctly, if you
blast it with a load of broadspand energy or absorb certain unique frequencies, because you're playing
the piano, please, the molecule. So if we can make a cell telescope to say its size of the sun,
right, then which should be possible, basically use gravitational lensing and just go and just
basically bug a detector quite far away from Earth. You're probably more likely to do it with the
Earth or something or make it just a big array. But we should be able to at some point image
exoplanets and look for complex molecules in the infrared. And we might be able to remotely
detect alien life using a really big telescope that will just detect molecules that have enough
complexity. And one of the things I want to design before I die is a is an emergency switch,
like I want to design a gas. No one's going to do this, right? It's insane. But I want to design
a gas that has so many different bonds in it, that if the civilization is about to end, we want to
just pull this and put the gas in the atmosphere to say to the aliens, we were here, because they
will be like, holy shit, why are you absorbing in all this? Like, I want to basically write time
numbers into a gas, which I think I know how to do. We should be super cool.
That'd be pretty incredible. A good signature, almost like carving, carving something in a
post saying that you were there. Yeah, be impressive. So last question. If you could
manifest a technology into existence, I think I think I might know your answer. You might have
already mentioned this, but if you could manifest a technology into existence in your field,
what would that be? Into my field. Is it the novelty? Is it the novelty generator or is it?
Yeah, yeah. I mean, and again, for some definition of your field, your call. Can I have three?
Fire away. All right. Number one, I'd like the computer to be, I'd like to all the hard work
be done and just be in every lab in the world right now and just people running code. But I
think that will happen within within a few years. We've got 50 in the lab, 50,
and chemifiers and regenerating loads. I built the computer to build an origin of life machine.
And the origin of life machine is a big grid that I'm going to go searching. So the next technology
I need, and I've already built one as well, but I'd love to have a big enough one where I can
create life forms on demand, have an issue. So yeah, you want a different life form. The other
technology that we're working on, I suppose I'm being really boring, just what technologies I'm
working on. I would like to make a true chemical configurable brain. And basically, and I think
I know how to do this actually, because I make it conscious. And this is this will drive this
little this is a, are you talking about like an artificially constructed Boltzmann brain,
something of this nature? Boltzmann brains can't exist. Boltzmann brain are as ludicrous as I
mean, creationists and Boltzmann physicists who believe in Boltzmann brain same same thing.
Okay. Because Boltzmann brain can't print spring into existence, because you have to have the
lineage of all the brains going back in time. I mean, I think even the math behind that specifically
said even Boltzmann said, yeah, it would be heat death of the universe before it even exists.
There are some questions that are so ludicrous to ask you, just because you can write down the
number doesn't mean you should ask it. And I think for those listening, a Boltzmann brain is
literally a conscious brain that pops into existence through random events. Exactly in the
universe. And in the universe. And there's no causal structure for that. It's just not it's
absolutely an impossible thing, right? And when someone says, oh, no, no, it's possible,
you know, no, it's not possible. You want to be a creation. But if you believe in Boltzmann
brain, you're a creationist, you know, and it's not an insult to creationists, you're allowed,
you're allowed to imagine creation. But the thing I would love to be able to do is to make
a chemical consciousness in my life. And the way I would do this, now, how we become conscious,
we move around arguably the most seminal event. And this wasn't my idea. I think it was, you know,
lots of biologists realized when basically animals came out of the sea onto land, they could suddenly
see for distances. And because they weren't going to be eaten in like a nanosecond or just a few
milliseconds, they could see trouble coming. And so selection helped them invent basically
cognition in a new way with time. So you can imagine you remember the past,
see the present and anticipate the future. And if you've got a predator coming towards you,
you've got some time to move. So this cognition, this cognitive, this movement with your brain
allowed you to generate intelligence in a new way and ultimately consciousness. Now,
how do you make a conscious, how do you make an AGI? Well, we put a chemical brain in a robot and
it has to walk around the world and just interact, you know, like a toddler and just do stuff.
I was like, that's really expensive. But if we could put, if we can make a simulation, a metaverse,
and attach the brain to the metaverse and move it around, we could probably build a consciousness
in a physical form by having it wander around a metaverse. And that blew my mind because literally
we are then creating brains in a simulation. You know the simulation is just that your brain
is in the physical world, but everything you know is a simulation or a hybrid between you.
So that would be something I'd love to create for fun. But I think that causes philosophical issues.
It's true. In a really simplistic manner, they've created a one Hertz computer inside of Minecraft
as in it actually functions inside and they also created Minecraft inside of Minecraft.
Some pretty, pretty interesting stuff there. Before we wrap up, where can people find you online?
They can find me on Twitter, just randomly making people angry, although I'm actually not
doing that anymore because it's just, it's no fun. But I am, I am often trying to say,
yeah, I just say random things. So I think it's at Lee Cronin and you can find me on
www.kmi5.io and www.croninlab.com. Awesome. That's outstanding. Lee, thanks so much.
We have been standing on the shoulders of giants with Professor Lee Cronin. Thank you. I'm David Mackay.
