Welcome back. In our last lecture, we talked about my belief that it's very important
to make your speech wherever possible a story. And it's a well-known fact that every story
has three parts. A beginning, a middle, and an end. So today's continuation, as we work on the
disposito, the arrangement and organization of the material within your speech, is about
tripartite structures and presenting things in threes. Just as I believe the human brain
was designed to remember stories, but not masses of facts, I believe the human mind was also
designed to find threes satisfying, and to feel that something presented in threes has made its
case. Two of something seems an opposition. Three of something seems a completion. There can be
threes in terms of three modifiers for a noun, the tripart story that we just talked about,
or three phrases, three examples. All of these things are tremendously important
things to consider as you lay out that speech and begin to organize your material within it.
In order to get into this world of threes, I want to plunge us all into the oratory of what I think
is perhaps the single most inspired piece of prose ever conceived. It's that famous 13th chapter
from the first letter that Paul wrote to the Corinthians. It's the section that you've heard
so many times at weddings and other occasions. It's usually called a passage on love or on charity,
but that's not the word he used. Nonetheless, we're going to talk about the historical background
a little. We're going to talk about the word I'm going to use for the subject of this short
speech, and I believe it was a sermon and not just a letter, and then we're going to go through it
bit by bit. Now we've got to talk first about the word, the subject of this talk that Paul is
giving to us. In Greek, the word is agape, just like agape, open. It's the same word.
Agape means an open welcome. It goes back to Homer, to very ancient Archaic Greek.
It means tolerance. It means getting along with people. It means treating everyone alike.
It means being friendly and welcoming to all. We don't have such a word in English.
This is one of the many ways in which English can fail to adequately represent
words in another language. Of course, no two languages are completely consistent in how they
choose their vocabularies to describe the world. Although love has been chosen by most of the
modern translations of the gospels as the subject of Paul's speech or letter, and although the
King James version chose charity, charity sounds too much like a handout. That's not what it's about.
And love sounds too warm, rich, specifically emotional. How am I supposed to love my neighbor
as myself or as my parents or as my children or spouse or beloved one? And yet it's also tied
in with just trivial things, loving ice cream, loving the Fourth of July. Not that the Fourth
of July is trivial. At any rate, let's just use the Greek term. Let's get into Paul's letter. The
Corinthians were quarreling among themselves, this congregation that he had helped to start,
and he's writing to them about getting along and what really matters in this world. So here we go.
And I'm going to give you the three parts of the speech as we go. The introduction is, of course,
the beginning in which he sets up the subject of this talk, this letter, this sermon. Then we have
the body of the speech where almost every sentence begins with the word. The word is agape, that
open, tolerant, welcome, and acceptance of all. And then when we get to, when I was a child, I spake
as a child, we're into the conclusion. It suddenly shifts to a personal statement. We feel we're on
new ground, and he wraps it all up with a little narration about the child growing up, becoming
a man, and now seeing things as they really are. And notice how much of this incredible piece of
writing is governed by this rule of three. Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels,
and have not agape, I am become as sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal. And though I have the gift
of prophecy and understand all mysteries and all knowledge, and though I have all faith so that
I could remove mountains, and have not agape, I am nothing. And though I bestow all my goods to
feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not agape, it profiteth me nothing.
Agape suffers long and is kind. Agape envieth not. Agape vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up,
doth not behave itself unseemly. Seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil,
rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in truth, beareth all things, believeth all things,
hopeeth all things, and dureth all things. Agape never faileth, but where there be prophecies,
they shall fail. Where there be tongues, they shall cease. Where there be knowledge,
it shall vanish away. For we know in part, and we prophesy in part. But when that which is perfect
is come, then that which is in part shall be done away. When I was a child, I spake as a child,
I understood as a child, I thought as a child. But when I became a man, I put away childish things.
For now we see through a glass, darkly, but then face to face. Now I know in part,
then I shall know, even as also I am known. And now abideth, faith, hope, agape, these three,
but the greatest of these is agape. It's an extraordinary passage,
but part of its effect is its structure, that skeleton, that massive bones and tissue behind
the words that make Paul's meaning so powerful and make us feel we have come on a progression
with him, a story, a journey. We've started in the introduction with visions, speaking with the tongues
of men and of angels, sounding brasses, tinkling cymbals, the gift of prophecy,
mysteries, all knowledge, all faith, moving mountains, and then extravagant things, bestowing
goods on the poor, giving your body to be burned. That's our introduction, extraordinary set of
images, vivid that word which means lively, living, which I'm always urging that you try to find in
your images. Paul really does that. Now it's often said, when people are talking to you about
making your speech, your public talk in a three part form, that the introduction and the body of
the speech and the conclusion play very simple roles. You will sometimes see this sort of mantra.
First, tell them what you are going to tell them. Second, in the body, tell them, and then in the
conclusion, tell them again what you told them. Obviously in a summary form at the beginning
of the end and with all of the material in the middle. This seems to me a council of despair
and desperation. Who wants to really hear things three times? Paul doesn't give you things three
times. You feel you know where you are at every point in this wonderful sermon, but there's not
the kind of repetition that that model implies. I believe in the three part structure, but I believe
those are the wrong things to put in the parts. So what do we have in the first part, the introduction?
Well, he has made you curious about Agape. Instead of telling you what he's going to say about it,
he has announced it as the subject of his sermon, and he has filled you with wonder
and questions and confusion about exactly what it is. How can this rather everyday kind of quality of
an open, tolerant welcome be tied up with these men and angels and sounding brasses?
Well, he's going to tell us in the middle, but you see what that first part did, that introduction.
It gave you the subject of the talk. You are in no doubt about that, that this is going to be
about this quintessential character, this Agape, this feeling of openness, which in the very last
line is going to be introduced as the greatest thing in the world, the most abiding thing.
There's faith, there's hope, there's charity, Agape, charity, love. That is the supreme one.
But that's where we're going. He's not going to tell you that at the beginning. He's just going
to give you these clouds of visions. Part of the point of an introduction after that first element,
which is explain or introduce the subject, is arouse curiosity, wonder, a desire to know more,
and boy, does he succeed in that with these wild images about this still somewhat mysterious
characteristic Agape. Now, we go on to the body of the speech. The body of the speech carries your
message. When I'm trying to put together a lecture, all the things I think will be,
as we say on the test, go into the body of the speech. If a lawyer is giving a summing up,
the opening may introduce the problem, arouse the jury's emotions and so on, but the middle,
the body, needs to present in a coherent fashion and a compelling way, maybe as a narrative,
maybe in some other form, everything the listener needs to know to feel they understand
your meaning and can make an informed opinion about it themselves. And then, let's see how Paul
does it. Agape suffereth long, he says, at the very start of his body of the speech,
is kind. Agape envyeth not. This is the way you define things in a dictionary. He is wanting
to make the subject of the speech, what is it? And he wants to give you all these characteristics
of it, and the body of the speech is very coherent, very straightforward. He's explaining to you a
great mystery that this characteristic of being open to all people should be all these different
things, but he's presenting it to you like a textbook. I think here we can see why it would
be inappropriate for him to speak in parables. He is assigning to Agape a mystical belief,
it is that thing out of the parable of the good Samaritan that we saw last time that made that
Samaritan stop, that was Agape, but he's wanting to get at it crisply. He's wanting to get at it
not mysteriously at first, but in a sort of a very regular, almost scientific, descriptive way.
The body of your speech should be like that. It should be easy to follow, the form should
be clear, the diction, the choice of words, the presentation. It should all help the person follow
your meaning as you go along. And then, having begun to feel that he's gotten you on board,
he's willing to bring back some of the stuff from the introduction to unify the whole speech,
thematically and in tone, the tone of grandeur, the tone of prophecy, Agape never faileth.
Well, we think we're in for more of the sort of it is this, it is that, but no. But where there be
prophecies they shall fail, where there be tongues they shall cease, where there be knowledge it
shall vanish away. You notice his threes there, he's continuing to use those triads, that rhythm.
He's a preacher, I'm descended in the third generation from a Baptist preacher and I certainly
feel that rhythm when it comes and feel swept up by it. He's starting to want to get beyond the
definitions and get into the emotion again that he stirred up in his introduction with all those
extraordinary images. And then we get into this question of knowledge, for we know in part and
we prophesy in part, but when that which is perfect has come, then that which is in part shall be
done away. The words are simple, the meaning is obscure, but that's how it all wraps up.
What we can know in this world is that this Agape is the most important thing.
Now, having presented that in the body of his speech, he finally comes to a conclusion. Now,
if we were to take that rule of tell them what you're going to tell them, that's the introduction,
tell them, that's the body, tell them what you told them, that's the conclusion.
Well, you would have hammered away at it enough, perhaps that it might be remembered,
but please follow Paul's example and follow the example of all other good speech composers
in giving people something new, in making the conclusion open up, broaden, shed new light,
bring in more ideas and more feeling. Let's see how he does that. Suddenly,
we're back to our lecture three, be personal, make it about yourself. It has not been so far,
but now listen what he does to signal the change to the conclusion he brings at home.
When I was a child, I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child,
is triad again. But when I became a man, I put away childish things. Well, one of those
childish things is not understanding the world. His eyes are being opened with maturity. For now,
we see as to a glass, darkly, mirrors and windows in the Roman world that Paul lived in were not
the clear glass we had today. But then, that is in the future, when we are truly grown up,
then we shall see face to face. Now I know in part, then I shall know, even as also I am known.
Knowledge is what this is about, knowing what matters in the world. He introduced the motif,
as we might say in music, of knowledge in the first part in the introduction. He's given you
the knowledge in the second part, the body, and now he's referring to it at the end to close it all
off. So we're getting a sense of chords being struck again and again, of the thing bound together
by motifs that keep you focused on the meaning. And finally, that great surprise with things brought
in that you haven't even been talking about in this final triad. And now a bydoth, faith, hope,
agape, these three, but the greatest of these is agape. A perfect climax. He's giving you one more
fact about this remarkable quality that he is urging you to prize in your life and to seek
and to recognize as the most important thing in this world. And he's listing these gigantic
qualities. Faith, hope, no, agape is greater than any of them. And then he stops.
And it's very important as you're crafting your speech that when you have covered in your introduction
the essential elements of explaining the subject, rousing curiosity about it, and setting the tone
of the speech, those three things. And then in the body of the speech, giving them all the
information they need to know, applying this to them, to their world. And finally, building up a
vivid picture through images that allows them to apply this beyond the confines of your speech,
apply it to their lives. He does that throughout his body of the speech here. When you get to the
conclusion, you are free then to add new elements, to raise the ante as we would say in poker, to make
things even higher, more dramatic, more strong, more forceful and emotional through some new
elements. Don't feel tied to just repeating yourself in your conclusion. In fact, I would
recommend you never repeat yourself in your conclusion. I think there are a few more deadening
words than either to sum up or, as I said before, people's minds switch off. The end of your speech
should be a climax, not a sinking back to a summary or repetition of what came before.
Now we can go way beyond St. Paul in Finding Threes. You find them almost everywhere.
Let me give you a couple that we haven't heard from before, and then we're going to go back and
look at our former guest professors and see how often they also follow Paul in this idea of the
triad as an essential building block as you put together your speech. Here we go. Sir Winston Churchill.
This one is fascinating to me. If you were told that Winston Churchill once said during World War
II that all he could offer the British people was blood, sweat and tears, you would say, I knew that.
Well, you'd be wrong. What he actually said in that famous speech was I have nothing to offer you
but blood, toil, tears and sweat. A foursome. The popular mind could not hold on to that foursome.
The toil had to go. I don't think it's because they're lazy and didn't want to work hard.
I think it's because four is too many. And nothing shows me the power of three more strongly
than this fact that popular consciousness took Winston Churchill's blood, toil, tears and sweat,
something that was printed from the day that he spoke it, distributed widely and yet turned it
simply by activity of the popular mind and memory into the unforgettable blood, sweat and tears.
Let's stay in England for a moment and go to an occasion that many of us can remember,
the funeral of Princess Diana, Princess of Wales. Her brother, Charles Earl of Spencer, spoke the
eulogy. That was in 1997 and he uses all the way through this eulogy some of these techniques
of using the triad. The eulogy of course does have its introduction, its middle, its conclusion
and like Paul, he brings in new things in the conclusion, reflections on the suns and what
will be their future that keep a sense of movement in the speech, that keep a sense of new things
opening up even though you do feel him coming to a conclusion. We're not going to have the whole
speech. Let me just give you a couple of examples of his triads. This is the very beginning of his
eulogy, spoken in Westminster Abbey. I stand before you today the representative of a family in grief
in a country in mourning before a world in shock. It's a very strong opening. It's a very
rhetorical opening. He has decided to save his strong emotional effects and his personal
comments and revelations for later on in the eulogy, so he has somewhere to go emotionally.
In fact, by using the triad, he creates a sort of feeling of objectivity about it. This is the
way you look at the world and assess what is the death of this young woman mean in the widening
circles of geography, of family, of country, of the world and that gives him room to move
as he gets on into the body of the eulogy and later on he's talking to her. He's addressing her
directly, her memory, Diana, and he is opposing those who want to turn her into a saint.
To sanctify your memory would be to miss out on the very core of your being, your wonderfully
mischievous sense of humor, your joy for life, your boundless energy which you could scarcely
contain. There's something very satisfying about that as he knew there would be. One feels that
a character has been described, that enough facets have been presented that we feel
we knew this woman and that's what he's after. Now, musical form is a good guide for us here
as is the form that novels take. Always be thinking as you put together your speech of stories,
books that you've read, think how the opening chapters of any novel are presenting to you
the characters and the situation, the place and the themes, the important sense of what's going
to happen, what is the basic underlying story, it all comes in that introduction and you also get
the tone and that's something that Spencer has tried to, the Earl of Spencer and this eulogy
has tried to do. St. Paul also, St. Paul, a tone of exaltation and almost mysticism.
The Earl of Spencer, a sense that I am talking about something that matters to the world and
that's what he wants you to get right away. This is a big important momentous occasion.
All that comes in the first chapters of a novel, the beginning, then in the middle the body of it
comes the working out. If we were talking in musical terms we'd say the opening of the novel is the
exposition where all the themes are laid out by the composer. The middle of the novel which
usually contains the strife, the conflicts, all of the surprises, if we're headed for a happy
ending we're sure not going to be happy in the middle because we need somewhere to go to with
a resolution. That would be the middle of your speech, that's where you're putting all of your
ideas in play and watching them sort of thrash it out, dealing with the difficult problems
and then we finally get in music to the recapitulation. We get back to the themes of the
beginning now in a proper order and tonality. In a novel we get to that concluding part of
a novel which often is quite short in which all the problems are resolved where the tone,
if it was tragic, has carried things through to their horrible logical conclusion or if it was
comic or optimistic has resolved all of the difficulties from the middle part of the novel
and given you a satisfying ending. Three parts, remember to put those into your speech and you
will have that same successful outcome that a good novel has and the same wonderful impact
on your listeners that a good novelist is able to have on the reader. Let's just review some of this
as we look back at some of our previous speakers to see how universal this is. I know I'm beating
this like a dead horse but that of course is onomatopoeia in a way for what the power of three
does. You keep hammering away at the thing and after three blows people get it. Here we are for
instance back with Will Rogers. I'm sure it wasn't some sort of very bookish kind of of thought and
objective analysis that made him talk in threes but here's a nice ending to his his speech as he
talks about the classes, the array of classes at Columbia. There are 3200 courses. You spend your
first two years in deciding what course to take, the next two years in finding the building that
these courses are given in and the rest of your life in wishing you had taken another course.
That's a very humorous passage but it builds very satisfyingly. It seems rounded off by the third one
but you've come up three steps. He has intensified as well as rounded off something you can do very
effectively with three. You can't do it with twos and as soon as you get more than three
maybe it's just something about what the human brain can normally take in through its ears.
You begin to lose track of what's being considered. Let's go to England and to Elizabeth the first.
Talking to her men at Tilbury, I myself will be your general judge and rewarder of every
one of your virtues in the field. She could have added 15 other things she is to them.
She knew three was the right number and at the end she repeats a triad of a threesome that she
introduced earlier. By your valor in the field we shall shortly have a famous victory over these
enemies of my God, of my kingdom and of my people. Now here we can see a difference between her and
Will Rogers. Will Rogers has varied his threesome. You spend the first two years in this. You spend
your next two years in this. You expect you spend your last two years. He has expanded it. He's given
a sense of opening up by making his ending and the rest of your life in wishing and that's part
of the hyperbole that makes it funny. She is trying for a very tight parallelism. Her clauses are
parallel. They all begin with of, of my God, of my kingdom and of my people. That will give you a
more consistent set of words that will help you put your threesome into a more consistent arrangement
and give them more impact for your listener. And then let's go on to Sojourner Truth. She's got one
phrase where she does the same thing as Elizabeth just did. We do as much. We eat as much. We want
as much. The we is women. But see how powerful that is, like the ringing of a bell when her clauses
are exactly parallel to each other, each one beginning with we and then the verb and ending
with as much. So you could not have a more forceful use of threes and the parallelisms of threes.
And she began also the passage that we began with, I have been 40 years a slave and 40 years free
and would be here 40 years more to have equal rights for all the 40, 40, 40. It's the backbone
of the expression. Is it really tied into the meaning? What does that have to say about her
desire for, for women's rights? That's not so clear, but you are riveted by that and you remember
those figures and you feel that you have been carried along. You've moved with her through that
progression that she is so careful in evoking. Finally, let's look at our example of the
Good Samaritan, that story. Jesus, you will remember in describing his little, his story that
explains who is your neighbor, has decided to have three characters walk by the man who's been robbed
and beaten and left for dead on the road between Jerusalem and Jericho. Three men.
Why three? If you look at the world's folklore, you will see time and again, three tasks,
three brothers, three talismans, three achievements, universal folk consciousness moves in threes.
Jesus has used that expectation so that when we see three come along and two
fail the test, pass by on the other side, we are ready with a sense of completion and a sense of
rightness when that third one stops and helps. So our lessons this time are three in number
and they're brief and they're simple just as the triad form tends to be. First, construct your
speech in three parts, introduction, body, and conclusion. Second, create a rhythm with clauses,
examples, and parallel sentences in groups of three. And finally, getting even down to the
molecular structure of your speech, use adjectives and other short sequences of words in threes.
It's not so important in written language, in creating books or articles, but believe me,
when you are up in front of a crowd and you are wanting to hold their interest, make your
meaning clear, and create a sense of order and form in your speech, you should always remember
the power of three.
