Welcome back. As we continue to consider how you should be crafting your speech, we're
going to move from our subject last time, which was about the architecture and structure
of your speech with its tripartite form beginning, middle, end. And we're going to consider
today a kind of speech that is often something you are going to have to deliver, a factual
speech where you will be building a logical case. This is a speech in which you are stating
some principles at the beginning and proving a point by the end. It's important if you
are in situations involving law or political situations. It's important if you are giving
a religious speech, a sermon where you're making a point based on holy writ and carried
through to something that applies to modern times. It's important in business for sales
or for promoting the idea of a new activity for your company. In any of these cases, you've
got to build the logical case to be credible. Now, we can go back to Aristotle for some
guidance on the kinds of appeals that work in a logical case. He gives us three. Very
handy as an echo of our subject last time. Aristotle's three appeals are logos, ethos,
or ethos and pathos. Logos is reason. Logos means the concept. The ethos or ethos is
an appeal to personality. He thought of it as an appeal to your own personality. You
should believe me because I'm a good and honorable person, but it can also be extended to the
idea of ad hominem attacks. That is, an attack on the other man, the other person, ad hominem.
You are at your antagonist and talking about that character and saying, don't believe any
of that because of the kind of person that is. Obviously, this is a weaker argument than
the logos, the reason, the logic. And of course, logic comes from that word, logos. And third,
there is pathos, the appeal to the emotions. As we're going to see, it makes you a much
weaker person in presenting your argument if you base it on the ethos, the personal element,
or the pathos, the emotional element, rather than the logos. So what we're going to focus
on today are good examples of building a speech on logos and some contrary examples where
people will use the ethos or the pathos instead and, I believe, not be so convincing. We're
going to start with our featured guest professor today, Susan B. Anthony, American suffragette
of the mid-19th century, who was famous for her work trying to secure the vote for women
in America. She gave this speech many times. In 1872, she had walked into a barbershop,
which was a voter registration place, and demanded the right to register. And when she
cowed the people there into submission and did register, she was then accused of a crime
and fined $100. She never paid that fine, but starting in the following year, she gave
this speech, which became her signature speech on the subject of voters' rights, what she
had done, and sets out to prove in a very logical way that she was in the right. I'll
be reading parts of the speech and then breaking it down as we go so that we can follow the
process of her logos, her use of logic, from beginning to end, creating a straight, arrow-like
trajectory from the bow to the target, so that we start with some principles, we end
with the conclusion which she feels is irrefutable, and if she's done her work, you will feel
the same way.
Citizens and fellow citizens, I stand before you tonight under indictment for the alleged
crime of having voted at the last presidential election without having a lawful right to
vote. It shall be my work this evening to prove to you that in thus voting, I not only
committed no crime, but instead simply exercised my citizens' rights guaranteed to me and all
United States citizens by the national constitution beyond the power of any state to deny. That's
her introduction. That's as personal as she's going to get, but she needed to explain her
relationship to this issue, this logical problem, for you to have belief in her, for her to
be credible to you as someone that needs to speak on this point and that you want to listen
to. Now she presents the axiom, the unassailable truth on which her argument will be based.
The preamble of the federal constitution says, We the people of the United States, in order
to form a more perfect union, establish justice, ensure domestic tranquility, provide for the
common defense, promote the general welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves
and our posterity, do ordain and establish this constitution for the United States of
America. I don't know if she read that from a book or not, but it would certainly be appropriate
for her to take that up in a book and read it to you as a listener. It would be appropriate
for you as a speaker when you are giving your axiom or axioms those bedrock truths on which
your argument will be based to read them. It gives you something to do at the beginning
of the speech with your hands. It ensures that you will exactly quote the original words
and the audience will feel more confident seeing that these axioms come from a source,
a printed source and not from your own memory. Now back to Susan B. Anthony. What's she
going to get into now? Definitions of terms. Very important to Aristotle, very important
to anybody building a logical case. It was we, the people, not we, the white male citizens,
nor yet we, the male citizens, but we, the whole people who formed the union. And we
formed it not to give the blessings of liberty, but to secure them, not to the half of ourselves
and the half of our posterity, but to the whole people, women, as well as men. And it
is a downright mockery to talk to women of their enjoyment of the blessings of liberty
while they are denied the use of the only means of securing them provided by this democratic
republican government, the ballot. Alright, here's the problem. It comes from the definition.
She is in the preamble to the Constitution. It's not limited in some way. She points that
out. It's not just white males or even just males. It's we, the people, that must include
females. So in the definition of the term, she is beginning to work out the strength
of her argument that's going to lead to her conclusion. Now we move on. She's already
gotten to that hardcore nub of the whole issue, the ballot, the right to vote. For any state
to make sex a qualification that must ever result in the disfranchisement of one entire
half of the people is to pass a bill of attainder or an expost facto law and is therefore a violation
of the supreme law of the land. By it the blessings of liberty are forever withheld
from women and their female posterity. To them, this government has no just powers derived
from the consent of the governed. To them, this government is not a democracy. It is
not a republic. It is an odious aristocracy, a hateful oligarchy of sex. This is the body
of her speech. This is the presentation of the whole problem as it's going to be presented
to you in the course of the evening. And she is making it very forceful with those short
phrases. You heard that. The threes that we saw last time are so helpful, not a democracy,
not a republic. And here the third is the contrary, an odious aristocracy. And that
word oligarchy means government by the few. So she is, she's taking a very technical term,
oligarchy, and yoking it to a very downright term, sex, the oligarchy of sex. This is the
way to hold your viewers interest. This is to make your argument seem very immediate.
We continue. Webster, Wooster, and Bouvier all define a citizen to be a person in the
United States entitled to vote and hold office. The only question left to be settled now is,
are women persons? And I hardly believe any of our opponents will have the hardy hood
to say they are not. Being persons, then, women are citizens. And no state has a right
to make any law or to enforce any old law that shall abridge their privileges or immunities.
That is the core of her speech. It is a logical case, built step by step, starting with axioms,
going on to definitions, going on to examinations and demonstrations of different points, and
ending with a conclusion. Note that she continues her definitions right to the end. Webster,
Wooster, and I believe that's how it's pronounced, W-O-R-C-E-S-T-E-R. Might be Worcester if he's
an American writer, and Bouvier, they are writers of dictionaries. Now, she sweeps you
along with this. I want to point out that there is, in fact, an illogicality here. Webster,
Wooster, and Bouvier all define a citizen to be a person in the United States entitled
to vote and hold office. Well, alright, but she needs to get right onto her great thunderclap
of a question. Are women persons, before we stop to think, wait a minute, that definition
can be limited to men? She is using the forms of legal argument, even when the logic has
to make a big jump there, and Aristotle would have considered this point very illogically
arrived at. You saw it again earlier when she used that term ex post facto, that Latin
legal term, to again give a sort of a halo of the legal, of the clear, the concise, the
completely logical about the words, regardless of what the line of the reasoning might be.
Throughout this speech, she has given no examples. She's given no colorful languages, no metaphors,
no images, no pictures of oppressed women. It's all been on a cerebral, abstract, intellectual
level. That is where logical cases need to be made. As soon as you get off into ethos
and pathos, the personal and the emotional, you are beginning to create doubts in your
audience's mind about the hard core value of your reasoning. Now, I want to say that
I have added to this speech to give it to you now. She did not originally give it quite
this way. There was a digression in the middle, and there was a sentence tacked on at the
end, which I think seriously undermined her own case. So let's go back now and look, having
seen a good example of how to make a logical case, how to build it step by step. She still
had her three elements there, the introduction, the body, and the conclusion. But let's see
some things that were in the original speech that I think we should all learn from and
decide we're not going to follow that path. First, the digression. This picks up with
those words, a hateful oligarchy of sex. Also, an oligarchy of wealth, where the rich
govern the poor. Well, now, this is a kind of digression that starts trains of thought
in people's minds as they try to work it out. There are rich women, there are poor women,
there are poor men. Where do we tie this into this whole argument about sex being what she's
talking about, that it's about all women. This is not well thought out. This is a distraction
and it's going to disrupt the reader's own concentration or the listener's own concentration
down this path of how does wealth and poverty tie into this. But now we get into what I
really find not just a digression that distracts, but something downright offensive. And trust
me, you never want to offend any potential listener in the course of a logical case.
An oligarchy of learning, where the educated govern the ignorant. Or even an oligarchy
of race, where the Saxon rules the African. Where is she going with this, you wonder?
Might be endured. What? But this oligarchy of sex carries dissension, discord and rebellion
into every home of the nation. This is a terrible digression. She's weakening her own case.
She's saying, oh, there are cases where equality doesn't matter so much to me. Is she really
saying that the ignorant are not persons? Is she saying that Africans are not as much
persons as women? She hasn't thought this through. This should have been cut once it
was written as she read through her speech and left on the floor as something not to
be put in, both because of the distraction from the main point, but of the potential
of undermining her own case with an illogicality and of offending some of her listeners.
Finally, let's listen to the original ending of this speech. You'll remember that I gave
you her last sentence as this, being persons then, women are citizens and no state has
a right to make any law or to enforce any old law that shall abridge their privileges
or immunities. That's a strong ending. That is tying the whole thing together that's going
back to the idea of the law of the land that she started with, an echo of her quoting of
the preamble to the Constitution and denying the right of the states to abrogate that.
What did she originally go on to say? This is the original ending. Hence, every discrimination
against women in the constitutions and laws of the several states is today null and void,
precisely as is everyone against Negroes. Well, why did we bring that in? It's an important
point, but it's not the point she's trying to make. And to end with that, suddenly turns
your attention, undercuts everything she said before, and leaves a new case and a new problem
in your mind, especially with that very unfortunate echo back to the digression, which I admitted
when I read it to you the first time, where she's saying she thinks it's more important
for women to have the vote than even Africans. So, those are the things that I think are
needed to be pruned away in order to make this the really strong argument that it essentially
is, although it does have that funny jump in that final definition where she's taking
her idea of a citizen as a person are women persons from dictionary definitions that don't
fully bear out her case. But that brings us to another point I want to make before we
leave Susan B. Anthony, and that is, you don't want to make cases against yourself. No cases
cast iron, every case even in science and nuclear physics has contrary opinions and views to
present. Let someone else present those, unless you can overcome them, unless you have the
proofs that show that these contrary views are wrong, leave them out. Now, let's talk
about the axioms. And let's consider the fact that axioms can show up in all kinds of conversation,
in all kinds of presentations, in all kinds of tone. Jane Austen, who we quoted before
for Mansfield Park and her wonderful observations on the importance of training young people
to memorize poetry and speeches and recite them at home so that they can become good
speakers. She also gives us a good example, although a rather satirical one, of starting
with an axiom. The first sentence of her novel, Pride and Prejudice, is an axiom. It
is a truth universally acknowledged that a single man in possession of a good fortune
must be in want of a wife. The whole novel flows from that axiom and in a very comic
way, the way a logical case will flow from the axioms at the beginning of it. So, be
on the lookout for these. When you hear people giving speeches, look for the axioms at the
beginning as you set out to build a logical case, do what Susan B. Anthony did, state
what this is about and how it relates to you, but immediately then get to your axioms.
On the same subject of women's suffrage, we can listen to John Stuart Mill in 1867, speaking
in Parliament in London. He had married a suffragette, he admired her a great deal,
and he too is going to give a big speech, as Susan B. Anthony did, about women's rights
to vote. Let's hear his axiom right at the beginning.
To lay a ground for refusing the suffrage to anyone, it is necessary to allege either
personal unfitness or public danger. That is John Stuart Mill's axiom, it's drawn from
English law that says that any voter can only have the vote taken away in case of insanity,
let's say, or criminal activity that makes them a convicted felon. He goes on, having
stated his axiom. Now he's beginning to work out truths from it. Now, can either of these
be alleged in the present case? Can it be pretended that women who manage an estate
or conduct a business, who pay rates and taxes, often to a large amount and frequently from
their own earnings, many of whom are heads of families, and some of whom, in the capacity
of school mistresses, teach much more than a great number of male electors ever learned,
are not capable of a function of which every male householder is capable? So he starts with
an axiom, and then he tries to find the illogicality between the current situation and the axiom
that is part of the law. I think that we can see a problem here in John Stuart Mill's
presentation, just as we saw something that I consider a problem with Susan B. Antony's,
and that is that immense parenthesis, which is so important for his argument, it actually
should have been a series of separate sentences. The parenthesis goes, he's talking about
the women. Can it be pretended that women who manage an estate or conduct a business,
paying rates and taxes and so on, all of those should have been separate sentences, maybe
somewhere else in the talk, but it's too much. You've lost the thread of his idea and of
his original sentence by the time you get way down to the point where he hooks back
up to the, can it be pretended that these women are not capable of a function? He's
given so many examples that you, the listener, are beginning to lose the thread. You never
want the audience to lose the thread of a logical discussion. In entertaining speeches,
even in teaching speeches, rambling, discursive, following the subject down all sorts of byways,
getting into digressions, they can be a lot of fun. These speeches are not about fun.
These speeches are about logos, concept, logical trains of thought, trains as in one car hooked
up to the next. You never want to go off into such a long set of examples or a parenthesis
that that train of thought is broken and I certainly think it is broken here. Also, he
makes a mild joke. I don't know if you saw that, but he's talking about the, the, the
why the women should not be considered unfit to, to vote. He talks about the many women
who are heads of families and some of whom, in the capacity of school mistresses, teach
much more than a great number of male electors have ever learned. That's a joke. That does
not belong in this argument. It's also a problem for a second reason. There are going to be
some in the parliament who are thinking, is he talking about me? Is he thinking that I
am one of those people who was taught more than I learned? If so, you've got some of
your audience thinking, maybe he's insulting me. You do not want to insult your audience
while making a logical case or any part of your audience. You want to always be courteous.
You want to always be positive. Treat them as reasonable, reasonable people who you know
are going to do the right thing once they have simply understood the axioms, the definitions
of terms and the logic behind your presentation. So although both Susan B. Anthony and John
Stuart Mill, I think in general teaches a lot of very positive things, I think we can
also see some dangers that we want to stay away from as we get into our own public speaking
and building our own cases. Now, to go to someone who was working on this side of the
Atlantic in a very different sort of social sphere, but back in the same period, in fact
in the year 1876, let's listen to the words of Chief Joseph of the Nez Perce Indians out
in the Great Plains. His tribe is being forced onto a reservation and he is resisting with
logic. His logic, which comes in the early part of the speech, you won't hear it, is
that the creator, what is sometimes called the Great Spirit in Native American oratory,
we're going to hear a lot about that next time as we get into painting a picture in
words and listen to the words of Tecumseh, Chief of the Shawnee. Chief Joseph's logic
is the creator gave that land, created the land for the Indians and the proof of that
is they were the first occupants. Didn't the creator spread people around the globe?
He must have meant the land for this people. Now, Native American oratory, Indian oratory,
is often characterized by flamboyant images, pictorial kind of talking. He really stays
away from that here. It's interesting to me that Chief Joseph, who spoke very good English,
chooses to use the word creator to identify his supreme being with that of the Christians
he's talking to rather than Great Spirit, which implies that there are two different
gods. Here we go. Perhaps you think the creator sent you here to dispose of us as you see
fit. If I thought you were sent by the creator, I might be induced to think you had a right
to dispose of me. Do not misunderstand me, but understand fully with reference to my
affection for the land. I never said the land was mine to do with as I choose. The one
who has a right to dispose of it is the one who has created it. I claim a right to live
on my land and I accord you the privilege to return to yours. Now, that's very simple,
but it's very powerful. And by avoiding distracting images, poetical language, and any emotion
except pride, self-respect, and according that same self-respect to the American official
that he's addressing with that final line, I accord you the privilege to return to yours.
That is the words of courtesy, although certainly not the underlying emotion. He is building
a more powerful case than if he were resorting to appeals about himself or based on emotions
about what was owed to his tribe. He is getting back down to axioms. The axiom is the creator
made the world, he assigned people their lands, you do not have the right to change the creator's
disposition of people upon their lands. A very strong case.
Finally, let's hear Chief Joseph getting worked up over the causes of freedom and what he
would be within a new United States system. Three years have gone by, this has made a
tremendous difference to the status of the Nez Perce, they've lost some battles, but
he's still fighting. Now, here are his logical statements. Let me be a free man, free to travel,
free to stop, free to work, free to trade, where I choose, free to choose my own teachers,
free to follow the religion of my fathers, free to talk, think and act for myself, and
I will obey every law or submit to the penalty. So he is coming to a legal point and he is
stating the conditions now. If he has granted the freedoms, he will accord the obedience
to the law. If he has not accorded those freedoms, he will not. So again, no extraordinary images,
pure logos, pure reason as Chief Joseph works us through his ideas on what it will take
to make him a loyal citizen of the United States. Now, in my line of work, I am often
called upon to make logical arguments. I have got to present my results of my fieldwork
to my peers. I have to convince them that the interpretations that I am coming to with
my evidence are things that they would agree with. I give a completely different kind of
talk at our national meetings when I am with my peers in this science of archaeology. Then
when I'm in the classroom with my students or when I'm out on the road giving speeches
to groups of museums or civic organizations, I emphasize the logic. I begin with certain
premises that I can demonstrate are true. I make steps. One after the other that involve
the defining of terms, the establishment of strata. I use a language that is technical.
Remember Susan B. Anthony, using that legal language. I am using the language of my field
in order to get people to buy into what I am saying, to convince them that the point
I am making is true. I always think in the logical terms, I keep the poetry out of it.
I keep the illustrations out of it, how wonderful I felt. I keep myself out of it as much as
possible except to say, these are the conclusions I draw. This is the evidence that I saw as
I excavated that site. If I don't make it logical, I know people will not be with me
on my conclusions. And when you are making a logical case, as you will be in so many
situations in your life, you too are going to want to bring people along with you by
emphasizing the right part of your argument, the solid, firm footing, and not the softer
terrain. So, we've got a lot of lessons today, drawn from mainly Susan B. Anthony and John
Stuart Mill as we look at the way to build a logical case in a speech. Let's start looking
at those lessons. First, use clear, concise, but neutral reasoning. Aristotle's logos.
Avoid personal issues, emotional appeals, that is, ethos and pathos. Appeals like that
may sway a crowd, but they are most often going to undermine your credibility. Second,
base your argument on axioms, laws, self-evident truths. Present them near the beginning of
your speech. Third, define your terms and make those definitions into stepping stones
as you work towards proving your point. And fourth, focus on proving a single point. Rigorously
avoid side issues and unnecessary digressions. Unless you can decisively refute objections
to your case, do not refer to such contrary matter as you make your speech. But we have
more than this. In addition to those hardcore lessons, there are some others, applying especially
to the kind of way in which you present your speech that I think are very important to
bear in mind. So, be strong and forceful. Be an advocate for your view. Don't hesitate
to make it clear you believe this, but at the same time, always be courteous and positive.
And avoid statements that might alienate anyone who would be listening unnecessarily. Then,
check the accuracy of all your facts. Double check the precise meaning of any technical
terms that you use in your speech. In addition, think carefully before including humor, anecdotes,
vivid language, metaphors, dramatic surprises in your speech. They're often very good in
some kinds of speech. They're not good in arguments. And finally, our eighth lesson
for the day. Enliven your argument with rhetorical questions. Are women persons? To create a
sense of dramatic dialogue and to clarify opposing issues. I believe if you can learn
from our great guest professors, if you can take to heart what they show you about the
step-by-step progression of building a logical speech, your logic will be able to prevail
in almost any argument that you choose to make.
