Welcome back. Over the past eight lectures, we have been preparing ourselves and preparing
our ideas for a speech in public. And now, it's show time. We are getting ready to get
out in front of that audience, out of our studies, out of our homes, into the real world,
and speak in public. So what I have devised for our last four sessions together is a sequence
of speakers who can focus for us on certain essential elements of giving the speech. And
the first one that we are going to bring in as a guest professor is the great Indian leader
Mahatma Gandhi, and the speech that he gave when he was on trial for his life. This speech
is one which illustrates focus on the audience. And it shows us a very difficult case, although
not an uncommon one, where there may be more than one constituency that the speaker must
bear in mind as they give their talk. Let's begin. We're in Ahmadabad, India. The year
is 1924. Gandhi, who has been publishing a magazine or newspaper for Indian youth about
his idea of satyagraha, that nonviolent passive resistance, which is nonetheless resistance,
has finally been accused by the occupying British government of sedition. And that is
a capital crime. Gandhi was trained as a lawyer. He's used to courtrooms in South Africa, where
he lived as a younger man. He worked in courtrooms himself. So you'll see that in part he is
focusing on the primary target of his speech, the judge. And in the full version of the
speech, you would have heard him address Mr. Judge in person several times. But Gandhi's
aware there is another, and for him, more important audience. That is the Indian people,
the millions, and I do mean millions, who had been following his printed words and who
would now follow the speech through the newspapers, through all of the organs by which it would
be disseminated to the people in India who longed for liberty from England. So he is
thinking about making statements of belief that not only make clear his legal position,
but make clear his mystical faith in the right of India to be free and in the future
of India as a free country. We begin at his very beginning, and in this case, I would
say this is a speech with no introduction. We are moving into the heart of things with
his very first words. Nonviolence is the first article of my faith. It is the last article
of my faith. But I had to make a choice. I had either to submit to a system which I considered
has done irreparable harm to my country, or incur the risk of the mad fury of my people
bursting forth when they understood the truth from my lips. I do not ask for mercy. I do
not plead any extenuating act. But by the time I have finished with my statement, you
will perhaps have a glimpse of what is raging within my breast to run this maddest risk
which a sane man can run. My experience of political cases in India leads me to the conclusion
that in 9 out of every 10, the condemned men were totally innocent. Their crime consisted
in love of their country. This is not an exaggerated picture. Section 124a, under which I am happily
charged, is perhaps the prince among the political sections of the Indian Penal Code, designed
to suppress the liberty of the citizen. Affection cannot be manufactured or regulated by law.
If one has no affection for a person or thing, one should be free to give the fullest expression
to his disaffection so long as he does not contemplate, promote, or incite to violence.
I have no personal ill will against any single administrator, much less can I have any disaffection
towards the king's person. But I hold it to be a virtue to be disaffected towards a government
which in its totality has done more harm to India than any previous system. In fact, I
believe I have rendered a service to India and England by showing, in non-cooperation,
the way out of the unnatural state in which both are living. Nonviolence implies voluntary
submission to the penalty for non-cooperation with evil. I am here, therefore, to invite
and submit cheerfully to the highest penalty that can be inflicted upon me for what in
law is a deliberate crime and what appears to me to be the highest duty of a citizen.
That's a great speech. It suggests his own pride and self-respect. It suggests the pride
in his country that he feels at heart. It encapsulates in those last two clauses the
two different targets of his speech. Notice one is directed at the judge. I am here happily
cheerfully to accept the highest penalty that can be inflicted upon me for what in law,
you Mr. Judge will know, is a deliberate crime and what appears to me and obviously to his
people to be the highest duty of a citizen. So the two audiences, the two tones as it
were are both there. He does have that extraordinary bit of humor in his speech. I think this is
very much not for the judge, but for the people to show his carelessness. This is like the
condemned man whistling a tune on the scaffold just before the little ramp opens below him
and he falls to his death with a noose around his neck. That business about section 124A
under which I am happily charged, the happily is a warning we've got something satirical
coming, is perhaps the prince among the political sections of the Indian penal code. These are
not the words of someone who is afraid of his fate. This is someone who is willing to
in fact give a rude gesture at the occupiers of India to the delight of all those who are
going to be reading this speech. Nonetheless, the tone is very reasoned. He is giving a
fair assessment. He is not asking for mercy. He recognizes the role of the judge and what
the judge must expect and that reasonable tone is in fact part of his defense. He I
believe would have been happy to die. He knows that would have made him a martyr and that
would have brought about to the much more rapid liberation of India through horrendous
wars but he didn't particularly want to turn, touch off those wars and so he is in a way
being conciliatory. He's making it easier for the judge to commute this sentence from
death to some sort of penal servitude and that is indeed what happened. It's a masterpiece
of a speech but it's I think one that better than most shows us a speech presented at two
different audiences and very clearly satisfying both. Now there are times when you are talking
to people who you know are resistant to what you have to say. One often talks about speeches
being meant to persuade. It's not my belief that they often change people's minds in the
act of being spoken. They usually just move people from dead center to a position that
they are ready to go to or intensify a mood that is already there. But I'd like to read
you an example of a speech that was given in the hope of convincing a very unsympathetic
body to vote in a way contrary to the mood in which they had entered the chamber. This
was a speech given in the United States Senate in 1847. The speaker is Thomas Corwin. He
was a senator from Ohio and he is trying to convince the president of the United States
not to follow those who want to tear territory away from Mexico which has been recently defeated
and make it part of the United States. There are many issues here behind the scenes enlarging
the number of slave owning states, states where slavery was legal is part of it. But
Corwin really doesn't want this to happen and he's trying to find a way to stop what
has become a trend in America that manifests destiny which is carrying America relentlessly
toward the Pacific Ocean. How's he going to do it? The speech didn't work but I think
he found the right tone. Let's hear his words. What is the territory, Mr. President, which
you propose to rest from Mexico? It is consecrated to the heart of the Mexican by many a well
fought battle with his old Castilian master. His bunker hills and Saratoga's and York
towns are there. The Mexican can say, there I bled for liberty. That's a stroke of genius.
There were still people alive in the United States in 1847 for whom the American War
of Revolution was a living memory and certainly the majority of the people who formed the
government at that time had at least fathers, if not grandfathers, who'd fought at Bunker
Hill or Saratoga or Yorktown. He is getting on undeniable ground here when he compares
their feelings toward the struggle, toward liberty of the American Revolution, toward
what those Mexicans feel about the land that is now being taken away from them. As I say,
it didn't work but it's the right way to go about trying to change your audience's
mind through your speech. Once you know that your audience is antagonistic, look at what
they feel favorably toward and then try to align the subject of your speech with that
favorable impulse. Glorify your own subject through attaching it to something that they
glorify themselves. We've also got Theodore Roosevelt to help us in the same position
of you're talking to a potentially unsympathetic audience. Roosevelt in 1902 went to New York
City to help open a grand new building to house the Chamber of Commerce. There were
many dignitaries present for this huge celebration that was one of the landmarks of New York
and the Chamber of Commerce was among the most important, wealthy, influential bodies
of men in the country. Roosevelt at this time, like Corwin half a century earlier, had an
issue on his mind and that issue was unions, the rights of laborers as opposed to these
plutocrats who sat in New York at places like the Chamber of Commerce and seemed to pull
all the strings in the country. His speech is a little bit of a Trojan horse. I'm not
going to read you all the sections which are long congratulations to the Chamber of Commerce
for everything that they've done but I assure you that most of the speech is about praising
them, praising their role in American history. Nonetheless, he is tucking in his conviction
that until there's a balance between the wealthy and the laboring classes, America will not
truly live up to its potential. Let's listen to how he does it. Theodore Roosevelt at the
New York Chamber of Commerce. Important though it is that we should have peace abroad, it
is even more important that we should have peace at home. You, men of the Chamber of
Commerce, to whose efforts we owe so much of our industrial well-being can and I believe
surely will be influential in helping toward that industrial peace which can obtain in
society only when employer and employed alike show not merely insistence each upon his own
rights but also regard for the rights of others and a full acknowledgement of the interests
of the third party, the public. No patent remedy can be devised for the solution of these
grave problems in the industrial world but we may rest assured that they can be solved
at all only if we bring to the solution certain old time virtues. Now if he had come to the
podium, President Roosevelt, and said I'm going to make an appeal here for more rights
for unions, I think people would have been throwing things at him. He's wrapped it up
in such a way as to make his message as acceptable as possible. First of all he's praised them.
He's praised them for their role in American history and in bringing America to this pinnacle
of power and wealth and he goes on at the very end of that passage that I quoted to tie
them to old time virtues that they represent that old time traditional quality. Those good
American virtues of thrift, of hard work, of fighting for independence, they are banner
carriers. They should be the ones to set an example. He's in fact trying to flatter them
into changing their attitudes towards the laboring masses, towards the unions, towards
giving the workers a fair share of say in their own destiny and in America as a whole.
There were mixed results from this speech. You're well aware that the struggles between
management and labor are still part of our American scene but he didn't shy away from
making the attempt. He just had the good sense to phrase his oratory, his rhetoric in such
a way that rather than a blunt demand or a statement of his own position that would
alienate his audience, he made every effort possible to make it easy for his audience
to say, we might agree with that. Now that was a man, a powerful man addressing
some of the wealthiest in the country. Let's turn the coin over and look at a man, a priest
way back in 1381 in England talking to a lot of peasants at Black Heath outside London
about overturning their political order and see how he matches his tone, his language,
to that particular audience. The man's name is John Ball. He's the man who touched off
the peasants' revolt and he is well aware that those who are rallying to the cause are
in many cases peasants themselves, not just idealists and reformers like himself but peasants
who have been used to working in the fields, yoking the animals to the plow, bearing the
burden of English economy on their shoulders and not getting any rewards from it. He wants
to reach them on their own level and we will see how he brings in imagery and kinds of
speech that he thinks will make a direct appeal to them. When Adam delved and Eve span, who
was then the gentle man? From the beginning, all men by nature were created alike and our
bondage or servitude came in by the unjust oppression of naughty men. For if God would
have had any bond man from the beginning, he would have appointed who should be bond
and who free. The time has come for you to cast off the yoke of bondage and recover liberty.
He began with a little rhyme. Most of his listeners are illiterate. They don't know
books so he is wanting to reach out to them with the kind of literary reference they might
actually be familiar with and that is a sort of nursery rhyme when Adam delved and Eve
span who was then the gentle man. What does this mean? He is referring back to those
Bible stories they would have heard in church about Adam and Eve thrown out of the Garden
of Eden and becoming the first workers. There were no gentlemen then. There was no one to
do the work. Adam is farming, digging the fields. We're told this in the book of Genesis.
And Eve is spinning cloth to make them clothing in order to hide their nakedness. They are
workers. He is identifying his listeners, his audience, with the primal couple in all
of human history, Adam and Eve. This is a way of giving them pride in what they're doing,
but he's making a serious point. In addition, there were no gentlemen then. Nobody worked
for anybody else. God did not so arrange the world that Adam and Eve were a lord and a
lady. They were workers. That is the natural, original status of human beings. And he asked
the question, who was then the gentleman? There was no gentleman and he makes the point
that neither bondage nor gentleman came in until these high men oppressively forced it
on weaker, lower men. I also like his use of the word yoke, yoke of bondage. That's kind
of a dead metaphor in most speeches about liberty. You find it in lots of the speeches
that go along with the Revolutionary War. In other words, the yoke of oppression, the
yoke of slavery, has been used so often, what we say by dead metaphor is you've forgotten
that it really means an object from the agricultural world, that wooden contraption that goes over
the neck, wooden or leather contraption that goes over the neck of the ox or the other
draft animal so that the plow can be pulled. He brings it back to life, that dead metaphor,
by using it to a group of peasants who have just come off the farm, who have just left
their plows behind them and are now getting that reinforcement from him. Cast off this
yoke, cast off this symbol of your oppression, join me in the attack on the established order.
A beautiful speech, a beautiful use of metaphor. Let's stick with English history for a moment
and go back to someone we've had already as a guest professor, and that is Queen Elizabeth
I of England. We last encountered her at Tilbury Field, trying to rouse up the courage
of her troops to face the Spanish Armada. Thirteen years later, she received a deputation
from the House of Commons in Parliament, and she wanted to talk to them about her relationship
to them and her love for the common people of England. Now, to picture the scene as it
was at the beginning of this short excerpt, you need to realize that they would have not
been allowed to stand in her presence unless she gave them leave. As soon as they came
into the presence of their monarch, they had to get down on one knee, lower their heads,
and not look at her until she gave them leave to do so, and typically that would not be
to the end of the speech. Now, this is a speech of thanks, this is a speech of warm hearted
love for her subjects, and she gives the impression halfway through, and I'm only going to read
you apart from the middle, that she's realizing that she has so much to say about her love
for them that she's going to go off the script, and so we have this interesting little piece
written into the speech that the Queen gives. Of myself, I must say this, I never was any
greedy scraping grasper, nor a strict fast-holding prince, nor yet a waster. My heart was never
set upon any worldly goods, but only for my subjects good. What you do bestow on me,
I will not hoard up, but receive it to bestow it on you again. Mr. Speaker, I would wish
you and the rest to stand up, for I fear I shall yet trouble you with longer speech.
To be a king and wear a crown is a thing more glorious to them that see it than its plight,
pleasant to them that bear it. That's a short excerpt from a long speech, but that moment
where she first of all breaks off and says, stand up, I'm going to talk so long, I know
you won't be able to hold that proper pose, I want you to be able to hear all the things
that I have to say of thanks and praise for you. And then the little thing aimed very
much at them, she certainly wouldn't say this to another monarch, that you who look at me
think it's more glorious to wear this crown than I do, who wear it. That is a monarch
talking to common people that's trying to put herself in touch with their point of view
and perhaps correct it from her own perspective, but always thinking about them. There's never
been, I don't think a monarch in the world, quite like Elizabeth, and she was rewarded
with a love from her people that certainly matched the kind of love that she showed
for them. We certainly have an America president who's shown an instinctive kind of empathy
with the people of America, and one of the most striking of those was John Kennedy. And
he, through a series of speeches, I think everyone remembers, even if one was not alive
at the time, that he used that famous line, ask not what your country can do for you,
ask what you can do for your country. He reached out to people, he wanted people to be getting
in touch with and getting involved with their own government, their own country's health
and state of affairs. He wanted an inclusive government, and so his words bore testimony
to that. He also wanted to get Americans behind the idea of the space exploration program.
And I want to show a little clip, and let you hear a little clip, of Kennedy talking
about this, this quest to get a man on the moon, that he used as a speech in a number
of different places, but you're going to be hearing him at Rice University, standing
in the football stadium. Let's listen to him for a little bit, and then I will share
with you something that the president of Rice University told me about what Kennedy said
that day. We choose to go to the moon. We choose to go to the moon. We choose to go to the
moon in this decade and do the other things, not because they are easy, but because they
are hard, because that goal will serve to organize and measure the best of our energies
and skills, because that challenge is one that we're willing to accept, one we are unwilling
to postpone, and one we intend to win, and the others too.
That's a beautiful line, that you should undertake a thing not because it is easy, but because
it is hard. I hope you noticed at the beginning of that clip from the center of what is quite
a long speech by President Kennedy, that use of threes, we choose to go to the moon. We
choose to go to the moon. He almost pretends that he said it three times just to be heard
over the crowds of applause. Nonetheless, the triad, the triple repeat, is something
we talked about as a way of really reinforcing any kind of a message, but I hope you also
noticed at the very end of that clip where he tossed in almost in an undertone undertaking
this and the other things too, how that weakened the statement. It's the same problem that
we saw with the end of Susan B. Anthony's original speech. When you've made your point,
stop talking. And of course, someone who did sometimes extemporize and go off script the
way President Kennedy would do, the way I think we saw Queen Elizabeth doing, is sometimes
going to make decisions that perhaps are not optimal for the occasion.
Now, I was told by Rice University President, David LeBron, that Kennedy actually, in addressing
a group there while he was on campus, said something that didn't end up in the final
official version. He said to them all, why does Rice play UT? Meaning, why does Rice
University's football team play the football team of the University of Texas at Austin?
And then he followed that by his same essential message about the glory of the space program.
Not because it is easy, but because it is hard. Everybody at Rice got the message immediately.
They all understood that idea because they feel too that it's always unlikely that they
shall be University of Texas. They're a small liberal arts college. Nonetheless, they all
feel the glory of having attempted an immense, seemingly impossible task and occasionally
achieving it. They were also impressed, as David LeBron shared with me and has become
part of Rice tradition, apparently, that Kennedy knew exactly where he was, knew exactly
who he was talking to, and threw into almost casual conversation a reference to something,
calling it UT, that they would all get, would be the way they would say it themselves and
felt honored then, correspondingly, from the President of the United States, immersing himself
in their own point of view and in their own interests.
Now, let's go to a very different kind of speech at the Harvard Commencement ceremonies
of 1978. The speaker was the great Soviet writer and activist Alexander Solzhenitsyn.
A very different tone here as befits the man, and perhaps in a way befits the place. Let's
just hear the opening of his commencement address. I am sincerely happy to be here with you on
the occasion of the 327th Commencement of this old and illustrious university. My congratulations
and best wishes to all of today's graduates. So much for his introduction. Now, the body.
Harvard's motto is veritas. Many of you have already found out, and others will find out
in the course of their lives, that truth eludes us as soon as our concentration begins to
flag, all the while leaving the illusion that we are still pursuing it. Also, truth is seldom
sweet. It is almost invariably bitter. A measure of bitter truth is included in my speech today,
but I offer it as a friend, not as an adversary. This is not the tone that they expected. And yet,
I think they must have felt as he went on with a speech that was in part critical of things in
the Western world, that they were being honored by him. They were being respected by him. Certainly,
he feels absolutely on an equal level with Harvard University and all of its grand tradition.
Notice that little tiny touch at the beginning. I am sincerely happy to be here with you. I'm sure
99% of the graduation speakers at Harvard, Yale, Princeton, the other great university, say I am
honored. He didn't feel that they had any honor to bestow on him. It was he who could bring a mutual
sense of equality and of honor on both sides to the occasion. And then there is that bit of the tying
of his theme for his speech, truth, to their motto. That's the same kind of thing that Kennedy had
done that he's remembered for at Rice of having picked up on an obsession of people at Rice from
the president right down to the freshman class, the annual game with UT. By showing he'd studied
enough to know about them, he played them, he paid them a great compliment. And he also then had a
springboard for his speech. He had that word veritas, truth, and he made that the keynote of
his own address, and thus created a very memorable, a very powerful speech, as well as
a recognition of Harvard important enough that he would study it before he came that this great
man of letters would really get to know the place where he was speaking. So I urge you,
whenever you are talking to a group, be sure that you talk to them, having studied them,
having gotten to know them, if there are relevant links that you can draw between your experience
and theirs or between your subject and the things that concern them, do so, personalize,
particularize your speech for the audience at hand. I have a very vivid memory of being invited
to be a commencement speaker at a high school in Louisville, the collegiate school where my dear
sister Amy was a student at one time. It was a school that ran from first grade to 12th grade,
and many of the graduating seniors had heard me give lectures there at the school. I was honored
to be invited to be their speaker, but I was aware that the first graders and the second and
third were all going to be there because they all came to the ceremony. I didn't want to leave
anybody out. So first of all, I went around to where the first graders were gathering before
the ceremony, and I told them a little story about my own family. I have a great nephew named Jack,
and Jack's mother, my niece Carol, told me that on one occasion, Jack, when he was three or four,
having been told a hundred times by his mother, you're not listening, you're not listening,
made it plain to her that she'd been on the way wrong wavelength the entire time when the two
of them were lying in bed one morning, hearing the rain on the roof, and Jack suddenly turned to her
and said, am I listening? He hadn't understood. Well, they all thought that was funny, more a joke
on the mother than on the kid. And so I said, okay, I'm going to be giving this long speech.
I'm going to try to make it interesting for you, but every now and then I'm going to shout,
first graders, are you listening? And what are you going to say? And they all shouted back at me,
right then, we're listening. So periodically through my address, which went on about 20 minutes,
and I'm sure would have bored them stiff if they had not been keyed up to participate,
I would ask them, first grade, are you listening? We're listening. I enjoyed it. They enjoyed it.
I have no idea about the rest of the assembly, but it was a way of reaching out to a group in
the audience and a pretty sizable one when you threw in the other young grades who otherwise
might have felt completely left behind. At the same time, I use some of my own experiences in
the field to draw a picture of young people in old societies who were kept by their elders
from going out in the morning until they heard some truths and said that I was one of those elders
standing at the door and making sure that before the young people ran out of the lodge,
they would hear some of the truths that I wanted to share with them.
In this way, I'd hope to touch everybody in that audience. So let's consider
what are some of the lessons we can learn starting with our great guest lecturer today,
Gandhi, but thinking of all of these different people and different kinds of
speeches we've heard which show a very keen appreciation on the part of the speaker for
the audience. First of all, you must ask yourself in advance who is my audience and you must adapt
your speech to address them particularly and to address them directly. You must remember
that you may have two or more constituencies among your listeners. Be sure to address them all.
Not only your message, but your tone, your language, your examples should all be chosen with a specific
audience in mind and you need to look for areas of common ground with your listeners. That's the way
to bring them over on to your side and that's to the way to make them feel that you've got respect
and interest in what they are feeling. And finally, unless you are determined to alienate your listeners,
always be courteous, respectful, sympathetic and, like Queen Elizabeth, mindful of their comfort.
