Welcome back. In this last section of our course on the Art of Public Speaking, you will remember
that we are focusing on the actual delivery of the speech to a live audience. And on the
relationship that you are going to want to establish between yourself and the audience
as you deliver, read, or extemporize those words that you have decided to use to clothe
your ideas and put them across most effectively. We've also been talking systematically about
Aristotle's three kinds of appeals, the logos, which is the appeal to reason, the ethos,
the appeal to the personality, especially of the speaker, and finally the pathos, the
appeal to feelings. Last time, in our first of these four lectures, we focused on Gandhi,
a former lawyer, now on trial for his life in the speech we heard. And that speech really
showed how the keynote that he sought to strike was the keynote of logos, reason, orderly
thought. In this way, he could both appeal to the judges, his primary audience, and also
to the millions of Indians who would be listening. Because remember, nonviolence is the beginning
of his faith, nonviolence is the end. He's wanting people to use this reason rather than
force or rage in dealing with this long-term injustice in British India. Today, we are
looking at a very different kind of speech with a different emphasis. It's the famous
I Have a Dream speech by Martin Luther King, Jr. I think it's important to remember that
a speech needs a principal tone, just as it needs a single focus subject, and just as
it needs a sense, although it may be broken into three parts, of a single trajectory from
the first word to the last. The tone that pervades Martin Luther King's speech is the
tone of ethos, the personal feeling, and that's expressed in that phrase that has come to be
known as the title of the speech, the I Have a Dream speech. As we'll see, that's not the
biggest part of the speech, and it's not the first part, but it is the element that dominates
the rest, that gives the rest of the speech a special color. This is a speech that I think
you should take as your model when you're thinking about speeches that are meant to
be inspirational, motivational, speeches that will work on people's visions of the future
because you have shared your own vision with them. It's not so much about closely reasoned
argument, although it needs some of that to be a balanced speech, and it's not so much
about the pathos, the working on emotions in a general way, although it needs that also.
It's about a personal vision. We have a word in our language, inspiration. It comes from
the Latin, inspiratio. Well, the in is inside, the spiratio as in respire and so on. That
means breath. Your spirit, your breath is inside you. You want to share it now. You want to
put it into other people, you're going to do that with words. This is a long speech. It is in
the traditional three parts. Each of the three parts emphasizes one of Aristotle's three
kinds of appeal. So let's think for a moment about the architecture of the speech. Martin
Luther King, Jr. was a minister by training. His father had been a minister. He was used to
sermons that needed to last for a very long time and needed to somehow have this structure as
they worked their way through from a beginning, often with a biblical text, that would be the sort
of axiom, which starts the whole logical process off, working up to personal statements on the
part of the clergyman, and finally that universal application, which is the pathos, the feelings
at the end, where the audience may be moved to stand up to join the speaker in what can be called
a call and response tradition in those churches, where the minister will call out, shout out,
give a line, the people respond. That kind of joining together in a mutual emotion was often
a climax. What we're going to focus on in this speech, as we work our way through it, is that
section which has remained in the public mind as the real focus of the speech. I have a dream,
the ethos, the personal vision being shared as the inspiration of the speech. I think it's
interesting to note that most people you will talk to about this speech have no idea that it began
with a long logical section. We'll get to that in a moment with a very carefully worked out metaphor
which compares guaranteed freedoms to, of all things, checks written out or drawn on a certain
bank, not what you'd expect in this speech if you didn't already know it, and certainly not
something that's lodged in the popular memory, but a very necessary part of Martin Luther King's
progression. The middle part of the speech is the I have a dream, the ethos, that's what everybody
remembers, it's so compelling. The whole idea of a dream being part of the American style of looking
at life is mentioned by Martin Luther King himself that he felt his dream was a subset of the American
dream or grew out of the American dream. Many people through history haven't had this obsession
with dreams. We as Americans do, and this speech is the ultimate expression of that. And finally
there's a third section, the actual conclusion of the speech, better remembered than the first,
but often still forgotten by people who think about the speech only in terms of that ringing
repetition, I have a dream, I have a dream, and that is a speech, that is a section of the speech
working on general emotions by quoting a famous song and then taking the last line of that song
and using it as a refrain repeated in a litany of clauses in order to build up the same kind of
force, but now not just about the speaker and the speaker's dream, but about the whole country
united in a final great burst of emotion. So let's take the speech and begin to work our way
through it. We're going to do a sort of anatomical analysis to understand why this speech by this
minister from a church in Atlanta, Georgia was nominated by the journalists of the Guardian
newspaper in London in the year 2000 as the most important and influential speech of the 20th
century. An extraordinary achievement on Martin Luther King Jr.'s part. Let's see how he did it.
First of all, we want to set the stage. The year is 1963. We are standing with hundreds of thousands
of people outside the Lincoln Memorial on the Mall at Washington DC, our nation's capital. Martin
Luther King himself, Martin Luther King Jr. is a well-known figure. He has not yet received the
international glory that came to him when the following year he was awarded the Nobel Peace
Prize. We've had a number of Nobel Prize winners among our great speakers. Maybe that shows that
they go together. At any rate, his back is to the Lincoln Memorial. And as you may know, on the inside
of the Lincoln Memorial is not only the great statue of Lincoln seated, but engraved, carved on
the walls, quotations from the Gettysburg Address and from the second inaugural address so that he is
able to evoke Lincoln. We're going to be with Lincoln on our very last speech, number 12 in the
series of lectures that we're devoting to public speaking. But everybody knew those words. Everyone
knew who Lincoln was. And everybody knew that Lincoln had begun his Gettysburg Address with the
words four score and seven years ago. A very biblical, a very evocative way of saying 87 years
ago. Exactly 100 years had gone by since Lincoln pronounced those words at Gettysburg. Lincoln is
the great emancipator. Martin Luther King Jr. wants to evoke his spirit immediately in his speech. And
he does it without even naming Lincoln. How does he do it? Listen to a direct quote of the first
sentence of Martin Luther King's so called, I have a dream speech. Five score years ago, a great
American in whose symbolic shadow we stand today signed the Emancipation Proclamation. Even without
the more clear reference to Lincoln, just using five score years ago to say 100 is a very thoughtful
way and a thought provoking way to make the audience connect this present occasion with what
happened in the Civil War 100 years before. That war that was fought over the issue of slavery and
which in Martin Luther King Jr.'s opinion and that of many others had not yet brought to a full
resolution equal rights for all Americans. Now this first section is going to be the logos part of
Martin Luther King's speech. After evoking Lincoln, he gets into what I have to say when I first read
it was a very surprising to me kind of reasoned argument about what was the problem in America
today. He picked a source of imagery through a metaphor, an extended metaphor. What's that mean?
Well, you may know Shakespeare's sonnet. When to the sessions of sweet silent thought, I summon
up remembrance of things past. Goes on for another 12 lines, but throughout those other 12 lines,
there's continual courtroom imagery. Shakespeare loved to do this. He liked to like Homer picture
one thing always in terms of something else. And so he's picked his image, the courtroom and to
his own delight and amusement, figured out all the ways in which thinking about a love affair can
be like being in court. Martin Luther King is going to do the same kind of balancing act in this
opening section of his speech, which is in fact the first two thirds of the whole speech. This
reasoned argument, not a reasoned call for action, not a reasoned plan for the future. He's not going
to give us that in this speech. This speech is going to be a vision of the future, the promised land
that lies ahead without a roadmap on how to get there. But he wants to set up the initial
situation and he does it through his extended metaphor, this metaphor of the bad check. So
let's get into his logos, his reasoned section of the speech. This source of imagery, which is
going to be so common, begins as sort of an axiom. He's going to quote for us what lies behind his
bad check metaphor, the founding documents of our country. And he will quote lines from, or at least
allude to, the Constitution and the Declaration of Independence. And later on, he's going to actually
quote a direct line from the Declaration of Independence. All the way through this speech,
he's going to be quoting not just single lines, but entire texts of songs and other familiar
quotations as he builds up his whole grand edifice on the words, on the images, on the evocative
statements and verses that other people have created. So we've got our axiom, we've got our
ground to stand on guarantees, the Constitution, the Declaration of Independence. That's the first
step. The second step is to say these guarantees have been violated. This is an assertion. It's to
say that while the guarantees are being fulfilled for some, they are not for others. Injustice,
oppression are preventing the guarantees from being offered to the general public. That portion of
the general public, which is African American, which is excluded by race and has been for the
hundred years since the emancipation proclamation of Abraham Lincoln from enjoying those guarantees.
Now we get the metaphor. It's a bad check. Everybody else is able to cash their check,
but this group, these hundreds of thousands have come to Washington, D.C., check in hand to try
to cash it, and they're finding that the bank is claiming to have no money and that their
check will be stamped insufficient funds. I'm not sure that this was the best kind of metaphor to
use. I want to suggest to you that the reason the public has forgotten this part of the speech is
because it is intellectual. It involves a lot of logical reasoning. It involves remembering the
details of the check metaphor as you go along and get to the bank and get to the words that are
stamped on the check and what they mean, and then the conviction of the African Americans that there
are plenty of funds to cash this check. This is not true. The bank is lying to them. They should
receive those funds. I think perhaps in the mental effort to try to follow the picture, the extended
metaphor, it's becoming almost an allegory here. That is a metaphor turned into a story.
You have to imagine that people are beginning to stop listening to whatever he's saying at that
moment and start to focus on working out what's just been said in image form. Whether I'm right
about that or not, this did not become the remembered, the well-beloved part of the speech.
Nonetheless, it is the opening statement and it starts it off on that mood of logos, reason,
logic. Let's follow a thing step by step from axioms and statements of self-evident truths
that no one will deny and see where that lands. Now, having gone through his extended check metaphor,
the bad check, he wants to make a transition now to what's going to be the big part of the speech,
the I Have a Dream speech. He is going to begin to work his way through other ideas,
through other concepts broadening the original application of the fact that an essential
injustice and oppression has been done touching on what some of those problems are,
some of those actual oppressive acts, but in general staying away from that.
If you're trying to inspire people, follow Martin Luther King Jr.'s example. Do not use negatives
to try to create a positive. He rigorously excludes from almost the entire speech any specific
references to the outrageous, the indignities, the criminal acts that have been done in the
effort to deny African-Americans their rights. Instead, he is relentlessly positive and we saw
that already in Gandhi. We're going to see it again with Mark Antony and Lincoln, our other two
speakers in this section, that relentless positivism makes people feel, no matter what the exact words
are you're saying, they want to be with you as you work your way through to your conclusion.
It's at the end of the transition that we suddenly find him talking about dreams,
the American dream, his own dream, and now comes that second part of the speech,
the ethos, it's the shorter part, but the one that is stuck in everybody's minds.
And I just want to draw a parallel back to what I mentioned regarding Winston Churchill,
when he gave the world, it would seem, the conventional triad of terms blood, sweat, and tears,
well as we remember, he didn't really say that, he said blood, toil, tears, and sweat.
The popular consciousness rejected that, picked out what it wanted,
made three of it, and that became blood, sweat, and tears. Similarly, with this speech by Martin
Luther King, that long first section is often simply left out when the speech is excerpted in
shorter form and certainly has not made its way into the popular consciousness. Was it a mistake
to put it in? No. Everybody's expecting a long speech. Some of these people have walked to get
there. There are hundreds of thousands of them from all over the South. It's been a long journey.
They are aware that they are there at a moment of great importance, great significance,
both to American history and specifically to African American history. The length of the
speech needs to match that. Remember, Lincoln could only get away with a three-minute address
at Gettysburg because someone else, who we will briefly meet in our last lecture, Edward Everett,
had already given a two-hour oration. Martin Luther King has to shoulder the burden of
presenting a speech of such gravitas, such weight, such critical mass, that people are aware
the speech lived up to the occasion. And he's starting low. He's starting with the emotional
level very controlled. He's starting with a metaphor that you find is thought-provoking,
rather than inspiring or stirring up your strong emotions, so that he has somewhere to go.
And in a way, the trajectory of a fairly long time on that level playing to begin with,
and then the stair steps accelerating gives the feeling of drama, gives the feeling of
dynamism to the other two portions of the speech. Now, as I said, this second portion is the ethos,
is the section where he opens his heart, ethos being, as Aristotle would say, all about you,
all about the speaker or personalities at any rate. This is where the dream begins to echo
through the speech or resound like the ringing of a bell again and again. We're in fact going to
hear that phrase, I have a dream, eight times. There are going to be six elements to the dream,
or six individual dreams, at two of them he repeats at the end. That phrase, I have a dream.
So, let's hear the very first one. I have a dream that one day this nation will rise up and live
out the true meaning of its creed, and now he stops his own words and quotes the Declaration
of Independence. We hold these truths to be self-evident that all men are created equal.
So, we have our element of logos here, our element of reason and logic, but now we have
gone to a more exalted place. We're in a dream. We're in one of those prophetic visions like
those of Isaiah or Amos in the Bible. He is creating a nimbus, a sort of aura of light and
magic around these words by this continue to frame, I have a dream. He goes through a number
of other dreams. As with the Old Testament prophets, a lot of the things he sees in the
dreams are geographical. If you read through the prophecies in the Hebrew Bible, the Old Testament,
you'll find that again and again they give a concrete reality and grounding to the dream
by naming the place where it happened. So, we're going to hear three states mentioned,
specifically as part of the sequence of dreams or visions. Georgia, Mississippi, Alabama,
he's foretelling transformations in each one of those states, each of them separate dreams.
But at the heart of this litany, this sort of repetitious sequence of prayer-like or
religious-inspired statements, there comes the heart of the ethos, the heart of the personal vision.
He is actually going to describe for you his dream for his own family.
You can't get more intimate than that. Here we are, another direct quotation from his work.
I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where they will
not be judged by the color of their skin, but by the content of their character.
That is powerful not only because it's so personal, often public figures like to keep their children
out of the limelight, and he's brought them right into the thick of things, but by a very simple
device, one of dozens that are talked about for effective rhetoric, and that is this alliteration,
especially at the beginning of words, the content of their character, the color of their skin,
those repeated sounds, the C or the K and skin, bind that phrase together. It makes it seem like
something you would encounter in a vision, something out of those Biblical verses where the
King James translators often sought for that kind of alliteration to give verbal impact,
oral impact, the way you hear it in your ear, to the sequence of words.
Now, as he goes on, he begins to work away from the dream, and with another transition,
he moves toward the third part of his speech, the pathos, where we are going to be in the realm of
emotion. Now, this brief sort of transitional phase gets Biblical again with two terms we met back in
our lecture where we talked about Paul the Apostle and his son, Paul the Apostle, and Paul the Apostle,
lecture where we talked about Paul the Apostle and his sermon or letter
on the quality of agape, charity or love. You remember at the very end of that,
Paul takes one by surprise by bringing in three, or threesome, but two of the elements we haven't
heard about before. They were faith and hope. Martin Luther King knows the entire Bible by heart.
He is now picking faith and hope out as things that he will evoke. The unspoken love is hovering
in the background, and so he works his way through hope to faith and begins to talk about all the
things he has faith in about the transformative power of faith, and he actually begins to have
his own visions again like a prophet. He sees a mystical thing. He sees a gigantic mountain
whittled down or carved down to a single small stone. The mountain was despair,
but what has been carved down out of it through much work is hope, a small stone of hope.
That's a beautiful image. He also has another image, although this one is one that you hear,
discords, horrible noises, conflicting sounds, gradually being transformed into brotherly harmony
as the whole world learns to sing together. That's his transition to the pathos, the emotional part
of the speech, and this for him is as important clearly as the ethos, where he's ringing the bell
of I have a dream. Now we are getting into the world of a different phrase, let freedom ring.
Those are not his words. He is going to give you the entire text of a familiar hymn. I sang it
when I was at Green Valley Grade School watching the flag right after the Pledge of Allegiance.
My country tis of thee, sweet land of liberty, of thee I sing.
Land where my father's died, land of the pilgrim's pride, from every mountainside,
let freedom ring. Now he immediately seizes upon that quotation, let freedom ring for another
rhythmic litany. Like the I have a dream one that's preceded and been the middle part of the speech,
let freedom ring. And we're back to our our geographical terms. Now one of the things that
he saw in his dream, his sequence of dreams, was a vision that he takes straight out of the
prophet Isaiah. It's from the advent part of the liturgical year and the Christian calendar,
that's when it's most usually read, this vision. It's the vision of the the world's changing
when it's put right by the coming of the righteous one. And Isaiah puts it in terms of these great
geographical geological changes. As Isaiah says, I want to read you the King James version of the
the passage, every valley shall be exalted and every hill and mountain shall be made low.
The crooked shall be made straight and the rough places plain and the glory of the Lord shall be
revealed. Well, the visions bounce off each other as Martin Luther King Jr. starts proclaiming again
and again, let freedom ring, let freedom ring. What is it ringing off of? Isaiah's hills and
mountains. And so he does a litany of hills and mountains, some of them by name, in different
states. So we get New Hampshire, New York, Pennsylvania, Colorado, California, Georgia,
Tennessee, and Mississippi, all named, some of them with the appropriate mountains like Look Out
Mountain for Tennessee, echoing Isaiah, binding the visions together, making you feel this great
world, all singing, all resounding, letting freedom ring with Martin Luther King Jr.'s vision.
So at the end, he's got a short conclusion to wrap it all up. And his conclusion, having brought
together these opposites, reconciled all the conflicts, he sees all the people gathering
together and singing in the words of a traditional spiritual hymn that he must have heard again,
often in his father's church and in his own, and now quoting from the hymn,
free at last, free at last, thank God Almighty, we are free at last. And he gives that line from
the spiritual pride of place as the resounding conclusion of his speech, again, not his own words,
just as he really started not with his own words, but with ideas from the Constitution and the
Declaration of Independence, but somehow resting on a higher authority. It's a wonderful speech.
It's a wonderful example of how to weave together quotations, different sources, words from the
Bible, from songs. One thing I want to remind you about when you are using quotes is, it's a very
good thing to have the book. You want to be sure you can find the correct quote quickly without
having to fumble for it or search the page, but you also want to keep up your energy level through
the quote and you want to keep the eye contact with the audience. Try to memorize, and if you
watch the films, you'll see he really keeps up the eye contact, try to memorize the opening
of the quote and the end so that at the beginning and as you come out of it, you are able to still
be with your audience, putting it over to them, communicating with them every second.
That man has shared a vision. That vision ultimately did become a reality. It partly became a reality
because of that speech. This is one of those speeches that we can say made a difference
to history, to the way an entire country thought about the issue, partly because of that essential
positive element in the speech, and partly by skimming over exactly how are we going to do this?
It wasn't a ways and means kind of speech. It's sharing a dream, sharing a vision. When you're trying
to inspire people, whether it's a group of people at work, whether it's your family, whether it's
people at a eulogy and church or during a sermon, whether it's a group of athletes who are being
coached by you, whatever the inspiration is being applied to, look at this speech. I do not know
any better example of how to put together an extended speech that deals with stirring up
positive feelings in a group of people and making them go forth from that place renewed
and thanking you for sharing your inspiration with them. Now, I'd like to consider the ways
in which Martin Luther King had an impact beyond his own time and in different areas of the
United States. So let's consider an American president who, in fact, I believe, drew on that
tradition that Martin Luther King Jr. had made familiar to the whole country, those simple phrases,
the repetitions, the sort of rhetorical style of the sermon and the appeal. I'm talking about
President Ronald Reagan. The year was 1987. President Ronald Reagan had gone to Berlin
to challenge the existence of that wall. His speechwriters were debating on whether he should
mention the idea that the wall should be torn down, and he decided at the very last minute
to do so. So let's listen to him using those effects from Martin Luther King in his speech.
There is one sign the Soviets can make that would be unmistakable,
that would advance dramatically the cause of freedom and peace.
General Secretary Gorbachev, if you seek peace, if you seek prosperity for the Soviet Union and
Eastern Europe, if you seek liberalization, come here to this gate. Mr. Gorbachev, open this gate.
Mr. Gorbachev, Mr. Gorbachev, tear down this wall.
President Reagan enjoyed many triumphs in the course of his presidency, but none greater than that.
The wall was torn down a couple of years later, and the entire city of Berlin seemed to join in the
effort. So let's conclude by looking at our lessons, mainly drawn from Martin Luther King's
I Have a Dream speech, and considering what we can take away from this lecture on inspiration.
First of all, it helps to integrate all three kinds of appeals, logos, ethos, pathos, appeals to logic,
appeals to personal concerns, and to emotions, if you want to make your most satisfying and most
compelling case. But specifically in inspirational speeches, second, the personal and emotional
elements are far more important than the logical. Visionary images carry more weight than reasoned
argument. If you want to create the feeling of visions, repeat words and phrases. This will
create a powerful feeling of unity, inevitability, whether you do it at a pregame pep talk, a political
rally, or even a religious revival. But we have some other elements, too, that we want to remember.
Do what Martin Luther King Jr. did. We've familiar quotations and references to well-known texts
into your speech. This establishes common ground with your audience. Also, divide a long speech
into those three clear-cut sections that we've been striving for all through the course. Give each
section its particular tone and its own particular take on your theme. And finally, maintain eye
contact with your audience and maintain your energy while reading those quotes, especially at the
beginning and the end of the quotes, and use pauses and changes in vocal tone to set the
quotes apart from your text. It may not be your own words that you're using, but believe me,
you will infuse your words with additional and especially spiritual power if you will bring
in the best of the words of others.
