Welcome back. We've been talking about the ways in which you need to engage your audience
during a speech and using different examples of different kinds of speeches as we explore
what's important and how the tone of the speech can affect how you want to engage.
We were talking last time about these visions, these special speeches that we're sharing
a personal dream and there are a few quotes that link the idea of speaking to those dreams
and visions that I just, their favorites of mine, I just want to share them with you.
Thorough in his book Walden has a wonderful statement, if one advances confidently in
the direction of his dreams and endeavors to live the life which he has imagined, he
will meet with a success unexpected in common hours. There's an anonymous quote, dreams
are the stuff of progress, which I certainly feel in my field underwater archeology, everything
we do was dreamed by Jules Verne back in the 19th century and technology has scrambled
to keep up with him just as the space program has scrambled to keep up with Jules Verne's
idea of getting to the moon. William James, 1902, the brother of the famous American novelist
Henry James, he was a philosopher of science. An idea to be suggestive must come to an individual
with the force of a revelation. I find that fascinating, the idea that even a scientific
breakthrough needs to come like a vision from the beyond. And finally Oliver Wendell Holmes
in 1872 about the sort of relationship between the speaker and the listener. It is the province
of knowledge to speak and it is the privilege of wisdom to listen, where it is the audience
that is the source of wisdom and the speaker merely the source of knowledge. We've been
talking about different uses of Aristotle's three kinds of appeals, logos, ethos, pathos.
And although our main focus in this lecture is going to be on pathos, on appeals to emotion,
and we're going to be focusing on that great speech that Shakespeare wrote for the historical
character Mark Antony in Rome in his play Julius Caesar, I do want to begin with one
other character from classical history, the Empress Theodora in Byzantium, who is recorded
as having given an extraordinary short speech, which yes is an appeal to the emotions, yes
is an appeal to reason and logic, but mainly is that ethos that we talked about last time
with Martin Luther King Jr. That simple situation where you are the message your own character
comes through as the essential argument. The situation is very serious. Rebels are attacking
the city of Constantinople, which is the capital of the Byzantine Empire. Empress Theodora
is a girl from the streets, a girl who grew up in the circus on the racetrack and was
taken out of it by her husband Justinian, a great general. The great general is ready
to flee as these rebels approach. Theodora has been present at the council and as they
have decided they will take ship and roll away to safety, Theodora to everyone's amazement
speaks. My lords, the situation is too grave for me to obey the custom that a woman does
not speak in a council of men. In the most extreme dangers, those who are threatened
must consider not customs, but the wisest course of action. I believe that to flee would
be wrong, even if it should save our lives. All who are born into this world must die,
but no monarch should consent to become a fugitive. My lord, if you wish to save yourself, you
may do so. We have our treasure. There is the sea. There are our ships. But think, once
you have fled to the safety you seek, will you not desire to exchange safety for death?
As for me, I hold to the saying that a robe of royal purple makes the noblest of shrouds.
The emperor was not about to flee after that speech. They decided to stay. He in fact won
a great victory over the rebels and saved his throne and owed it very much to Theodora,
his wife. That is a model of how you are persuasive in your own person with the firmness, with
the clear vision, with allowing for the other person's point of view and yet arguing very
strongly against it. We're moving now to pathos, to the play of emotions, the appeal
to sentiments of sorrow, grief, pity, terror, self-interest, all kinds of emotions that are
the third of Aristotle's group of appeals. We're going to focus on this very famous speech
which begins Friends Roman's Countryman, maybe the most quoted speech in all the history
of theater from Shakespeare's Julius Caesar. The speaker is Mark Antony in Real History,
which was written down for us by Plutarch and another historian, Dio Cassius, and it's
their writings that tell Shakespeare what happened on the occasion when Caesar was assassinated,
Brutus and Cassius and Casca and the other assassins, all friends of Caesar's, now appear
to be in control of Rome, but they let Mark Antony, who was a beloved friend of Caesar,
speak at the funeral after they have gotten at the crowd first. So, Caesar's body is there
with a blood-stained robe, he's tumbled down the steps of the capital, the rostrum where
the speakers talk in the forum is there. It's not a podium, it's a platform surrounded
by the beaks, the rams of warships, that's what rostra are, they are bronze rams, so it's
a victory monument but it has a nice big platform on the top and that's what allowed the Roman
orators to stride around, to use gestures, to move closer to the audience, go around
the platform so they could address all the people and draw near them or draw back in
very dramatic ways as if they were on a stage, it's a perfect place for Shakespeare to set
his imagination on fire and create a fabulous speech. Mark Antony is ostensibly on the
surface buying into the idea that the assassination of Caesar was necessary, that Caesar was ambitious
to become a monarch or a tyrant and that what the conspirators did was just, in his heart
he is wanting to work on the emotions of the crowd who've been convinced by the previous
speeches of Brutus and the others that what was done was just, he wants to bring them
over to a sense of outrage, he wants to turn the crowd against Brutus and the other conspirators.
Now, I consider this to be the hardest thing in all of public speaking, although in many
books written about the subject you will hear about the persuasive speech that changes
people's minds. I haven't heard many of those speeches, I'm not sure I've ever given
one myself except at one zoning board meeting and I'll be glad to share that with you later.
Most people are really only reinforced in their original opinions by a speech, they
can be stirred up to higher levels of enthusiasm or depressed on lower levels of grief that
they already felt or they can be moved from neutral people sitting in the middle on an
issue one way or the other. It's the rarest thing in the world to actually figure out
how to change a crowd's opinion. These are Shakespeare's words remember, we don't know
exactly what the original Mark Antony said, but Shakespeare has given us a model on how
to work on people's emotions to change their fundamental attitude to a situation. We start
with the strongest beginning of any speech I know. It immediately grabs the attention,
it identifies the speaker with the audience by calling them friends and since this is
many common people of Rome in the audience and the speaker is a great noble, this in
itself is a reaching out to a great indulgent form of getting on to the audience's level.
It's unforgettable as is much of the speech. Let's just go ahead and hear it now.
Friends, Romans, countrymen lend me your ears. I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him.
The evil that men do lives after them. The good is oft enterred with their bones. So let
it be with Caesar. The noble Brutus hath told you Caesar was ambitious. If it were so it
was a grievous fault and grievously hath Caesar answered it. Here under leave of Brutus and
the rest, for Brutus is an honorable man. So are they all, all honorable men. Come I
to speak in Caesar's funeral. He was my friend, faithful and just to me. But Brutus says he
was ambitious and Brutus is an honorable man. He hath brought many captives home to Rome
whose ransoms did the general coffers fill. Did this in Caesar seem ambitious? When that
the poor have cried Caesar hath wept. Ambition should be made of sterner stuff. Yet Brutus
says he was ambitious and sure he is an honorable man. I speak not to disprove what Brutus spoke,
but here I am to speak what I do know. You all did love him once, not without cause. What
cause withholds you then to mourn for him? O judgment! Thou art fled to brutish beasts
and men have lost their reason. Bear with me. My heart is in the coffin there with Caesar
and I must pause till it come back to me. We're not at an ending. We're at a place where
Mark Antony breaks off to simulate weeping and the crowd gets to mutter and murmur. I
said earlier that when you are presenting your own case you never want to be negative
even about the opposition. Mark Antony is employing that rule incredibly effectively
here. He is so overpraising Brutus, so monotonously calling him an honorable man that the pure
contrariness of human nature is beginning to go the other way. I'd also like you to
notice this does not have a tripartite structure. We have no idea where we are in his speech,
introduction, middle, end, who knows, and the audience is being jerked around by his variations
in tone. Those things I told you not to do about changing abruptly from one tone to
another. Mark Antony is a master of this here. He is working on their sympathies by seeming
like he's being muzzled by this command and forced to say things he doesn't want to say.
Suddenly erupting in great emotion earlier saying oh the evil that Mendu lives after
them, the good is off in terror with their bones, so let it be with Caesar, very resigned,
and then he's a firebrand by the end. This keeps them off balance. This is preparing
you for the fact that in this state of uneasiness and uncertainty he's going to be able to push
them the way he wants them to go. It's a masterful psychological study on Shakespeare's part,
and these are lessons that any of us could use if we're up against a crowd that needs
to be gotten off balance and needs to be moved in the direction that we would like to see
them make their choice. Now, after all of their talk and their beginning to doubt, Shakespeare
has a number of citizens speaking to each other, we're suddenly back with Mark Antony.
If you have tears prepared to shed them now, you all do know this mantle. I remember the
first time ever Caesar put it on. It was on a summer's evening in his tent. That day
he overcame the nervy. Look, in this place ran Cassius Dagger through. See what a rent
the envious Casca made. Through this, the well-beloved Brutus stabbed as he plucked
his cursed steel away. Mark how the blood of Caesar followed it, as rushing out of doors
to be resolved if Brutus so unkindly knocked or no. For Brutus, as you know, was Caesar's
angel. Judge, oh ye gods, how dearly Caesar loved him. This was the most unkindest cut
of all. I'm not going to go on with the speech. It's immensely long. It ends in chaos as
the crowd, so worked up by Mark Antony, leaves the rostrum there in the Forum of Rome and
goes off to chase down the conspirators and either kill them or drive them out of the
city. Mark Antony is left very pleased with himself on the rostrum. All of his emotion
is a show, although he does have fondness for the dead Caesar, and that's genuine, but
nothing like what he's imitating here. We've got a number of things to talk about. One
is the use of props. We haven't really considered that too much. We've been talking about you
yourself as your own prop, with your gestures, with your movements on the platform, with
your expression of your face, your eye contact. All of these things make the visual side of
your presentation, but it's often very important to incorporate these props. I mentioned my
own experience with the zoning board. I had to offer a speech trying to prevent the clear
cutting of trees on a slope below my house, and I was aware that the slope was made up
of a crumbly shale. It's really just layers of mud that have become a soft stone. I carried
in some of this shale, wetted it down, passed it around to the members of the zoning board
so they could feel that this stuff, as soon as it was exposed by the cutting of the trees,
would start to wash away in the rains. We won the case. I'd like to think partly because
of the tactile impression of that prop. What is Mark Antony using here? He's actually used
another one earlier, the will of Caesar. Now he's gone on to the mantle, the cloak that
Caesar was wearing when he was dying, that beautiful touch of remembering the summer evening
when Caesar first put it on, and that he was in the tent. Oh, it was that day that he defeated
the nervi, that tribe that were enemies of Rome, harping on all of his services to the
people. But then we move on to something very different. He's going to consider not the
mantle itself, but the holes that the daggers went through. He cannot possibly know which
hole went with which dagger. He wasn't there. But he's willing to use his own imagination
to personify those holes, to make them speak like bloody mouths. The blood of Caesar is
all around them. And that final thing, this was the most unkindest cut of all. What a
resonant line. What a powerful thing. And that double superlative, which defies the
grammarians, most unkindest, really seemed to hit home. Now, he goes a little off track
as hard to say this of Shakespeare, but that business of how the blood of Caesar rushed
out after the steel went in, as if to see, as if coming out of a door to see who had
knocked on it. I think that's a bit of Elizabethan fancy we could have done without. Keep your
focus on your props. Keep your focus on showing, telling, being explicit and clear, and not
too much on rhetorical tricks. I think with a second edit, Shakespeare might have pulled
that pair of lines there. At any rate, props are important. Props are going to be something
that can help make the emotional force of your appeal even stronger. And of course, it can
also help in the logos, in the reasoning. If you can show something, when I'm archaeologically
speaking in my classes, I will try to show archaeological artifacts in order to make the
points. There's always a question, do you want to hand things around in class? Well,
sometimes that distracts from the words. And this point of distraction with props and with
visual aids is very important. There is a popular kind of aid to rhetoric now, a power
point in which it's possible to actually throw up onto the board behind you your whole speech,
or just the outline of it, or just key words. I urge you, do not do any of these things.
Use power point, use slides only for the images to support and reinforce your words. As soon
as you put up actual words, the audience's minds shift entirely over into the left part
of the brain, where all the reasoning is, the logic, the cerebral processing and analysis,
they can no longer hear your voice. And they can't take in the actual words you're saying
in preference to the words that they are hypnotically seeing and reading up there on the board or
on the screen. Don't give them words to read, give them images to see, give them objects
to look at. That's what the props should be. Now, Mark Antony is a genius at manipulation.
Let's follow just a little bit more of how he turns this into an emotional roller coaster.
First of all, he is managing his tone throughout. He started low, he started quiet. In spite
of the clarion call of friends, Romans, countrymen, once he gets into the speech, the second line,
I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him. What could be more level, more smooth, more
modest in tone than that? It gives no inclination of where he's going. It gives him a low place
to begin so that he can shoot off by the end of the speech into extremes of emotion. Again,
you'll often read, make your beginning strong. Make your call to attention clear. The beginning
should simply give you a breathing space from which to move a low point, a sort of initial
standing place. And it's the end of the speech that really needs to be worked on. And we're
going to see that next time when we talk about the Gettysburg Address and Lincoln. I am not
of the school that thinks that you are sunk if you can't grab people by the throat with
your opening words. I think that the important thing in the opening words is, write what
Mark Antony does. He's probably spoken here before, but he wants to hear his own voice
and he wants to get their attention by declaiming friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears.
He's had a chance to focus their eyes on him and to get a sound of his own voice coming
back to him, so he's judged the space and he knows now how to be comfortable speaking
in it. But then he's getting off to a very modest start. You can follow his example very,
very well. Now, we are in a world here of using these different rhetorical devices that
I think calls up some interesting reflections about how this speech has been used by different
people and what it's meant to different people. I'd like you to remember back to Jane Austen's
Mansfield Park, which I quoted in our second lecture when we were talking about control
of body language and so on. You'll remember the two young Bertram brothers, Tom and Edmund,
had been required by their father so that they would learn to speak well as boys to
memorize different speeches and declaim them to their father after they had memorized them.
The result was that Tom Bertram is able to name this speech as one of the ones he'd memorized,
that he had spent one of his vacations, his holidays back home,
declaiming the death of Julius Caesar to his father. I also have a dear friend who became
very interested in the speech as the result of something that happened to her in school.
She was a very shy girl and she had a serious crisis in self-confidence as well. She was
not only shy with other people, she was unsure of herself. The class was given an assignment,
pick a speech, memorize it, and declaim it to the class. So she was memorizing and memorizing
this very Friends, Romans, Countrymen speech. And as she was at home, her family got to hear it,
and her mother said to her at one point, I don't think you're really putting much into this.
The emotion of the speech is not coming across. How would you really make them pay attention?
How would you get them excited? And the young girl, then about 12, said, well, I guess I might stand
on a chair. Well, then why don't you try it that way? So she stood on the chair. She really
declaimed it. She put her heart and soul in it. Her mother applauded and told her you should do it
just that way in class. And when she got to school the next day, and it was her turn,
all the others had simply stood up at their places. She stood on her chair, just as Mark
Antony would have stood on the speaker's rostrum in the forum. She declaimed the speech. And at
the end, there was a moment of complete, shocked silence. Many in the class had never heard her
voice. And then a standing ovation. So Shakespeare does a lot. Public speaking can do a lot to help
a person get over shyness, to help them see what they can be in the world, using their own voice,
using their own ideas. What kinds of speeches are you likely to make that we can kind of draw out of
this Mark Antony speech? But one is the tribute. I think we need to always consider as we're going
over the whole field of public speaking of the different situations in which you're going to
have to do it. Mark Antony in this speech on behalf of Julius Caesar is praising Caesar. He's doing
exactly what he said he wouldn't do when he first walked on. I come to bury Caesar, not to praise
him. That's total falsehood. He's praising him all the way through, first subtly, and then very
overtly. And certainly one of the areas in which I have been often, as to speak, is praise. Sometimes
that may be a eulogy at a funeral. Sometimes it is a toast at someone's birthday, or an anniversary
party, or an award ceremony. Often it is welcoming a distinguished visitor to Louisville and praising
them, but also making the crowd feel that this is a very grand and special occasion that these folks
have come to our city. We have a Kentucky Author Forum. One time the guest was Madeleine Albright.
What would be appropriate for me to say about Madeleine Albright, to say to her, that would induce
a sense of praise, link her to high and important things that we all know she was involved in. Our
county is called Jefferson County. It was laid out by Thomas Jefferson himself. His statue stands
on an imitation of the Liberty Bell down by the courthouse. And so she didn't know this. I told
her she was in Jefferson County, and Jefferson had been the first Secretary of State, the position
that she held with such honor for so many years, and which she had in a way inherited from Thomas
Jefferson. She then had a cue for her speech in that link to Jefferson to talk about him, to talk
about how she had read through all of his work. She had gone back through documents that he had
signed as Secretary of State. It became very personal to all of us. And I was thankful that I was
able to make it personal for her. So it wasn't just a reading of the CV. And I think if you'll read
through the speech on your own again, you'll see how Mark Antony is careful to personalize all the
important facts about Caesar in the areas that we didn't go into. Caesar's love for the poor, his
leaving them things in his will, the reading of the will itself turns into quite a scene. All of this
is something important for you to consider as you are thinking about how to personalize praise for
someone. One more from these introductions. I was asked to introduce Sandra Day O'Connor. I read up on
her and discovered she doesn't like to be praised. She's a no-nonsense person who grew up on a ranch
down in the Southwest, and she finds praise kind of offensive. So again, I looked for a contact
between her life and our community. So happens that my hometown of New Albany, Indiana, had been the
hometown of a Supreme Court Justice. His name was Sherman Minton. He'd been friends of my grandparents.
I also heard that she had had run-ins with rattlesnakes and so on on her ranch, and that she was
interested and accustomed to the company of dangerous snakes. Well, this funny story about
Sherman Minton that's told in our community was told to be by my grandmother, who was there for the
big event. He had invited after he became Supreme Court Justice all of the local folks there in New
Albany to a big dinner at his house to meet some people from Washington. It was going to be a really
elegant affair. And on the morning of the big dinner, he went down to the basement and told his son,
young Sherman, to get rid of all of his snakes and his collection of reptiles that he'd brought up
from the woods. Young Sherman went around, emptied all the cages, but the biggest cage was already
empty. This six-foot black snake had gotten loose into the house, and the whole family had to spend
the day tearing the place apart trying to find the black snake. They couldn't find it. The guests
arrived. It was the strangest dinner in living memory, according to my grandmother. The Chief Justice
and his wife seemed paralyzed. They couldn't finish a sentence. They were obviously terrified that
black snake was going to come out from under a sofa or drop from a chandelier. But finally the
guests left, and everything seemed fine. They were sure the snake had gotten away, just unseen,
into the woods when Mrs. Minton lifted the roses out of the big bowl that had been sitting in the
middle of the formal dinner table the entire time, and began to scream and scream. And the Justice
Sherman Minton ran over to see what was wrong. There was the black snake, coiled up inside that
bowl. Well, it got a laugh at the dinner. She laughed too. Sandra Day O'Connor, she responded with many
her pathological jokes and stories of her own. But it was a way I felt of praising her, of showing
that we in Louisville and in New Albany knew her background, wanted to match the kind of things
that she would be interested, wanted to meet her on her own ground, rather than simply giving the
kind of platitudes that you would find in a CV or on an online resume. Whatever it takes when you
are trying to praise somebody, try to make it personal, try to do what Mark Antony does, try to
arouse in your hearers a sense of admiration, a sense of feeling that that is a person that you
would like to meet, would like to know, and that you definitely admire. Now we're going to consider
the lessons that we get out of Mark Antony's address to those Romans. First, make a strong
beginning. Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears is a great way to start. Second, use
props to illustrate and reinforce the points of your speech. Anything that you can hold up and show
makes a very powerful effect. But avoid projecting or distributing printed matter while you are
speaking. Don't have any words up on the screen. The brains of your listeners will immediately latch
on to those printed words. They'll be distracted from your own voice. We've got a few other things
we need to remember from this wonderful speech by Shakespeare. In an argument, be relentless in
speaking well of your opponents and courteously allowing for contrary opinions. Your audience may
actually shift to your opinion based on your overpraising of the opposition. Pace yourself, move
step by step in an argument to keep your audience with you. Even though Mark Antony is jerking the
crowd around, point to point, emotionally, the actual flow of his movement from pretending not to
praise Caesar to praising him unreservedly is very carefully judged. And finally, focus always on
concrete points, not on abstractions. The holding up of the bloody mantle and the showing of the
holes that were torn by the knives of the assassins spoke more loudly in itself than any amount of
words from Mark Antony.
