Welcome back to the 12th and the final lecture in our course on public speaking.
I've enjoyed this long journey with all of its twists and turns and varied landscape.
I hope you've been enjoying it too.
And I look forward to the time when I may be sitting down in an audience and realize
that it's you up there on the podium delivering a speech that I expect to enjoy very much.
We talked last time about Mark Antony and his surprising way of keeping his audience
off balance.
That's a good thing to do.
You never want the audience to settle into complacency and feel they know exactly what's
coming.
If you've had a standard format for a speech or if you've been setting a pattern, break
it now and then just to make sure they're still listening.
We're going to do that now.
We've been having our lessons for our, drawn from our speeches, drawn from our guest professors.
We've been having those lessons come at the end of the talk.
We are now going to break the pattern, take you by surprise, lessons first, speech later.
So here we go.
Our featured speech today is Lincoln's Gettysburg Address, certainly my candidate for the greatest
speech ever written.
And I'd like you to think as we are working our way through some other speakers and some
other ideas towards that great Gettysburg Address of these following lessons.
First, incorporate the element of surprise through unexpected elements in your speech,
such as breaks and established patterns or conventional contents.
Second, employ simple language and short words whenever you speak in public.
Third, repeat important words many times if necessary to reinforce your message.
Next, include a clear call for action in your speech.
Hear the end.
Let your audience know what you want them to do or think or feel.
Finally, appropriately, craft the strongest possible ending.
Now there's actually one more lesson, but I'm saving it for the very end.
We will hear the speech.
I hope you'll be struck by a very unusual thing that Lincoln does all the way through
that speech.
We will talk about it at the very end because for me it's one of the prime messages that
Lincoln is sending us as we review the words of that unforgettable address.
I'd like to begin today with that part of a speech which we have so far neglected but
which is one of the most important of all, the ending.
The Gettysburg Address has a great ending, so do a number of other speeches, but of course
we've also seen a couple where in my opinion the speaker has run off the rails and done
something at the ending to weaken the effect of the entire speech.
No part of the speech can have a greater impact on the audience's overall impression
than the last words they hear from you, and that's why you must be so careful in crafting
the strongest possible ending for any public address that you make.
I'd like you to consider a metaphor or simile from the world of sports in diving, which
I watch when the Olympics are on the television.
I notice that the judges are always obsessed with the way the feet of the diver enter the
water.
What seems like an extraordinarily difficult dive, perfectly performed, can receive huge
demerits in the scoring if the feet flopped over, if there's a big splash, if they're
not perfectly vertical, descending without a ripple into the swimming pool.
That's the finish.
That's like the end of the speech.
That is what your audience is going to remember most.
As I said last time when we talked about beginnings, and of course Mark Antony gives us a wonderful
beginning, friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears.
I don't care what the books say, beginnings don't matter so much.
It's fine to ease your way in.
It's fine to get the sense of the hall with a few casual remarks, and thanks to the audience
and to the person who has just introduced you, endings aren't like that.
Endings must be strong.
Endings are more important for their sort of leverage on the audience's reaction, as
I just said, than any other single part of the speech.
So please, spend a lot of time knowing exactly where you're going in the speech, and when
you get there, drive that message home.
Now, let's look at what I consider to be an ending on a par with the beautiful ending
that Lincoln contrived for the Gettysburg Address.
This is from a speech by Nelson Mandela.
The year is 1964.
He's on trial for fighting against the apartheid system, and he is justifying what he's done
and taking advantage of the trial, much as Gandhi did back in the 1920s.
The trial itself is serving as a platform for him to state his beliefs and his ideals
and his motives.
And so he really spent a lot of time on this ending, and it was so much still in his mind
that 26 years later, when he was finally released from prison in 1990, on being freed and giving
a speech then, he used this ending as the close of that speech.
And I think you will understand why.
I have fought against white domination, and I have fought against black domination.
I have cherished the ideal of a democratic and free society in which all persons live
together in harmony and with equal opportunities.
It is an ideal which I hope to live for and to achieve, but if needs be, it is an ideal
for which I am prepared to die.
Without a single rhetorical flourish, image, piece of vivid language, Nelson Mandela has
established a sense of himself in those words, of his integrity, of his devotion to a cause,
of his determination even to die for the cause if necessary, that must have left the courtroom,
I hope, in awe of that giant of a character that was before them.
The sincerity of it is very strong, and the turn at the end, it doesn't quite go where
you think it's going to, that slight element of surprise, which I mentioned as being important.
It is an ideal which I hope to live for and to achieve, but then, but if needs be, it
is an ideal for which I am prepared to die.
That comes like the blow of a hammer at the end of that speech.
Good stunned silence would be the only appropriate reaction to follow those words.
You may not want to induce such an extraordinary response in your audience, but you do need
to think about the end of your speech.
I would like you to think back to that specific other speech we talked about, where the ending
was weakened because it went on one too long, one sentence too long, and that was Susan B.
Anthony, speaking for women's suffrage, she had a beautiful final sentence on everything
that women's suffrage meant to her, the importance of this injustice being redressed, and then
could not stop herself, added a sentence comparing women's suffrage, excuse me, to the rights
that had been extended to Negroes by law after the Civil War.
That's where she stopped.
The focus had suddenly shifted.
It doesn't matter to what other object she shifted it, she was wrong to move the audience's
attention at the very end away from the focus of her speech.
For Nelson Mandela, that statement is the focus of the speech.
To live or to die for the ideals, that says it all.
Your final speech should be a reaffirmation of your most important point.
That is the last place in a speech that you want to bring up a digression, a diversion
of interest, a detail that doesn't quite fit in but seem interesting to you.
You must be ruthless and rigorous in plotting out how your speech will end so that it ends
at its moment of greatest strength and not sort of on an offbeat or a second step that
weakens the effect of the whole.
There are some other points to remember when you're finishing a speech.
Not only do the words need to be strong.
You need to deliver them strongly.
If you've been reading your speech up to that point, please memorize the very ending so
you can lift your head.
And remember, I'm not after you if you have to read from a script.
It may be a way station, it may be something you'll need to do all your life.
But for the last lines, memorize them.
So when you see them coming, you lift your head, you fix the audience with a, we hope,
engaging gaze, and you deliver that peroration, that finale, in a way that really connects
with them, really grabs them.
It's very important you will be rewarded, believe me, by a very healthy round of applause.
What you must do also is give them time to applaud.
I can't tell you how many speakers I've listened to who come to the end of their speech and
then ruin the entire effect with an offhand remark.
Let's go on to the next, or one of our next speakers to hear from today.
I'll just read the end of his speech.
This is Pericles of Athens.
What would it have been like if he had ended his eulogy on the young men of Athens who
had been killed in combat during the first year of the Peloponnesian War, if he had ended
it this way?
In foreign lands, there dwells also an unwritten memorial of them, graven not on stone, but
in the hearts of men.
Make them your examples.
Do I hear any questions?
It's not good.
It's not even good in a simple lecture, in a classroom.
There may be questions, there may be not.
But you have killed the effect of your speech by running off into an offhand comment or
question or asking if you have enough time to talk some more, anything like that.
The final moment of your speech needs to be like those diver's feet, disappearing straight
down into the water, not a ripple behind.
A moment of silence, the applause breaks out, believe me, it's a good feeling, not just
for you.
Do this for the audience.
They spent anywhere up to an hour, some of my cases of long classes, two and a half hours
listening to you.
They deserve the chance to communicate back with their applause, to reaffirm for themselves
that this was an occasion that mattered.
So please do them that courtesy, finish strong, be silent, never ask if there are any questions.
If there are any, they'll raise their hands, or the people who have organized it will step
up onto the platform with you and say, I'm sure that our speaker will be glad to take
some questions, and of course you will be.
So that's the way it should all end, be careful.
Endings are more important in public speaking than beginnings.
Now there's another point I mentioned in our lessons, and that is this question of trying
to find a way to let the public know, let the people who are listening to you know,
what you want them to do, what's the message, you're guiding them to something.
Don't simply give a string of facts and let them lie out there inertly.
One of the beautiful examples of this I know is a famous speech by the Buddha, Gautama
Siddhartha, that young Indian prince born in what is today Tibet, who way back around
500 BC, created one of the world's great religions.
He obviously did not do a lot of public oratory.
His was a quiet seeking of a true path through life and through some withdrawal from society
in many ways, but he did leave a beautiful meditation, a record of a meditation, that
he performed and then remembered all of his life.
One that happened while he was sitting under a bowed tree, had a place called Bodh Gaya.
There's a big shrine there now, there's even a tree growing, which is said to be a descendant
of the original, big wall around the place, pilgrims come, know they're at the place where
Gautama Siddhartha acquired enlightenment.
He wants to share the enlightenment with you and he wants to feel that you are one
of those whose eyes are not so covered with dust, but that you will hear the words, you
will understand and you will follow the way.
So he is giving a gentle version of his vision, he's giving you a gentle version of his experience
of enlightenment as he sees these truths and then presenting them to you with the idea
that now you will have heard and you will do likewise.
Let me explain a few things, he's going to refer to the Four Noble Truths, they all
involve suffering.
The First Noble Truth is to exist is to suffer, and the Second Noble Truth is that suffering
comes from desire and craving for the things of this world, the Third Noble Truth, suffering
can end when you renounce desire and craving, and finally you can achieve that end by following
the Eightfold Path.
These are Eight Qualities from perfect understanding all the way to perfect contemplation.
So in doing this you achieve release from karma and that is the burden on you from past
lives in that Indian system of reincarnation.
So that's what's behind what you're going to hear, here is Buddha giving his vision,
but steering all of his listeners towards making a choice, making it very clear what
he wants them to do, which path he hopes they will take.
O my disciples, so long as certain knowledge and clear vision of the Four Noble Truths
was denied to me, I felt uncertain about achieving the supreme enlightenment, which
is the highest thing in this world of celestial beings, bad spirits and gods, ascetics and
holy men, immortals and mortals.
When I felt I had achieved complete knowledge and insight into the Four Noble Truths, I
immediately felt sure that I had reached supreme enlightenment, and I found out that deepest
truth so hard to see, so hard to comprehend, yet peace giving and heavenly, that you cannot
reach by reason alone, and which can be seen only by those who have attained wisdom.
But the world is given over to pleasures of the senses.
It is obsessed by pleasure, seduced by pleasure, charmed by pleasure.
In truth such worldly beings can hardly comprehend the law of conditionality and the dependent
origin of all things.
Likewise they cannot understand the end of all forms, the liberation from previous lives,
the fading away of desire, detaching from the world, perishing from the world, nirvana.
But there are those whose eyes are blinded only a little by earthly dust.
They will know the truth.
To all of the disciples sitting around him, that was a clarion call.
We are the ones whose eyes are only a little clouded by the dust.
We are the ones who will see the truth.
We are the ones who will follow our master into this perfect enlightenment, which he
has so beautifully described.
And I can't forbear pointing out that even in India in 500 BC, the Buddha is thinking
in threes, as he describes, the way pleasures attack people with obsessions, with seductions,
with charms.
Those three clauses are very charming in themselves and maybe they were meant to be.
Now let's look at this issue of funeral eulogies.
As an example of a kind of speech where you might not expect a call to action.
Lincoln's Gettysburg Address is a eulogy.
There's a clear call to an action or a response, a way to think or feel differently afterwards.
Eulogies can be very difficult, they can often dissolve in tears.
I've wept through them myself.
You need to find something for people to go away with, as you do in any speech, but especially
here, especially when you are mourning or grieving for a dead one, and you want to offer
hope, you want to in some cases offer laughter even, to turn the grief around, to keep it
at bay, to set the living back on their feet and start them off on a new path.
Let's go back to about the same time when Buddha was writing, we're in the 5th century
BC, but we're in Athens, Greece, and that man I invoked a moment earlier, in a very
rude way, by ending his phrases with a question that he didn't ask.
Pericles of Athens, the great general, the great leader of the Athenians, has been asked
by the people to read the funeral oration for their honored dead after a year's fighting,
the first year of the Peloponnesian War with the Spartans.
We asked to read that funeral oration was a supreme honor for an Athenian citizen.
The state funeral ground was on a sacred way, stretching out from the city gate toward
the academy where the philosophers taught, and there those who had died in the service
of their country would all be laid together.
It was the Athenian Arlington.
From the middle part of his speech, I take the passage where Pericles gives them and,
in an echo, gives us a sense of what to do about our grief at a funeral, especially
of those who've died young.
First, he starts by focusing on his listeners and what they should feel about the city that
these young men died for.
I would have you day by day fix your eyes upon the greatness of Athens until you become
filled with the love of her, and when you are impressed by the spectacle of her glory,
reflect that this empire has been acquired by men who knew their duty and had the courage
to do it.
The whole earth is the sepulcher of famous men.
Not only are they commemorated by columns and inscriptions in their own country, but
in foreign lands there dwells also an unwritten memorial of them, graven not on stone, but
in the hearts of men.
Make them your examples.
With that final sentence, make them your examples, Pericles has turned his speech from a speech
of mourning into a speech of motivation, of exhortation.
This is something for you to do, to think, to feel, that they are my new examples.
I shall follow in their path, and then, unspoken by Pericles, is the corollary, thus they will
not have lived in vain.
They will have made a difference to this world by my own actions.
I can ensure that that will happen.
Pericles' funeral aeration was one of the many speeches of antiquity that was studied
by young Abraham Lincoln.
He knew these words, he knew the words of the great Roman authors, he studied Scott's
lessons in Elocution, which was a big encyclopedia of excerpts from plays, from essays, from famous
speeches of the past.
All of his knowledge of those earlier speakers came together when he was asked in 1863, a
few days after the terrible battle at Gettysburg, which although a Union victory, was disastrous
in terms of the thousands who were lost there.
He was asked to add to the occasion not the primary eulogy speech itself, but a few remarks.
Lincoln obviously felt that this was going to be one of the important moments of his
presidency.
This was one of the greatest battles in American history in the terms of the scale.
It was a great turning point in the war.
Lincoln felt he must be the equal of the occasion itself, and the myth that he wrote
it down scribbling on the back of an envelope on the train from Washington out into the
Pennsylvania countryside is just that, a myth.
I'm sorry to say the myth was promulgated by his own son after Lincoln's death.
The son was nowhere near Lincoln at the time when this was done.
Who knows, it may have been from an offhand joke on the part of his father, who was always
humble and who might have told the boy when hearing praises of the Gettysburg address,
I scribbled it out on the train.
He did not.
Many sketches have been found of that speech.
It's known that he worked for at least two weeks to perfect it.
It goes along with an observation that Lincoln once made.
A five minute address is very hard to create.
As for a two hour oration, as he once said, I'm ready now.
To go on and on at great length, to have no limits to the diversions and digressions you
can go into, any ready speaker can fill the hours of talk.
But when you have to boil down your meaning to just a few minutes and the Gettysburg address
is only 270 words and only takes about three minutes to deliver, that is the supreme challenge.
As I said earlier, remember he was able to do this very short speech because the work
of the day had been done by Edward Everett, a great speaker who wrote and delivered a
two hour funeral eulogy about the men talking about them, talking about their sacrifice.
Lincoln did not want to sound those same notes in summary in his.
He came up with something different.
You'll sometimes hear that at the end of the Gettysburg address, the crowd was not impressed.
It's true that some newspapers later, having only the texts of the two speeches, the two
hour oration by Everett and then Lincoln's very short remarks, concluded that Lincoln
had not done enough for the occasion.
But we have it on the testimony of eyewitnesses that after Edward Everett's oration ended,
they all sang a hymn together and then people were actually beginning to disperse a bit
during the hymn.
Lincoln stood up, his commanding voice drew them back to the platform and in those short
three minutes he was interrupted five times by cheering.
That's not the way this speech is normally read.
I'm going to try to give it to you with some of that feel in mind that this is a rallying
cry that he's trying to say what we should do about this, not simply what we should feel
about it.
Fellow countrymen, four score and seven years ago, our fathers brought forth on this continent
a new nation conceived in liberty and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created
equal.
Now we are engaged in a great civil war, testing whether that nation or any nation so conceived
and so dedicated can long endure.
We are met on a great battlefield of that war.
We have come to dedicate a portion of that field as a final resting place for those who
here gave their lives that that nation might live.
It is altogether fitting and proper that we should do this.
But in a larger sense, we cannot dedicate.
We cannot consecrate.
We cannot hallow this ground.
The brave men, living and dead, who struggled here, have consecrated it far above our poor
power to add or detract.
The world will little note, nor long remember what we say here, but it can never forget
what they did here.
It is for us the living rather to be dedicated here to the unfinished work which they who
fought here have thus far so nobly advanced.
It is rather for us to be here dedicated to the great task remaining before us that from
these honored dead we take increased devotion to that cause for which they gave the last
full measure of devotion.
That we here highly resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain.
That this nation under God shall have a new birth of freedom and that government of the
people by the people for the people shall not perish from the earth.
You know that they cheered.
You know that they cheered because he had given them a sense that this all mattered.
Note that he never mentions the enemy.
He doesn't mention the situations of the war.
It's on some higher plane, not an abstraction exactly, but we're up way high.
Remember Thomas Jefferson at his inaugural address, talking about the high ground on
which a president stood to see that which others could not.
He's up there.
He takes his listeners up there with him and he makes sure that they are going to understand
the full importance of what they do after this ceremony.
Can't do anything for the dead.
Not even worthy to do anything to the dead or for the dead.
It's for the dead to inspire us.
How many times does he use the word dedication in here six times in this short speech?
This is his focus, dedication.
They came here to dedicate a cemetery.
It's still there.
People still visit it.
People still feel moved by the presence of that grief all around them and by the words
of Lincoln ringing in their ears.
But it's because he asked the living to do something about it, not just to reflect on
it, not just to bear witness to it, but to do something that this speech is the extraordinarily
great speech it is.
Let's look at just a few of the things that make it so remarkable.
One is the simplicity of the language.
Most of his words are one syllable words.
This has been often remarked on.
Note the biblical echoes.
He's tying what happened here into the whole of world history and of religious history.
Your score and seven years ago, 87 years ago would have done it.
But he's after a certain tone, a certain power in the language.
And finally, I promised you that you were going to get a final lesson from this.
And it comes from the word, set of words he uses most often.
We us our 14 times in this speech.
He never says I.
He never says you.
It's always we.
That's an ideal for us all to follow as speakers, to establish a complete unity with our audience.
So let me give you as my last lesson for you in this course inspired by Lincoln and his
example at Gettysburg.
Create empathy between yourself and your listeners.
Do it with your words.
Combine ethos.
The idea of personality and pathos.
The idea of feeling and shift the focus of your speech from I or you to we.
If we can remember to do that, we will have done one little step along the road that Lincoln
wanted us to follow of being inspired by these men's lives to unite in his case, in his thoughts
as Americans, perhaps for us as human beings, but to act together to make sure that their
sacrifices did indeed create a changed and a better world.
Along with the Gettysburg address, as I mentioned when we talked about Martin Luther King Jr.,
up there on the walls of the Lincoln Memorial in Washington D.C. are parts of the second
inaugural address, which has one of the most beautiful closes of any that I know.
I'd like to use Lincoln's words as an inspiration for us as we continue to pursue his footsteps.
He who has gone ahead of us in this world of public speaking, trying to measure up in
some way to what his expectations would have been to work at it as hard as he did.
This is the end of his second inaugural address.
Thanks for us to carry with us as we say farewell and go our separate ways.
With malice toward none, with charity for all, with firmness in the right, as God gives
us to see the right, let us strive on to finish the work we are in.
