You
You're lecture is professor Robert Garland
Dr. Garland is the Roy D. and Margaret B. Worcester Professor of the Classics at Colgate University.
He is the author of 11 books, the most recent of which is Hannibal,
a study of the Carthaginian general that attempts to illuminate the psychology of the great military strategist.
Dr. Garland has been a Fulbright scholar and his expertise has been featured in the history channels The True Story of Troy.
Hello, my name is Robert Garland and I'm delighted to have this opportunity to explore with you the fascinating subject of daily life in the ancient and medieval world.
Since I'll be asking you to use your imagination many times throughout these lectures, I think it's fitting that we start by doing precisely that.
So let's imagine ourselves in ancient Rome, March the 15th, 44 BC, the infamous Ives of March to be precise.
There was a very severe thunderstorm in the night and the streets are strewn with broken branches and roof tiles and other debris.
We're inside a building attached to a brand new theatre in the campus Martius, the field of Mars, on the west side of the city.
It's the first stone theatre in Rome, incidentally.
The official Senate House got burned down some years ago, so meetings take place in a variety of locations.
This one, ironically, belongs to a complex paid for by Pompey the Great, Caesar's Enemy.
Gaius Julius Caesar, dictator in perpetuo, perpetual dictator, the greatest man of his generation, has just arrived.
He's perhaps as many as five hours late.
The Senate was due to meet around dawn and it's now close to midday, but nothing can happen in Rome without him.
There's so much tension in the air, you could cut it with a knife.
And talking about cutting it with a knife when he walked into the Senate, but wait, you know this story, don't you?
I don't need to continue.
And besides, it's not Caesar and other great men and women who concern us in this course,
but ordinary people such as the ordinary inhabitants of Rome, the thousands, for instance,
who rioted at his funeral in the Roman Forum when they heard from Mark Antony that Caesar had bequeathed them his great fortune,
which was to be distributed liberally among each of them, each Roman citizen.
Caesar had the common touch.
He understood the other side of history himself, and I mean by that he understood ordinary Romans, citizens and soldiers.
Though the people we're going to be meeting in this course are anonymous, they nevertheless had dreams and aspirations just as we do.
They had risen that morning with work to do, just like us.
Some of them had a raging toothache, some of them had a hangover.
They loved, they hated, they got by as best they could.
And yet, however much they may have been like us, they also lived in a very different world.
And they were beset by very different challenges and also thought very differently from us too.
All of us know the emotions of joy and anger, the feelings of hunger and anxiety,
but which of us knows what it's like to be a slave, or from the perspective of the free population,
what it means to believe unhesitatingly that slavery is part of the natural order?
And Caesar's house that March morning in the Roman Forum, the centre of the universe as it was then,
there were men and women who had no legal or political status.
They were property that could be bought or sold.
They could be physically or sexually abused.
They could be tossed out into the street once they had outlived their usefulness.
I've been teaching Greek and Roman history for 30 years or so,
and I've written separate biographies of both Julius Caesar and Hannibal.
But although the events involving the great and the powerful continue to fascinate me,
and though greatness in human terms fascinates me as well,
what has always made history come alive for me is imagining what daily life was like for ordinary people.
So I've written a book called Daily Life of the Ancient Greeks,
which in essence provided me with the starting point for this course,
and another book called The Greek Way of Life, which covers the life cycle from conception to old age.
Whenever I think about the past, I try to put myself in the shoes,
or rather the sandals, of the people whose lives I'm investigating.
The questions, what would it feel like to be a Spartan hoplite,
or a Roman gladiator, or a medieval nun enthrall me?
So this course fits my interests to a T.
In a way, it's what I've been preparing for all my life.
That said, I do draw the line.
I've never gone in for what is called living history,
dressing up as a Centurion, say, and participating in simulated battles.
For one thing, spectacles and Roman helmets just don't work well together.
Sadly, I have to say, and I guess that rules me out as a gladiator as well.
The aim of this course is to enthrall you the same way.
We're going to spend our time exploring the less familiar realms of the ancient and medieval worlds.
We'll be looking at what I like to call the other side of history.
What do I mean by the other side of history?
Well, I have three things in mind.
First, we'll be asking questions that many textbooks never ask.
The 19th century historian Thomas Carlisle wrote,
The history of the world is but the biography of great men.
Carlisle believed it was great men and great men only who shaped history,
and like all historians of his time, he thought that what really mattered about the past was politics and war.
And for that reason, he and his contemporaries, and actually many history teachers to this day,
were chiefly interested in kings, conquerors, statesmen and tyrants.
But if we concentrate upon those who made the headline, so to speak,
then we're leaving out 99% of the human population who have ever lived, possibly more.
And that 99% deserves recognition.
In this course, we'll see that it gets it.
So we're going to be asking not what it meant to wield great power in the ancient and medieval worlds,
but rather what it meant to be human in those worlds,
what it meant to be on the receiving end of history, so to speak.
A second, I say we'll be exploring the other side of history because wherever possible,
wherever our sources allow, we're going to try to understand what daily life was like for people
who in addition to being neglected by most conventional history texts,
also suffered neglect and disadvantage in their own lifetimes.
I mean the sick, the infirm, the enslaved, the elderly, the poor, the disabled,
the refugees, these are the people who truly inhabit the other side of history,
and the women too.
Let me give you one example.
She's Greek, but her situation is universal, though I want you to think of her as an individual
because we know her story, a very strange and mysterious story.
Ythmonike, that's her name, went to the great healing sanctuary at Epidaurus in Greece,
dedicated to the divine healer, Asclepius, because she desperately wanted a cure for her infertility.
Hers, by the way, was a very common problem in antiquity.
If anything, being a married woman who could not conceive back then was a harder situation than it is today
because it carried a lot of social stigma.
Well, the divine healer, Julie obliged, Ythmonike, became pregnant.
Three years later, however, guess what? She was still pregnant.
So she returned to Epidaurus and, politely, I assume she was polite about it,
asked Asclepius what was going on.
Ah, said the god, you again. You said you wanted to become pregnant, so I obliged.
Now you tell me you wanted to give birth. You silly woman, you should have been more specific.
Well, no doubt Asclepius enjoyed his little joke, after which Ythmonike did indeed give birth
and recorded her strange story on one of the pillars at Epidaurus,
erected by those whose prayers had been answered by the god.
Whether we believe it or not, and whatever we make of it, Ythmonike's story speaks of the fervent hopes
of thousands upon thousands of childless women throughout history.
Finally, when I think about the other side of history, I like to reflect on a story told by the Greek historian Herodotus.
Herodotus has been called both the father of history and the father of lies.
I won't go into that debate, but he was also the father of anthropology and ethnography.
In other words, of the writers whose works have come down to us, he's the first one to show an interest
in what historians and anthropologists today call the other.
He was fascinated by how different peoples lived and how they observed different customs.
Herodotus demonstrated his deep respect for cultural difference in an anecdote involving the Persian king Darius.
Darius asked some Greeks who traditionally cremated their dead
what he would have to pay them to eat the corpses of their dead fathers.
He gods, they exclaimed, utterly gobsmacked. Don't even mention such a thing.
Next, he turned to some people from India who piously consumed the flesh of their deceased relatives
and asked them what he would have to pay them to burn the corpses of their dead fathers.
Ye gods, they exclaimed, equally gobsmacked. Don't even mention such a thing.
Which all goes to prove, as Herodotus concluded, that a custom, or as we might call it, culture, is king of all.
Throughout these lectures, I'll be inviting you to explore what is radically different or other in human behavior,
different in other words from how we behave today.
And as we do that, we'll also try to keep an open mind and demonstrate tolerance towards those who preceded us on our way,
just as I hope they would be tolerant towards us.
The period of history that we're going to cover extends from the time of human origins through to the Middle Ages.
That's actually a sweep of about six million years of history.
But it'll be the last five thousand years that will occupy us most.
That's when the human story was really heating up.
Though it had started to heat up more slowly, seven thousand years before that, with the end of the last Ice Age.
That's the point where the human story isn't just biological, but becomes cultural as well.
We're going to enter imaginatively into the lives of many different people, or rather many different individuals, as I like to think of them.
An Egyptian craftsman working in the Valley of the Kings downing tools when his wages don't get paid on time and his beer ration fails to be delivered.
A Minoan housewife fleeing from a deadly volcano on a tiny island in the Aegean as the air thickens with ash and threatens to suffocate her and her child.
A Roman soldier stationed at the Empire's most northern and least hospitable outpost on Hadrian's Wall in the province of Britannia.
An Anglo-Saxon warrior feasting in the hall of his lord with the fire roaring, listening to tales of monster slaying.
A medieval nun with no religious vocation who is forced to enter a convent because her family doesn't want to support her.
As we look into the lives and the livelihoods of men and women who never made headline news, we'll notice several themes that recur again and again.
Next we'll discover that environment heavily influences the quality and potential of human life and by extension the quality and potential of human society.
We will see how rivers, how a mountainous landscape surrounded by the sea, a peninsula and finally an island have given shape to the lives of those who lived in such environments.
And in some cases they did more than give shape to life, they enabled humans to prosper and to flourish.
For instance Egypt would not have produced the world's first civilization were it not for the regularity and the beneficence of the annual flooding of the Nile,
which for those who settled beside its banks gave life some predictability for the first time in human history.
It goes without saying that human life was very fragile in the ancient and medieval worlds.
Famine, disease and warfare were much more prevalent throughout the period covered by our course than they are today in the West.
And they were experienced by people at all levels of society.
Imagine having to dispose of your loved one, say your parent or your wife or your child at the time of the Black Death by dumping the body out of a second floor window onto a cart already heaped with corpses.
It wasn't that you were disrespectful, you had no alternative, you lived at the edge like most of the people will meet.
In fact what you had to do was made so much worse by the fact that you were deeply religious.
Or imagine being a child whose family has been wiped out by that terrible scourge having to beg in the streets for scraps thrown at you from a distance to keep you at bay.
Add to this the fact that infant mortality in all of the societies we should be talking about was perhaps as high as 25 maybe even 30%.
This means that every woman went into labour knowing that the life of the child she carried was at grave risk.
And further that she herself stood a very good chance of dying in childbirth.
Correspondingly life expectancy was much lower for the vast majority of people in every pre-industrial society.
The men and women we'll be talking about typically could expect to live to the age of 35 to 40.
A consequence of this is that people tended to age much more quickly than we do today.
And also that they became afflicted by debilitating physiological conditions much earlier in life.
Third, again and again we will discover that the subjugation of one group to another or of one people to another is a constant feature in all periods of human history.
Prisoners of war as well as debtors were enslaved. People were born into slavery.
The disenfranchised like the medieval peasantry were forced to serve in the army and pay crippling taxes.
Entire peoples like the Jews passed from one imperial power to another.
The scale of human subjugation and degradation throughout history is barely imaginable as is the depth of misery that it produced.
It's estimated for instance that Julius Caesar in his conquest of Gaul enslaved nearly half a million people.
Half a million and each one of them was an individual.
It's probably fair to state that there were as many enslaved people living in the Roman Empire as there were free people.
And what the Romans did was no different from what the Mesopotamians, the Greeks, the Egyptians and others did other than in scale.
And yet despite all the turmoil and the discontinuities at all periods of history,
it's rarely been the case that one civilization has completely obliterated another.
Or to use a modern phrase, bombed it back into the Stone Age.
Rather there has been some degree of assimilation and acculturation on both sides, that of oppressor and of oppressed.
We'll see acculturation and assimilation at work in the lectures I'll be giving about the many invasions that Britain experienced.
Each one of which did not obliterate but transformed and even enhanced the one before it.
That's an important fact.
First because when we talk about the invasion of one country by a different people for instance,
we should bear in mind that not everyone's life is turned upside down.
But also because there is an indomitability to the routines of daily life,
to the ways people prepare food or dress, entertain themselves or think about their gods.
So daily life itself tends to become richer as time passes because ordinary people cling to and pass along their preferences and routines,
as well as acquiring new ones along the way.
As well as the basic shaping facts of life, we will also be focusing upon what French historians call mentality,
what I should be calling the mindset of each particular people.
That's to say their thought processes, their assumptions, their prejudices, their expectations, their fears and their beliefs.
It's the people's mindset as much as the harsh facts of their existence that helps shape what their daily life is like.
In the modern west, our actions are guided by a mindset that includes such values as respect for individual liberty,
equality between men and women and human rights for all.
That mindset has a dramatic, if largely invisible effect on our daily lives.
It influences the way that we dress, how we speak to each other, how we raise our children, choose our politicians.
Needless to say, our particular mindset would not have been shared even remotely by the ancient Greeks,
whom we often revere as the founders of democracy, since the Greeks judged women to be politically and legally incompetent.
Quite aside from the fact that their democracy was made possible both by slavery and in the case of the Athenians,
generally the most admired Greeks of all by the subjugation of other Greeks whom they forced to pay tribute.
We face some real challenges in reconstructing the other side of history. There's no getting away from it.
First, we need to remember that both in antiquity and in the Middle Ages, history was mainly written by upper-class males.
In almost all the narratives that have come down to us, women feature only incidentally,
while the slaves and children and many other marginalised groups such as the poor and the elderly appear only very rarely.
It's also the case that although Greece, for instance, has left us a wealth of literature, we have no private documents,
no letters, no bills, no shopping lists, no accounts until the Hellenistic period,
the period following the conquest of Egypt by Alexander the Great.
Until the Middle Ages, we have no autobiographies from anyone who might remotely be described as ordinary.
So, to get to the other side of history, we have to turn history upside down.
We are not, however, limited to literary evidence in our investigation. We also have archaeology,
and we must give the archaeology a particular emphasis.
So, it's not the great works of art that will be engaging us, but humble artefacts that speak to us about mundane activities,
like cooking or features of everyday existence, like heating and sanitation.
There's another thing to keep in mind as we imagine our way into the past,
whether we're talking about being an Egyptian worker or being a Greek soldier or being a medieval woman.
We need to bear in mind that the world or rather worlds of Egyptian workers were extremely heterogeneous,
as were the worlds of Greek soldiers and medieval women.
We should never forget that every generalized class of human beings is actually composed of specific individuals,
and of course, no two individuals in any class or age are ever exactly alike.
But let's remember too that history is anything but a static discipline.
Discoveries are being made all the time, sometimes momentous ones, that are radically altering our picture of the past.
Let's take three important discoveries that were made in July of 2010, just after I had begun my research for this course.
First, a hall of 78 razor-sharp flint tools was discovered on a beach in Norfolk in the east of England,
revealing that Britain was occupied by humans at least 840,000 years ago.
That's to say, a cool quarter of a million years earlier than scientists had previously believed.
Second, the largest single horde of Roman coins ever found in Britain came to light in a field in Somerset,
52,500 bronze and silver coins dating to the 3rd century AD, 52,500 and just one horde.
This then was a society almost as monetary based as our own.
Third, new analysis of bones found in a cave in the south of England forced me to accept the fact that my ancestors were cannibals.
Using new technologies, scientists confirmed that the hunter-gatherers who migrated from Spain and France about 14,700 years ago
and settled in England's Cheddar Gorge practiced cannibalism as a way of obtaining food.
Chris Stringer, the head of Human Origins at the Natural History Museum in London, said,
these people were processing the flesh of humans with exactly the same expertise that they used to process the flesh of animals.
Perhaps they got fed up with the Cheddar cheese.
That's three major discoveries in England alone and in the course of only one month.
History is on the move all the time, which is one of the reasons I find it so fascinating.
And it's not just our knowledge of what happened in the past that changes.
The very discipline of history itself changes too.
New methods of analysis emerge.
Our paradigms shift and historians find fresh topics that captivate there and our interest.
The past 20 years have seen a huge increase in interest in daily life history.
In fact, it's become a veritable industry.
I don't just mean that there's been a lot of interest in questions like,
what did the Romans eat for breakfast? Fascinating though that question is.
I mean interest in what it meant to be, say, a Mesopotamian slave, an Egyptian mother,
an Anglo-Saxon warrior, a medieval child and so on.
But historians don't just focus on the physical conditions of slavery, say.
They also try to delve into the world view of slaves.
They begun to ask questions like, what was the relationship between slaves and their owners?
What image did slaves have of themselves? How did they interact with other slaves and so on?
These are important questions and I'm going to be inviting you to reflect on them as well.
And as you do so, I hope you'll reach out to the other side of history
and imagine yourself in the shoes or the sandals of the people we're going to meet.
In the next lecture, we're going to begin our journey through time
by trying to imagine what it was like to be Paleolithic.
In other words, to live in the upper stone age.
Imagine yourself as someone else, as a Roman slave or a Greek refugee or a medieval monk.
It's like looking up at the stars.
It helps us to put our own lives into some sort of perspective.
Trying to be another is an attempt to cross space and time.
It also helps us to empathize with other human beings,
even human beings with whom we might think we have nothing at all in common.
It helps us to realize our human interconnectedness.
I want to illustrate this by talking about a scene in the Iliad.
The Iliad is sometimes regarded as a celebration of war. It isn't.
It focuses upon the terrible, ruinous cost of war and of anger.
And yes, it's about the other side of history too.
At the end of the Iliad, the Trojan king, Priam, comes to beg the corpse of his son, Hector,
from the Greek warrior Achilles, his killer.
Priam's action, his courage, his love, love of his son, and his humanity are an example to us all.
Achilles has been desecrating his son's corpse by attaching it to the wheels of his chariot
and dragging it round the walls of Troy.
And yet, Priam is driven by something greater than either fear or anger.
In what to me is one of the most extraordinary passages in all of literature.
After Priam has managed to slip unseen into Achilles' tent, evading all the guards,
the two enemies gaze into each other's eyes and marvel, and then we.
Achilles is reminded of his father Pelius, back in Greece, his father whom he will never see again.
Priam and Achilles at this moment are no longer Trojan and Greek.
They are simply human, by which I mean that they are elevated to the level of their common humanity.
Achilles sees Priam as a father. That shows how far he has travelled psychologically.
It's the same sort of journey I'm asking you to take in this course.
The biologist and historian Jakob Bronowski, whom I greatly admire,
ended his lecture on the Nazi concentration camps in his acclaimed BBC series,
The Ascent of Man, by walking unscripted into the ankle-deep mud of Auschwitz.
Kneeling down, he picked up a handful of that mud and said,
We have to touch people.
I too want to touch people. That is what delivering these lectures means to me.
That is why it is important for me to speak to you, so that the dead, in turn, can speak to us all.
