Welcome back.
So let's get ready to turn history upside down by beginning at the very beginning of
the human story, to ask the fundamental question, what does it mean to be human?
To answer it, we'll have to examine the findings of paleoanthropology, which is the study of
human evolution.
We begin at our point of departure, the moment, so to speak, when we came down from the trees
and made the revolutionary commitment to walking on two feet.
I'll be using the words revolution, revolutionary, more than once in this lecture.
The words signify that our ancestors did indeed take amazing steps in both senses of the word
millions of years ago.
Our main focus in this lecture is the Paleolithic period from about 1.8 million years ago to
about 20,000 years ago, though if you don't mind, I'm going to chuck in no extra charge,
an extra four million years, so that we can begin right at the beginning of our human
story.
We're going to be encountering two of the central themes of our course in this lecture.
First, how climate and geography shape human life, always have done, always will do.
And second, how all human beings are subjugated to that most basic imperative of existence,
merely keeping themselves alive.
So we're in prehistory, and what does that mean?
Well, it means the study of any culture in history which has left us no written record.
So it isn't a fixed period in history, it's not a fixed span of years, far from it.
Different societies became literate at different times.
Mesopotamia, for instance, the region today that includes Iraq, parts of Turkey and Syria,
as well as Egypt, became literate as early as the late third millennium, whereas the
Greek world became literate as late as the early second millennium, and then literacy
disappeared from Greece for about 300 years, so it became prehistoric again, only to become
historic in a very different form with the adoption of an alphabet in the ninth century
BC.
The first question to ask, then, is how do we know anything about our ancestors going
back six million years?
And the answer is that we have evidence from fossils, that's to say, from stones that provide
traces of once-living organisms embedded in them.
Imagine you'd been living in the 17th century.
You might well have been absolutely thrilled to be told that the earth had been created
in 4004 BC, on Sunday, October the 23rd, 4004 BC to be precise, which was the date which
Archbishop Usher of Amar came up with in 1650 by totting up all the life spans of everyone
descended from Adam and Eve in the Hebrew Bible.
It wasn't till the 17th century, in fact, that the science of geology began to challenge
faith-based assumptions like these, and it wasn't until the mid-19th century that paleoanthropology,
the study of human evolution, came into being.
Paleoanthropology is one of the most exciting branches of scientific and humanistic inquiry.
In fact, that combination of disciplines makes it a thrilling endeavor.
In fact, discoveries are constantly being made that are revolutionising our understanding
of human origins.
DNA findings, for instance, now indicate that we're 98.4% indistinguishable from chimpanzees.
While I was doing research for this lecture, scientists released video footage revealing
the complex emotions of chimpanzees when confronted by the death of one of their number, checking
for signs of life, tending the corpse and so on.
We have a lot in common with the primates.
So where does the human story begin?
Well, if you want to pluck a figure out of the air, let's say six million years ago,
give or take a million either way.
That's the moment when chimpanzees and hominins first begin to separate off from one another.
Hominin means any species that is on the way to becoming human, including those that became
extinct.
Now that's also the moment when our ancestors came down from the trees and began to move
about on the ground.
We don't exactly know why they did this, but it may have been in response to the onset
of an ice age they needed to be on the move, or it may have been competition for diminishing
resources or even that very human desire for change.
The earliest incontrovertible fossil evidence for a hominin is three to four million years
old and it comes from East Africa.
It's called Australopithecus afarensis.
Australopithecus means southern.
It comes from a Latin word, ape, which comes from a Greek word, not very logical I'm afraid.
Afarensis derives from the fact that the most extensive remains of this species come from
the Afaregion of Ethiopia from a place called Hadar.
So in a very real sense we all come out of Africa.
The most famous example of Australopithecus afarensis is a fossil skeleton called Lucy.
Lucy is an adult who was found at Hadar in Ethiopia.
It's assumed she's a female solely on the basis of her short stature.
She's only three foot seven inches, 1.1 meter tall.
She acquired the name Lucy because Donald Johansson and his colleagues who dug her up
sung the Beatles song Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds over and over again to celebrate
their victory.
Johansson claimed that Lucy is the so-called missing link between ape and human, but we
don't know that for certain.
In fact the missing link is still missing.
The oldest traces of hominin footprints are slightly older than Lucy and were found at
a place called Litoli in Tanzania.
They indicate that Australopithecus afarensis was capable of walking upright.
A diorama in the American Museum of Natural History of New York depicts the two hominins
who left the footprints.
The male with his arm placed protectively over the shoulder of the female.
It's very affecting and it may be our earliest evidence of what anthropologists call pair
bonding, but to be fair, to be historically accurate, it's only an artist's impression.
Lucy and her Australopithecus family were on the earth for about three million years and
then around 1.8 million years ago, a new type of hominin emerges in Africa, Indonesia and
China.
Homo erectus, standing man, the first ancestor in the Homo lineage that leads incontrovertibly
to Homo sapiens, thinking man, to us in other words.
It was Homo erectus who as Bill Bryson notes, I quote, was the first to hunt, the first
to use fire, the first to fashion complex tools, the first to leave evidence of campsites,
the first to look after the weak and the frail.
We know he looked after the weak and the frail because a skeleton has been found of
a female with a crippling disease who had lived with the disease for weeks, possibly
even months.
Someone had cared for her all that time one million years ago.
Our ancestors already showed the virtue of compassion.
From Indonesia too comes evidence of a species of miniature humans, real life hobbits, in
other words as they're affectionately called.
The hobbits go by the name of Homo floresiensis, a reference to a small island called Flores
where a skull with a partial skeleton was discovered in a cave in 2004.
They came into existence about 80,000 to 100,000 years ago.
They were approximately three feet tall.
They had small brains about the size of an orange, but they made relatively sophisticated
tools.
Species that are confined to small islands often tend to be small as a result of having
had to adapt to the limited resources available to them.
So it's quite likely that their diminutive size is due to natural selection.
Talking of tools, the very first stone tools come from Tanzania and Ethiopia, the countries
we talked about a moment ago.
And I'd like you to think yourself into the body and mind of one of the apes in Stanley
Kubrick's 2001 A Space Odyssey, when he picks up a bone and begins idly toying with it in
his hand as he gradually discovers to the stirring accompaniment of Richard Strauss's
Alzo Spracht Zarathustra, that it could be used to smash things.
And then in the next scene, you and your mates use bones to smash the skulls of other apes.
Using and making tools are not exclusive, however, to human beings.
We share those characteristics with chimpanzees as the British researcher Jane Goodall discovered
50 years ago.
And with members of the crow family, I might add, who use sticks as tools and even break
them to size.
Even so, the manufacture of tools marks a huge advance in human evolution.
It signals the origins of technological thought.
One of the very earliest manufactured tools is a stone chopping tool from the Olduvai
Gorge in Tanzania, part of the great Rift Valley in East Africa.
It's estimated to be about two million years old, and it can be dated that far back because
it was taken from a layer of rock that had been formed that long ago.
If you'd been an early hominin, however, you wouldn't have hunted.
You would have fed on flesh that other animals had killed.
You would have used the stone chopper to strip away flesh from the carcass, especially to
obtain bone marrow, which provides the most nutrition.
We'll now zoom ahead to the Neanderthals, relatives of the human race, who began to
emerge sometime between 300 and 100,000 years ago.
The best recent estimate for their appearance as a distinctive species in Europe is around
130,000 years ago.
I say in Europe, because at this point our course ceases to be about humans the world
over, and now focuses on Europe, Africa and Western Asia.
So, I shan't be tracing the important developments in China, which humans first entered 1.8 million
years ago because it lies beyond the scope of this course.
Neanderthals take their name from the fact that fossil remains were accidentally discovered
in the Neander Valley near Dusseldorf in Germany in 1856.
Incidentally, Neander in Greek means new man.
How ironic is that?
So what do we know about Neanderthals?
They're those chaps who drag their knuckles on the ground and whose courtship technique
consists of bashing some unsuspecting female on the head and dragging her by her hair
into the cave, or at least that's the common perception.
Well, the fact is that A, we use the word Neanderthal almost synonymously with stupid,
and B, our view of prehistoric societies tends to be extremely dismissive and patronizing.
Actually, the Neanderthals weren't in the least bit stupid or backward.
Some paleoanthropologists have even argued that those of us who live outside Africa have
between 1 to 4 percent Neanderthal DNA in us, and this would mean there was interbreeding
between Neanderthals and Homo sapiens.
It's still a highly contentious area of debate.
There are serious doubts both as to the accuracy of DNA that is tens of thousands of years
old and as to whether two species could have produced offspring together.
But whatever the truth, the picture of Neanderthals bashing women on the head has more to tell
us about the misogynistic inventor of that image than it does about Neanderthals themselves,
even though I dare say it's true that they didn't have much time or energy for the niceties
of social interaction.
Neanderthals had a very sturdy musculature.
They were barrel-chested with short legs and had protruding forearms.
They stood about 5 foot 4 inches, 1.63 meters tall.
They also had a very decent sized brain, perhaps even a bit larger than our own brain, though
You probably would have found thinking a bit of an effort.
Having a big brain doesn't translate into being super intelligent.
They were particularly well adapted to the cold, both because of their stocky stature
and because they had large noses and large teeth, which enabled them to warm the air
they inhaled and so protect the brain.
Try to picture yourself as a Neanderthal, living in conditions of perpetual and extreme deprivation.
You're stalked by death in multiple forms every single day of your life, fearful not
only of animals, but also of every human being outside your own limited circle.
You're entirely exposed to the elements, you lack most creature comforts, you understand
virtually nothing about the natural world, your life is dominated by the environment and
by the climate.
You experience prolonged, perhaps agonizing pain at times, which you can do nothing, absolutely
nothing to relieve.
You live life very close to the bone in more ways than one, and you live without the consolation
or inspiration of religion.
You and your fellow Neanderthal mates face virtually constantly the possibility of extinction,
not that you would know that of course, but for you it's a matter of survival at all costs.
Like your predecessors, you nap flint and other types of stone into razor sharp tools.
You do this to dismember and devour the carcasses of beasts and occasionally of other Neanderthals.
Impressive evidence that Neanderthals practiced cannibalism came to light recently in a cave
called El Cidron in northern Spain.
Cut marks were found on the bones of twelve individuals, indicating that the muscle had
been stripped away by means of stone blades.
You fish and hunt small game with pointed weapons.
You live in a cave or some sort of rock shelter.
You exchange resources with other Neanderthals, some of whom live a long way off, up to about
200 miles in some cases.
You are the first species in the line to becoming human who bury your dead.
Paleoanthropologists have found a Neanderthal grave dated 65,000 years ago with branches
and flowers.
Burial is a uniquely human undertaking, so to speak.
We can't assume that this was connected with the belief in the afterlife as no associated
finds have come to light, but it does indicate that you honoured your dead.
You weren't just burying them for purposes of carcass disposal to prevent corpses from
attracting the attention of scavengers and thereby exposing the social group to danger.
You know how to control fire, or at least you learn over time how to control fire.
You use it for a variety of purposes, to keep warm, to scare away predators, to sharpen
your tools and to cook.
When I was preparing this lecture, scientists at the Smithsonian Museum discovered particles
of starch from barley and water lilies on Neanderthal teeth that showed clear signs
of having been cooked.
Someone, somewhere, discovered that food is easier to chew and tastier if it's held
over a fire.
It's something that isn't obvious at first sight.
Think of it.
It was a great discovery, and cooking represents a huge advance in human culture.
Preparing and sharing food is a way to consolidate a sense of community.
You live in a group consisting of perhaps as many as 150 other Neanderthals.
You take care of your fellow Neanderthals, the weak ones.
There's a Neanderthal skeleton in the Smithsonian, 40,000 years old, with evidence of a crushing
blow to the skull.
Even so, the Neanderthal was cared for by his family and friends for many years.
We know that for a fact, because his right arm became withered.
So he had his uses.
Perhaps he helped raise children, or perhaps he was a great cook, or a spellbinding storyteller.
Embryonic Neanderthal professor for the Great Courses.
So what happened to the Neanderthals?
Well around 35 to 40,000 years ago, they began to be replaced by Homo sapiens by uslot, in
other words.
Replaced may be a euphemism, though that's the term employed by Paul Melars, a leading
paleontologist who says, and I quote, one could easily imagine a scenario of eventual
replacement without any notion of mass genocide or even direct conflict between the two populations.
The fact remains, however, that the way in which the Neanderthals became extinct is one
of the great who-done-its of history.
Maybe they failed to adapt to changing conditions, or maybe they just lost out to our direct
ancestors in the fierce competition for limited resources.
The latest research suggests that encounters between the two species took place around
40,000 years ago in the fertile crescent.
And incidentally the hobbits were still going strong, thousands of years after the Neanderthals
had been swallowed up by Homo sapiens.
They were still romping around on their Indonesian island a mere 13,000 years ago.
In fact at one time, about 40,000 years ago, there seemed to have been at least four hominin
cousins of ours who ranged across Europe and Asia, along with our direct ancestors, Homo
erectus, the Neanderthals, the hobbits, and what has been unromantically called Species
X, identified from a single finger bone, a pinky, as well discovered in a Siberian cave
as recently as 2008.
And indeed, future research may well reveal that there were more species of extinct human
relatives sharing the planet with us at this time.
So far I've talked mainly about daily life in the Paleolithic period, but what about
the human mind?
When in fact did we acquire a mind?
A mind isn't just a brain.
A mind is something that is capable of symbolic thought, capable of art, of language, of reasoning,
of complex emotion, of social organization, and of manipulation, specifically of the manipulation
of other humans, like I'm manipulating you here, now trying to persuade you that I have
something of immense value to tell you, which by the way I do.
Well there's a general consensus among paleoanthropologists that early humans acquired minds somewhere
between 60,000 and 20,000 years ago.
Somewhere in that period, in other words, our ancestors became capable of creating objects
of aesthetic appeal, of having more extensive social connections, and of being able to live
imaginatively in the past, as well as in the future, all of which we're doing here now
incidentally.
And they did so because they were now sufficiently freed from the exigences of life.
Life was no longer just a fight for survival.
There was a little bit of give in the system, and that enabled us to become human in a cultural
and social sense.
All of the above is connected with the development of language.
We don't know when humans first began using language.
Language may have begun with the Neanderthals or even earlier, but it was probably sometime
around 40,000 BC that a structured language began to take shape as opposed to single words.
Around the same time, in other words, that our brains became minds.
It was a very limited language, of course, rather like that of a seven-year-old, but
it was a lot more refined than the grunting and gesticulation that had preceded it.
It meant that we could exchange thoughts, acquire a shared memory, express tender emotions,
and crucially engage in cooperative enterprises like hunting.
In fact, some paleoanthropologists believe that hunting only became possible with the
development of language.
It enabled humans to say things like, don't move, there's a bison over there, let's throw
our rocks all at once, one, two, three, yeah, high five.
This too is a period that has produced the first evidence of artistic accomplishment,
most spectacularly in the form of cave art.
The earliest cave paintings come from the Chauvet Cave in southern France and may be
as old as 30,000 BC.
Other examples of cave art have been found in Lascaux, also in southern France, dated
about 15,000 BC, and in Altamira, in northern Spain, dated 2,000 years later.
Wild animals predominate, orcs, bison, bulls, deer, horses.
Humans are rare, though we do find tracings of the human hand.
Art is unquestionably a product of human culture, but if you'd been a cave artist,
would you have thought of yourself as creating art?
What I mean is, did you intend to give aesthetic pleasure, or were you merely, in quotes, dabbling
in sympathetic magic, to demonstrate mastery over the animals depicted on the walls to
make them appear when you next went hunting, for instance?
Well, Picasso certainly thought cave paintings are art, and after visiting Altamira, he famously
declared, after Altamira, all his decadence.
Whatever the interpretation, cave art offers proof of a high level of technical skill and
an ability to visualize imaginatively through the symbolic language of art, irrespective
of whether the artist was self-consciously creating art in the way that we understand
the concept of art today.
Cave art does not, however, provide the earliest evidence of painting.
Pieces of ochre, inscribed with geometric patterns, dated about 80,000 BC, have been
found in the Lombos Cave in South Africa, and what's fascinating here is that the art
is non-representational, which suggests that early man could already think abstractly,
and perhaps as well symbolically.
As a paleolithic, you survived the last Ice Age, which began about 18 to 20,000 years ago.
You did so by hunting animals that adapted to the cold, reindeer, wooly mammoth, steppe
bison, and wild horse, whose migratory paths you learned to predict.
You preserved the animals you'd killed in permafrost, which acted like a deep freezer,
and you made clothes from animal hides.
You built shelters from mammoth bones.
You engaged in trade, particularly in obsidian, which was a highly prized black volcanic glass,
which you used for making weapons before the invention of metals.
Then, around 10,000 BC, the climate suddenly heats up, the ice retreats, and the forests
expand.
In fact, the temperature went up by about 7 degrees Celsius within 50 years, and you
now become a hunter-gatherer.
Or perhaps if you live beside the sea, you become what my colleague, the archaeologist
Albert Amemann, calls a voyager forager, like the people who sailed from Turkey to Cyprus
to obtain salt.
Finally, what is it that makes us different from every other species on the face of the
earth?
Hell, not a lot.
Our brains may be three times bigger than that of chimpanzees, but our psychological
makeup is no different.
Our basic needs and wants are the same as well.
That's perhaps hardly surprising in light of the fact that we share that 98% of our
DNA with chimps.
What does differentiate us is the fact that we've inherited a culture.
We've built complex social institutions.
We communicate in a complex language system, and we have minds that aren't limited by
the desire for food.
Studying prehistory is not just grappling with chimeras and it's not just dealing with
the fact that theories are constantly being revised.
It's also about the origins of what is undeniably human, the manufacture of objects, social
organization, the ability to express oneself through language, delight in representing
the world pictorially, the hope or belief that death does not signal extinction and
as well caring for those weaker than yourself.
Our Paleolithic ancestors deserve a lot of praise, and not only for their sheer guts
in us, but also for their intelligence and resourcefulness.
Because they lived in small groups, they didn't just invent things once, they had to keep
on inventing the same thing over and over.
Because they had no writing, they had to pass on all their wisdom and all their knowledge
orally.
And because there were things like meat, which they needed, but which was attached to an
animal many times larger, stronger and faster than themselves, they had to learn to cooperate
with other humans to obtain it.
From the beginning of human history, the sustainable resources of the planet have limited the size
of the human population, a population that may at times have sunk to as low as a few hundred.
We only just avoided extinction.
74,000 years ago, a supervolcano erupted in northern Sumatra, which is thought to have
reduced the entire human population on Earth to a few thousand.
And of course, we still face the challenge of living within a balanced ecological budget.
We're down from the trees, but by no means out of the woods.
In the next lecture, we're going to see how climate and landscape again determined how
the earliest human societies evolved in the period we call the Neolithic Age.
And we're going to see as well how humans no longer fully subservient to the imperatives
of existence learned how to subjugate their own kind.
