As we saw at the end of the previous lecture, everyone in the Paleolithic period was, so
to speak, on the other side of history, in that everyone was struggling for survival.
In fact the human race came near to the brink of extinction.
Survived the eruption of the supervolcano in Sumatra as we saw by the skin of its teeth.
And no doubt there were other catastrophes as well that all but brought the curtain
down on human life.
The threat of extinction is etched in our racial memory.
Think of the flood story in Genesis or the one in the epic of Gilgamesh.
In today's lecture, by contrast, we're going to move into a period of history when human
life becomes more secure.
When humans are able to establish a daily pattern of life that would be recognizable
to us today in conditions that are more or less settled.
I wouldn't call it a civilization, we'll talk about that word in the next lecture.
But it's a whole lot better than what preceded it.
And that's the thesis, the message, so to speak, of the present lecture.
We're going to be focusing mainly on the region known as Mesopotamia, which is where
many of the advances in culture took place.
Mesopotamia comprises modern-day Iraq, part of southeast Turkey, northeast Syria.
It's a Greek word that means the land between two rivers, the two rivers being the Tigris
and the Euphrates.
They both have their source in the uplands of Turkey and flow into the Persian Gulf.
This lecture is a river story because it was very largely due to the Tigris and the Euphrates
that culture evolved in this region.
And the reason for this is because they provided the memes and the setting for some of the
earliest attempts at agriculture and irrigation.
Even if you look at a map of the region today, you'll see that there's a green swathe of
cultivated land on either side of the two rivers.
We're going to be looking at how geography and climate enabled human society to take
a huge leap forward.
We're also going to examine the specific ways in which the various cultures that evolved
had much in common with each other, even though they also had their own distinctive characteristics.
Lastly, we're going to see how as everyday life evolved and became more complex, peoples
and cultures began to struggle with one another for supremacy and domination.
Some words at the beginning about the passage of time.
We live today in a world where the rate at which the world around us is changing is phenomenally
fast.
It's as if someone has a finger permanently on the fast forward button.
But when we go back to any other period of human history, and particularly if we go back
about 12,000 years, it's as if everything is moving at a snail's pace.
Last time we were able to cover hundreds of thousands of years because daily life remained
more or less static, at least from our distant vantage point.
In this lecture, we're only going to be covering about 8,000 years of human history, from about
10,000 to 2,000 BC, and I say only because time is beginning to rev up.
In the previous lecture, we covered millions of years of human history.
By the time we get to the end of our course, we'll only be able to cover say 100 years.
Even so, it'll still be like watching paint dry by comparison with the rapid rate of change
that we're used to today.
I mentioned last time that if you lived near the sea, you might be a Voyager forager.
Living in Mesopotamia, around 10,000 BC, however, you'll probably be a hunter-gatherer.
That's to say, you hunt wild animals, you gather berries, nuts, mushrooms, and you fish.
You use axes, whose heads are made of flint.
You move your campsite regularly, following the trail of food.
You have domesticated dogs to help you hunt.
You probably don't have a cat, however.
The very earliest evidence of a domesticated cat comes from Cyprus, where a human grave
dated 7,300 BC was found with the bones of a cat.
The kitty was perhaps so beloved that its owner had decided that he or she had to take
it with her to the afterlife.
As resources are scarce in Mesopotamia in 10,000 BC, you have to defend yourself from
other hunter-gatherer groups, probably fighting with them to the death for valued hunter-gathering
grounds.
Turf warfare, in other words, in the literal sense of the word.
Then around 9,500 BC, a dramatic change in the environment takes place.
The world begins to emerge from the last ice age, and grasslands begin to spread across
much of what we call the Middle East.
People begin to clear openings for grass to grow, to attract animals and to create living
spaces in the woods for themselves.
We're now at what archaeologists used to call the Neolithic Revolution, the revolution
of the New Stone Age, although it's now becoming clear that there was more continuity
with the Paleolithic period, the Old Stone Age, than used to be thought.
The change in environment is marked by the widespread adoption of sedentism, meaning
a sedentary way of life, though not in the modern sense of the term.
Sedentism means residing in the same place, instead of always following your food source.
And among the first people known to have practiced sedentism are the Natufians, who flourished
from 12,500 to 9,500 BC.
The Natufian homeland was primarily in what we call the Levant, Jordan, Syria, Israel,
Lebanon, though there were some Natufian sites in Mesopotamia.
Along with sedentism came the introduction of agriculture, and once again it may be that
the Natufians can claim credit for being the first farmers around 11,500 BC.
Farming revolutionized human life and was an enormous catalyst for change.
People learned how to mark out fields, plant seeds, harvest crops and make bread.
They also learned how to domesticate first sheep and then a little later cattle and pigs.
We certainly shouldn't suppose that the landscape where farming was practiced changed dramatically
that it suddenly took on the modern appearance of a farmed landscape.
Farming was on a very small scale and in isolated pockets.
There would have been something magical about farming in this period of human history.
You would have sensed only very dimly the connection between cause and effect.
You certainly didn't see yourself obeying the laws of nature.
You wouldn't have had the faintest idea of such a concept, rather you see yourself trying
to control what was wild and chaotic.
The cycle of the seasons is a complete mystery to you.
So all the actions that you perform are accompanied by ritual in order to secure the favour of
the gods, or more likely that of the spirits which surround you and influence every natural
event.
Hence, the importance of fertility, religion, often symbolized by a heavily pregnant woman
like the famous Venus of Villendorf, 4 inches high and some 20 to 25,000 years old.
In your mind, all forms of fertility are linked and no symbol better expresses fertility
than that of a heavily pregnant woman.
The introduction of agricultural sedentism brought a huge change in the mindset of human
beings.
Now for the first time you would have enjoyed a sense of safety and security in having a
few jars of stored grain between yourself and famine.
You would have had the leisure to create works of art, make up stories and perhaps specialise
in making pottery or jewellery.
Pottery was perhaps invented in Mesopotamia as early as 6000 BC.
Since you now had more possessions than you could carry on your back and since you occupied
land that you had to sweat over to make it yield you a harvest, you developed a greater
sense of territoriality and a sharper need to protect what was yours against the encroachments
of others.
The earliest permanent settlements in Mesopotamia which also date to around 6000 BC were in
northern Iraq and Syria.
They first developed in the north because there's more plentiful rainfall in the north
of this region than there is in the south.
So we see again the importance of climate.
Living close to the riverbank you built your house either from piled up mud or from layers
of mud or with sun dried mud brick and then you covered the surface of your walls in plaster.
And using again the mud you created pottery both to eat and to drink out of and to store things in.
And using the two rivers you traded over long distances.
You were particularly keen to acquire obsidian, a stone that was used to shape arrowheads.
When you discovered the technique of irrigation you were able to establish settlements further south.
The discovery of irrigation made as profound an impact upon human life as of the discovery
of the means to make and control fire.
Henceforth you could control floods though at times they overwhelmed you as happens all
too frequently to this day.
The story of the cataclysmic flood that is recorded in both Genesis and the epic of Gilgamesh
may have its origins in a particularly severe flooding of the Tigris and Euphrates river
resulting in very severe loss of life.
I'm now going to zoom forward to 3000 BC to the Bronze Age period so named because
bronze now began to replace stone as the preferred material for tools and weapons.
The peoples living in Mesopotamia by this date share a great deal in common with one
another.
First a lot of them live in what we call cities.
The earlier city in the region may well be Uruk, modern day Warka on the banks of the
Euphrates.
It was part of the ancient so called Kingdom of Sumeria in southern Iraq and it flourished
from 3500 BC.
The Kingdom of Sumeria was a loose confederation of city-states some of which exercised sovereignty
over others.
Each city had its own king but no king managed to establish dominion over the whole of Sumeria.
We certainly shouldn't be thinking of nations with political boundaries at this date.
Uruk probably numbered about 10,000 people and it wasn't the first city to be founded.
That distinction goes to Jericho on the West Bank which was settled as early as 9000 BC.
Another earlier city is Katalhuik in Turkey which was founded around 7500 BC.
I'd like to pause and talk about Katalhuik for a moment.
It's a reminder that humans aren't genetically programmed to found cities.
Katalhuik didn't have streets.
All the houses were bunched together so if you wanted to get to one at the centre you'd
have to literally climb over the ones at the periphery and it's not clear that they had
doors either.
So imagine some neolithic genius had to invent streets and doors and of course there were
no places to gather and no public squares either.
Katalhuik flourished for about a thousand years largely due to its trade in obsidian,
that volcanic stone I mentioned earlier.
By contrast to Katalhuik, Uruk is the first settlement that has unambiguously been identified
as a focus for administrative, religious and civic expression, a city or city-state in
the fullest sense of that word.
It had surrounding walls made of brick that were six miles in circumference and like other
Sumerian city-states, we should probably think of Uruk as an irrigated oasis surrounded
by desert.
As you scrolled through the streets, yes it did have streets, you would have seen residential
areas, canals, palaces and temples.
Coming up you would have had an impressive view of the main temple which was established
at the highest point of the city.
This was a terrace or step pyramid with receding platforms known as a ziggurat.
A ziggurat was believed to be the dwelling place of a god because by this point in time
people believed that the gods could be encouraged and enticed to dwell among them.
It was built out of sun-dried bricks, faced by fired bricks.
There were thick walls also made of mud brick, six miles in circumference, pierced by gates
surrounding the city.
It's difficult not to feel incomplete awe of these first cities and of the people who
built them.
They were light years ahead of the caves and the small villages that preceded them and
they represented a bold new experiment in human living and as I said the concept of city
dwelling that had to be invented.
As well as urbanization, another thing the Mesopotamian people shared in common is cuneiform
writing which they used primarily for administrative purposes.
The earliest example comes from the temple complex of Eianu at Uruk and the word cuneiform
derives from cuneis which is Latin for wedge.
It's so named because of the wedge shape of the writing signs.
Writing seems to have been discovered independently in Central America, China, Egypt and Mesopotamia
all around the same time, that's to say around 3300 BC and how that came about is a mystery.
At the moment scholars think that the Mesopotamians were just ahead but that view may change.
The Egyptians whom we'll talk about in the next lecture wrote mainly on papyrus whereas
the Chinese wrote on bamboo and both of these materials are highly perishable.
But it may be that the earliest examples of their writing have simply not survived.
The Mesopotamians on other hand wrote on moist clay tablets using a pointed reed stylus.
They simply scooped up the clay from the river banks in the same way that they scooped up
the clay to fashion mud bricks so those rivers served them well.
The tablets were generally left to dry in the sun though some were deliberately baked.
Once they dried they're pretty well indestructible and as a result thousands upon thousands have
survived.
There are 130,000 such tablets in the British Museum alone.
The earliest ones are inscribed with pictographs that's to say images or symbols of the objects
that they represent.
Later however the Mesopotamians came to realize that a symbol could also represent the sound
of the thing itself.
In other words that a writing system could be phonetic and eventually these symbols
evolved into abstract signs that were made out of various combinations of cuneiform impressions
and then we have a real writing system.
It's impossible to overestimate the importance of writing for the development of the human
mind.
It enables it to keep track of things, to record historical events, to create imaginary
worlds and landscapes, to engage in complex thinking, to undertake higher mathematics
and so much more besides.
I'd not be able to deliver a course of 48 lectures if I didn't make copious notes.
As I mentioned earlier the vast majority of cuneiform tablets were used for administrative
purposes in other words they served the function of what we might call bean counting but some
also served a literary purpose.
Ten peoples from 3000 BC onwards shared a similar belief system accompanied by a shared
mythology and a shared set of rituals.
We know about their belief system because their tablets which were inscribed in a number
of languages found all over Mesopotamia tell us stories about the gods and their interactions
with human beings.
The most celebrated story is the so called epic of Gilgamesh which I referred to earlier.
I love to teach the epic of Gilgamesh to students just after they've arrived at Colgate because
it's all about growing up.
Gilgamesh who is king of Uruk the city I mentioned a moment ago wants to leave a great
name behind him like any aspiring young person and he does so but at great cost the cost
is the life of his dearest friend Enkidu.
He also wants to become immortal but he hasn't the strength to stay awake so how can he
become immortal.
Because he can be however is a good king to his people and that in the end is enough.
The poem is all about learning the limitations of human existence at a time when you feel
that you'll live forever.
So by around 2150 BC the date of the earliest Guneiform tablets relating to Gilgamesh human
beings were pondering in a sophisticated way their place in the order of existence.
The meaning of life their relationship with the gods their responsibility to others and
so on and there's a further use to which writing was put in Mesopotamia the codification
of law and the keeping of historical records.
One of the earliest if not the earliest law codes was promulgated by a Babylonian king
called Hammurabi around 1760 BC.
It's impossible to overestimate the importance of laws for the development of human society.
It means that ordinary people the heroes of our cause know where they stand they're no
longer subject to arbitrary punishment.
Mind you the punishments set by Hammurabi were pretty severe.
For instance if you were caught breaking into someone's house you were to be put to death
in front of the place where you broke in and then walled up inside the breach poetic justice.
And what's also interesting is that the law code replicates a number of the laws that
we find in the Hebrew Bible in Exodus Leviticus and Deuteronomy.
This suggests that the law codes were widely used throughout the Near East albeit no doubt
with local variants.
As early as 9500 BC as we saw Mesopotamians were trading with one another from 3000 BC
onwards however their trading became far more intensive.
It was one of the chief reasons why the region was culturally homogeneous.
Exports included barley and wheat, wool, textiles and silver.
Imports included ivory, tin, copper and gold as well as lapis lazuli from Afghanistan.
This often travelled vast distances changing hands many times along the way.
At first oxen, donkeys and wild ponies known as onigas were used to pull slabs that dragged
along the ground.
Then sometime between 3500 and 3200 BC the wheel was invented first made out of solid
wood and later out of spokes and around 2000 BC onwards horses began to be used for transportation
and then camels from around 1500 BC.
The Mesopotamians also shared a number of technologies in common with one another.
These included copper manufacture, copper was invented around 4000 BC and used for making
axes and arrowheads and also glass making and textile weaving.
Of course scholars can detect differences between one culture and another but to the untrained
eye examples of metalwork and jewellery throughout the region bear a strong family resemblance.
I now want to turn our attention to my final point how people were subjected to those above
them in the social order and how the different cultures struggled with one another for supremacy.
One of the most chilling pieces of evidence for the subjection of one group of people
to another comes from the so called Royal Cemetery at the Sumerian city of Ur and is
dated 2600-2300 BC.
In the part of the cemetery that is christened the great death pit by its British excavator
Sir Leonard Woolley six guards and 68 women were buried.
We can't be absolutely certain it's possible that this is evidence for human sacrifice.
A fine from the Royal Cemetery known as the standard of Ur also provides evidence of
the subjugation of other peoples.
It's called the standard of Ur because when it was first discovered it was thought to
be part of a standard that was carried into battle.
Its real purpose however is unknown.
It's a wooden box inlaid with mosaic.
One side of the box shows ordinary people queuing up to pay tribute to their king who
sits on his throne drinking with his buddies.
The other side shows him at war.
His prisoners have been stripped naked and have been led in file.
The other side of history on the other side of the box so to speak.
So by the middle of the third millennium BC we have evidence of warfare being practiced
in Mesopotamia though very likely its origins are much much older.
Sometime between 2300 and 2150 BC the city-states of Mesopotamia became unified under the rule
of the Akkadian Empire so named for its capital Akkad or Agade which has yet to be discovered.
The Akkadian language now supplanted Sumerian and became the lingua franca throughout Mesopotamia.
The Akkadian Empire eventually extended north into Anatolia which is central Turkey, south
into Arabia, east into Iran and west to the Mediterranean coast.
Well the way I've phrased it makes it all sound very bland.
What it means is that people throughout a vast geographical region were now being oppressed,
being treated as inferior, being made to work for a master race.
And now too, if not earlier, punishments meted out to captives in war would have included
being blinded with a burning torch, being impaled on a stake, being flayed alive, having
ones hands, nose, ears, lips, tongue, other body parts chopped off and so on.
People were certainly doing this by the beginning of the first millennium as we know from inscriptions
set up by the Assyrians, the imperial successors to the Akkadians, boasting of such abominable
practices.
Over the next 33 lectures we're going to be looking at a number of other cultures and
it's worth noting before getting started that they all shared certain salient features
in common from the perspective of an ordinary person.
Number one, you're most likely to be engaged in agriculture.
Number two, if you want to go anywhere you'll probably have to travel by foot or on water.
Number three, you rise with the sun and tumble to bed exhausted at sunset.
Before you will regularly experience the deaths of those close to you, partly because of the
high rate of infant mortality, perhaps as high as 25%, partly because of accidents,
warfare, disease, and partly because of the much lower level of life expectancy.
Number five in most of these societies you'll be lucky to make it to the age of 40 if you're
a man, 35 if you're a woman, six if you do make it to a decent age.
The chances are you'll be disabled in some way if only from failing eyesight.
Seven, you won't possess anything much of value.
Eight, you'll rarely hear of anything outside your local region.
News travels slowly if at all, the pre-modern world wasn't wired.
Nine, you almost certainly suffer from intestinal parasites and other chronic disorders.
And finally, you're also prone to vertebral degeneration, particularly if you're a man,
mainly as a result of the wear and tear of everyday life.
In conclusion, the early development and prosperity of Mesopotamia were largely due to the two
rivers that in so many ways fostered human flourishing.
Now for the first time in human history, the conditions were in place for a more continuous,
more settled form of life.
No longer did humans have to invent things time and again.
On the contrary, something that we can justifiably identify as human culture developed over a
wide area, the most spectacular demonstrations of which are agriculture, sedentism and writing.
In the next lecture, we're going to see how one river, namely the Nile, had an even more
dramatic and long-lasting effect upon human flourishing.
