Although death has not featured prominently in our course so far, we saw earlier that
there is some evidence to suggest that the Neanderthals, who first appeared on Earth some
time between 300 and 100,000 years ago, had already developed a belief in the afterlife.
I think there can be little doubt that humans have from earliest times wrestled with one
of life's greatest mysteries, namely what happens after death.
The Egyptians certainly did, and the answer that they came up with is that being dead,
if you happen to be Egyptian, is a pretty good deal, and to prove it, so to speak,
they provided their dead with wondrous sculptures, paintings, furnishings and jewellery, unsurpassed
in my view, in terms of artistic accomplishment.
Of course, you'll need money to set yourself up nicely in the afterlife with these kinds
of things.
Being dead comes at a price.
All the things you like to do in this life, however, including hunting, fishing, strutting
around, partying all hours, listening to music, having sex, you'll be able to do in the next.
You can even get drunk if you want.
In one tomb painting, we see a number of ladies being handed drinking bowls, and the text reads,
Drink till you get drunk, make whoopee.
You won't have to deal with bereavement, of course, or sickness.
There's still work to do, but with any luck, you'll be able to get out of it if you play
your cards right and make adequate provisions for your afterlife.
That's the picture that we get from the magnificent paintings in Egyptian tombs.
As we'll see, however, it was getting to the afterlife that was the tricky business, and
that's because there were lots of hazards along the way.
You also needed to make sure that your body remained intact because it would come back
to life physically inside the tomb.
That's how you'd exist in the world to come through your body, the same body you have
now, though you also had something resembling a soul as well.
I'll talk about that a bit later.
Books on ancient Egypt almost invariably characterized the Egyptians as being addicted
to life-affirming activities, such as partying and other pleasures.
They do so to counterbalance the Egyptian fixation with death, but it isn't a fixation
with death.
It's a fixation with the afterlife.
There's no way of knowing whether the Egyptians were fun-loving as such, but they certainly
enjoyed life.
They enjoyed it so much that they couldn't have enough of it.
They wanted it to last forever.
There's an ancient Egyptian text that begins, You Who Love Life and Hate Death.
There's something very moving, even inspiring about this Egyptian commitment to life, a
commitment made by a people who lived two, three, four, five thousand years ago.
In some, the Egyptians weren't obsessed with death, they were obsessed with life.
To help me write this lecture, I popped into a shop that sells antiquities just near to
the British Museum to purchase a shabti.
I don't believe in supporting the illegal trade in antiquities, but shabties are so
commonplace that I thought it excusable.
They're too apeni.
Well, they were in ancient Egypt.
They're a bit more expensive today.
Shabties are miniature figures, commonly only two or three inches high, resembling Osiris,
the Egyptian god of the dead.
They're among the commonest objects that were placed in Egyptian tombs.
I said a moment ago that you didn't have to do any work in the afterlife.
You don't, so long as you find someone to stand in for you.
And that's where your shabti comes in.
If someone calls you up to do work in the underworld, for instance, be a part of the
corvée that deals with the effects of the annual inundation of the underworld Nile,
just send your shabti off to do the heavy lifting, so to speak.
If you're wealthy, you won't just have one shabti to do all the work.
You'll have 365, one for every day of the year.
When we think first of the Egyptian treatment of the dead, indeed, when we think of Egypt
itself, we inevitably think of the pyramids that were built to house the bodies of the
pharaohs and other members of the royal family.
The Greek historian Herodotus claimed that the great pyramid of Kyops, Egyptian named
Khufu at Giza, took 100,000 men 20 years to build.
More likely it was only 10,000 men.
Organization on that scale still represents an accomplishment that is unparalleled in
human history.
However, the period of pyramid building was relatively short, roughly speaking, it lasted
from about 2,600 to 2,150 BC, and it's not the pyramids that are going to occupy us here.
As usual, it's the common man and woman whom we're interested in, though, as we shall
see, Egyptian beliefs about the fate of the pharaoh in the next world had a trickle-down
effect on the population as a whole.
But over time, the belief arose that even if you were poor in this life, you could enjoy
at least a decent standard of living in the next life.
So how did it come about that the Egyptians got this fixation with the afterlife in the
first place?
Other cultures have placed great emphasis on death, of course, but I think it's safe
to say that none has invested so much time, energy, inventiveness, and resources on the
dead as the Egyptians.
Egyptian interest in the fate of the dead goes at least as far back as 3,500 BC.
Already, by that date, the Egyptians were conducting experiments on dead bodies at Hieroconpolis
in Upper Egypt.
In particular, they were attempting to preserve bodies artificially by using resins and linen
wrappings.
Modern Egyptologists believed that these experiments were prompted by the chance discovery of bodies
that had been naturally preserved, naturally mummified, so to speak, because they had been
laid directly on the hot, dry sand, just like Ginger, whom we met in a previous lecture
who died around 3,400 BC.
It may be that Ginger and others like him suggested to the Egyptians that the human body could
survive death.
And if the body can survive, why can't the spirit survive as well?
But this is the important thing to note.
Your body must be preserved for your spirit to survive.
From being a body, it will need all the necessities of life, of life in this world.
So Ginger's grave goods included plates, bowls, dishes, a string of beads and a knife.
The irony is that if the Egyptians had continued interring bodies directly into the sand, as
they did to begin with, they would have been much better preserved, since mummification,
which is what the Egyptians practiced from the fourth dynasty onwards from around 2,500
BC, is far less effective as a way of preserving the body than the bare hot sand.
So let's imagine you've just died.
Because of the hot climate, there's no time to lose as your corpse will quickly decompose.
So your relatives immediately engage the services of the embalmers whose premises are on the
west bank of the Nile.
Most facilities having to do with the dead were on the west bank, seemingly because that's
where the sun sets and where the dead have their home.
It's there that you'll be mummified, that's to say your body will be cleansed, treated
with chemicals and dried for long term preservation.
The word mummy comes from the Arabic word mummiyah, meaning bitumen, or a thing made
of bitumen.
Bitumen is a black tari substance that was once mistakenly thought to be the preservative
used by Egyptian embalmers because of the blackened skin of the mummy.
The Egyptian word for a mummy was sa, which means nobility or dignity.
The best account of the process of mummification is that provided by a foreigner, the Greek
historian Herodotus.
Herodotus was writing in the 5th century BC, although the practices he describes had been
in effect with variations since the 18th dynasty.
That's to say for about a thousand years before he wrote his description.
Herodotus, as we've seen, was fascinated by all things Egyptian.
He visited Egypt and almost certainly went to an embalmer's to see for himself what
they did.
He tells us that there were different mummification packages, so to speak, suited to fit all wallets.
If you wanted to go business class to the next world, then the 80 day package was the
one for you.
The embalmers first remove your internal organs by making an incision in your side and draw
out your brain tissue, which is considered superfluous matter, with a long needle that
they pass through your nostrils.
They'll store your organs in what we call canopic jars, jars with human and animal headed stoppers.
Canopic is a modern misnomer.
When early Egyptologists first saw the jars with human headed stoppers, they thought they
were depictions of the legendary Greek pilot called Canopus, who was worshipped in this
form at the time of Canopus in Egypt.
You'd have one canopic jar for your liver, one for your lungs, one for your intestines,
and one for your stomach.
The Egyptians believed that you'd be reunited with your internal organs in the afterlife,
so long as the canopic jars were buried with you.
The embalmers then cleanse and sew up the interior of your body and sew the incision
up.
And this all took about 10 days.
For the remaining 70 days, your lionna table covered in natron powder, which, unlike hot
sand, absorbs the moisture without severely darkening and hardening your skin.
And finally, you'll be washed and wrapped in linen bandages.
Or well and good, but what if you could only afford to go to the underworld economy class?
Well, in that case, you'll have to settle for oil being squirted up your anus.
The oil will be released after a period of time and your internal organs, now dissolved,
will simply flow out.
So this meant you'll say you'll end up in the next world without your internal organs.
Sad to say yes.
Once the mummification process is over, the embalmers will place amulets on your body
for protection, tied with pieces of papyrus string, and wrap you in linen bandages with
a copy of what we call the Book of the Dead.
We'll talk about the Book of the Dead in a moment.
Then they'll place you in a mummy form coffin made out of either wood or cartonage, a cardboard-like
material made out of strips of linen that have been stuck together and coated with stucco.
By which they hand you back to your relatives.
On the day of your funeral, your relatives will place your body in a kind of sledge and
drag it to the tomb with the assistance of a team of oxen.
Behind the sledge come all the mourners lamenting loudly.
Egyptian funerals were opportunities for overt displays of grief, particularly by women, as
is the case in the Middle East to this day.
Women would pour dirt in their hair, tear their clothes, beat their breasts, and wail
loudly.
This was not only a sign of their grief, it was also to keep evil spirits away.
Sometimes too they wore special wigs with long hair so that they could cover their faces
as they lamented.
Behind the mourners comes a shrine containing the canopic jars, assuming you have been
able to afford them.
In some depictions of funerals we see a bundle wrapped in an animal skin coming after the
shrine.
The bundle probably contains the bits of your body that had been discarded from your mummy.
At the rear come your servants, there bearing all the items that you'll need in the next
world, like pottery, toiletries, shabties, furniture, and little models.
The Egyptians believed that models could become real in the tomb, so for instance to enable
you to travel up and down the Nile in the afterlife you've been provided with a pair
of model ships, one that is rode to take you north with the current and one that is under
sail to take you south with the prevailing wind.
Tomb paintings too become the things they depict so that if you are shown hunting or
passing then that is what you're going to do in the afterlife.
Even hieroglyphics depicted on the walls of your tomb would come to life.
For instance a hieroglyph representing food becomes the food itself.
Once the funerary procession arrives at your tomb your mummy is set up right and a priest
performs the ceremony known as the opening of the mouth.
The purpose of this ceremony is to reanimate you so to speak, to bring you back to life
before rather to bring you to eternal life.
By touching the face of your mummy with an ad that's an instrument for sharpening wood
so as to symbolically open your mouth and while that ceremony is being performed spells
and incantations are being pronounced.
Once your faculties have been restored to you a calf is sacrificed by having its foreleg
cut off and its heart removed.
The still pulsating heart is presented to your mummy which thereby receives its life force.
Your mummy is then laid inside the tomb and if your family happens to be wealthy the tomb
is in two parts the burial chamber itself which is where you will lie with all the things
you need for the afterlife and the mortuary chapel.
The mortuary chapel is a kind of vestibule to which your relatives will have permanent
access so that they can make periodic offerings to you.
The Egyptians didn't merely think of the dead as physical entities they also had a belief
in something approximating to the concept of a soul that we should not assume exact equivalences
with anything any of us might believe in today.
There were two entities that roughly fit the bill so to speak the car and the bar.
Your car is born with you and represents your selfhood.
It has a physical aspect but it is separate from the body it's your car that receives
food and drink in the tomb and for this reason the tomb is known as the house of the car.
Your bar on the other hand leaves your body at the moment of your death.
It's commonly depicted as a human headed bird during the daytime.
It leaves your tomb and revisits the upper world only returning to your tomb at night.
Let's now turn to your journey to the afterlife which as I said at the beginning is what was
most tricky.
To help you negotiate the various pitfalls your encounter on the way your relatives have
provided you with a copy of the book of the dead I mentioned before.
That's a collection of hymns spells and instructions designed to help you pass through the obstacles
that beset you on your way to the afterlife.
It also tells you what to do when you come before Osiris the god of death and rebirth.
Osiris had once been a mortal king of Egypt who was murdered and dismembered by his brother
Seth.
Isis his wife had retrieved the dismembered parts and restored him to life.
Osiris had been a good and just king and the test he will put you through is designed
to find out whether you too were good and just.
The test is generally called the negative confession by archaeologists.
That's because you will make a number of statements denying any wrongdoing.
You'll say things like I have not told tales about a slave to his master.
I've not wronged an orphan.
I have not committed adultery.
I've not taken milk from the mouth of a child and so on.
The divine scribe Thoth will take down your statement.
Behind him is a monster called Amit who has the head of a crocodile, the four parts of
a lion and the hind legs of a hippopotamus.
She is ready to devour you if you fail the test.
At the end of your statement, your heart will be placed in a balance and weighed against
a feather that represents Mart, signifying truth and harmony.
Congratulations.
You've successfully passed the test and been inscribed among the aku, the blessed dead.
So what happens next?
As in so many belief systems, there were conflicting, even contradictory beliefs.
The principal one was that you'll become Osiris yourself.
Belief in Osiris was at first in competition with and later combined with belief in Ra,
the creator of the universe, who was also the source of life in the afterlife.
As Ra set out each evening from having set at night, he passed through the underworld
and shed light on the world of the dead.
So according to this belief, the dead woke up each night when the living slept in order
to enjoy the perks of the afterlife.
Very likely the Egyptians derived this belief from observing the sun die every night and
become reborn at dawn.
Egyptian beliefs about the afterlife deserve our attention not least because they helped
shape Egyptian society and affected daily life.
Being dead became the way in which ordinary Egyptians could claim equal status with their
pharaoh.
In the period of the Old Kingdom, only the pharaoh was linked to Osiris and only the
pharaoh was capable of attaining a life after death.
From around 2000 BC onwards, however, ordinary Egyptians identified themselves with Osiris
and believed that they too would achieve resurrection.
The religious texts that had been used to guarantee immortality for the pharaoh now
became common property.
This gave the ordinary woman and man access to spells like how not to rot and how not
to have to work in the realm of the dead.
So from around the middle of the second millennium BC, on arrival in the next world, every Joe
Smough could got the same identical, so to speak, divine treatment.
The fact that everyone got a piece of the afterlife and the fact that getting to enjoy
the afterlife was such a big deal meant that the Egyptian death industry was one of the
biggest earners up there with the American automobile industry before the arrival of
Japanese.
In order to deal with consumer demand, it resorted to mass production, almost certainly
the first example of mass production in human history.
If Kmart had existed in ancient Egypt, there would have been a huge section devoted to
mortuary practices.
My little shabty is one of hundreds of thousands of such objects, all pretty much identical.
It must have been turned out on the Egyptian equivalent of a conveyor belt, though unfortunately
we know very little about how the mortuary industry was run.
The description of the Egyptian way of death that I've provided up to now might suggest
that every Egyptian, without exception, was fixated on what happened to him or her in
the next world.
But human society is never like that.
There are always individuals who don't subscribe to the dominant ideology, whether it's communism,
capitalism or Christianity.
There was certainly a number of Egyptians who thought that it was just a load of hocus
pocus, including, I have to say, some of the embalmers.
As the Egyptologist, Alan Spencer, notes, embalming was a gruesome and grisly process
and it's difficult to imagine that a thinking embalmer with even a bit of a brain could
have sincerely believed that any of the corpses he handled, however well he prepared them,
would, in Spencer's words, serve as homes for the immortal spirits of their owners.
In the Ptolemaic period, the period we call Hellenistic Egypt, the period when Egypt was
under Greek rule, there's evidence that the embalmers were up to all kinds of monkey business,
including creating mummies out of body parts belonging to different corpses.
There's one with the head of an old woman, the body of a child and the legs of two, yes,
two different men.
One can't help wondering if it's intended as some sort of a macabre joke and it's by
no means unique.
Then there were the tomb robbers.
They certainly didn't pay into the dominant ideology.
As early as the Baderian period, that's to say around 4,400 to 4,000 BC, tomb robbery
was a profitable industry and the fact that so much wealth accompanied the dead functioned
as a huge incentive.
All the pyramids were robbed in antiquity, which makes them the most colossal technological
failure ever undertaken.
Tomb robbers weren't in the least deterred either by the stiff penalties that they incurred
if they were apprehended or by the curses that were meant to terrify those who desecrated
royal tombs in particular.
Death by impaling seems to have been the most common punishment for convicted tomb robbers
and the robbers consistently found ways to circumvent the various ingenious security devices
that the Egyptians invented to keep the tombs permanently sealed.
One device was to construct a portcullis block or several such blocks set into grooves at
the side of the entrance exactly like the portcullis of a medieval castle.
The block or blocks were then let down and jammed into place once the tomb had been sealed.
Another mechanism was to construct a false burial chamber.
Sometimes two stone sarcophagi were provided with a locking mechanism to prevent them from
being reopened.
It was all largely to no purpose.
Royal tombs were the greatest prize, but even ordinary burials were worth looting since
they often contained jewelry and other valuables.
Necropolis guards were in on the act in a big way.
What must have been particularly distressing for the bereaved was the fact that most tombs
were robbed shortly after the body had been interred.
And of course tomb robbing in Egypt continues to the present day, albeit on a much reduced
scale.
Tomb robbers were in fact the first archaeologists.
Incidentally, the curse of the mummy may have its origins in the curses that were inscribed
on Egyptian tombs in very early times to deter tomb robbers.
Though one Egyptologist believed it derived from a Victorian stage show in which real
mummies were unwrapped, either way it gained a notoriety with the death by blood poisoning
of Lord Knaven who financed the expedition, which discovered the tomb of Tutankhamun in
1922.
Howard Carter, however, a professional archaeologist who was really responsible for its discovery,
lived on happily for another 16 years.
The prevalence of tomb robbing is the reason why the pharaohs of the new kingdom took the
decision to construct their tombs in the so-called Valley of the Kings, the isolated valley behind
the cliffs of Der El Medina.
Even this, however, proved to be a waste of effort.
The only royal tomb in the Valley of Kings that survived virtually intact to modern times
is that of Tutankhamun.
But even in this case, tomb robbers had broken in but been disturbed before they could get
under way, so the treasures survived by a cat's whisker.
In the next lecture, we're going to look at the lives of the Egyptian workmen who laboured
to so little purpose to construct the tombs of the pharaohs in that well-looted valley
and of the many other types of workers who toiled in Egypt simply to make ends meet.
