It's always tempting to talk about the elite in any society. They lead such fascinating
lives. And as far as Egypt is concerned, most of the evidence we have about daily life has
to do with the elite. But we're not interested in the elite. Very, very few Egyptians lead
lives of luxury. And our focus is the other side of history. We're going to have to dig
deep to get at their lives as only a handful of houses belonging to ordinary Egyptians
have survived. That's because all Egyptian houses and palaces too for that matter were
mainly built of mud brick, which is highly perishable. It's also due to the fact that
most villages were built close to the banks of the Nile, so over time the mud brick decomposed.
In addition, many large Egyptian settlements lie buried under modern cities.
One village that does survive, however, is Der El Medina. Der El Medina was inhabited
by the craftsmen who toiled in the desert in the Valley of the Kings and the Valley of
the Queens, some way from the flood valley of the Nile. Like ourselves, most Egyptians,
both men and women had to work for their living. Boys tended to do the same job or enter the
same profession as their fathers. Many Egyptians too were employed by the government, which
means in effect they were employed by the pharaoh. In fact, a larger percentage of the
workforce was employed in the public sector, as we might call it, than at any other time
in human history, until fairly recently. We actually know a great deal about working
conditions of this government-employed workforce because we have lots of documents which cover
almost every aspect of employment. They tell us such things as what you had to do to get
a job, what your terms of service were, what happened when you became sick, on what grounds
you would go on strike, and so on. We learn that it helped to bribe an official to get
a plum post, that someone took a roster of workers who were on sick leave, no doubt in
order to deduct the days off from their earnings, that when there was a shortfall in rations,
workers would down tools and hold a torchlight procession in protest, perhaps chanting like
modern workers on strike, and so on. But before I talk about craftsmen, I want to talk about
some of the other jobs that you might perform. Probably most Egyptians were farmers. It
was, however, a lot easier being a farmer in Egypt than anywhere else in the ancient
world, as you aren't dependent on rainfall. You just wait for the annual inundation of
the Nile, year in, year out. It never fails, regular as clockwork. Of course, the gods
have it in their power to suspend the inundation if they get angry, but with any luck the priests
will keep them happy. They seem to know how to do that. But anyway, that's not your concern.
As soon as the waters have receded, you mark out your land, and if the flooding has been
particularly heavy, it'll be difficult to work out exactly where your land ends and
that of your neighbour begins. So you may well get into a dispute with him like you did three
years ago. It's almost impossible to establish fixed boundaries on land that is being constantly
flooded. You then dig a network of canals crisscrossing your fields, and only after
that can you begin plowing. The soil is moist, so it's easy to work. You transfer water from
the river into the canals by means of a cantilevered pole, known as a Shadoof, with a bucket on
one end and a weight on the other. Shadoofs are still in use today. This is one of the
worst parts of your job. You have to spend a lot of time bending, lifting and sloshing
about in muddy water, not to mention the fact that it's devilishly hot and there are no
trees to shelter under from the rays of the sun. There are other snags. Before you're
permitted to harvest your crops, government officials are going to come around and calculate
how much you'll have to pay in taxes to the IRS, or rather to the Pharaoh and the
other gods. So when it's harvest time, you fill several baskets and load them onto your
donkey before setting out to the local temple where you make your payment. When you arrive,
the baskets will be inspected and counted and placed in a storeroom. Only if you were
fairly wealthy would you own your own farm and perhaps raise cattle. If you were poor,
you may have a few pigs and goats. Sheep were relatively rare.
Let's suppose that you and your wife, Desgerit, work together as a husband and wife team to
produce linen, which is what most Egyptians wear. Linen is made out of flax. Flax is easy
to grow and in fact was one of the first crops ever cultivated by man. So you, the farmer,
plant the flax seeds and then, when you harvest it, you set it out to dry before stripping
away the outer husk. Then you leave it to soak for several days before beating it, scouring
it and bleaching it. After that's done, you hand it over to Desgerit, who does the spinning
and the weaving. If you don't own your own farm, you might be a herdsman following the
herds of sheep, cattle and goats that roam the land beyond the cultivated strip along
the Nile. Or you might earn your livelihood by hunting or fishing or collecting papyrus
in the rich swampland of Lower Egypt around the region of the Nile Delta. To do this, you'll
punt around in a little shallow bottomed boat. The boat is made out of bundles of bound papyrus
reeds, lashed together in the shape of a shallow crescent and the boat has been caulked to
prevent it from sinking. I should warn you, there's an occupational hazard of being attacked
by a crocodile. The chances are that if you do get attacked, the croc will eat you alive
and your family will never know what happened to you. Although you may be lucky and just
lose a limb like my poor uncle Meket Ray. So I don't recommend going to sleep on the
job. Papyrus wasn't only used for making boats, it was also used as writing material.
Being very light, it was easy to carry and to store. The Greeks, who were major importers
of papyrus, called it Biblos, from which our word Bible derives. Our word paper comes
from papyrus, which demonstrates its ubiquity as writing material throughout the ancient
world. Not surprisingly, therefore, papyrus was one of the chief Egyptian exports. To
turn papyrus into writing material, you first slit open the stalks with a sharp knife and
lay them out in parallel horizontal strips. Then you place a second layer of papyrus over
the first vertically. Next you pound the surface of the papyrus layers with a flat stone so
that the strips bond by means of their natural juices. So that's another job you could do,
manufacturing papyrus. So maybe you do that in your spare time.
If, for whatever reason, you can't afford a papyrus boat, or you don't particularly
like the thought of ending up in the belly of a crocodile, you might consider becoming
a miner or a quarryman, though I have to warn you the dangers are probably greater, which
is why condemned criminals and prisoners of war were often set to work mining and quarrying.
There are no timber supports in the mines. Timber is extremely expensive because it has
to be imported and either your life isn't worth the expense or you can't afford it.
So you'll have to crawl on your belly to get to the rock face and then do the hacking,
lying down, breathing in dust all the time. The fittest worked at the rock face with lamps
bound to their foreheads. As the rocks broke away the children would haul them to the entrance
of the mine where older men and even women would take over, all working under the watchful
eye of the foreman who whips you if you slacken off or are careless in your work if you happen
to be a condemned criminal or prisoner. The Egyptians also mined for gold, silver, copper
and lead. Quaring was just as dangerous as mining and for that reason condemned criminals
and prisoners of war were again chiefly employed. Many of the quarries were subterranean so
you'll be lying on your belly breathing in all that dust again with the same danger of
being crushed to death. Accidents and fatalities would have been extremely common. In the new
kingdom, the period we're concentrating on, sandstone was the most common building material
followed by limestone which is weaker. Other hard stones that were quarried include basalt,
diorite, granite and skis. Maybe you fancy trying your hand at making
mats or washing laundry or laying bricks or brewing beer or baking bread or butchering
meat. There's certainly no shortage of choices of employment. What if you're educated? Well
then you'll probably go for a cushy job as a scribe. That's to say it'll be cushy once
you've completed many years of apprenticeship beginning perhaps as early as the age of five.
Once you graduate so to speak the sort of work you do will depend on the level of literacy
you've attained. If you're just a hack so to speak you'll spend your time copying but
as you become more experienced you'll be able to write to dictation and if you really apply
yourself you'll get the chance to write your own compositions. I mean you'll write memos
and so forth. Your equipment will consist of a simple wooden pallet with two depressions
on one end for red and black ink and a slot on the other end for the brushes that you
write with. You'll write most commonly in the script known as hieratic. This is a cursive
form of hieroglyphic that was invented around 2500 BC. As a scribe you'll enjoy a high status
in Egyptian society. You'll be able to stretch your stuff in a long skirt unlike other Egyptian
males who wear short skirts and you have your own god. A rather important one called Thoth
who was depicted either as an ibis or as an ibis headed man. Being a scribe also offers
you the chance of upward mobility. That's because being able to write is an essential
prerequisite to landing a much coveted job as an engineer on a prestigious building project.
Though to be eligible for that you'll have to get a degree in mathematics or the ancient
Egyptian equivalent. Mathematics by the way meant only addition and subtraction. The Egyptians
didn't know how to multiply or divide. You'll probably have to grease a few palms as well
to get a well paid post. No wonder one Egyptian father wrote to his son I shall make you love
books more than your mother. Though you'll be working for the pharaoh as a government
scribe you can also hire out your services to some military businessman who engages you
to keep track of his accounts or handle his correspondence. Another job with good career
prospects is service in the Egyptian army. The best job is that of Archer. The bow and
the arrow were the most effective weapons in the wars that the Egyptians fought and
so Archer's were considered elite fighters. You'll be rewarded at the end of your service
with a parcel of land and possibly two with some slaves to work it. A career in the military
also offers you the chance of promotion. We know of two new kingdom pharaohs Horemheb
and Ramesses the first who had previously served as military commanders. I'm not suggesting
that you could become a pharaoh. Don't get too big for your sandals but with a little
bit of luck and perhaps bribery you could certainly work your way up socio economically.
It's fair to state however that compared with most of the peoples we're going to be
looking at in this course the Egyptians weren't particularly good at fighting. In fact it
wasn't until the new kingdom that they first had a standing army. Prior to that they had
an army composed of conscripts peasants largely who were summoned in times of emergency but
who had little if any military training. Another profession dependent on being literate
was that of physician. A large number of papyri have survived of a medical nature testifying
that Egyptian physicians were required to be learned. Although there was no hard and
fast dividing line between what we would call conventional medicine based on empirical
observation diagnosis and treatment without reference to the supernatural on the one hand
and Magico religious medicine which drew on spells and incantations to the gods on the
other. A strict hierarchy prevailed among the medical profession the most important
doctors being those who attended at the court. Many doctors are claimed to be specialists
one court physician evidently a proctologist rejoiced in the title herdsman of the anus.
Yet another occupation that you could do is that of trader. You'll be journeying abroad
to import hardwood from Lebanon and Syria or gold from Nubia in the south or copper and
turquoise from the Sinai desert. There's also an unidentified region known as the land
of punt possibly the Horn of Africa where you go to acquire gold ivory ebony and exotic
animals such as monkeys and baboons which wealthy Egyptians liked to keep for pets.
You might also trade with the inhabitants of Western Turkey to obtain copper and tin
both of which are essential for the manufacture of bronze or with the Greeks and the inhabitants
of the island of Crete for olive oil or with the people of Afghanistan for the highly prized
blue stone called lapis lazuli so favored in the manufacturer of jewelry in exchange
your export grain linen and papyrus as well as cunningly fashioned artifacts made of gold
glass and stone. Up till now I've taught mainly about men. Let's suppose now you're
desgerit the woman I mentioned earlier and that you don't fancy working alongside your
husband. You can of course perform one or more likely all of the traditional unpaid jobs
that women have performed throughout history as housewife, childrearer, cook, cleaner, caregiver,
bread maker and probably as a married woman you'll do at least some of these and unless
you have a servant it'll be you too who has to fetch water each day from the Nile. But
just like today you'll probably have to earn an income as well. You'll be paid in kind
for your services just like your husband is paid since Egypt didn't have a monetary
economy. Again there are lots of jobs to choose from. You could be a beautician, a hairdresser,
a domestic, a nurse, a basket weaver, a singer, a dancer or a musician and many more professions
as well. Probably the entertainment industry was a bit suspect. I doubt it included many
married women. If it's the case that you're literate and some Egyptian women were literate
and if you have the right connections well you might just luck out and become a priestess
or even if you're very lucky an overseer, a senior bureaucrat in other words.
I want now to give special attention to the many artisans mainly if not exclusively men
who have bequeathed to us such a stunning record of Egypt's artistic achievement. I
mean the potters, painters, draftsmen, stone masons, sculptors, weavers, jewelers, cabinet
makers, architects and so on. It's likely that most of them were men though we know that
women were potters and textile makers. We know the names of very few of them because
they just weren't considered important so they rarely signed their work. Most were as
anonymous in their lifetimes as they are to us today. Few of them were thought of as artists.
The Egyptians didn't even have a word for art but just once in a while they were noticed
as in the case of a painter and sculptor who was shown dining together in the afterlife
with their patron in a tomb painting at Thebes but this is exceptional.
If you were a craftsman the chances again are that you'd be working for the Pharaoh.
You probably inherited your craft from your father. You will have put in several years
of apprenticeship and whatever the nature of your craft your tools are extremely simple
which means that your work will be both painstaking and laborious. What you'll need in spades
so to speak is patience and self-discipline. To get a taste of the life of an artisan
I want to take you to Upper Egypt namely to Thebes which was one of the greatest cities
in antiquity. Thebes first came to prominence in the new kingdom. It possessed two of the
most magnificent temple complexes in Egypt, Karnak and Luxor. One of its residents wrote
what do they say to themselves in their hearts every day? Those who are far from Thebes they
spend the day dreaming of its name. Most of what remains of Thebes today are its temples
and tombs. That's not what we're interested in however. Fascinating though it is in terms
of the level of architectural accomplishment achieved by Egypt's artisans. I want you
to instead cross over to the west bank of the Nile just opposite Thebes so that I can
accompany you to the ancient desert village called Der El Medina which I've said so much
about already. Der El Medina is its modern name. It means the monastery of the town.
Its ancient name was Pademi which simply means the town. It's often called a workers village
but it was actually the home of a community of the highly skilled craftsmen who built
and decorated the tombs of the pharaohs and their queens in the Valley of the Kings and
the Valley of the Queens. In other words it's a company town. The size of its workforce
varied from 120 down to 30. Der El Medina is virtually unique in its state of preservation.
It has survived because it lies way above the water table of the Nile. Whereas dwellings
that lay closer to the banks of the river all got washed away, it mercifully has managed
to escape destruction. Der El Medina sheds a unique light on the lives of Egyptian craftsmen
during the latter part of the new kingdom. That's to say about 1300 to 1100 BC. It's
yielded a wealth of documentary evidence, both formal and informal, both about their
terms of service and about their private lives. Some of the documents are written on papyrite,
others on broken pots, herds and fragments of limestone known as Ostraca. We also have
Stilae inscribed stone pillars and funerary inscriptions. The inhabitants of the village
were by no means uncultivated. It's been estimated that at least 40% of the boys in the village
were taught to read and write. And we also have letters written by a number of women
whose rate of literacy seems to have been pretty high. So let's imagine you're one
of the craftsmen. Your village is surrounded by a circuit wall. There are 68 houses inside
the circuit wall and about 50 outside. You're lucky enough to live in one of the houses
inside the wall. Like all Egyptian houses, your house is made of dried mud brick with
a stone sockle or base at its foundation course. It's in a row of houses and it shares party
walls with houses on either side. The front door is painted red and that's because red
acts as a deterrent to malign influences and forces, of which of course there are many.
You can't be too careful. The outside walls are painted white and the inside walls are
plastered and whitewashed. At least that's the case with the formal rooms at the front.
Your house has four rooms. They run back in a straight line directly off from the street
and about half a meter below street level. The entrance room is sacred to your household
gods, the gods that is who preside over fertility, childbirth and so forth such as Bess and Tawerat.
It contains an altar resembling a four-poster bed where you offer sacrifices. There are
small niches in the walls that are filled with the images both of deities and of your
dead ancestors. After the entrance room comes a living room with a wooden column on a stone
base in the centre and a couch built into a wall. You don't have much furniture because
as I've said wood is very pricey. You just have a kind of bench that doubles up as both
table and seat. Next in line comes a small bedroom that serves for you to sleep in at
night and at the rear there's a kitchen with a brick oven and a subterranean cellar leading
off from it. Your roof is made of straw or reeds tied to the wooden beams that support
it and when it's really hot you and the rest of your family go up onto the roof and sleep.
A practice that is still common throughout the Mediterranean to this day. You work eight
days out of ten. Your shift is eight hours in length and you're permitted a short lunch
break. During the eight days you're at work you live in a simple shack at the site where
you're working in the desert. When you're absent perhaps you rely on the workers who
are enjoying some time off to protect your family or perhaps there are some guards always
on duty. Either way your family seems to have been well protected for we never hear of any
disturbances. So all things considered your conditions are pretty good. You're directly
under the administration of a Vizier a very high ranking official. This is a clear indication
of the regard in which you are held as a skilled craftsman working on the royal tombs. You're
permitted time off to observe all the religious festivals of which there are many and in your
spare time you can earn a bit extra by making furniture and other funerary items for private
sale. You're even permitted to go on strike when your wages or your beer don't arrive
on time. You're paid in kind like everyone else in Egypt most commonly in the form of
Emma Wheat and Barley. Emma and Barley were used for making bread and beer respectively.
You're paid more than you need so that you can exchange the surplus grain for other necessities
and you also receive an allowance of fish, vegetables, beans, onions, salt, fat, ointments,
beer and firewood. Water is obviously a problem out in the desert so the government sees that
water carriers deliver it regularly probably on the backs of donkeys. The government even
provides you with a laundry service and you get a new issue of clothing once a year. Your
laundry is washed in the Nile by washermen and returned to you the next day. Remember
to put a tag on it. Clothing found at Der El Medina has laundry marks for identification.
If you or any of your family falls sick there's a part-time physician in the village who is
one of your co-workers. A particularly common illness was ailment of the eye. One very moving
papyrus is in the form of a request from a father to his son for him to send medicine.
It begins, don't reject me. I'm not well. Don't cease to weep for me. Bring honey for
my eyes and ochre and black eye paint. Am I not your father? I'm wretched. I'm searching
for my sight but it has gone. As one of the highly skilled craftsmen at Der El Medina it's
been estimated by some scholars that your earnings will put you in the top two percent
of the population. You have free housing, a reasonable degree of job security and all
the benefits I've mentioned. You're respected and you enjoy considerable status. Not a bad
life all things considered. I can hardly blame you for practicing a little bribery and corruption
in the hope of securing a job on the site for your son, Kenty. We know that the workers
practiced bribery because we have an ostrichon, a piece of broken pottery on which a father
records the various bribes he has paid out to officials to get a promotion for his son
as he, without shame, even perhaps with a touch of pride, admits in the text.
Over the course of the past six lectures we've seen how rivers have given shape to human
destiny, first the Tigris and Euphrates in Mesopotamia and now the Nile, primarily by
providing stability and predictability to the agricultural cycle. In the next 12 lectures
we're going to be looking at a people whose distinctive character was shaped by a completely
different set of circumstances, a somewhat barren and rocky land that lacks a single
river worth the name. But it was the very barrenness of this land, along with the sea
that surrounded it, fretted with numerous small islands which spurred on its restless
and enterprising inhabitants to reach a level of cultural achievement unlike anything previously
achieved. Please join me as we sail northwards to the world of ancient Greece.
