It was the Tigris and Euphrates rivers that made possible the civilisation that flourished
in Mesopotamia the two and a half thousand years, and it was the Nile that made possible
the civilisation that flourished in Egypt for a much longer period. But rivers are no
longer part of our story. Instead the sea is the Mediterranean sea and the islands dotted
all over it. In time there came to be some fifteen hundred Greek settlements scattered
all over the Mediterranean and the shores of the Black Sea like frogs around a pond
as Plato delightfully put it. The Mediterranean facilitated contact between diverse peoples
on an unprecedented scale in human history, not only between Greeks and Greeks, but also
between Greeks and Egyptians and Phoenicians and Lydians and Carians and Persians and
so on. In today's lecture however, I'm going to ask you to first imagine that you're
a Minoan, a people whose name derives from the legendary king Minos of Crete. Minoan
civilisation flourished for nearly two thousand years from about three thousand to eleven
hundred BC, though its heyday was in the first half of the second millennium BC. The Greek
historian Thucydides believed that the Minoans were the first people to build a thalysocracy,
perhaps to say an empire based on control of the sea. That would have been a new use
of ships in the ancient world, though human beings were surely engaging in piracy and
piratical raids on coastal communities ever since ships were invented and a thalysocracy
is merely a highly organised form of piracy. The centre of Minoan power was the island
of Crete, specifically the palace of Knossos on its northern shore. Knossos was excavated
by the British archaeologist Sir Arthur Evans in the early 1900s. And like all archaeologists
of his day, Evans was interested primarily in the upper crust of society. He wasn't
much interested in daily life, so many artefacts that would be routinely preserved today in
the course of an excavation were simply chucked away. But today we're going to give Knossos
a miss and sail to the tiny volcanic island of Santorini, one among a group of islands
that we call the Cyclades, which lies 60 miles to the north of Crete. We're going to look
at what happened to its inhabitants in the space of just 24 hours or less. There were
Minoan settlements throughout the Cyclades and beyond, but the one on Santorini was particularly
prosperous. Somewhere between 1650 and 1500, however, a catastrophe occurred of the kind
that is all too familiar in the contemporary world. Santorini experienced a cataclysmic
volcanic eruption, and around this time, your town, it was a town, not a village, situated
on the south coast of the island near the present-day village of Akratiri, was destroyed,
though we don't know absolutely for certain whether it was the eruption itself that destroyed
your settlement. There's a less likely theory that it was destroyed by an earthquake that
occurred 25 to 50 years earlier than the volcanic eruption. The volcanic eruption was enormous.
Volcanologists estimate that it was four times greater than the one that destroyed Krakatoa
in Indonesia in 1883, and it came without any warning at all. Let me rephrase that.
There were probably some warning signs, but you didn't know how to interpret them. The
local springs dried up, there was a smell of sulfur in the air, and there were occasional
earth tremors. But you had no idea that your life was in danger. So there you are, living
contentedly in your village, when one day or night somewhere between 1650 and 1500 BC,
you hear a continuous burst of thunder, and when you go outside to investigate, you see
plumes of smoke filled with debris trailing upwards into the sky from the mountain that
broods over your island. At first, all you can do is to stare up at the mountain and
the discharge from it, and then as the air thickens and it becomes difficult to breathe,
you quickly collect your senses. You scramble desperately to gather your family together.
You just have time to grab a few valuables, some jewellery, a figurine or two of the deities
you worship, scraps of food, a pitcher of wine, all of which you stuff into a wicker
basket. Soon the sky is pitch black. You can no longer tell whether it's day or night.
You can hardly see your hand in front of your face any longer. All you see in the gathering
darkness is a reddish glow coming from the direction of the volcano, now no longer visible.
The air has become heavy with soot and ash. Everyone now is coughing and wheezing and
gasping for breath. The elderly are already finding it difficult to breathe. Out in the
street there is pandemonium. People are screaming. They're terrified running blindly in all directions,
desperately calling out the names of their loved ones. You start heading towards the
shore or towards where you think the shore is, clutching your children, urging on your
husband or your wife, groping your way, stumbling as you do so. You manage to escape from the
town to the harbour. No skeletons have been found at the site, so everyone at least got
away from Akratiri, but only just in the nick of time. Soon your village has been covered
in lava flow and ash. What happened after that is a mystery. The you and your family
and your fellow islanders managed to get onto a boat and to sail away? Or are you either
overwhelmed beforehand by the smoke and the burning ash? We just don't know. There's
no evidence to help us reconstruct what happened at this moment. And if you do get on board
a boat, are you able to row to safety? You may have been drowned by a hail of pumice,
or you may have been submerged by a tidal wave. Or perhaps, let's hope so at any rate,
you do get away and make it to Crete, where you're received and given shelter by your
fellow Minoans. It's a terrifying story, but one that is becoming all too common in our
own age of tsunamis and catastrophic floods. Every human catastrophe, however, is archaeology's
gain, and that's a sad fact of life, because the people who fled the town of Akratiri left
behind very preciously for us their everyday items, their cooking pots, their baskets, their
furniture and so forth, which got buried and thus preserved beneath layers of volcanic
ash known as Potsalana, which in some places lies 30 metres, 100 feet down. Potsalana is
named after Potswoli, a town near Mount Vesuvius in Italy, where this type of ash first came
to light. The archaeologists who excavated the site have left the objects exactly where
they found them, which makes Akratiri like Pompeii and Herculaneum, which suffered a similar
fate, immensely moving to visit, even though it's on a much smaller scale than either of
these cities. Excavations at Akratiri began under the direction of the Greek archaeologist
Spyridon Marinatos in 1967. And when you visit the site today and you look down at the streets,
you are looking at a settlement as it were whose inhabitants have just gone out to lunch.
It's tempting to believe that they'll be back in half an hour to carry on with their
Bronze Age lives, all of which makes Akratiri one of the most interesting archaeological
sites ever to be excavated, even though a human tragedy overshadows the vivid picture
it presents to us, three and a half thousand years down the line.
Well, let's now imagine your life on the day before the eruption, a very peaceful, prosperous
and contented life it was. The house you live in, like those of your neighbours, is at least
two, possibly as many as four, store is high. It's made of the fine squared masonry that
was common. It has plumbing in the form of round clay pipes which connect to the streets.
The walls are reinforced with wooden joists to bolster them against earthquakes, which
means that you know from bitter experience that there are risks attached to living on
the island. But life is good for you and your family and all life has risks attached to it.
And besides, where else would you live? Your family has been living on the island for generations
and I said you were prosperous. How do we know that?
Well first because Akratiri has a well protected harbour, that means pirates would like to
raid you if they could. It also means that you're engaged, like all islanders, in export
import. And in addition to its harbour, your town also has access to a large area of cultivatable
land. So it's good for both commerce and for agriculture. So the risks of living on the
island are well worth it. The greatest glory of Akratiri is its frescoes or wall paintings,
the Minoan equivalent of high definition television. Almost every house has at least
one wall painting and I'd like to give a bit of attention to the frescoes because they
tell us a lot about daily life and about the landscape of Santorini in 1500 BC. They're
now in the National Museum in Athens. One room for instance was decorated with frescoes
of antelopes and boxing children. Then there is the fisherman fresco. A young boy holds
up his catch and in the same room there's a fresco depicting the aftermath to a sea battle.
We see corpses floating in the water while warriors disembark from their ships. Perhaps
the islanders had recently won a striking naval victory and they wanted to perpetuate
the memory of their victory in art. And at the top of the fresco in the middle distance
herdsmen heard their cattle oblivious to the scene below. Life goes on as the Beatles pointed
out long ago. What can we say about your mindset as a Minoan? Well without written records
that's a very difficult question to answer. But I'd suggest that there were two ways in
which you would have thought and behaved very differently from us. To begin with there's
a very good possibility that you practiced human sacrifice. At the palace of Knossars
on Crete the bones of at least four healthy children were found. Butchered in the same
way the Minoans slaughtered their sheep and goats suggesting that they had been sacrificed
and eaten. I'm quoting a British archaeologist called Sandy McGillivray. McGillivray adds
that a senior Cretan archaeologist was so horrified by this suggestion when it was first
proposed that he insisted that the bones must be those of apes. And then in March of 2010
just as I was preparing this course the Greek press reported the discovery near Hania in
Crete of the bones of a young girl who had been sacrificed on an altar. I quote like
another Iphigenia. That's what one newspaper specifically said. It's a reference to the
sacrifice by the Greek king Agamemnon of his daughter Iphigenia to secure the favour of
the goddess Artemis. It's obviously a highly contentious issue who wants to believe that
their ancestors were cannibals like mine were. Those blokes we talked about in the first
lecture who lived in Cheregorge 14,700 years ago. But this is a lot more recent and therefore
a lot more politically sensitive. A second distinctive feature of the Minoan mindset
is that you weren't embarrassed by female nakedness in the way that we are at least
publicly. It seems to have been customary practice for women to expose their breasts
at least in ritual contexts. That at least is how they are depicted in statuettes and
on frescoes. We don't know why they did this. It probably had something to do with religious
ceremonial. But whatever the significance it reminds us that different cultures have
different relationships with their bodies and that what each of them chooses to expose
to the public gaze and in what circumstances is the result of social conditioning. We don't
know what caused Minoan civilization to decline. Marinatus believed that the volcano was ultimately
responsible but this is just a theory. It's clear anyway that power had already been shifting
from the island of Crete to mainland Greece sometime before the volcano erupted. Primarily
to Mycenae, a fortress situated in the northeast of Peloponnese. So now I'm going to invite
you to imagine you're a Mycenaean living at Mycenae. Yours is one among many so-called Mycenaean
communities that flourished on the mainland and on the Aegean islands from about 1650 to 1300 BC.
Your own particular fortress owes its importance partly to the fact that it's surrounded by
rich corn producing land, the so-called Argyve Plain. Agriculturally, by the way, Greece is rather
poor with only pockets of cultivatable land, although it was actually a bit more fertile in antiquity.
You yourself don't live inside the fortress. That's only permitted to the elite, which is the
royal family, members of the priesthood and their servants and slaves. Instead, you live in an
unprotected settlement outside. You're only allowed inside the fortress to shelter from the enemy
in time of danger. So from the point of view of the other side of history, Mycenae is something
of a disappointment since it tells us very little about daily life added to which the outside
settlement has only been partially excavated. We don't know whether the Minoans were Greek
because their writing, known as Linea A, hasn't been deciphered. The Mycenaeans, however, were
unquestionably Greek. The evidence for this comes from clay tablets inscribed with a cuneiform
script known as Linea B, a script similar to the one we talked about in the lecture on
daily life in Mesopotamia. Some signs represent vowels, others represent vowels with consonants.
Linea B was deciphered in 1952 by an architect called Michael Ventris, who used code-breaking
techniques that had been developed in the Second World War. These tablets testify to
a high degree of administrative centralization. Coccolus repaid the following quantity of olive
oil to Umades. 648 litres reads one. Well, that's a vast amount of olive oil, and it
testifies to the centralized nature of the economy. It's fascinating how early on in
history bureaucracy takes hold of organized societies. We saw that already with Egypt.
Societies need bureaucracy to feed all those hungry mouths, and the tablets also tell us
that your society was highly stratified. You yourself belong to the Damos, the Mycenaean
equivalent of the later Greek Demos, meaning common people. You're a free citizen, in
other words, you own your own land, and you have certain rights, including the right to
lodge a complaint against your superiors. As the historian Rodney Castleton puts it,
the Demos was a force to be reckoned with. The tablets also tell us of the Daeroi, which
is the Mycenaean equivalent of the later Greek Duloi, meaning slaves or perhaps serfs, both
men and women who could be bought and sold, in other words, the substratum of Mycenaean
society. From the thickness and height of the fortress walls of Mycenae, we can infer
that yours was a very warlike society. There was something nasty and threatening out there,
roaming the countryside, which you and your fellow Mycenaeans definitely wanted to keep
at arm's length. We also know this from the contents of the so-called Shaft graves of
the elite found inside the fortress, so let's talk about the elite for a moment. The term
Shaft grave takes its name from the deep, narrow shafts that were dug into the natural
rock, some as many as twelve feet deep, to protect what were presumably royal burials
from robbers. It's beginning to seem a rather paranoid society, but as someone once said,
just because you're paranoid, that doesn't mean people aren't out to get you.
The commonest grave gift is a bronze sword, often with relief decoration on the blade.
One Shaft grave contained 90 swords distributed among only three burials. Talk about overkill.
Swords were still relatively new in this period, and the technique for manufacturing them
was still in its infancy. So if you owned a sword, you were saying, I've got wealth
and high social status, not only in this world, but also presumably in the world to come.
Something else you'd want to take with you is a gold cup, preferably one that is elaborately
decorated with repousse images which have been beaten into the surface of the gold,
like those that depict scenes of hunting. You'd also have your body covered in gold foil
with a gold mask over your face. What the grave gifts found in the Shaft graves indicate
conclusively is that if you were one of the privileged few, you enjoyed a pretty sumptuous
lifestyle, and not for nothing. Homer describes Mycenae as rich in gold.
Between 1300 and 1100 BC, however, almost every Mycenaean site was plundered and burned down.
Mycenae itself was destroyed around 1150. It must have been a pretty desperate time watching
your entire world collapse around you. The cause of the collapse is unknown.
Later Greeks attributed it to an invasion by a people who swept in from the north,
the so-called Dorian invasion. There's no conclusive archaeological data to support
an invasion, however. Another possibility is that the Mycenaean Greeks exhausted their resources
and strength by fighting the Trojan War, assuming, of course, that the Trojan War
actually took place, which some scholars still dispute. If the Mycenaean Greeks did fight the
Trojans, however, it certainly wasn't over Helen, but for access to the Black Sea region,
which Troy, situated close to the Dardanelles, controlled. The Black Sea region was rich in
corn, and the Greeks had a desperate need for imported corn.
A third possibility is that the absence of its main fighting force at Troy over a period of years
left the Mycenaean homeland vulnerable to raiders from inside the country.
Whatever the explanation for the collapse, around 1025 BC,
objects made of bronze began to disappear from mainland Greece to be replaced by iron,
a metal that had previously been in very short supply. And with the fall of Mycenae,
we come to a period in human history that historians call the Dark Age, so named because
much of what we think of as the marks of civilization died out.
So let's now suppose you're living in the Dark Age. You've forgotten how to read or write.
You barely have enough to eat. You live in a hovel, and you rarely communicate with the outside world.
You can't paint, can't sculpt, can't build in stone. There's still an aristocracy of sorts,
but even they lead lives that are reduced and precarious. The remains of the previous great
civilization baffle you. The Great Circuit Wall at Mycenae, for instance, you just can't understand
how it could have been built. It obviously wasn't built by human hands. No human could have raised
those giant boulders. So you imagine a race of giants, the one-eyed cyclopers laying the stones.
There is, however, one cultural achievement born of this darkness that indicates that the people
who lived in Greece in this period were neither ignorant nor uncouth, however limited their
lifestyle, namely, epic poetry. Epic poetry was, in origin, an oral mode of composition.
That's to say, it was transmitted verbally, orally, by word of mouth, and it only much later
became written down in the form in which it has survived to this day. The irony is that
it might never have come into being if the art of writing hadn't disappeared. Its greatest products
are the Iliad and the Odyssey, both attributed to Homer. Homer, assuming he was one person and not many,
which we don't know for certain, lived long after the Dark Age was over, around 700 BC.
But he belongs to a tradition of oral composition that has its roots in the Dark Age,
indeed, Homer himself may have been illiterate.
His poems, and the poems from which they were fashioned, don't describe life in the Dark Age.
Would you want to hear some bard singing about poverty, precariousness, anxiety,
lawlessness, when that's what your everyday life consists of? That was far too close to home.
Instead, you'd want to hear about an age that was the complete antithesis to the one you were
living in. An age of unimaginable prosperity and luxury when men were real men, and when people
like you, Greeks, that is, or Achaeans as they call themselves, were a power to be reckoned with.
It was a period of dreaming, in other words. The Dark Age might have been pretty bleak,
but it certainly didn't wipe out Greek culture. The Greek language lived on,
the gods lived on, we find the names of the major Olympian deities inscribed on linear B tablets,
proving their continuity. And critically too, the memory of a glorious past lived on,
to fire up your imagination, and to act as your inspiration. It might have been all you had to
keep you going as you sat around your half at night, but the strength and vitality of that memory
proved enough to illuminate the darkness. The Dark Age lasted about 200 years from
1100 to 900 BC. Greece might not have recovered, and it's not altogether clear why it did.
But recover it most certainly did, between 900 and 800 BC. The lead was taken in Athens and in
its surrounding territory, known as Attica. The most striking physical evidence for recovery
might seem totally insignificant. The humble craft of pottery.
But this is not just any old pottery. This is pottery on a grand scale. One might almost say
epic scale. A magnificent example is the so-called dipelan amphora, which stands almost five feet
tall. An amphora is a two-handled vessel. It served as a two marker for an aristocratic woman.
It's so named because it stood outside the later dipelan or double gate on the west side of Athens
in the Keramikus. Athens is principal cemetery. It's not quite on the scale of the pyramids,
but it's immensely impressive nonetheless, and it's one among a series of such monumental
Athenian vases of similar date. The series also initiates the wonderful Greek tradition of depicting
the human body. The figures are somewhat stick-like, but they're recognizable as men and women,
nonetheless. In the central frieze of the dipelan amphora, we see them surrounding a corpse laid
out on a couch lamenting the dead. It's true that they're aristocrats. They've got to be
aristocrats to be able to afford such a magnificent vase, but their grief in the face of human loss
is universal and timeless. However, if there's one development above all that epitomizes the end
of the Dark Age, it's the reinvention of writing around 800 BC, made possible by the adaptation
of the consonantal Phoenician alphabet to the Greek language. The Phoenicians were a seafaring
people who inhabited cities on the coast of Syria. We don't know where this adaptation first took
place, but a likely candidate is Al-Mina, a mixed Greek and Phoenician community on the present-day
border between Turkey and Syria. It was the sea that brought the Greeks and the Phoenicians together.
I can just see you as one of those Greek traders at Al-Mina examining those odd-looking
stretch marks and trying to puzzle out what they meant. You know a few words of Phoenician,
and when you've finished haggling over some deal, you engage your counterpart in a halting
conversation. He explains to you that these stretch marks can be used to send messages
or make lists. You immediately start making scratches yourself on a piece of pottery,
and you quickly adapt it to your own language by adding seven vowel sounds. And you also have
another idea. You realize you can use the script to preserve lines of poetry. In fact, what may
well be the earliest bit of Greek writing inscribed on a piece of pottery is just that,
a line of poetry. That's not all. The reinvention of writing marks a huge shift in the experience
and quality of everyday life. For one thing, it meant that laws could now be written down.
We've seen already the importance of laws in Mesopotamian society as early as the 19th century
BC. But our earliest example of a Greek law dates to the 7th century BC. Laws serve the interests
of ordinary people, of the other side of history, because they prescribe punishments and procedures
and thus prevent the exploitation of the vulnerable by the powerful. You know where you stand when
there are written laws. In this lecture, we've looked at the people who for a period of over
1,000 years inhabited the land and the island that we today call Greece. It is a disjointed
and uneven story which could hardly prepare us for the remarkable renaissance with which it ends.
It was a renaissance made possible in part by the sea, by contact between the Greeks and the
Phoenicians and other peoples. But it's not the renaissance that will be our chief concern in
the 10 lectures about the Greeks that follow. On the contrary, it's the lives of women, of children,
of slaves, citizen soldiers, refugees, sick, disabled and elderly. Before we look at these
specific types, however, we need to ask ourselves a very basic question. What it meant and what it
felt like being Greek.
