When and where and under what circumstances did the first human being reach the terrible
decision that it was OK to reduce other human beings to slavery?
We've no idea, but slavery was definitely being practiced in the 3rd and 2nd millennia
BC by the Mesopotamians, by the Egyptians, and later by the early Hebrews.
It certainly wasn't the Greeks who invented slavery, though the Greeks get a particularly
bad rap, because to their cost being a highly articulate and literate people, they just
happened to have provided us with a full record of how slavery functioned in their world.
As we've already seen, slavery existed in Greece in the Mycenaean period from around
1600 BC.
By the end of the 8th century BC, at the very latest, slavery was so much a part of everyday
life that even if you had been poor, you'd have owned a slave.
We know that for a fact, because the poet Hesiod, author of an epic poem called The
Works and Days, a kind of farmer's almanac, takes it for granted that even a peasant farmer
will own a slave.
Already by the 8th century too, slavery rather than wage labour was the most common form
of dependent labour in the Greek world.
As the historian Paul Cartledge has noted, however, slavery in antiquity covered a multitude
of sins and life chances.
The ideal type of the slave is the socially dead chattel, ripped forcibly from organic
ties of kin and community, transported to an alien environment, there to be treated
as merely a piece of property or as a factor of production to be used and abused at will.
An inanimate tool or beast of burden with no sense of self other than that allowed by
the slave owner and no legal, let alone civic, personality whatsoever.
But no slave fitted this ideal type and this is really an essential point to note.
Slavery had in fact many faces, many conditions and many statuses.
It wasn't the case that you were either free or a slave.
On the contrary, there was what one scholar has aptly called a continuum of unfreedom.
And as we shall see, some slaves actually did okay by the standards of the day.
So today, you're going to be a Greek slave.
And not surprisingly, you won't find the time or the means to leave us an account of your
life or we don't have a single testimony from any period written by a Greek slave telling
us what she or he felt about being a slave.
Slaves make a few brief appearances in literature and very occasionally too in art.
Philosophers sometimes discuss slavery in an abstract way but never with any insight
into the feelings of slaves.
So what we have to go on is admittedly minimal.
Even so, we can build up a pretty clear picture of the daily life of slaves even though we
can't get into their heads.
What we can do, however, is get inside the heads of Greeks who own slaves, which is what
I want to invite you to do now.
From childhood upwards, you've grown up with slaves, all your friends own slaves.
There isn't a single person in the entire Greek world so far as we know who advocated
the abolition of slavery.
And you certainly don't.
It would never cross your mind to do so.
That makes Greek slavery a very different kind of phenomenon from slavery in the antebellum
south.
Even if you're a really nice Greek man or woman, which of course you are, it would
never ever have occurred to you to question the necessity, the inevitability or the essential
rightness of slavery.
The best we could expect of you is that you'll act decently and humanely towards your own
slaves.
It's true that the 5th century BC comic dramatist Crates does, in one of his plays, fancifully
imagine a world so technologically advanced that all you have to do is pronounce a command
and it happens automatically.
A table, lay yourself, a mixing bowl, pour the wine, meat dish, serve the beef, says
one of his characters.
But that hardly amounted to empathizing with a slave and it certainly wasn't an argument
for abolishing slavery.
Crates was merely envisaging a world that could dispense with slaves and that's something
entirely different.
Even if you had the greatest brain in the world, you still wouldn't be able to think
yourself outside the box, a common, if not universal, failing of human beings throughout
history as we've seen already.
In the politics, Aristotle differentiated between what he called slaves by nature, i.e.
born in captivity and slaves by law, i.e. those captured in war or acquired through piracy
and sold into slavery.
Well, you didn't have to be a genius to realize that those who were born free but ended up
slaves did so as the result of happenstance, whereas those who were born into slavery from
the start belonged to a substratum of the human race.
To prove for this, let's consult Aristotle.
Just look at their bodies, Aristotle said.
The fact that they're often misshapen proves conclusively they were indeed born to be slaves.
Well, Aristotle, great mind that he was, was of course confusing cause with effect.
Of course their bodies are going to become misshapen if you give them back-breaking work
to do.
Things also lack the faculty of deliberation, Aristotle avert.
Of course they do, you prized chump.
They don't have any leisure and what on earth would they deliberate about anyway?
Aristotle was a great one for defining things and the choice phrase he came up with to define
a household slave was, ktema empsucon, a piece of property that breathes, meaning that a
slave is in the same category as a chair or a table, with the exception that it, the
slave, happens to be endowed with life.
Well I'm being hard on Aristotle because he happens to have articulated his thoughts
about slavery but he was no different from any other Greek.
It's that mindset thing at work again and if someone as smart as Aristotle was stuck
inside his head, it's safe to assume that every other Greek would have been as well.
Before I talk about your life as a slave I want to give you some idea of the size of
the slave population in Greece.
Nobody of course kept a register of slaves, not even the Athenians who as ever provide
us with the best evidence but Paul Cartelidge whom I quoted a moment ago, drawing on comparative
data from modern slave societies including Brazil, the Caribbean and the Antebellum
South, estimates that between 450 and 320 BC there were about 80,000 to 100,000 slaves
out of a total population of perhaps a quarter of a million, that's to say somewhere between
one in four and one in three of the Athenian population were slaves.
Moses Finley who pioneered the study of Greek slavery back in the late 1950s, Greek historians
before his time had been rather embarrassed for the Greeks and so avoided the subject,
went so far as to say, we can take it as a rule that any free man who could possibly afford
one owned a slave attendant who accompanied him when he walked abroad in the town or when
he travelled and also a slave woman for his household chores.
So owning a slave was very much like owning a car in our society.
If you were well to do however you probably owned two or three whereas if you were seriously
rich you owned between 10 and 20.
As I've already indicated as a slave you don't have any social, legal or political persona.
What that means is that you have no family, no rights under the law, no political identity,
you can be beaten at your owner's will and you can be forced into a non-consensual sexual
relationship.
If you're called to give testimony in a lawsuit you can only do so under torture which was
intended to get you to spill the beans by either confessing to your own guilt or by
incriminating someone else.
To us torture in such circumstances seems not only inhumane but also counterproductive.
In the eyes of the Greeks however a slave was incapable of distinguishing truth from
falsehood and worse perfectly prepared to lie just for the hell of it.
Remember as Aristotle said you lack the faculty of deliberation.
So unless he was tortured the court wouldn't know whether he was telling the truth or not.
What the Greeks didn't realise is that people will say anything under torture merely to
get the torture to end.
In some you were largely invisible both literally as well as metaphorically because you lack
what we would call personhood.
As I've already indicated however Greek slavery was not an absolute condition and we should
not treat Greek slaves as an undifferentiated mass.
Moreover the bleakness of the picture I've just drawn needs to be somewhat qualified
and ameliorated.
Given the prevalence of hardship, poverty and disease in the ancient world, a Greek
included, you might actually prefer being a slave to being a freeman.
When Odysseus encounters Achilles in the underworld in Book 11 of the Odyssey the latter says
that he would rather be a man who works for someone else rather than lord of all the dead.
Significantly he doesn't say he'd rather be a slave, presumably because being a slave
would be preferable to being a hired hand and not least in terms of job security.
Though we should also bear in mind the possibility that an aristocrat like Achilles was incapable
of imagining coming back to earth in the guise of a slave.
It's clear even so from the statement one that the Greeks considered it to be a total
disgrace for a freeman to work for another and two that slavery provided some measure
of economic security in a dangerous and unpredictable world.
So let's now look at the various types of jobs that you might be required to perform
as a slave.
Let's suppose to start with that you're a domestic, a ketema emsucon, a piece of property
that breathes as Aristotle put it.
In other words, you're an example of the most advanced labor-saving device that the Greek
world ever produced.
You may be a cook, a gardener, a porter, a cleaner, a washer, a reader, a scribe, a nurse
both of children and of the sick, an escort, a messenger, a travelling companion, a fetcher
and carrier or pretty much all of the above rolled into one.
Your quality of life depends very much on the luck of the draw.
With good luck, your master or your mistress will be humane and treat you within strict
limits of course like one of the family.
He or she wouldn't want you to get apathy, however.
And irrespective of how they actually treated you, you would to some extent have been officially
integrated into the oikos or oikia, the household and family.
Oikos, oikos and oikia that give us our word economy, which literally means the proper
running of a household.
The fact that you were officially integrated into the oikos is demonstrated by your participation
immediately after you had been acquired in a religious ceremony by which you officially
became an oikitis, which means a person of the oikos.
And the ceremony you went through was very similar to the one performed on behalf of
a newborn baby when it was incorporated into the family at the Amphidromia, which I talked
about in the previous lecture.
Over time too, you may develop a close tie with your master or mistress and that's particularly
likely if you have to look after the children either as a female nurse or as a male pyrogogos.
A pyrogogos means literally someone who accompanies a child, though in practice such a slave often
functioned as a tutor.
And that's how we get the words pedagogue and pedagogy.
Odysseus and Euryklaia for instance enjoy a very close relationship with one another
in the Odyssey.
As we saw in the previous lecture, it's she who notices a scar on Odysseus' thigh when
he returns to Ithaca disguised as a beggar because she's intimate with his personal history.
Incidentally, Euryklaia belongs to the Aristotelian category of slave by law.
She was originally freeborn and captured by pirates and sold into slavery and that's
no doubt why she is so trusted.
As we've seen already, the Greeks had an issue with the trustworthiness of their slaves.
The Odyssey makes a point of differentiating the slaves who have been loyal to Odysseus
throughout the 20 years of his absence and those who have not.
In the plays of the 5th century BC, Tragedian, Euripides, the faithful old family retainer
who closely identifies with the fortunes and misfortunes of his master is a stock figure
just as he is in the plays of Shakespeare.
Kent in King Lear is an obvious example of the faithful retainer who watches over his
master even when he is down on his luck.
Though an idealized image, it's likely to reflect reality even though that reality may
contain a measure of wishfulfillment on the part of some Greeks.
No doubt if you'd been a fly on the wall in the Greek household, you'd have heard a great
deal of complaints about slaves failing in their duties in various ways.
Even so, there was a good chance too that you would have won the hearts of your master
or mistress, particularly as I said if you had taken a hand in raising them.
This is suggested by depictions of slaves on classical Greek funerary monuments, further
indicating that they were part of the family.
And were also buried in family plots.
All that said, the fact remains that your owner was at liberty to abuse you physically
and sexually.
He was also free to chuck you out on the street once you had outlived your years of usefulness,
though we never actually hear of this happening.
Even so, you would have been at particular risk at times of economic hardship and famine
because if food was in short supply, you'd obviously be the first to be put on reduced
rations or to go without.
Other than at times of crisis, however, domestic slaves were, for the most part, relatively
well often secure.
Not so agricultural workers.
The size of this workforce is much disputed.
Sticking with Athens, the size depends on how many Athenians were peasant proprietors
and how many were large landowners.
As a peasant farmer, despite what Hesiod suggests, you probably preferred to hire laborers on
a seasonal basis than to own slaves to do the work because seasonal labor would have
been considerably cheaper overall.
So let's suppose that you're a slave who works for a wealthy landowner.
You'll be a lot worse off than a domestic, that's for sure.
That's because you'll have little contact with your owner and you won't be able to build
up a personal relationship.
You won't have the status, the comfort, all the security of an oikestes.
You'll probably sleep in a shack or a barn.
If you fall sick, there may welcome a time when it's not worthwhile keeping you alive.
We don't know this for a fact, but you may well be restrained at night, say in legions
like agricultural slaves who worked for the Romans.
Apart from domestics and agricultural workers, there was also a few slaves who were described
as those living separately, Horus oikuntes, those in other words who lived on their own
and who served their owners as managers of shops and factories, bankers, captains of
trading ships, bailiffs, artisans, you name it.
You got to take on these tasks because as I mentioned, Greeks despised working for other
people.
So as a slave, in this category, you would have enjoyed considerable freedom.
You operated independently, worked on your owner's behalf and generally paid him or her
a commission.
You'd probably be much more valuable than the average slave.
The Athenian general Nikias, who led the ill-fated Sicilian expedition in 415 BC, is
said to have paid one whole talent, that's a huge sum of money, to purchase a particular
slave to manage his silver mines.
It's clear too that a few slaves who lived separately were freed after a period of time,
but only a few of them, unlike Rome, the Greeks never instituted a system whereby slaves
after performing several years of service became eligible for their freedom.
You might also be one of the De Mosiai, literally the public ones, that is, slaves who were
owned by the state.
If you belonged to this group, you could be a notary, a coin tester, a jury clerk or
even the public executioner.
It was work that no Athenian would want to perform because it was considered degrading.
Or you might be one of the 300 Scythian archers whom the Athenian state owned to keep the
peace at times when the citizen body got a bit unruly.
Or you might be a roadmender or a mason.
As a mason, you might actually work alongside citizens.
We know this from the building accounts of the Erech Theum, that's one of the temples
on the Acropolis in Athens, which identifies three categories of workers, citizens, medics,
those are resident aliens and slaves.
And whatever kind of slave you happen to be, you might also be pressed into military
service in time of war.
Your worst fate of all, however, was to be an industrial slave, working down in a mine
or in a quarry, very like the Egyptians' slaves I mentioned before.
Athens had silver mines in Lavrian in southeast Attica and these were worked intensively.
According to Thucydides, more than 20,000 slaves, many of them, no doubt, from the mines
escaped to a Spartan stronghold in Attica called Desalea during the Peloponnesian War.
We're told that the Athenian general Nikeas, whom I mentioned a moment ago, owned as many
as 1,000 slaves whom he leased out at the rate of one obel per slave per day to work
down in the mines.
If you'd worked down in the mines, you would have been worked literally to death.
Work went on 24-7 uninterruptedly.
From the discovery of miners' lamps containing oil, it's been estimated that your shift lasted
about 10 hours.
Working in the quarries wasn't much better.
There were quarries on Mount Imetus and Mount Bentelecon, close to Athens, from which the
Athenians extracted marble for their building program.
And you might end up working there.
Alternatively, you might work in a factory of sorts, the largest factory of which we
hear employed 120 slaves to manufacture shields.
The arms trade was big business in the ancient world as it is in the modern.
I now want to turn to Sparta, the only other Greek slave-owning community that we can discuss
in any detail.
Athenian slaves, as we know from inscriptions regarding the confiscation of property from
those found guilty of religious crimes in 416 BC, came from a wide variety of places dotted
all around the Mediterranean.
Probably a small minority of them would have been born into slavery.
As a slave owned by the Spartans, however, you would have identified yourself as ethnically
homogeneous with all other Spartan slaves.
That's because when the Spartans conquered your homeland, they reduced you all to servile
status.
Your homeland was Messinia, the rich agricultural region that lies to the west of Laconia.
Laconia was the name for the territory to the east occupied by the Spartans.
It gives us our word, laconic, because the Spartans of course were known for their brevity.
You are called helots, a word of uncertain origin that is probably connected with the
Greek verb meaning to capture.
You're part of the indigenous population of Messinia and you work your own land, albeit
in a state of unfreedom.
You have no political or legal rights and you can be executed or hunted down without
trial.
The Spartan poet Teteas characterised you and your fellow helots as asses worn down with
great burdens.
You mainly perform agricultural production for your absentee landlords, the Spartan
citizen body, which is either engaged in military training or off fighting somewhere.
In times of emergency, you might serve as light armed troops.
You're there at Thermopylae by the way, beside the famous 300, though hardly anyone remembers
that, even today.
After all, you're almost wholly invisible.
Even so, at home you lead something resembling a family life and you enjoy an independence
of sorts.
At least you're not at someone's constant beck and call every minute of the day and
night like most slaves.
Here we hear of an organisation of Spartan youths aged between 18 and 20, known as the
Kruptire, which I mentioned briefly in the lecture about growing up Greek.
The word translates roughly as that which is secret or covert.
And the objective of it was to strike terror into you by committing random acts of violence
against helots.
And along as you keep your head down, you can probably stay out of trouble.
In addition, you're permitted to retain everything that you produce over and above what you
have to deliver to your Spartan masters, which is probably about half.
Very occasionally the Spartan assembly might even give you your freedom, especially at
times when there was a dearth of Spartan citizens, something that became increasingly
frequent from 450 BC onwards.
Be careful, however.
On one occasion the Spartans agreed to honour those helots who had performed acts of bravery
on their behalf.
But when they had got them all assembled, the Spartans massacred them, judging them
to be too dangerous to be allowed to live.
Well, that's smarter for you.
Individual Spartans were not permitted to free their slaves.
One last major difference between you as a helot and other Greek slaves is that you greatly
outnumbered the master race.
We have no means of accurately determining the size of the helot population, but some
scholars estimate there were seven times as many helots as citizens.
Hardly surprisingly, your masters lived in constant dread that you might revolt, and
this contributed to their reluctance to engage in lengthy foreign wars.
This dread was made more acute by the fact that you were ethnically homogeneous, had
a collective identity, and worshipped your own gods.
And all of the above made the Spartans habitually paranoid.
Their fear was increased by the fact that their way of life was more dependent on slaves
than any other Greek community of which we have knowledge, because it was the helots
who did most of the farming.
And the Spartans did indeed have a great deal to fear.
In 464 BC, the helots staged a major revolt, which it took the Spartans five long years
to suppress.
In no other Greek state was there even a slave uprising, nor so far as we know even the threat
of one.
When we think of Athens as great cultural accomplishments and of Greece generally, we
should never forget the unpalatable fact that these were supported, if not based on slavery,
on the other side of history.
To put this in context, Heronitus claims that no fewer than 35,000 slaves served as
light-armed troops at the Battle of Plataea in 479 BC, the battle that finally drove the
Persians out of Greece, as well as serving, as we've seen at the Battle of Thermopylae
the previous year.
If that figure is even remotely accurate, and I can't think why Heronitus would inflate
it, then it's no exaggeration to state that Greece's victory over the hated barbarians
was made possible by the contribution of its downtrodden and degraded.
Slaves are indeed the unsung.
In the next lecture, we're going to examine how it came about that the Greek military
and navy, with the aid of its slaves, managed to repel those hated barbarians.
