There's no two ways about it. As a Greek male, you would have been extremely bellicose.
As soon as spring arrived and the dandelions popped up, you would have felt an irresistible
urge to work off your testosterone. To reverse Klausavitz's famous dictum, politics for the
Greeks was a continuation of war by other means. Probably most Greek communities were engaged
in hostilities of some sort every year. In the case of the Athenians, there were often
several theatres of war. As in the previous lecture, I'm going to be talking mainly about
the Athenians and Spartans, the ones we know most about, and I'm also going to be talking
mainly about the 5th century BC, the period that begins with the Persian Wars and ends
with the Peloponnesian War. Those wars had momentous consequences for Greece. For the
most part, however, the battles you fought were small and localised and did not change
the balance of power in the Greek world. Every Greek community required its citizens
to serve in the military, so I'm going to be talking about an aspect of daily life that was
common to virtually every Greek male, and one more over that dictated the rhythm of daily life.
The Greeks regarded service in the military as a privilege, not a duty and far less a chore.
Service in the military was as much part of your political identity as was attendance at the assembly.
This is something that is very difficult for us to understand. We of course have a professional
army, and except under circumstances of dire emergency, most of us today wouldn't expect to
have to fight for our country ever. We'd probably go to war much less frequently if we did.
The Greeks, the Spartans apart, weren't professional soldiers at all. They were farmers, tradesmen,
gentlemen of leisure and so forth, who from 18 onwards were also members of a citizen militia.
Being a conscientious objector wasn't an option. Even a philosopher like Socrates,
not the most military of men one supposes, fought in three battles. As two, no doubt,
did all the greatest intellects of the fifth century. The tragic poet Aeschylus in the epitaph
that he wrote himself alludes proudly to the fact that he, quote, slew the long-haired
meads, that's another name for the Persians, at Marathon. He doesn't record anything about
his accomplishments as a dramatist. As a Greek, you accepted the fact unquestioningly that you
would put your own life as well as the lives of your sons in harm's way on a regular basis.
Another thing that made serving in the Greek military so special was the fact that you served
alongside your relatives and your neighbors. That's because mobilization was conducted on a
tribal and thus regional basis. This again made the experience very different from what soldiers
face today since you would have known many of the people whom you were fighting alongside from birth
upwards. In other words, serving in the Athenian military was a collective and civic undertaking
and this made a huge difference to what fighting for your country would have felt like. Finally,
there weren't people back home criticizing the government for going to war while you put your
life on the line because it was you and the rest of the citizen body who had taken the decision to
go to war in the first place. The Athenians weren't like the Spartans when it came to
making war. In the famous funeral speech that the historian Thucydides puts into the mouth of
Pericles at the end of the first year of the Peloponnesian war, the statesman makes a pointed
contrast between Athenians and Spartans. The Spartans, he says, are constantly training.
We, on the other hand, I quote, have procured many ways to refresh our minds from toil by indulging
in athletic contests and in annual sacrifices. In other words, we, unlike the Spartans, know how
to kick back. So let's suppose you've just turned 18 and you come from a well-to-do family, a family
that is with enough money to supply you with hoplite armor. Hoplite means a soldier armed with a
hoplon. A hoplon is a round shield made of wood or stiffened leather with a bronze covering about
three feet in diameter. You hold it in such a way as to protect about half of your body
and half of the body of the man standing on your left. It goes without saying that hoplites have
to be right-handed. You're also going to need a bronze corslet or breastplate, a bronze helmet,
a pair of greaves, a thrusting spear about eight feet long, and a short sword. The equipment of
a hoplite was cutting edge in more sense than one. It's been plausibly suggested that the Athenian
victory over the Persians at Marathon was partly due to the superiority of hoplite equipment.
At 18 you're now required to serve for two years as an effib. That's to say as a cadet.
Effibos means literally poised at the moment of youth. In your first year of service you'll train
both as a hoplite and as a light armed warrior. That's to say you'll learn to use not only a sword
and a spear but also a bow and a catapult. During your second year you'll serve as a patrolman
at forts situated along the borders of Attica. When you've completed your two years of training
you're liable at any time to be called up for military service. Typically you'll be called up
several times in your lifetime as Socrates was. You'll learn that you've been called up
when you read the relevant notice attached to the base of the monument to the eponymous heroes
in the Athenian Agorah. The eponymous heroes are the patrons of the Ten Athenian tribes
into which the entire citizen body is divided. One hero for each tribe. The notice will also
tell you how much food to bring with you which was the same as telling you how long the campaign
was expected to last. Mobilization is conducted on a tribal basis and there will be a notice
under the appropriate statue stating which age groups within your tribe are required to serve.
Younger men obviously serve more frequently than older men and as someone who has just
completed his military training your chances of being called up are very high. Even so we know
that many in their 40s and 50s commonly fought and died in battle. Rarely was the entire citizen
body called up however. It doesn't take much imagination to work out that the leave taking
between you and your family will be very poignant as is the case with every leave taking between
soldiers and their families. Scenes of leave taking are frequently depicted on Greek vases
indicating their centrality to the life of the family and the home. We see hoplites polishing
their armor donning it and then bidding farewell. Occasionally there's a dog sniffing around it
obviously realizes something is up. The scenes are invariably restrained you don't see people
weeping but they're highly charged nonetheless. And once you've left your family won't hear any
word of you till you return not not for months even perhaps years in some cases as in the case of
Odysseus' wife Penelope which was like my mother's situation in World War II made worse by the fact
that she received a telegram telling her that her husband was missing presumed dead. It wasn't true
he turned up at the end of the war but in the meantime she'd fallen in love. It must have been
common occurrence in antiquity. Hoplite battles usually took place on level ground since that
way you and your fellow hoplites could maintain order and discipline. First however your general
would ask a seer to see whether the omens are favorable and if the seer reports that they are
the general will give the order to join battle and your march locked step to the sound of pipes
singing a peon or a hymn to the god Apollo. You march in a rectangular formation known as a phalanx.
A phalanx is a long battle line about eight ranks deep you take your stand directly opposite the
enemy who if they're Greeks are also drawn up in a phalanx formation. You engage by running towards
the enemy being careful to keep in battle formation and at the moment of impact it's
like two tanks smashing into each other. Your objective is limited to break through the enemy
line on mass. In order to achieve this you and your fellows have to stand your ground
and this meant that individual heroics are pretty much ruled out. There's no point breaking out
of line because all that does is to put the men fighting alongside you at risk because they'll
be unprotected and remember that your shield partly protects the man on your left so complicated
maneuvers are rarely attempted. Generals don't play much of a part so far as we can tell since
once you had engaged you wouldn't have been able to hear their orders as your helmet had no piercings
for the ears. The noise that reverberates inside your helmet is intense and disorienting unless
you're fighting in the front rank you probably don't have much sense of how your side is doing.
All you can see is the back of the man standing in front of you. You do a lot of
jabbing at the unprotected parts of your enemy's body especially above and below his shield and you
push hard with your shield. The battle probably lasts under an hour by that point you may well be
seriously dehydrated and faint with exhaustion. Your phalanx and that of your enemy probably
push forward and then get pushed back for a while rather like in a tug of war but eventually one
side begins to give way where upon a swift outcome will generally ensue. Most battles ended in a
tactical victory. As the victors you wouldn't have bothered to pursue the enemy instead
you're probably content to erect a trophy on the field of battle. Our word trophy comes from the
Greek noun trope meaning turning point since you erected your trophy at the place where your army
gained the upper hand. So the battle is over probably you've taken some prisoners and now
they're exchanged. Now too comes the grisly task of disposing of your dead. If you've been defeated
it was still a pan-hylenic law and all Greek law that you could return to the battlefield
and recover your dead. So by the standards of modern warfare it's all rather civilized.
That's because you're fighting against Greeks. It wouldn't be so civilized if you were fighting the
Persians. One recent estimate is that typically five percent of the victorious army and 14 percent
of the defeated army were killed in the fray and that doesn't include the wounded many of whom would
have become permanently disabled as a result of their injuries. The Athenians generally cremated
their dead on the battlefield and then brought their ashes back to Athens and then at the end of the
campaigning season the ashes of all the war dead from all the campaigns fought that year were
interred in 10 Cyprus wood coffins at one for each of the 10 tribes and a man chosen by the
Deimos that's to say by the Athenian assembly who was noted for his wisdom and his high reputation
as Thucydides puts it delivered a funeral speech over them like the one I quoted from earlier
in the Keromikus Athens's principal cemetery. It was one of those rare occasions in the Athenian
calendar when men women and children all assembled together. The Athenian statesman Pericles who
was chosen to give the speech on behalf of the dead who died in the first year of the Peloponnesian
war used it as an occasion to celebrate Athenian values to give an account of what it was that
Athenian soldiers were defending. The whole world he said is the grave of glorious men
Andron Epiphanon Pasagay Tafos meaning those who have died in battle it's a wonderful way
of expressing our debt to our soldiers. Only in exceptional circumstances did you
inter your dead on the battlefield as in the case of the 196 Athenians who died at Marathon
in 490 BC repulsing the Persians. You accorded them this honor because you judged their courage to
have been heroic in the technical sense of the word. In other words you regarded them as heroes
and worshiped them accordingly. You buried them collectively at Marathon at the exact spot
where most of them fell and heaped a mound on top of them and it remains to this day a very sacred
spot. We don't know the size of the Athenian hoplite army at any period of history. Historians
used to assume that most Greeks were either rich or poor. It's becoming increasingly apparent however
that Athens at least had a sizable middle class the class that supplied the hoplites. If you didn't
have enough money to purchase a suit of armor you probably volunteered to become a rower in
an Athenian warship known as a trierim. Trierim derives from trieres meaning three fitted a
reference to its three banks or tiers of oars. The trierim has been aptly described as the gray
hound of the seas. It was designed to achieve maximum speed and maneuverability with minimum
weight. It accommodated 170 rowers, 10 hoplites, 4 archers and 16 crew members making a complement
of 200. Two square sails enabled it to take advantage of favorable winds. It was also
tipped with a bronze ram so that it could sink enemy ships. We know a great deal about trierims
thanks to John Coates, a naval architect who persuaded the Greek Ministry of Culture to build a
full-scale replica trierim to a design that was not only faithful to the ancient testimony
but also consistent with the laws of physics. It was named the Olympias and it was commissioned
into the Greek Navy in June of 1987. It achieved a top speed of 8.9 knots and 46 strokes a minute.
If say the trierim caught fire the sailors could accomplish an emergency evacuation by jumping
into the water in a mere 24 seconds or at least that's how long it took the volunteer rowers on
the Olympias to jump overboard. Let's pass now to Sparta. Plutarch in his life of Lycurgus
memorably states that the Spartans belonged entirely to their country and not to themselves.
Everything we know about Spartan society supports this claim although it has to be acknowledged that
almost all of what we know about Sparta was written by non-Spartan philosophers and historians
which means that we see Sparta entirely from the outside. As Plutarch tells us at the age of six
you were removed from the care of your parents and subjected to an extremely tough system of state
education and known as the agogay. Its objective was to instill obedience discipline and resourcefulness
in you. I've talked about Sparta's educational system in the lecture about growing up Greek so
let's move on to the point where you hit 20 when you became liable for military service.
A military service will now dominate every aspect of your life. You'll wear a distinctive scarlet
cloak allegedly to disguise your blood if you're wounded and you'll have the letter lambda painted
on your shield indicating that you're a Lachydimonia the name by which Spartans were generally known.
Even on your wedding night you'll be permitted to spend only a short time with your bride before
having to return to your barracks before dawn and nothing could indicate more obviously your primary
attachment to the state. At age 30 you'll finally become a full citizen a Homoios meaning one who
when you're not actually fighting you're training a state of affairs that prompted Plutarch to
observe that the Spartans were the only Greeks for whom war was a welcome respite from the business
of preparing for war. You'll finally be released from military obligations at the age of 60
though like many retired servicemen by that point you'll probably feel more at home with
your comrades in arms than you will with your family. All that training did I suppose pay off
sort of at any rate. As a Spartan you had the reputation justifiably for being the most courageous
warriors of all the Greeks. Your reputation was secured for all time of course at the Battle of
Thermopylae in August for 80 BC when 300 of you under the command of your king Leonidas
defended the narrow pass at Thermopylae before being overwhelmed by the Persians.
Herodotus tells us that when a scout sent by the Persian king Xerxes went to spy upon the Spartans
he found them brushing their hair. Spartan men wore their hair long. The Spartans always
brushed their hair before they placed their lives at risk. How cool is that? Equally cool is the
reply by Dianneke is one of the 300 to an observation by one of the locals that the Persians had
so many arrows that they would block out the sun. Good he said that means we'll fight in the shade.
The poet Simonides wrote this wonderful restrained epigram to commemorate their sacrifice.
Go tell the Spartans stranger passing by that here obedient to their law we lie. It exactly captures
the Spartan fighting spirit and to this day American and British soldiers serving in
Afghanistan wear tattoos on their bodies that testify to their admiration for the 300.
Yet noble though the sacrifice of the Spartans was for the cause of western civilization
the sighting of it in the context of modern warfare is a stark reminder of the
long shadow cast by interracial hatred. We'll be talking more about the east west divide
in a later lecture about life among the Persians but it's it's worth noting here that its origins
lie in the wars between the Greeks and the Persians. It was during this period too that
the image of the dreaded and despised barbarian first came into being. Previously there doesn't
seem to have been any deeply embedded animosity between Greeks and Persians. What made the
Persians so hateful in the eyes of the Athenians was the fact that they destroyed their temples
on the Acropolis and smashed their grave markers. As a result of the Persian wars therefore
the Greeks came to view the Persians as quintessentially the other inferior to themselves
in every way. I want next to talk about mercenaries the soldiers who fought not for their country but
for pay. We already hear of mercenaries in the Greek world from around the second half of the
seventh century onwards and they may well have existed earlier. Until the end of the fifth
century however they were relatively few in number due to the fact that the city states all depended
on citizen militias for their protection as I've pointed out. The only employers of mercenaries
until then were tyrants and kings. It was the worsening economic conditions of Greece at the
end of the Peloponnesian war that made being a mercenary an attractive job proposition.
So what would have induced you to offer your services as a mercenary? Basically the fact
was that it afforded you a degree of security in an increasingly insecure world.
If you were hail and hearty had a taste for adventure and didn't mind putting your life on
the line it had much to recommend it. Initially mercenaries came from the poorer regions of
Greece such as Arcadia in the northern Peloponnes where farming was an uphill struggle or from
outside the Greek world altogether such as Thrace in the far north many of whose people
were so wretched that they sold their children into slavery. In time however men began enlisting
as mercenaries from all over Greece including from the leading city states. Being a mercenary was
a very demanding job you'd need to be trained in a variety of techniques as you never knew what
sort of fighting you'd be asked to do. Engagement increasingly took place in rough terrain which
meant it wasn't enough to know how to fight as a hoplite you'd have to know guerrilla tactics as
well. You'd sign up to fight on a seasonal basis or for the duration of a specific campaign.
We hear of recruitment centres at Cape Tainaram and Cape Maliya both at the southernmost tips
of the Peloponnes. You wouldn't care who your paymaster happened to be nor who you were fighting
just as long as the pay was good and that was all accounted. In 401 BC the Persian prince Cyrus
hired more than 10,000 Greek mercenaries in an attempt to seize his brother's throne. Cyrus was
wealthy so the pay would have been good. People signed up from all over Greece. After Cyrus had
been killed in battle his mercenaries succeeded in making their way back from the Persian heartland
to friendly territory without suffering serious losses and in so doing they had to cross deserts
and negotiate mountain passes. Their journey is stirringly described by an Athenian general called
Xenophon who was one of their number in his anabasis or march up country. It proved the
military superiority of Greek soldiers over barbarians and was a tremendous advertisement
for their prowess and expertise. And from this point onwards a mercenary is gravitated to every
theater of war. Yet despite their importance as a mercenary you'd be decidedly low down on the
social scale. The Athenian orator and essayist isocrates characterized you as the dregs of
society. Writing in 3 ACBC he defined you as persons who are either refugees, deserters or
criminals and who follow anybody so long as he increases their income. Later Isocrates warned
his fellow countrymen that those who wander about without the means to support themselves and who
assault all those they encounter are in danger of becoming so numerous without our realizing it
that they will become as formidable as the barbarians once were. Isocrates is no doubt
using scaremongering tactics for rhetorical effect but the fact that he expected his scaremongering
to work indicates that the Greeks were genuinely alarmed at the increase in the number of persons
of no fixed abode. Because you are armed to the teeth and owed no allegiance other than to your
paymaster you'd be capable of dealing the death blow to Greek civilization as we know it or at
least that is what Isocrates indicates. His hysterical hype is fully equal to the worst
successes of modern tabloid journalism. To conclude the rise of the mercenary had profound
implications for daily life in the Greek world it meant that a sizable percentage of the Greek
male population was uprooted and on the move. We don't know what specific consequences this had
for the women who were left at home but they must have been profound. In the next lecture we're going
to direct our attention specifically to the world of Greek women to find out how they were perceived
by men, what being in the home was like for them and what alternatives there were to the
traditional role of being wives and mothers.
