By our way of reckoning, the Greeks were deeply sexist. Women in their view were responsible
for all that is bad in the world. It was a woman, you may recall, called Pandora, the
name means all gifted, who because of her insatiable curiosity opened the jar which contained
all the evils in the world, sickness, hard work and so on, leaving only hope inside.
In other words, Pandora bears a strong family resemblance to biblical Eve. It wasn't just
Greek myths that were sexist. Greek scientists weren't any better. The greatest of them
believed that women were biologically inferior to men. In his treatise called Generation
of Animals, Aristotle defined a woman as an infertile male. She is infertile, he exclaimed,
because of a kind of inadequacy, adunamir, being unable to produce semen. He thought
that the menses was failed sperm, sperm that hadn't coagulated properly. As a Greek woman,
you might well have been stuck in a rut. There were very few outlets for female talent.
Your chances of becoming a creative artist or an intellectual were pretty much nil. You
might have become a poetess. We hear of several poetesses, the most notable of whom is Sappho,
but only fragments of their work have survived, which in itself seems to tell us a lot about
the prejudices of largely male readers. And there were other drawbacks to being a woman.
A skeletal evidence indicates that you would have pre-deceased Greek men by about five
to ten years. This was partly due to the early age at which you became pregnant and entered
childbirth, and partly due to the small interval between your successive pregnancies. If you
haven't guessed it already, I should tell you that there's going to be a lot of social pressure
upon you to get married, and once married to become pregnant, ASAP. I've mentioned already
Madea's comment in Euripides' play of that name. I'd rather go into battle three times
than give birth once. Though that comment comes from the pen of a man, I bet there were
lots of women who said to their husbands, you think battle is dangerous and painful?
Just you try giving birth. Incidentally, some scholars used to argue that Euripides was
a misogynist on the grounds that he portrayed some pretty frightening women in his plays,
women like Madea who murders her children, Fedra who falsely accuses her stepson of raping
her and so on. I happen to think the very opposite was the case. I think he was horrified,
not so much by women as by the horrific things they could do when placed under intolerable
pressure by men, like killing their children if their ex-husbands try to take them from
which is what Madea does. Unless you choose to cut off all ties with your family, you'll
be under the control of a male, either your father, your husband, your elder's brother
or your guardian. Your subjugation to your husband would have been made more acute by
the fact that there was typically a large discrepancy between your age and his. The poet
Hesiod, who was composing in the 7th century BC, recommended that a man should be not much
under 30 and a girl in her fifth year past puberty. That's to say, perhaps around 17.
As a moderately prosperous wife, you would have spent most of your time in the home.
And Dromache in Euripides's play The Trojan Women states, there is one prime source of
scandal for a woman when she doesn't stay at home. But before we get too down on the
Greeks, we need to put aside our own preconceptions, our own sensibility and our own sense of cultural
evolution, as I argued in our discussion on slavery. Only then can we come some way to
understanding what it was like to be a Greek woman. I don't expect anyone at the end of
this lecture to be thinking, oh, I do wish I'd been a Greek woman. They had so much fun.
But I do hope to contextualize their lot in a way that makes it seem that if you had been
a woman living in ancient Greece and thinking as an ancient Greek woman, then your life
would not have seemed as bad as it does from our 21st century perspective. And as with
slaves, we shall discover that Greek women were not an undifferentiated mass. There were
real choices that women could make, choices that enabled them to lead radically different
lives from the majority of their kind. So let's imagine you're a young Greek girl.
Pretty much all your life, you've been stuck at home strictly supervised until the day you
get married. As we saw in the lecture about growing up Greek, you probably wouldn't have
received any formal education. There's no dating see unsupervised premarital contact
between a well brought up boy and girl is out of the question. Even a premarital peck
on the cheek is probably forbidden, except perhaps when you become betrothed. Even so,
extramarital sex must have occurred from time to time, though teenage pregnancies are likely
to have been far fewer than they are in our society.
So when you reach the age of about 14, your parents start looking for a husband for you
if they haven't had their eye on a suitable candidate for some time. Arranged marriages
were the norm in Greek society as no doubt in most ancient societies. And as indeed they
are in many modern societies as well. There's a wonderful discussion in Xenophon between
a fictional character called Iscomacus and his wife in which Iscomacus tells her how
it was they came to get hitched up together. It wasn't just because I wanted someone beside
me in bed at night, he tells her. Your parents were looking for a suitable son-in-law and
I was looking for a suitable wife. I chose you and they chose me from a host of possibilities.
How romantic. So what are the criteria that your parents will be thinking of when they
go about choosing a husband for you? Well, first and foremost, they want a man with wealth
and social status of course. Marriage served two principal goals both for your family and
for your husband's family. These were one, to produce offspring and two, to increase
the family's wealth. Your parents would have to provide you with a dowry because without
a dowry you risked ending your life unwed and barren as Oedipus lamented, thinking of
his girls. The dowry was intended to reimburse your husband for supporting you. If he divorced
you and we've no idea what the divorce rate was in Greece but divorce certainly occurred,
then he had to return it in full, either to your father or if your father had died to
whoever now became your legal guardian, perhaps your elder's brother. Your dowry in other words
was a kind of insurance policy. It guaranteed that as a divorcee you would not be financially
destitute and of course it also acted as a disincentive to divorce. You may be betrothed
for months if not years. Eventually however, it's the day of your wedding. It's almost
certainly the summer. On the day of your wedding you take a ritual bath from a special
vase known as a leutrophorus which marks your right of passage from unmarried to married.
You then sit down to a banquet in your father's house or the house of your legal guardian.
All your relatives and friends are present as are the relatives and friends of your bridegroom.
You're veiled and you sit apart from your bridegroom. Then when it starts to get dark
the feasting ends and your bridegroom conveys you, still veiled in a wagon to your new home.
On arrival at his house both of you are showered with nuts and dried figs, the Greek equivalent
of confetti, symbolic of the prosperity and fertility that it is hoped will attend your
marriage. What happened next is a complete mystery. There was no state official or priest
waiting to conduct the marriage ceremony. We know of no standard form of words that
was equivalent to an exchange of vows. We don't even know whether anyone pronounced
you husband and wife but if some form of words were spoken it was surely now. And then your
husband conducts you to the bridal chamber and once inside you finally remove your veil.
The door to the chamber is now closed. Outside the chamber relatives seeing a hymn called
an epithalamion from thalamos meaning in a room or bedroom. The rest is silence or perhaps
the opposite. A late source tells us that the macabre purpose of the hymn was to muffle
the cries of the bride as she underwent the painful ordeal of penetration. It's clear
that marriage created a much more violent disruption in your life as a woman than it
did in the life of a man. Your husband as we've seen is likely to have been considerably
older than you. He's probably had plenty of sexual experience as well. The violence
of the disruption you experienced is brilliantly conveyed by the anonymous 7th century poem
known as the hymn to Demeter which describes the abduction of Persephone daughter of Demeter
who was the goddess of the corn by Hades the grim god of the underworld. Persephone
is innocently plucking flowers in a meadow when she is snatched away to become the bride
of an aged and forbidding stranger whom she has never seen before. In real life too the
bride was often taken from her family when she was scarcely past playing with her dolls.
I'm reminded of a famous song that the British born Gracie Fields used to sing Walter Walter
take me to the altar which ends with a killer line marry me make all my nightmares come
true. Well there was no altar involved but the nightmares may well have been just as
real for some Greek brides rested from childhood and forced to submit to their husbands. So
you're married. What next? Well you immediately take on a number of responsibilities chief
of which is to produce a male heir to sweet to ensure that the family line does not die
out. Should you fail to become pregnant you will either be regarded with grave suspicion
or it will be assumed more benignly that there's something wrong with you. No blame will be
attached to your husband. It was always the woman who was to blame for the failure to
become pregnant. So you're under intense pressure to conceive from the word go so to
speak. Not surprisingly therefore concerns about infertility feature prominently in
the miraculous cures that are recorded at the healing sanctuary of Asclepius at Epidorus
in the northeast Peloponnese. We've already met Ithmanike in the first lecture who was
infertile and went to Epidorus to be made pregnant. Another reads as follows. Agamede
from Chios she slept in the sanctuary in order to have children and she had a dream. A snake
seemed to lie on her belly and as a result she produced five children. Snakes were sacred
to Asclepius. We'll be talking about his healing powers in a later lecture. Well lucky
old Agamede. Let's hope that guaranteed her a bit of respect when she returned to Chios.
I find myself wondering what compulsion brought her all the way to Epidorus a considerable
distance across the Aegean. Intolerable pressure from her husband a sense of personal worthlessness
or that most human instinct a basic yearning for a child. As a married woman you're also
in charge of the running of the household. If you're well bred you don't have to do
any housework yourself that's all done by the slaves but it's still your job to supervise
those slaves and to see that they don't get up to any mischief. And finally it would be
you and your sisters and your sisters in law and so on who would take the major part in
preparing a corpse for burial as women do to this day in Mediterranean countries.
Justice had been the case when you were an unmarried girl so now you would rarely have
appeared in public and if you do go out you'll wear your veil. Pericles notoriously observed
the highest glory for a woman is to be spoken of neither in praise nor in blame. In other
words you're expected to be socially invisible. You're expected not only to stay at home but
also to keep yourself away from the gaze of men. The only men you had regular contact
with were your close relatives. Most of the time you'll be in the women's quarters the
gunakayon which is situated in the most remote and sheltered part of the house or perhaps upstairs.
Whenever your husband invites some of his pals over for a drink you won't be present.
There was a special part of the house designated for him and his pals too known as the undrone
and all this of course is if your family is well to do.
You'll have to spend long hours in the company of your female slaves and your children. We don't
actually know whether Athenians or other Greeks would have gone out much with their wives and
daughters or would they typically have strolled together in downtown Athens arm in arm for instance
we never hear of it though that obviously doesn't mean that they didn't do it. There were however
some occasions when you were allowed to appear in public to start with you were allowed to attend
festivals. There were even a few festivals such as the Phezmophoria which was held in honor of
Demeter in the fall which only women could attend and you could also attend funerals.
In the novels of Jane Austen young girls spend much of their time eagerly awaiting the next ball.
As a young Athenian girl you'd probably spend much of your time eagerly awaiting the death of
Uncle Meletus or Aunt Melpomene. In fact a funeral was one of the few occasions when you might catch
the eye of a potential lover as we learn from the speech writer Lycius. The husband a man called
Eratosthenes for whom Lycius wrote the speech is facing a charge of homicide for having killed
his wife's lover. He claims however that he killed the man in flagrante delicto. The prosecution
claimed the killing was premeditated. Anyway it emerges that his wife's adulterer first set eyes
on her at a funeral. He subsequently suborned one of her slaves who then acted as a go-between.
The speech known as in prosecution of Eratosthenes provides us with a wonderful insight into daily
life. It demonstrates how even in the most straight laced societies and even when the penalties
for violating the conventions are extreme there will always be people who find ways to break the
mould even at the risk of their own lives. And finally in addition to festivals and funerals
you were expected to make periodic visits to the cemetery to perform cult what the Greeks
called the customary practices on behalf of your dead relatives attending their tombs and
depositing food and drink there. So was this the best so to speak that life had to offer
being either someone's daughter or someone's wife without any independent identity of your own?
Certainly this seems to have been how the majority of well bred Athenian women lived
and it had its compensations. It gave you security, status, respect, material comfort
and family ties. Not a bad package. However it came with a certain amount of boredom at least
from our perspective. It was certainly better than being what used to be called a spinster
that's to say an unmarried woman a position with low social status in Greek society and
one's perspective little gratification. Very likely a spinster would end up as a kind of servant in
the family of some male relative. Of course if you happen to be poor there would be no slave to do
the shopping and other tasks such as drawing water from the nearest wells so you'd inevitably
enjoy more freedom, the freedom at least to do manual labour. Widows too would not be constrained
in the same way that unmarried girls and married women were. But is that the total picture?
What about women who chose for whatever reason not to get married? What was the ancient Greek
equivalent of the singles scene in Sex and the City? Or you might think that's a bridge too far
making any comparison between contemporary New York and ancient Greece. The fact is however that
we do have portraits of two single women in earliest Greek literature. Calypso and Kerke in the Odyssey
are both single and 30-something perhaps even 40-something in Kerke's case. They're clearly
looking for men to hang out with. We should note however that these were goddesses not mortal Greek
women and the Odyssey provides us with a unique picture. We don't meet anyone remotely resembling
a Calypso or a Kerke in any other literary source and it's inconceivable that there was a singles
scene in ancient Greece. What we do encounter however in real life are hetari or female companions.
Though the term is sometimes inaccurately translated as prostitutes, many hetari were highly
accomplished. They were the only women who were permitted to take their place beside men at
symposia or drinking parties. The most famous hetira of all was Aspasia, the mistress of the
powerful Athenian statesman Pericles. Aspasia was fully able to hold her own conversationally
in the company of the leading luminaries of her day. Educated, politically informed,
personal and no doubt very attractive as well, she epitomizes all that any and every Greek woman
might have been if only she had been allowed to fulfill her potential. We don't know anything
about the circumstances that might have induced you to decide to become a hetira but it's possible
that you would have opted to take this career path a because it enabled you to achieve your
potential in ways you could not have done if you'd got married and b because you craved a life of
independence. But we've no idea what percentage of the population chose this path though it's likely
to have been relatively small and of course you would also have had to deal with some opprobrium
that's probably part of the reason why a lot of hetirae moved away from their native cities
to pursue their careers like Aspasia herself to avoid being made to feel ashamed and to avoid
becoming outcasts. As foreigners in the city where they worked they would also have become more
exotic and therefore able to charge higher fees. Other options available to you outside the home
included being a priestess or being a midwife but we've no idea what percentage of the population
chose this path though it's not necessarily much independence and there weren't many positions
available as a midwife by contrast you would have had not only independence but also authority
since midwives not physicians controlled the birthing process probably however only women
beyond childbearing years perhaps widows primarily would have been regarded as eligible for this job.
By contrast to the situation elsewhere in the greek world spartan women enjoyed a measure of
independence that was exceptional if not unique. As a spartan girl you would have undergone an
intense physical training program which included running, discus and javelin throwing and wrestling
its objective was to ensure that you would become a fit breeder of spartan babies.
As a spartan wife you could be loaned so to speak to an interested party with the agreement of your
husband presumably to maximize upon your fecundity especially if your husband happened to be elderly
or infirm sparta had to deal with a falling birth rate. As a woman you were permitted to own property
this was certainly not the case in Athens you might even be celebrated for your wisdom we have
examples of female wisdom preserved in plutarx sayings of spartan women though we should not
assume that they are all authentic. The most famous is the laconic farewell from a spartan mother
to her son who was departing for war with it or on it the it is his shield what she meant was
that he should either return home bearing his shield because to throw it away when retreating
was a disgrace or on it if he was killed whether historical or apocryphal this saying and many
others like it suggests that spartan mothers played a leading role in reinforcing the spartan
value system perhaps at the cost of their role as mothers. In conclusion what can we say about
the relationship between the sexes over all there's much of course to lament and to objective
as a female your life expectancy was lower than that of males your opportunities for receiving
an education severely curtailed and your job prospects very limited the connection between
education and longevity has recently been scientifically demonstrated while I was working
on this lecture I read an article in the leading British medical journal known as the Lancet by
Christopher Murray an epidemiologist at the University of Washington his article indicated
that women who are educated and who live in countries where they have opportunities of
fulfilling their potential actually live longer not surprising. In addition many Greek men law
did it over their wives in a way that would be I would like to say largely unthinkable in the
West today. However we should not assume that a men and women did not achieve intimacy or that b
men invariably held the upper hand. Odysseus in the Odyssey is wholly dependent on the services
and resourcefulness of a group of very strong willed and independent women who are more
than a match for their male counterparts. His wife Penelope for a start fends off no fewer than 108
suitors over a period of 20 years to keep the household and her chastity intact and in the end
tricks Odysseus into revealing his identity to her. Odysseus it is who actually provides us with
the best definition of what marriage meant in the Greek world not withstanding the fact that he is
been flagrantly unfaithful to his wife. He says no finer greater gift in the world than that when
man and woman possess their home together two minds two hearts that work as one despair to their
enemies a joy to all their friends their own best claim to glory. Greek drama too suggests that
Greek women were anything but a pushover. The women we encounter in Greek drama Clytemnestra
Antigone, Yocasta, Madea, Fedra, Lysistrata are among the most powerful in any theatrical tradition
the world over and then there are the goddesses you wouldn't want to mess with them not with
Hera or Athena or Artemis or Aphrodite and though again they're only fictionalized so to speak
the inspiration for them had to come from somewhere it must have come from real life.
Writing some 800 years after Homer Plutarch in a treatise entitled advice on marriage extolled
the virtues of homofrosune or hominoya roughly translatable as like-mindedness which he and
no doubt many decent Greeks believed to be the mark of an ideal marriage. Ordinary men and women
don't invariably achieve that state of bliss with each other but the fact that some Greeks did
yearn for the perfect union suggests that in this respect they weren't much different from us
and there's another respect in which the Greeks weren't much different from us.
They like to relax so in the next lecture we're going to examine the various ways they achieved
the same.
