I think it's fair to say that the Greeks like to put their feet up metaphorically speaking
as much as anyone else, even though our word relaxation has no exact equivalent in their
language. The nearest equivalent is scollae, which originally meant leisure of any sort,
but which came in time to denote leisure activities associated with intellectual pursuits. So,
our word school ultimately derives from the Greek word for leisure. Its antithesis,
ascolia, the lack or absence of leisure, meant, roughly speaking, what we would call today work.
This in itself indicates that the Greeks weren't burdened by the Protestant work ethic, which
they would surely have despised on the grounds that life is much too valuable to be spent working.
That's an admirable view to take in some ways, but they could only hold it because
they had slaves to do their donkey work. When they weren't dealing with a crisis such as war
or famine or illness or bereavement, and those of course were all too frequent,
even fairly poor Greeks led more relaxed lives than most of us do today.
And when they did have to face a crisis, they were much more tightly knit together as a community
than we are, and that gave them a lot of supports which we simply don't have.
I'm going to be focusing on Athens in the classical period for the usual reason,
because Athens has supplied us with the most information. I'm going to assume that you have
one or more slaves, and that you're wealthy enough not to have to work for a living,
which was probably the condition of the majority of Athenians. Incidentally,
the reason why you don't have to work is because you're raking in the dough from your
so-called allies. Each allied community had to pay tribute. The Greek word is foros,
which means literally the thing brought, a nice evasive expression. Ostensibly,
to pay for the protection that Athens provided you with against the Persians.
In reality, however, it went to pay for a lot of other things as well.
Hardly surprisingly, in light of this, you'll be able to spend most of your day relaxing.
Even when you're relaxing, however, you will never forget the fact that you're a citizen
who belonged to a specific city-state, Athens in this case, though that would be equally true of
citizens of Sparta, Corinth, Megara, Thebes, and so on.
Citizenship and the pride that you took in it defined you as a person, whatever you happened
to be doing. So let's follow you through your rather relaxed day and see how you amuse yourself.
You rise before dawn and, assuming you live in Athens or it's on Veron,
you take a leisurely stroll down to the Agorah, which is located in the heart of the city,
directly to the north of the Acropolis. You probably have a slave who accompanies you.
He'll carry anything you might want to buy in the market and keep you company.
The Agorah was a peculiarly Greek institution. In physical terms, it was simply a level,
open space, though over time buildings had grown up around it on awful sides.
It was the civic, legal, religious, and commercial heart of Athens,
as well as its social hub. All manner of business was conducted there, both official and unofficial.
In addition, it was a place quite simply to hang out, and that's what you're going to do today.
In fact, there was a Greek word for this, agoradzane, the best translation of which
is to hang out in the Agorah. So you gravitate first towards the monument of the eponymous heroes,
which lies close to the center of the Agorah. We talked about this monument in our lecture about
being a Greek soldier. The Ten and Non-Paponimus heroes were the heroes who gave their names to the
ten Athenian tribes, among which the citizen body was distributed.
Well, today there's a large group gathered around the monument, all straining to read the notices
that have been attached to the boards underneath the statues. There's a notice giving the agenda
of the next meeting of the assembly, another one with details about forthcoming lawsuits,
and a third one with the names of the tribes that have been called up for military service.
It takes you a while to elbow your way to the front so that you can actually read them,
but when you've done, you stick around and join in one of the many heated conversations.
After all, Greeks love to argue, and none more so than Athenians. Fortunately, your tribe hasn't
been called up for military service, so that's a relief, as your wife is about to give birth
any day now. After that, you decide to drift over to one of the spots where the philosophers
habitually tout their ideas. We might not think of philosophy as a leisure activity, but
the Greeks definitely did, and put a very high premium on it. The Agora was a place where Socrates
did most of his teaching, as too somewhat later did the so-called Stoics, or men of the Stoa.
The Stoics took their name from the fact that they used to gather in the so-called
painted Stoa, one of the many colonnaded buildings in the Agora. Stoics were ideal places to hang
out because they provided shelter from the elements. Bankers and businessmen would set
their tables up inside them. Incidentally, the Greek word for a bank is trapeza, meaning table.
For the same reason that our word bank comes from Italian banca, also meaning table or bench.
You can't make a business deal without having a table.
So, after listening to some philosopher wittering on about being and non-being, you walk over
to the section of the Agora where people have set up stalls and you make a few purchases.
The Agora is one of those spaces where all sorts of different people hang out. If you
happen to be a Greek from another city, say from Plataea or Argos, you'll hang out with
other Plataean and Argyves at the special spot that they frequent.
After you've had your fill of the Agora, you dispatch your slave with your purchases and
idly saunter over to one of Athens's many gymnasia. As we've mentioned before, a gymnasium means
a place of nakedness. It was a kind of leisure center rather like a Roman bar. It typically
included a wrestling ground, a running track and a bath. Many gymnasia also possessed a lecture
room, so you could get educated as well as get fit. The two most famous gymnasia in Athens
in the 4th century BC were the Academy, the home of Platonic philosophy and the Lyceum,
the home of Aristotelian philosophy. Largely, it was Ephiebes who patronized the gymnasia. The word
Ephiebes, as we saw in an earlier lecture, means young men on the verge of manhood. But there's
no problem hanging out there if you're getting up in years. There are a lot of elderly Greeks who
like to keep in shape and hobnob with the young. You spend a couple of hours at the gymnasium by
which time it's midday, so you pop home for a spot of lunch and to see the wife and kids. Then if
you don't have any other business to attend to, you decide to take a lengthy siesta. If you're
perhaps feeling a bit more energetic, you might decide to go out hunting or watch some cock fighting.
And so, evening approaches. It's been a very filling day. You've socialized, nourished your mind
and attended to your body. Time now to go down to the local for a couple of pints or rather for a
couple of jars of wine. Perhaps taverns were certainly plentiful in the Greek world, but
they were primarily patronized by the down and out. Not your sort at all. You prefer to drink either
at home or at the home of one of your friends in a semi-formal setting known as the symposium
or drinking party. Symposium means literally a drinking together. The Greek writer Plutarch described
a symposium as a passing of time over wine which guided by gracious behavior ends in friendship.
Beautiful definition. We know a great deal about what happened at symposia because we have a lot of
literary and pictorial evidence to go on. It's the setting for numerous scenes depicted on luxury
pottery items that were used at such gatherings. I sometimes think that if I could travel back in
time I should have liked to have attended the drinking party that was held at the house of a
young tragic poet called Agathon in 416 BC in celebration of his victory in a dramatic contest.
So if you don't mind, I'm going to describe this in the first person. We know about the event
because it is recorded and no doubt somewhat idealistically by Plato in his dialogue known as
the symposium. So picture me. Here I am knocking at the door of Agathon's house. I'm straight way
conducted into the room where the symposium is due to be held. Agathon is a very wealthy man and like
many of his sort he has a special room for holding symposia known as an andron or andronitis.
The word which means literally men's quarter. Rooms of this sort are easily identifiable in the
archaeological record because they have an off-centre doorway in order to accommodate the couches that
were set against the walls. When I arrive, Phaedrus, Porcenias, Eric Zimacus and Aristophanes are
already there as of course is my host Agathon. He's a rather shallow fellow and a pretty useless
poet but well I had to humour him as it was his party and he invited me as soon as he heard I was
in town. The truth is however that he would never have been awarded first prize if he'd been competing
with Sophocles or Euripides. You don't sit on chairs at the symposium. Instead you recline on a couch
which you share with two other men propping yourself up on your left elbow. In front of your couch is
a three-legged table where munches are laid out and where you can rest your cup.
So we all reclined and were eagerly awaiting the arrival of Socrates and waited and waited.
Well eventually one of his slaves was dispatched to find out what had become of him. After a while
the slave came back with Socrates in tow accompanied by one of his wretched hangers on.
Apparently the slave had found Socrates standing in a doorway somewhere trying to work out a
philosophical conundrum of some sort. So finally we were able to get down to some serious drinking or
at least we should have been. Wouldn't you know it? Some of our company who shall remain
nameless were suffering from hangovers. So we all agreed quote unquote to drink only
a modest amount of heavily diluted wine. At a Greek symposium as you may or may not know
everyone has to drink exactly the same amount. You're not allowed to help yourself to wine.
Instead at periodic intervals a wine pourer circulates and recharges the cups of all the guests
to the same amount. It's his job too to dilute the wine with water. No self-respecting Greek would
drink neat wine. He'd fear it would make him go insane. Something only barbarians did.
So the wine pourer dilutes the wine in a vase called a cratin which means a mixing bowl.
I should perhaps mention at this point that Agathon owned a very expensive set of symposastic
ware that included not only a cratin but also a psiktae or wine cooler, an inokoe or jug for
pouring out the wine plus a number of very elegant two-handled drinking vessels known as kulikes.
Well to make matters yet worse we also agreed quote unquote again to dispense with the services
of a hired flute girl. I'd been greatly looking forward to having a little cuddle with her so
I was mightily disappointed. Instead Eric Zimacus recommended that we all deliver an impromptu speech
in honor of Eros the god of love going from left to right around the room beginning with
fedrus and ending with Socrates. Boring. I won't bother you with the speeches here other than to
say that everyone agreed that mine was the best. Even Socrates said it was jolly good although
you can never quite tell when he's being serious. He can be incredibly sarcastic at times.
Well just when the party was beginning to lose steam the handsome and gifted en fontereble
Alcibiades burst in upon us accompanied by a flute girl. He was wearing a wreath of ivy with
ribbons and violets tied in it. He was thoroughly blotto as per usual and could barely stand on
his feet. As soon as he collapsed onto one of the couches he embarrassed everyone by literally
falling over Socrates telling him how brilliant he was and all that. I could tell Socrates didn't
like it one bit. Later still some gatecrashes broke in and we all started finally downing
immense quantities of wine. The party continued till dawn by which time everyone was completely
drunk except for Socrates and Aristophanes who were still going strong. The subject they were
arguing about at that point was can the same man write comedy as well as tragedy.
Well for me the best moment in the evening was when Aristophanes said in a very loud voice
shut up Socrates. I want to hear what Garland has to say. Well not all symposia were the same by
any means. They could take a variety of forms depending on the temperament age social class
proclivities and mood of the guests. A symposium might for instance take the form of a highly
cultivated discussion like the one Plato describes or it might take the form of a thoroughly rowdy
and dissolute gathering where the drink overflowed and the guests indulged in sexual intercourse.
If sexual activity did take place it would not however involve freeborn Athenian women. You
would never dream of inviting a freeborn Athenian woman with an iota of respectability to a symposium.
The women you would invite or rather hire were the female companions or hetari whom I mentioned
in the previous lecture. Some you might hire for their conversational skills others as flute
players others as dancers and still others as prostitutes. If the images on vases are anything
to go by a symposium did at times degenerate into an orgy though how frequently we have no way of
knowing. As I said at the beginning of this lecture even when you were relaxing you wouldn't
forget that you were a citizen. You'd have a civic consciousness that would govern your conduct
added to which the formalism of the symposium would I suspect have checked the worst excesses
of an unregulated drinking culture. In addition every symposium began and ended with prayers to
the gods particularly to Dionysus the giver of wine and to the agathos dimon literally the good demon
or spirit. Another important point to note is that the symposium was a vehicle by which culture
was transmitted. For instance to be a good symposium you had to be a dab hand at the capping game.
What one version of this was as follows you quoted a line of poetry and the person next to you
had to cap it by giving the next line or you quoted a line of poetry and the next person had to
quote a line that began with the last letter of the line previously quoted. Games of this sort
would have fostered familiarity with the works of the poets. Of course there were other more rowdy
games as well like Cotibus. Cotibus involved flicking drops of wine at a small bronze statue
with the aim of making the statue topple over. It may strike us as a somewhat mindless pastime
but I dare say it was lots of fun to play when you were a little bit tipsy. Politics also featured
at the symposium many of the songs that the drinkers sang were politically inspired. One of the
most famous was a kind of Athenian national anthem. It celebrated the murder of a man called
Hipparchus who was the brother of the tyrant Hippias in 513 BC. The Athenians were extremely proud
of the fact that they had kicked out their tyrants and established democracy. Since it was a male
dominated institution there can be little doubt that the atmosphere of the symposium fostered
homosexual attachments between a younger and an older man. However distasteful some of us
may find this the fact is that such attachments were an important component of an aristocratic
education particularly in the sixth and early fifth century though they lost favor later on.
A book two of the collection of poems that are traditionally ascribed to Theognis of Megara
is in part an instruction manual addressed to a young man called Kiernos about how he should
conduct himself at a symposium and elsewhere. The Spartan equivalent of the symposium was the
Phyditian a dinner that was shared by companions in the same military unit. I wouldn't recommend the
food that they served you. The national dish was called Melas Zomos black broth someone in
antiquity quipped no wonder the Spartans are such brave fighters any sane person would die
10,000 deaths rather than eat that kind of muck. The Phyditian was the place where seasoned Spartans
told edifying anecdotes designed to promote male bonding and reinforce Spartan values to their
juniors so it too served a political agenda. Yet another way to relax was by going to your club.
Clubs became particularly important in the Hellenistic era that's to say in the period
following the death of Alexander the Great in 323 BC. They usually had a religious dimension many of
them were organized around the cult of a specific deity. They were especially favored by foreigners
since they provided them with a context in which to associate with one another while at the same time
furthering the worship of some deity whom they venerated in common. Clubs were particularly
numerous in trading centers like the Piraeus the port of Athens on the island of Delos on the island
of Rhodes largely because they serve to facilitate commercial ties between their members and many
of them functioned as well as burial societies. Once you were officially enrolled in a club and
so long as you continued paying your dues you were guaranteed not only a decent burial but also
periodic deliveries of food and drink at your tomb. At your club you could socialize,
do business deals, arrange marriage contracts, gossip, enjoy a good meal and relax. Clubs also
enabled citizens and foreigners, Greeks and non-Greeks that is and even slaves and freemen
to come into contact with one another on a somewhat equal footing.
I want to turn next to spectatorship which was very important in the Greek world. I'll begin with
athletic contests which were really big time in Greek culture. The most important athletic contests
were attached to the four great panhellenic that's all Greek festivals that were held in
southern central Greece and the northern Peloponnese. The foreign question were the Olympic games
in honor of Zeus at Olympia, the Pythian games in honor of Apollo at Delphi, the Ythmian games
in honor of Poseidon at Corinth and the Nemean games also in honor of Zeus at Nemea.
One of these festivals took place every year which meant that athletes and spectators always had
something to look forward to. The events included foot race, boxing, wrestling, pancration,
that's a combination of boxing, wrestling and judo, hoplito dromos, a race in hoplite or heavy
armor, pentathlon, horse racing and chariot racing. The athletes competed naked or at least
that's how they appear on Greek vases, though scholars have sometimes doubted if that was
really the case. Stephen Instone, a well-respected Greek scholar who died at the untimely age of 54
provided a definitive answer by stripping off on a Cretan beach to prove in his words that
you can run perfectly well naked. Instone is also remembered for running across Regent's Park in
London with a saucepan on his head and a trash can lid in one hand to demonstrate the feasibility
of the hoplito dromos, the race in heavy armor I mentioned a moment ago. At the games you could
also attend musical contests including flute playing, lyre playing, singing, tragedy, comedy and
satiric drama as well as competitions in composition and recitation of epic verse.
You probably would have gone to the games at least once in your lifetime, it would probably have
been a slog for you to get there but they were the high point of the Greek calendar, they took
precedence over everything else that was happening in Greece. If a war was in progress it had to be
suspended. On your way to and from the games you were under the protection of the gods and guaranteed
safe conduct even when you were passing through enemy territory.
You also loved attending the theatre, at first you could only see productions in Athens and its
steams but by the Hellenistic period theatres were being established throughout the Greek world.
Productions were state sponsored and initially plays were performed only once though in time
revivals became commonplace. The most prestigious theatre festival was the city dinosia held in
Athens at which both tragedies and comedies were performed in the great theatre of Dionysus on the
south slope of the Acropolis. You'd sit in a section or wedge of the theatre reserved exclusively
for members of your tribe so this was yet another way in which relaxation took on a civic flavour.
So far I've talked exclusively about men for the simple reason that we know so much more about
men than about women and because there were so many more opportunities for men to chill out
than there were for women. As we noted in a previous lecture as a well bred woman you'd spend
most of your time cooped up in the home. You'd never be seen in public unless you were chaperoned.
You weren't allowed to attend the symposium you weren't permitted to attend the games
because Greek athletes participated naked. We don't even know whether you were permitted to attend the
theatre. So what does that leave you not a whole lot. The limited ways in which women could relax is
one of the clearest indicators of their confined status in the Greek world. There are only three
activities that I can think of. You could occasionally host or visit your female friends.
You could participate in religious festivals. Those that were open to both men and women and those
that were exclusive to women. So long as you were accompanied out of the house at all times.
Finally you could enjoy the company of your husband once he returned home either at lunch
or late at night. We might suspect that your life would have become even drearier if your husband
went off to war. Although it's possible that his absence gave you some long awaited freedom.
Indeed that may well be how Spartan women came to achieve their greater independence since
their husbands were absent from the home more often than other Greeks.
To conclude it's clear that relaxation had many of the aspects of work and conversely that work
had many of the aspects of relaxation since both to a large degree were forms of civic expression.
Not all Greeks lived like this however and in the next lecture we're going to talk about a
class of people whose lives were characterized by hardship uncertainty and depredation namely
those who were homeless and stateless.
