Women and slaves only attracted the attention of Greek historians in the past 50 years or
so. Refugees have yet to do so. Hardly any work has been done on the subject. It's as
if they didn't exist. So we're really breaking new ground here today. The fact that historians
ignore them is due largely to the fact that they were ignored in antiquity. Intensifying
Peloponnesian War sparks refugee crisis. Athenian correspondent reports that 250 children
die of hunger each day. Well, the Greeks didn't have newspapers, but even if they had done,
so I seriously doubt that the refugee crisis brought about by the Peloponnesian War would
have ever made the headlines. No one would have cared. As a refugee in the Greek world,
you weren't even a statistic. At least you're a statistic today. Thucydides, who was the
author of the authoritative account of the Peloponnesian War, did at times take note
of population movements consequent upon that war, but only in brief throwaway remarks.
He certainly never tried to put himself in the shoes or sandals of someone who was forcibly
objected from their homeland, which is what we're going to do today. That's all the more
amazing in light of the fact that he was himself exiled from Athens for many years.
Still, being an exile is rather different from being a refugee. From his perspective
and the perspective of all Greek and Roman historians, humanitarian crises just weren't
worth writing about. No educated, well-heeled Greek was interested in the sufferings of
the masses. So, let's again get ready to go to the other side of history. Up to this
point, we've assumed that daily life in the ancient world, though not exactly a stroll
in the path, was at least, since the Neolithic Revolution, fairly settled, and by accidents,
famine and wars, that it had a fairly regular rhythm to it. I now want to confront you with
a fact that is often overlooked, that there was a very large percentage of the population
who for one reason or another became uprooted, exiles, fugitives from justice, runaway slaves,
bandits, and above all, in largest numbers, what we call by an all-encompassing term,
refugees. Although Greek historians gave scant attention to refugees, the folk memory
of the Greek people did indeed acknowledge their prevalence. They even believed that
Greece was largely settled by a migratory wave or waves of peoples who swept into Greece
from the north. It's possible that they were right. We don't exactly know when the people
we call Greeks first arrived in the land we call Greece, but by the 15th century BC at
the latest, Greek was being spoken on the mainland, as we know from the Linear B tablets
that I talked about in an earlier lecture, and the likelihood is that these Greek speakers
entered in fairly large numbers. The earliest event in quote-unquote Greek history according
to the Greeks was the so-called Dorian invasion. The Dorians were supposedly people who swept
down through northern Greece and who settled in the Peloponnese and elsewhere. As so often
in history, what an invasion means in this case is an influx of refugees, even though
we don't know what motivated them to leave their former homeland. Greek history is peppered
with allusions to population movements, even though, as I've indicated, they never make
the headlines. There were moments in Greek history when they reached a peak. One such
peak was in the late 8th to 6th centuries BC, and it's associated with what scholars
call, rather misleadingly in my view, the colonization movement. A more accurate title
would be the refugee movement. It's a period of Greek history that has been well studied,
but it's generally looked at from the point of view of Greek expansion across the Mediterranean
and the Black Sea region. What we're going to do here today is look at it as a human
dilemma. From the late 8th century onwards, Greece was no longer able to support its population,
probably due to a combination of famine and demographic growth. As I indicated in an
earlier lecture, it has always been a poor country agriculturally. Even in Mycenaean
times, it was unable to support its population. As a result of both famine and demographic
growth, the Greek city-states sent out small expeditions to found new settlements throughout
the Mediterranean and Black Sea regions. So let's suppose you're living in these times
and that famine is beginning to take its toll on your city-state. We don't have any first
person account to draw upon, but it's not difficult to imagine your plight. There's
been a shortfall of food for two or three years and all your supplies are exhausted. A meeting
is held of the citizen body and at the end of it a vote is called and the majority decision
is that some of the population will have to emigrate. There's no alternative. Starvation
is looking at you straight in the eye. Volunteers are called for. If enough people don't step
forward, then others will have to be conscripted. You consider your options. What would induce
you to enlist? Fear of starvation, obviously, or simply the prospect of a better life. Inscriptions
tell us that the settlers went out, I quote, on equal and fair terms. What that means in
theory at least is that all social distinctions were abolished once you set forth from your
homeland. You were making common cause with everyone in your group. Even if you came from
the lower ranks of Greek society, you would have been on an equal footing with an aristocrat
in theory at least. We can't test the claim, obviously, but I think it's pretty likely
that there would have been at least a blurring if not an elimination of social distinctions.
So who are the likeliest candidates for the enterprise? Those who are feeling the pinch
the most, of course, namely the poor. So it's probably they who volunteer in the largest
numbers. Though they may not have been the ones who get selected in the largest numbers.
You had to be physically fit and in your prime. You wouldn't be much use if you were feeble
or getting up in years. You also had to be mentally resilient. Men are more likely to
be mentally resilient in such an enterprise if they're single. So it's likely that unmarried
men and widowers would have formed the majority. My godfather who was a Japanese prisoner of
war in World War II said he felt sorry for his fellow prisoners like my father who were
married because they were always worrying about their wives and children. For obvious
reasons, women and children did not participate, at least not in the initial shipload. And
by shipload, I mean a contingent of about 200 men on average. Once the settlement was
successfully established, then subsequent shiploads would set out from the mother city.
There's one big question we can't answer. Did eligible young women follow the pioneers
or did the pioneers chiefly marry local women? The decision who to take as pioneers, no doubt
rested chiefly with the leader of the expedition who was called an oikistes, a word we've
encountered before. Oikistes derives from the Greek word for a family or a home, oikos
or oikia, because the purpose was to found a new home. The oikistes was invariably an
aristocrat because the thought was only aristocrats were worthy of leadership in such an enterprise.
There would probably have been a fair number of aristocrats who signed up, including younger
sons who didn't stand to inherit much or others simply with a taste for adventure. Once you'd
agreed or once you'd been conscripted, there was no going back. An inscription from the
island of Santorini in the Cyclidares, we visited Santorini before, states, anyone who refuses
to sail if he is sent out by the city shall be liable to the death penalty and his property
will be taken from him. Well that leaves no room for second thoughts.
So you bid farewell to your family, your parents, your sisters, others in the knowledge that
you may never see any of them again, although you probably keep that thought to yourself.
You don't want to upset them more than they are already upset.
You're sailing off literally into the unknown. Though your mother city might retain close
political links with its settlement, it will not attempt to foster close emotional or material
ties. This after all was an age before email. Out of sight, out of mind had to be the motto.
The refugee or as it's called colonization movement knocks my socks off. How did the
Greeks go through with it? Though desperation is a powerful incentive, there must have been
more to it than that. Something that gave them confidence.
One great asset was the god Apollo. Apollo took a special interest in colonizing ventures
and for that reason a representative from your city state would visit Apollo's irracula
shrine at Delphi to get advice where to head for once your city had decided to export some
of its population. Quite likely he'd come back with a riddling answer but with any luck
someone would be able to interpret it. Without Apollo's blessing you would have been entirely
rudderless so to speak. With Apollo's blessing however, the boatloads
of hopefuls were assured in theory at least of an ultimate end to their wandering and
that's what counted most. Very few enterprises in human history have
been undertaken in such circumstances. One thinks of course of the Mayflower as a kind
of modern parallel or the boatloads of Vietnamese who fled their country's conflicts in the 1970's
and early 1980's. It requires enormous guts and faith to sail off into the unknown. The
waters of the Aegean are unpredictable even at the best of times and schools can occur
at any season. That's why it took Odysseus ten years to get home. That's in the seductions
of the women he met along the way of course. So just put yourself in the sandals of a boatload
of Greek pioneers. You sail close to the coast and eventually find a sheltered cove
to disembark. Once on land you peer anxiously into the undergrowth to see if you can discover
whether your landing has attracted the attention of the locals. You spend the first night beside
your ship or perhaps if you're lucky in a cave starting up at every sound.
Leaving Greece was the equivalent of leaving the solar system. There's no knowing what
forms of alien life exist out there. Haven't you heard of those giants with a single eye
in their forehead like the Cyclopes whom Odysseus encounters on his way home? All those women
the size of mountains like the Leastragonians. The Odyssey with its strange cast of characters
is very much a product of this colonizing era, a product of its fears and uncertainties.
Let's now suppose that you don't find anywhere suitable to establish a new home or that you
meet with such spirited resistance from the native population that you can't establish
a settlement. What then? Do you chuck it all in and head back home? Well that's exactly
what a boatload of pioneers from the island of Santorini did as Herodotus tells us. Having
failed to establish a settlement on the coast of Libya they sailed back to Santorini, hoping
perhaps expecting to be welcomed back by their fellow countrymen. Except that they aren't
their fellow countrymen anymore. And anyway things had got worse, not better, while they
were away. So their erstwhile fellow countrymen pelted them with missiles to prevent them
from disembarking on the shore. The pioneers had become what we would call stateless persons.
So they had no alternative but to set out for Libya again and give it another go. Knowing
this time it was their last chance. Well the story has a happy ending however for they
eventually succeeded in establishing a settlement on an island off the coast of Libya. But the
story emphasizes starkly the intense pressure that Greeks were under if they were prepared
as the inhabitants of Santorini evidently were to kill their kith and kin in order to
survive. The colonization movement was vast in scale. At least 139 settlements are known
to have been founded between 800 and 500 BC. That's perhaps as many as 28,500 people in
the first wave. Though in most if not all cases once a settlement had been established
there would be successive waves sent out. So probably it's not much of an exaggeration
to think in terms of 50, 60, 70,000 leaving their homeland eventually. But I take my
hat off to those original 28,500 who had the guts to sail out into the unknown. When it
came to an end it's estimated that the colonization movement had led to a doubling of the
number of Greek settlements dotted throughout the Mediterranean and Black Sea and elsewhere.
There were settlements in what are called today Albania, Bulgaria, Egypt, France, Italy,
Libya, Romania, Russia, Sicily, Spain and Turkey as well as new settlements in Greece
itself. There are of course many other types of refugees and I'm now going to focus on
wartime evacuees. The year is 431 BC. The Peloponnesian War has just broken out between
the Athenians and their allies on the one side and the Spartans and their allies on
the other. Let's say you're a farmer living in Attica, the territory surrounding Athens.
An announcement reaches you that the Spartan army is heading towards Athens and that intends
to ravage the countryside. The army will be there in a few days. You've no choice but
to abandon your farm and head towards the safety of the city, taking your wife, children,
elderly parents, slaves with you if you have any. The Thucydides tells us that when the
rural population of Attica had to leave their homes they found it, I quote, very difficult.
That surely is a huge understatement. You knew that the Spartans would cut down your
olive trees, burn your crops and destroy your homes though you may not have known that they
would also smash your tombs. How would you feel? Awful of course. You presumably leave
your ox and your cow behind though you probably take your chickens with you and perhaps your
goat. You gather up all your valuables, not only your few pieces of jewellery and your
embroidered cloths but all the wood you own because wood is very valuable. I mean wood
in the form of door frames and window frames as well as any furniture that you owned. In
other words, you strip your house down and leave only the mud brick walls and roof still
standing. All this is assuming of course that you have a hand cart of sorts in which you
can transport your valuables to Athens at least. Maybe you live as far out as the Deem
of Marathon, that's 26 miles away on the northeast coast, so it's going to be a long slog.
You join the endless lines of refugees flooding into the city from the northeast and when
you get close to Athens you discover that all the gates in the city wall are jammed
with people passing inside. How many people are we talking of here? Well, Thucydides tells
us that more than half of Athens' population was living in the countryside at the time,
so we should think in terms of tens of thousands of people if not more. If you're among the
lucky ones who are the first to arrive, you'll be able to set up a lean-to shack in a plumb
location say against the inside of the city wall. If you arrive late, you'll have to take
whatever space is available. Aristophanes, the comic poet, describes the refugees from
the countryside living in barrels, shacks and garrets and no doubt tempers fray and
fights break out both among the refugees as a fight for somewhere to live and between
the refugees and the permanent inhabitants of Athens. As soon every available space has
been filled. There are refugees squatting alongside the so-called long walls, the walls
that join Athens to its port city called the Piraeus and there are refugees in the Piraeus
as well. Even the space inside the sanctuaries is being utilized. Only the Acropolis remains
out of bounds. Athens and the Piraeus have become one big refugee camp.
After a while, some sort of order is established but you lack even the most basic services.
Soon there are piles of refugees everywhere, stenches abominable, the squalor unimaginable.
It doesn't take long for the water supply to become polluted. Presumably there was a
distribution of rations but we hear nothing about it. And then in the summer of 430, just
a few months after the arrival of the refugees, as if things aren't bad enough already, a
deadly plague breaks out. Inevitably it takes its heaviest toll on the evacuees, thereby
further increasing the tension between them and the permanent inhabitants of Athens.
Cremation pyres burn inside the city day and night. The sound of women keening fills the
air. Within a few months, perhaps as much as a third of the entire population has fallen
victim to the plague, most of the people who fall sick die. Those who survive, like the
historian Thucydides, will be disfigured for life. Thucydides devotes only a brief paragraph
to the evacuation and says virtually nothing about the conditions in which the evacuees
lived. What interests him most is the plague itself, both its symptoms and its effects
on law and order. But the evacuation was a humanitarian catastrophe for Athens of the
first order, quite irrespective of the plague. The kind of occurrence I've just described
must have happened many times, though we only know what we know about this one because Thucydides
mentions it in passing. Another way in which you might become a refugee
was by being forcibly ejected from your homeland and becoming an asylum seeker. Our word asylum
derives from the Greek asylia, which describes the condition of a person who is protected
by the gods. The largest percentage of asylum seekers in the Greek world were in fact exiled
as a result of civil unrest. And that's because many Greek cities were subject to stasis,
that's to say to civic upheavals due primarily to tensions between those who favored power
being in the hands of the entire citizen body and those who favored giving power to the
oligarchs. These upheavals frequently led to the expulsion of democrats by oligarchs
or of oligarchs by democrats, depending on who got the upper hand.
Another group of asylum seekers were those who fled from their homeland to avoid enslavement
after their city had been captured in war. Murderers too sought asylum abroad. We know
quite a bit about asylum seekers because they feature prominently in several Greek as to
say Athenian tragedies. Athens prided itself on being the most receptive of all Greek states
to asylum seekers. The Greek biographer and philosopher Plutarch tells us that already
by the early 6th century BC, I quote, the city was teeming with people constantly migrating
to Attica from all over the Mediterranean seeking refuge. The procedure you would go
through as an asylum seeker was as follows. After you had arrived on foreign soil, you
would head for the nearest sanctuary where you would formally adopt the guise of a supplient.
That's to say you would clutch an olive branch wound around with a white wreath in your left
hand. This meant that you were now under the protection of the gods, for most among whom
was Zeus Hikecius, the general overseer of Hikecia or asylum seeking. Soon you attract
the attention of the local inhabitants who report you to the Deimos, the people of Athens.
So a contingent of soldiers arrives and orders you to quit the sanctuary while you or your
leader, if you happen to be in a group of refugees, are escorted away to make your case
before the people of Athens. Hopefully when you appear there will be some Athenians to
speak on your behalf. You'll need to convince the assembly of citizens
that it's in their best interests to let you stay and that you have something to offer
them in return. For instance if some of you are of military age you can offer to fight
on behalf of your adoptive country. The assembly then votes and if your appeal is unsuccessful
you'll be immediately expelled. If it's successful however the assembly will pass a decree authorizing
your permanent residence inside Attica and guaranteeing your protection.
Hikecius' play the suppliance preserves the words of a typical decree to this effect.
The asylum seekers quote, are not subject to arrest and are under the protection of the
law. No resident or alien has the right to carry them off as slaves if anyone uses force
against them. Any citizen who fails to render them assistance will be deprived of his civic
status and driven into exile by public decree. Let's now turn finally to the condition of
those whose city was sacked as a result of war. If that happened then your best bet was
to escape in the confusion because once the enemy took possession you'd probably slaughtered
if you were a man or enslaved if you were a woman or child. That's why the Trojan Prince
Ineos flees from Troy when the Greeks take his city and in so doing he becomes the most
famous refugee in antiquity. His escape and subsequent wanderings are the subject of Virgil's
Roman epic The Aeneid. This isn't the place to discuss that poem though it does cast a
very vivid light on a refugee's lot. I've always thought it interesting that the Romans,
one of the proudest nations of the earth, saw nothing dishonorable in tracing their dissent
from a refugee. The refugee problem reached crisis proportions in the 4th century BC.
In fact it got so bad that in 324 Alexander the Great took the revolutionary, we might
almost say visionary, step of instituting a panhellenic old Greek amnesty for refugees.
He permitted them to return to their native cities and repossess the property they had
owned prior to their banishment. It must have been a bureaucratic nightmare. Some of the
people who returned had been refugees for 30 years or more so how could they reclaim
their property? But at least Alexander made an attempt to redress a serious grievance.
The text of his decree is preserved by a historian called Diodorus Siculus, Diodorus of Sicily
and it reads as follows. Alexander the King to refugees from the Greek cities. We were
not responsible for your exile but we shall be responsible for your return to your own
homelands with the exception of those who are under a curse. Those who are under a curse
included both criminals and persons whom Alexander himself had driven into exile. The largest
group in the latter category were the 30,000 refugees from the city of Thebes which Alexander
had destroyed following a revolt. Another humanitarian catastrophe of vast proportions.
We know nothing about the fate of those 30,000 Thebans. All we know is that Alexander did
nothing to address the crisis that he himself had created.
To conclude we've examined some of the many groups of people who were compelled to leave
their homelands and in some cases drift without hope of ever achieving settled conditions again.
Pioneers, evacuees, asylum seekers and exiles. The plight of refugees in Greek history situates
us squarely on the other side of history. In the next lecture we're going to examine
the plight of two other groups whom our sources banished to the other side of history namely
the sick and the disabled.
