My advice to anyone who's planning to travel back to antiquity is don't get sick or injured
while you're there. Don't drink the water, don't eat any uncooked vegetables and keep
a weary eye out for potholes, bolting horses and things falling on you from above such as the
contents of chamber pots or indeed chamber pots themselves. Because if you do get sick or injured
there are no painkillers, no antibiotics and no anesthetics. You'll have to deal with pain
on a level of intensity and frequency that is scarcely imaginable in the West today.
The first Greek doctor to practice in Rome, a certain archagathus, was nicknamed
carnifex which means butcher, the name alone makes one squirm. Our ability to control pain through
medical intervention is surely one of the things that differentiates our lives most from all the
peoples we encounter in this course. Even so, though it's none too pleasant, let's imagine you're sick.
Perhaps you're suffering from berry berry or dysentery, malaria, scurvy, rickets, pneumonia,
typhoid or tuberculosis. We know that all these diseases existed in antiquity because their symptoms
can be identified in the so-called Hippocratic texts. The texts ascribed to the semi-legendary
Hippocrates. I'll talk about Hippocrates in a moment. Or perhaps you have a sexually transmitted
disease not syphilis or gonorrhea as these didn't exist in ancient Greece. Or perhaps you're suffering
from chickenpox or mumps, diphtheria and whooping cough. Or perhaps you have cancer. A Galen who
was arguably the greatest Greek physician of all time indicates that breast cancer was prevalent
in the ancient world and it's likely that other forms of cancer existed as well.
If you're one of the poor or downtrodden, you'll try to shrug it off. There's work to be done
and only you can do it. You have your wife and family to look after. So you simply grit your teeth
and get on with your daily life. After a while, however, you can't stand the pain any longer. So
you make a dedication at the shrine of the local Iatros Heros, a hero who was credited with healing
powers. You might also engage the services of a folk healer who is said to do wonders with
amulets, charms, incantations and spells or some elder male or female who's a dab hand with herbal
remedies. But let's say for some reason none of this works. You decide to consult one of the
followers of Hippocrates. Allegedly born on the island of Cass in 469 BC, Hippocrates is credited
with being the founder of rational medicine. We have about 60 treatises ascribed to members of his
school. School doesn't mean institution. There were no medical schools in antiquity. To study
Hippocratic medicine, you would simply have attached yourself to a practitioner.
One of the most important of these treatises is called On the Sacred Disease. The treatise
ridiculed the belief that epilepsy is an affliction sent by the gods. The author castigates,
I quote, which doctors, faith healers, quacks and charlatans for claiming to be able to relieve
the symptoms of epilepsy by prescribing purifications and incantations and abstinence from
baths. When the fact of the matter, as he says, was that epilepsy was no more divine than any other
disease. So as I said, you decide to engage the services of a Hippocratic physician. That's if
you happen to live in a town. If you happen to live in a village, you probably never set eyes on a
physician unless he happens to pass through on his way somewhere else. And his services come at a
price. You'll need to draw on your hard earned savings. But what's more important than health?
You want a doctor who has a good reputation. Reputation is actually all you have to go on
in order to establish his credentials for what he has to do for you. He won't have a diploma
hanging on the wall of his office, such a system, if we can call it. That means that there are lots
of bogus physicians practicing medicine in the Greek world with no expertise whatsoever as the
author of the treaties entitled On the Sacred Disease, which I just quoted, pointed out.
So you find a physician and you both agree to terms. He asks you lots of questions about your
symptoms and gives you a physical exam to discover where the pain is. He explains to you that health
is a matter of establishing a balance between what he calls the four humours or liquids in your body,
yellow bile, black bile, phlegm and blood. And he tells you that ailments are frequently caused
by too much of one humour and too little of another. He then offers you his diagnosis. He recommends
regular exercise and puts you on a strict diet and he may also give you herbal remedies and drugs.
The Hippocratic corpus, that's the collection of treatises attributed to Hippocrates, recommends
the use of some 380 different herbs for a variety of ailments. If your symptoms warrant it,
he'll bleed you by making a small incision in your body and holding a warm cup underneath
to make the blood flow. Or if it's one of the other humours he wants to reduce, he'll try to make
you vomit to evacuate your bowels. He'll call upon you every day, recording your symptoms in the
equivalent of his notebook. There's a Hippocratic text entitled On Behavior, which describes how
physicians should conduct themselves in the patient's home, there to have a cheerful bedside
manner. Our words clinic and clinical come from the Greek word cleanay, which means couch or bed,
since couch is often doubled up for beds and you'll probably be lying on one.
It's impossible of course to know how effective Greek physicians were. It's clear they knew
next to nothing about the female body. They thought that the womb wandered around the body
and that the menses was quote unquote failed sperm. That said, we shouldn't blithely assume that their
success rate was negligible. There's a real danger in making the assumption that we know
everything and they knew nothing. And without their mistakes, we wouldn't have got to the place
we're at today. We have to thank the Greeks for that. The Greeks weren't the first people to
devise medical remedies, however. Prehistoric peoples learned how to use plants and herbs
to counter infections and to ease pain. And already in Egypt by 2000 BC, we hear of physicians who
specialized in particular ailments like eye diseases. As far as the Greeks are concerned,
however, though we hear of physicians in Homer's Iliad, that's to say by around 700 BC,
sickness doesn't seem to have become a major preoccupation until the fifth century BC.
This was when a previously insignificant healing hero called Asclepius was catapulted
to divine status. Until now, there had been no god of healing, just healing heroes.
Asclepius' principal sanctuary was at Epidaurus in the northeast Peloponnese.
Eventually, there were over 100 sanctuaries dedicated to this god throughout the Greek world.
Evidently, the Greeks had begun by this point to take their health seriously.
Asclepius was commonly depicted holding a staff with a snake coiled around it. His staff is still
used today as a symbol by many medical organizations, including the World Health Organization.
So this means that you have one more option if you're sick. You can travel to a sanctuary of
Asclepius, assuming of course you have the strength and the means to undertake the journey,
and seek what is called temple medicine. Healing sanctuaries were probably somewhat like
long time care facilities, since many of the patients would remain there for months,
possibly in some cases for years, awaiting a cure. Some patients in fact must have ended
their lives there with their health progressively deteriorating. Healing sanctuaries built their
reputations on miraculous cures that they claimed were affected by Asclepius. We have inscriptions
on stone pillars recording miraculous cures of patients who suffered from infertility,
paralysis, blindness, and even baldness. As a patient, you'd be housed in a building known as
an Encoimeterion, a kind of dormitory, that's the literal meaning of the word, the sleeping place,
where you would hope to be visited by the god himself, perhaps appearing to you in a dream.
You would also have been attended by the Asclepia die. Those are part priests and part physicians,
the equivalent of a kind of nursing staff. The medical profession never wholly divorced itself
from its religious roots. In fact, as late as the second century AD, Galen, whom I mentioned earlier,
claimed that Asclepius had appeared to him in a dream, urging him to take up medicine when
his father was sick. What this means is that the sick who traveled to Epidorus were inspired by
their faith in the god as well as by their faith in human physicians. It was a very potent combination,
I'd say. It wasn't only when you were suffering from an illness or some other complaint that you
would need the services of the medical profession. You might also need a medic to
perform surgery on you. Although we hear of surgeons working independently in towns,
you could also go to a healing sanctuary, as we know from the discovery of surgical instruments
at many Asclepia, further evidence of the fact that medical science and religion were complementary.
The one surgeon you engage won't give you an anesthetic before, say, amputating your arm.
However, instead he'll probably render you unconscious simply by a simple blow to your jaw,
which was the preferred method used by members of the profession until the second half of the 19th
century. The Egyptians may have used opium. They grew it in the fields around their capital
thieves, but there's no evidence that the Greeks did. After the amputation, the surgeon will
cauterize the wound. If he has to dress it, he'll wash it with wine or vinegar to reduce
the chances of infection. Surgeons would have been much needed on the battlefield. As I said,
we already hear of them in the Iliad, but it seems they weren't particularly effective. The vast
majority of those who were wounded in the poem die, and I suspect that that was largely true in
historical times as well, particularly since there was no way to stop heavy bleeding. And if you were
wounded but survived, there was a good chance that you would have been disabled for life. Disability
studies as a discipline originated as recently as the mid 1980s, until then both the disabled
and the deformed had been almost entirely neglected in the academy, which exactly mirrors
their fate in antiquity. And yet in a course about the other side of history, they are absolutely
central to our story. When we look at Greek art, particularly when we look at Greek sculpture,
we are invited to enter a world of anatomical perfection. The image of the perfectly formed
naked male and the perfectly formed draped female express better than anything that elusive concept
that is sometimes called the Greek spirit. Did the Greeks really look like that? A few, I suppose.
The majority certainly not. It would be absurd to suppose that anatomical perfection was the norm
in Greek society. So I'm inviting you to take a big imaginative leap beyond the anatomically
perfect image that is presented to you by Greek art and to confront the reality of a society
where disability as a result of both disease and injury was extremely prevalent.
Although this lecture is about the Greeks, disability and deformity were equally evident
in Roman society. A Roman statuary gives an equally false impression of reality, even though the
Romans had an impressive tradition of portrait sculpture, an artistic genre by the way virtually
unknown to the Greeks. But just look at the famous prima porta statue of the emperor Augustus,
which shows a splendidly muscular picture of a poster boy emperor. The real Augustus was very
different as we know from the description of his biographer Suetonius. He had birthmarks all
over his breast and belly and he limped slightly on his left side. He was somewhat sickly and never
expected to live to the great age he did. The International Disability Foundation estimates
that approximately 10 percent of the world's population of over half a billion people are
disabled. Statistics were unknown in the ancient world and there's nothing in any ancient text
to indicate either the proportion of the disabled as a percentage of the population overall or the
prevalence of specific categories of disability like blindness, lameness, deafness and so on.
Even so, there are several reasons for supposing that the incidence of persons with permanent
disabilities was at least as high among the Greeks as it is among us. First, there was no remedy for
many ailments that result in permanent disability if they're not treated properly. And second,
the ancient world was extremely hazardous and few individuals would have escaped serious
injury or disfigurement at some time during their life. And third, there was, as we have seen,
little medical care available and even if it was available, it would often have been inadequate
at best. Even a minor trauma such as a fractured leg or arm, if it isn't set properly, can result in
permanent disability. And once you acquire one disability, the chances of acquiring a second
are significantly higher since you will be less able to respond to situations that endanger life
or limb. Finally, those who suffered a fracture in later life back in antiquity were much more
likely to become permanently disabled than their counterparts today. That's going to the fact that
the body's ability to recover, if it is denied proper medical treatment at the time, declines
sharply with age. A proof of this is provided by paleopathology, the science of studying diseases
whose existence in antiquity can be demonstrated from human and animal remains.
An analysis of 233 skeletons from a Greek cemetery at Pantonello, near Metapontum,
in southern Italy, for instance, has revealed that 56% exhibit bone pathologies due to fractures,
metabolic disorders and systemic infections. So just think of that figure for a moment.
It means that over half the population of Metapontum was dealing with at least one disability
that was sufficiently severe to leave a permanent mark on the skeleton. That's a pretty sobering
fact if you add to it the possibility or rather I think the probability of other disabilities,
especially blindness and deafness, that have left no mark in the archaeological record.
We should also bear in mind, however, that there would have been a sizable percentage of people
who would have succumbed to disabling illnesses or accidents, who, had they been living today,
would have survived thanks to modern medical care, including, and this is an obvious example,
those afflicted with spinal cord injury. The Greeks were not confessional as we moderns tend to be.
We rarely hear of illnesses or injuries, even in the biographies of famous men. They weren't
considered sufficiently interesting or significant. There's only one testimony in the whole of classical
literature from an individual who identifies himself as physically impaired. It takes the form
of a forensic speech that was delivered to an Athenian court by an unnamed cripple who was
defending his right to public support. Athens offered a small pension to those of its citizens
who were unable to support themselves. Owing to the speaker's reticence, however, the speech provides
us with very little insight into his plight. It seems then that no ancient author ever attempted
to inhabit imaginatively the inner world of a disabled individual. I know of only one slight
exception. In the Iliad, the metalworking god Hephaestus, who is lame, says,
no one is responsible for the fact that I am disabled except my parents, and I wish they had
never given birth to me. It's a haunting and a chilling cry, and it's virtually unparalleled
in all of classical literature. The absence of any first-hand accounts puts us at a huge
disadvantage in our study of disability in antiquity, and so too does the fact that the
Greek words used to describe a disabled person are extremely vague. The adjective which comes
closest to our word disabled is adunatos, which means literally incapable, incapacitated, though
it is also used of anyone or indeed anything incapable of performing a specific task.
Another problem is that we can't assume that the Greeks differentiated whole-bodied persons
from impaired persons in the same way that we do, and that's why I called my book on deformity
and disability in the classical world the Eye of the Beholder. We're not dealing with a
straightforwardly objective reality, but with what has been rightly called an elastic social category.
Though the Greeks don't seem to have exhibited any particular sympathy for their disabled, if you'd
been blind, for instance, you might have been credited with the gift of clairvoyance, as in the
case of the blind seer Tiresias, or with the gift of poetic song, as in the case of Homer. Although we
never hear much about the physical condition of elderly Greeks, blindness and deafness,
blindness and deafness would have been the lot of the majority, alleviated by earpieces and
corrective lenses. So even if you were partially blind, say, you would have been fumbling your way
through the world. It's sobering to think that Plato and Aristotle, two of the greatest intellects
that the world has produced who both live to a ripe old age, may well have ended their days
in darkened silence. We should also spare a thought for slaves who became incapacitated,
even though we hear nothing about their fate. It just wasn't interesting to write about.
Obviously, they would have been entirely dependent on the goodwill of their masters
and mistresses. And incapacitated slaves constituted an economic drain on the household.
And in a world where resources were extremely limited, there must have been some masters,
I suspect, who would have denied them even the most basic form of support, perhaps justifying
their action on the grounds that it was kinder to let them die. Another very large category that
we hear little about are the disabled war veterans. As we've just seen, there was a small state
pension for Athenians who could prove they were incapacitated. But there's no indication that
the war wounded on block were cared for by the state. Though it's extremely likely on a priori
grounds that they would have been honored in various ways, say by being given a special
seating in the theatre of Dionysus, we never actually hear of them being treated as a special
group. And many no doubt ended their days on crutches or confined to their beds.
Finally, I want to talk about the congenitally deformed. There were no doubt substantially
more congenitally deformed newborns than there are in the West today, owing to the high incidence of
malnutrition and disease. A far fewer of them, however, would have survived than do today,
since the Greeks were of the opinion that it wasn't worth rearing a child who was incapable of
leading an independent life. The so-called Law of the Twelve Tables, a Roman law code, dated
around the middle of the 5th century BC, contains the stipulation, quickly kill a deformed child.
And quite likely there were similar requirements in the Greek world. Aristotle recommended the
passing of a law, quote, preventing the rearing of deformed children. And as we've seen, Spartan
children were inspected at birth by the elders of the tribes and abandoned in the wild if judged
defective. And no doubt they would have been eaten alive by animals and birds of prey.
Already in Hesiod, the epic poet who lived around the beginning of the 7th century BC,
we find evidence of the belief that the birth of a congenitally deformed infant was an expression
of divine ill-will or anger. A typical formula that we find in connection with oaths runs as follows.
If I break this oath, may my children turn out to be monsters. A terast, which is the word used
in the formula, means precisely that. A monster. Teras gives us teratology, the modern medical
study of birth defects. There was no equivalent medical study in antiquity. And in computer lingo,
terabyte, meaning monster bite, equivalent to one trillion bites. Incidentally, our word monster
comes from the Latin word monstrum, which means literally a warning, because the Romans believed
that abnormal births were portents. It's highly likely then that if you were born deformed and if
you somehow survived, you would have been stigmatized as a second-class citizen. You wouldn't have been
permitted to serve as a priest or priestess. You might not even be permitted inside a temple.
Only those who were physically perfect could serve the gods. There's also some evidence to suggest
that you would have become a scapegoat in times of crisis. That's to say, you would have been
identified as a farmacos, from which our words, pharmacy, pharmacologist, derive. As a result,
you would have been driven into exile from your city and ritually cursed. The reason for
singling you out as a scapegoat was because you were thought to feel resentment to the gods,
auto-nature, and so were judged to be harmful to society.
So how would you survive as a deformed person? Well, there were basically three options available
to you. You could perform tasks that didn't require you to be whole-bodied, like being a blacksmith
or a potter or a painter or a jeweler if you were lame, or a poet or a musician or a seer
if you were blind, or you could capitalize on your deformity by making yourself appear ridiculous.
The satirist Lucian tells us that hunchbacks, the lame, dwarves, and obese women were popular
entertainers at drinking parties, and there's plenty of artistic evidence to back this claim up.
In fact, the chances are that you would have made quite a decent living this way because you would
have been exotic. Of course, you'd have to put up with a lot of abuse, but you probably had to anyway,
so you might as well get paid for it, right?
Your last option was to beg or to claim the indulgence of your relatives. In Greece,
as in Egypt, extended families were the norm, and communities were more tightly knit than in our
society, both of which circumstances would have had obvious benefits for the disabled.
The fact remains, however, that the deformed were extremely vulnerable, and even if you were
protected by your family or even if you could find work, there would always be people around
who would have observed you with loathing, not only because of your physical appearance,
but also because they feared you and regarded your very existence in their midst as evidence of
divine disfavor. And whatever you did or said, you'd never be able to persuade them
to the contrary. Indeed, the tragic thing is, you may even have believed it yourself.
To conclude, the disabled and the deformed are easily overlooked in conventional histories
of antiquity. They represent, however, a very significant percentage of the population overall.
They're very human story, as human as any story can be. Compounded of neglect and prejudice
is one that fully deserves to be foregrounded in any social history worthy of the name.
In the next lecture, we're going to look at the highly specific character and goals of
Greek religion. A system which, as we've just seen, did nothing to alleviate the plight of the
disabled and deformed, and may even have made it worse.
