Get ready to encounter one of the most bizarre religious systems thought up by man.
Can you imagine laughing at your god or your gods?
Looking at them because they were stupid and cowardly.
If you'd been an Athenian attending a performance of Aristophanes's frogs in 405 BC you would
have done just that.
You would have laughed at the dread god Dionysus.
Why?
Because his stage character has an attack of diarrhea when he goes down to Hades and
meets all the terrible monsters down there.
He's so scared he tries to change places with his slave, his slave no less.
What makes the joke all the funnier, or not if you happen to be Dionysus perhaps, is that
Aristophanes' comedy was performed at the festival known as the Lenire in your honour
as Dionysus.
So there's your priest sitting in the centre of the first row and all the other Athenian
priests sitting on either side of him, bawling their heads off.
And if you think this was just Aristophanes going off the rails and asking for trouble,
think again.
The play was such a hit with the audience that it was performed again two months later at
the great city Dionysia.
It's the only comic play of which we have record that earned this honour.
Well let's hope you can take a joke Dionysus, I assume you can.
A god who can take a joke, that's got to be a first too.
And you didn't do anything nasty to Aristophanes at any rate.
He went on writing plays for another 20 years.
At first sight you might be excused for thinking that Greek religion, like Egyptian religion,
put few demands on you.
You weren't burdened with a sense of sinfulness.
You didn't have to deny yourself worldly pleasures.
You didn't have to live in accordance with any rule of life.
True the afterlife wasn't as pleasant as the Egyptian afterlife but in compensation you
didn't have to fear eternal damnation as the Egyptians did.
And in time too you could believe that if you were initiated into what were called the
mysteries you could lead what was called a blessed life in the hereafter.
You don't even have to subscribe to a particular set of beliefs or to privately worship a particular
set of gods.
Greek religion was too chaotic, too fluid and too downright disorderly to permit the
emergence of orthodoxy of the kind that we find say in Christianity.
The word orthodoxy which comes from two Greek words meaning correct belief has no ancient
equivalent.
All this might lead you to suppose that you didn't need to take the gods very seriously.
That would be making a very big mistake.
Virtually every aspect of your life had a religious dimension to it and virtually all Greeks were
religious.
Very few of them were atheists.
Probably the only ones who might have been were the philosophers.
The word atheos which gives us our words atheists, atheism meant godless, that's to say someone
who was disrespectful towards the gods, clearly not our meaning of the word.
Religion wasn't cordoned off from other aspects of life as it is in the modern world.
The secular and the profane were constantly intersecting with one another.
Attending the assembly, looking after your family, giving birth, having a drink, fighting
a battle, planting crops, all these activities had a religious dimension to them.
That is perhaps why there is no word for religion in Greek.
Being religious is in effect being Greek.
It permeates your whole being.
The gods are everywhere and in everything.
They're in your body, in your head, in the weather, in the crops, in the seasons, on the
battlefield, in your home, in your city, in your village and in what you eat and drink.
Practising Greek religion is being aware of this fact and acting accordingly.
The only human experience the gods steer clear of is the dying and the dead.
And that's because the dead are a source of pollution.
I'll talk about pollution a bit later.
Understanding what ordinary people thought about their gods is very difficult.
There's no holy book like the Quran or the Talmud or the Upanishads or the Christian
Bible to help us to come to an understanding of Greek religion.
All we have is a collection of highly unrepresentative writings produced by some of the least typical
minds of the period, or indeed of any period of history, whose perspective on religion
is likely to have been somewhat eclectic, to put it mildly.
They include the poems of Homer and Hesiod, the histories of Herodotus, the plays of the
Tragedians, Ischulis, Sophocles and Euripides, and of the comic dramatist Aristophanes, whom
I mentioned, the speeches of the Eurotus and the dialogues of Plato.
We also have funerary inscriptions, artifacts found in tombs, votive offerings, vase paintings,
and the archaeological remains of sanctuaries.
We have a lot of data, in fact, but what we lack in any quantity is what we would regard
as most vital, namely personal statements of belief about what you specifically would
have believed.
So what does all this data tell us?
They tell us that your gods are jealous, vengeful, unpredictable, selfish, and immoral.
They're constantly at war with one another, their interests frequently collide with one
another, and they're only marginally concerned with the welfare of mankind.
As Apollo says to Poseidon in the Iliad, during the Trojan War, Earthshaker, I would
be out of my mind if I were to fight with you for the sake of wretched mortals.
So let us give up this quarrel and let mortals fight their own battles.
For the sake of wretched mortals, that says it all, we're simply not worth it.
So let's get properly acquainted with your gods.
The principal deities are the twelve Olympians, so named because they inhabit the peak of Mount
Olympus in northern Greece.
The Olympians are immortal, but unlike the Jewish, Christian, and Muslim god, they have
not existed from the beginning of time.
They belong to the dynasty that just happens to be in power right now, but that dynasty
could at any moment be ousted.
Zeus, the father of gods and men, as the Greeks like to call him, ousted his father,
Kronos.
Kronos had tried to swallow Zeus alive immediately after his birth because of a prophecy that
his son would overthrow him.
Fortunately for Zeus, his mother Rhea deceived Kronos by wrapping up a stone in swaddling
bands and the idiot swallowed the stone in the belief that it was his newborn baby.
Because if that wasn't bad enough, Kronos had ousted his father, Uranos, by cutting
off his penis with a sickle.
What a family.
What all this tells us is that the gods you believe in aren't very nice to one another,
which is why they have no business telling us humans to be nice to one another either.
Though some of them had their favourites, what matters primarily to the gods are the
gifts that you give to them.
And all this may make the gods sound pretty despicable.
But it's an explication of divine motivation that makes complete sense in a world that
was much more unpredictable than ours and where natural forces were seen to be in competition
with one another and where humans acted most of the time both irrationally and cruelly.
Everything much has changed there, of course.
The gods, in other words, were acting out the disorder in the universe.
True, a few Greeks did make some attempt to link their gods to morality.
The poet Aeschylus, for instance, portrays Zeus as the overseer of justice in his great
tragic trilogy, The Orestia, so named for arrestees who kills his mother to avenge
his father.
However, as Zeus' record as a serial philanderer seriously undermined his claim to be a bastion
of morality among other thinking Greeks.
So given all the squabbling that characterised life on Mount Olympus, it's not surprising
that the Greeks never came up with the idea of a god whose love of humanity was unqualified.
One of the ways in which we can tell how seriously you, as a Greek, treated religion, lies in
the fact that all your most lavish buildings were sanctuaries.
Sanctuaries are thought of as places where the gods reside when they're not living on
Olympus.
They vary enormously in size and importance.
Most, like the Parthenon in Athens, for instance, are exclusive to a single community.
A few of them, however, were Panhellenic.
That's to say they were common to all Greeks.
They include Delphi, the seat of the Delphic Oracle, Olympia, the home of the Olympic Games,
and Epidorus, which was sacred to the healing god Asclepius.
The principal building inside a sanctuary was the temple.
Unlike a church or a synagogue or a mosque, a temple was not a place of worship.
It was the house of a god or goddess, rather like an Egyptian temple.
It was built primarily to house the cult statue of the deity and the various gifts
that had been given to him or her by worshipers.
But there's an important difference between Greek and Egyptian religion.
Ordinary Greeks weren't debarred from entering a temple.
On days of the year when the temple was open, you were free to wander inside at will, which
means you would have been able to look up at the great 36 feet high statue of Athena
Parthenos, Athena the Maiden, which stood inside the Parthenon.
It was made of a wooden core with ivory to cover the face and limbs.
The helmet, the breastplate, and the shield were made of gold.
Imagine the intense pride you would have felt gazing up at her.
This rituals moreover were performed not behind closed doors, but in the open air.
And ordinary people like you were not only free to attend, but also expected to attend.
It was part of your civic duty.
We tend to focus upon the Olympian gods because we know so much more about them.
But they weren't the only gods you needed to placate and win the favor of.
You also needed to appease the thonic deities.
Thonic comes from the Greek word khthone, meaning earth.
Thonic deities comprise primarily the gods of the underworld, the vengeful dead and the
heroized dead.
The gods of the underworld include Hades, the king of the underworld, and his wife Persephone.
Khthonic deities receive very little attention in our sources, and they weren't worshipped
in temples.
We learn most about them from Ischulis' play The Humanities, The Kindly Ones, the third
play in his trilogy known as The Orestia, in which khthonic deities known as the Furies
drive Arestes mad for murdering his mother.
You would also have worshipped a multitude of unidentified and unidentifiable divine
spirits or half deities known as Daimoners, whom you hold responsible for much of the
bad fortune you experience, perhaps because you don't want to offend the gods.
So how did you communicate with your gods?
Well, first of all, you pray.
Dawn was the time to pray to the Olympians with your arms upraised.
Twilight was the time to pray to the thonic deities with your arms downcast.
As I pointed out, however, the gods aren't concerned much with the plight of humans,
and they probably won't remember who you are either.
So you'll want to frame your prayer as respectfully as possible.
I suggest you begin with something to this effect.
Oh Zeus, who rules over Olympus, that will get you through to the right Zeus, because
there were literally hundreds of different Zeus's in Greece, all related, but all distinctive
as well.
If in the past you have looked favorably upon me when I've been in need, that indicates
that Zeus should remember who you are, because you have a sort of prior existing relationship
with him.
In fact, I suggest you spell out in detail how he helped you in the past.
What it was he did for you.
And then conclude by saying, please come to my aid again now, bye, and then tell him
what exactly it is you want him to do for you now.
I strongly recommend you also offer him a votive offering.
A votive offering is one that is vowed or promised to a deity, either in expectation
of assistance in the future, or as a thank offering for assistance already received.
A Greek religion like Roman religion was based on the principle of reciprocity.
An early example of a votive offering is in the form of a bronze statuette of a naked
youth, which is dated 700 to 650 BC, and it bears the following inscription.
Manticloss offers me as a gift to silver bowed Apollo.
The offering speaks in its own voice.
Give me something nice in return, Phoebus Apollo.
Well, Manticloss could hardly put it more clearly.
And when in due course the God responded, as he presumably did, Manticloss no doubt
saw Apollo's gift as just desserts, perhaps muttering under his breath and about time
too.
Another way to get the favor of the gods is by sacrifice.
This could consist simply of the first fruits of your harvest, such as a basket of beans
or grain, or a nice cake.
What really impressed them, however, was meat, though you wouldn't be able to afford
to make an animal sacrifice unless you were relatively wealthy.
Or you might make a libation, a drink offering that consisted of wine, milk and honey.
All that is what you did privately.
As I've noted, you were expected even required to turn up whenever the state held one of
its annual festivals to its major gods.
Manticloss afforded one of the few occasions when the entire citizen body had an opportunity
to eat meat.
And that's because all the meat from the sacrifice, apart from the five pieces, was distributed
among you and the priesthood.
A sacrifice wasn't just an opportunity to have a notch, however.
It was a sacred communion, not unlike the Christian Eucharist, and the actual sacrifice
itself would have been solemnly conducted.
The most important Athenian festival was the Panathanaea, or all Athenian festival in
honour of Athena.
So let's suppose you're an Athenian who's been chosen to participate in the great procession
that preceded the sacrifice, either as a horseback rider, or as a marshal, or as a
bearer of sacrificial offerings, or as an animal handler.
Both men and women participate along with resident aliens, that's to say, foreigners
who have the right to reside permanently in Athens.
There are a very large number of resident aliens, since Athens is hospitable to foreigners,
and this is one of the ways in which it shows its appreciation to them for their contribution.
The procession starts at the Dipilan, or double gate on the western side of the city, passes
through the agorah and ends up on the Acropolis.
It's this procession that forms the subject of the famous frieze in the British Museum,
possession of which is hotly contested by the Greek government.
When everyone has ascended to the Acropolis, and all the sacrificial animals have been
herded up there too, you jostle to get a glimpse of the olive wood statue of Athena, which
as you know, dropped from the sky.
It's quite small, extremely old, and very fragile.
The climax to the whole festival will be the removal of Athena's dress and its replacement
by a new one.
The dress is an embroidered woollen gown known as a peplos.
The disrobing takes place in hushed silence.
Afterwards, the animals are sacrificed, and though it's a solemn moment, the ground where
the sacrifice is taking place is now ankle deep in blood and excrement.
The dead animals are then skinned, their flesh roasted, and then after the gods have had
their share, the meat is distributed to everybody in attendance.
Later, a games in honour of Athena are held, these last several days.
There are athletic as well as musical competitions.
The prize for each event consists of a two-handled vase known as an amphora.
It depicts Athena on one side and the event for which the prize was one on the other.
In addition to the great state-funded festivals like the Panathenaire, you can also attend
festivals funded by your deam, or township, to which you belong.
The religious calendar of the deam of Erkaya, one among 140 or so such deams, indicates
that sacrifices took place on 25 days of the year.
As a deamsman or deamswoman of Erkaya, you'd be expected to turn up to many of those festivals
as well, so if you're a festival junkie, so to speak, there's plenty to keep you occupied.
Being religious, as we've seen, also meant participating in religious observances in
the home.
As the head of the household, the head of the Eikos or Eikea, you would perform the
functions of a priest in relation to the home.
So you'd conduct rituals, very possibly on a daily basis, to the several deities who
safeguarded the prosperity and security of your home.
To Zeus Ctesius, the protector of your property, to Zeus Hechios, the protector of the sacred
boundary that surrounded your home, and to Apollo Agius, the protector of the entrance
to your house.
You'd also conduct rituals on behalf of Hestia, a goddess of your half.
These rituals included the initiation ceremony for a newborn child, a new bride, or a new
slave.
The home, too, was where most Greeks died, apart from those who died on the battlefield.
The rituals of washing the corpse, laying it out, and lamenting, all this took place
inside the home, as we'll see in the lecture about death.
The home, in other words, had a special kind of sanctity.
No priest attended any of these ceremonies.
In fact, being a priest was very straightforward.
You didn't have to undergo any special training.
You had no pastoral duties, as we would call them.
You had no flock to look after.
You served on a strictly part-time basis.
You only wore your priestly robe when you were performing priestly activities, such
as conducting a sacrifice.
Your main charge was to oversee the correct observance of the rituals within whatever
sanctuary you happened to be in charge of.
In sum, you had no authority outside the walls of that sanctuary.
I've already indicated that Greek religion wasn't something you could safely ignore.
Most belief systems have fear built into them somewhere, and Greek religion is no exception.
To begin with, the gods are terrifying.
There are so many of them, and identifying which one to worship or placate at any moment
is a real challenge.
They're also extremely jealous of one another.
So if you're thinking of sacrificing to Aphrodite, say, because you want her to help you with
a love relationship, then I suggest you sacrifice to Artemis her exact counterpart at the same
time because Artemis abhors everything to do with sex.
In Herodotus Solon, a man celebrated for his wisdom tells Cresus, a king of Lydia, to call
no man happy until he is dead, because one cannot predict what evil the gods might have
in store for him.
In many cases, Solon concludes, the god, he doesn't identify which god, gives man happiness
and then utterly destroys him.
It's a pretty chilling worldview, and not unlike that of Gloucester in Shakespeare's
King Lear, as flies to wanton boys, are we to the gods?
They kill us for their sport.
You also have to be careful not to commit an act of impiety.
Impiety covered a multitude of offenses against the gods, your parents, your country, and
your dead relatives.
The most famous impiety trial involved the philosopher Socrates, who was charged in 399
BC with, among other things, I quote, not recognizing the gods whom the state recognizes
and introducing new demonic powers.
Impiety also included acts of sacrilege, such as stealing from a sanctuary or destroying
property within a sanctuary.
It was, for instance, a capital offense to cut down the sacred olive tree on the Acropolis,
because the tree belonged to Athena.
If you betrayed your country, that was also an act of impiety, because the gods were involved
in the welfare of the state.
Bear in mind that the Greek polis, or city-state, was the home of the gods, because the gods
resided in its temples.
You also have to be wary not to exhibit hubris, roughly translatable as overweening pride
or presumptuousness, because hubris engenders nemesis or retribution, and that will bring
about your downfall.
In other words, don't get too cocky.
It isn't safe to be too fortunate, either.
Great good fortune is asking for trouble, because it makes the gods extremely jealous.
Herodotus tells a wonderful story to prove that exact point.
A tyrant called Polycrates had everything going his way.
He knew he was in danger because of this, so he consulted his friend Amasus, pharaoh
of Egypt, and asked him, what should I do?
Throw away your most prized possession, Amasus advised him.
So Polycrates got on board a boat, removed the ring that he valued more highly than
anything in the world, and tossed it into the sea.
And then he went home and cried his eyes out.
A few days later, a fisherman makes a spectacular catch, a huge fish which, out of deference,
he presents to Polycrates.
Polycrates orders it to be prepared exactly the way he liked, and has it cut open.
And yes, there in the middle is the ring.
What can I do, Polycrates asks Amasus.
Nothing is the reply, whereupon Amasus breaks off all contact with Polycrates, knowing that
a man who is so fortunate is bound to come to a sticky end, which, of course, he does
shortly afterwards.
Another danger you had to watch out for was the ancient equivalent of a virus.
It was a virus that only religious observance could contain.
The Greek word for this virus is miasma, a word that is usually translated as pollution.
If you didn't control it, it could wreak havoc on your livestock, your crops, your family,
and your friends.
Miasma was released in a variety of ways, all in some way connected with bodily functions.
It was most lethal when it was released as a result of a voluntary or involuntary homicide.
A contact with the dead was also polluting, as was giving birth.
The principal disinfectant, so to speak, were saltwater, sulphur, and, most potent of all,
the blood of a pig.
But I also recommend that you call in an expert, a so-called interpreter of sacred law, to
advise you what to do.
You can't be too careful.
The good news about Greek religion is that you won't have to wrestle with your conscience.
The gods aren't urging you to be good.
How could they, given the fact that they themselves have committed every crime in the book?
The only heresy to import a Christian concept is to deny that the gods existed, as I've
indicated, and very few Greeks did that.
It's sometimes alleged that Greek religion represented a purely contractual arrangement
between the gods and humans, and that spirituality was absent from the lives of the Greeks.
And it is, with this point, that I wish to conclude.
You would have had an extraordinarily keen sense of the sacred, as is evidenced by the
intimate relationship that existed between landscape and religion.
It's impossible to visit the Acropolis in Athens, even with all the crush of tourists
around you, without sensing the presence of the divine.
But I want to take you, not to Athens, but to Delphi, to the most famous of the Oracular
shrines, where you seek advice from the god Apollo.
Travelling to Delphi, like travel anywhere in the ancient world, was arduous at best.
The very fact that you were making the journey would have contributed to your sense of odd
anticipation.
It's sometimes suggested that Apollo's oracle was operated by a venal and corrupt priesthood
that exploited the credulousness of a gullible people.
Not so.
As a Greek, you were anything but gullible, and had the priesthood of Delphi been simply
corrupt, the oracle would not have stood the test of time, from the 9th century BC to the
late 4th century AD.
To profit from Delphi, to understand what the god Apollo was telling you, you needed
to keep your wits about you.
The vestibule of the temple was inscribed with maxims of which the most celebrated are,
know yourself and nothing in excess.
Know your limits, in other words, and know what it is to be human.
Greek religion could hardly be more antithetical to Christian religion.
It offered little cheer, less comfort, and no consolation.
However, we may think of it, it takes guts to inhabit that kind of universe.
The Greeks were religious because their gods were powerful, and because it was extremely
dangerous to get on the wrong side of them.
The gods differ from us in that they are blissfully ignorant of the aging process.
Apollo is forever a young man on the verge of manhood, Aphrodite is forever a woman in
the fullness of her prime, and Zeus is forever a man in athletic middle age.
In the next lecture, we're going to examine what it was like to confront the very human
dilemma of increasing infirmity.
