Old age, like childhood or sexuality, is partly a cultural construct. I doubt the
ancient world had anything comparable to Mick Jagger, a nearly 70-year-old strutting
around as a 20-something. Good on you, Sir Mick. But if you couldn't be an aging
or aged pop star, you could, if you had talent, be an aging or aged something
else. The list of Greeks who remained productive and energetic in old age is
pretty impressive. At the top, age-wise, is Epimenides of Crete, a celebrity seer
and prophet who allegedly lived to 157, though I should point out that he spent
50 of those years asleep in a cave. The rhetorician Gorgias lived to be 108. Then
there's the tragic poet Sophocles, who wrote his last play entitled Edipus at
Colonus, a play incidentally very much about old age, when he was 90. His slightly
younger contemporary, Euripides, wrote his two last plays, The Bacchae and the
Iphigenia at Aulis, at about the age of 80. Plato finished the laws shortly before
he died at 81. The rhetorician Isocrates, a soldiered on till 98 and wrote one of
his most impressive treatises, the Panathaneikos, the year before he died. In
addition, according to one version, three of the so-called seven wise men of
Greece, namely Thales of Miletus, often seen as the father of Western
philosophy, Epiticus of Mitalini, who said, even the gods cannot strive against
necessity, and the Athenian lawgiver Solon reached 100, though as I say other
versions give them slightly lower ages. Thesolon is attributed a wonderful
observation that is especially apt for fans of the great courses. I grow older
learning something new each day. And even if some of these individuals
exaggerated their ages for effect, so to speak, or alternatively were
gratuitously assigned long lives, that in itself tells us something about old
age in Greece, that there was nothing to be ashamed of in being old. On the
contrary, longevity seems to have been regarded as a sign of wisdom and
exceptional intelligence, and therefore something in which to take considerable
pride. One of the reasons for this was because there were so few elderly people
in Greece. Being elderly was like belonging to a very exclusive club with
all the privileges that went with membership of it. If you had been walking
down the streets of any city in the ancient world, not just Greek cities,
but Egyptian, Roman, you name it, you would have seen far fewer elderly
people than you do in the West today. To put it more accurately, there would
have been far fewer elderly people since people aged, and so people looked
older and much more rapidly in antiquity, as is true today in countries
where people lead much tougher lives than we do in the West. In the US and
the UK, more than 15% of the population is currently aged over 65, and that
figure is set to rise. In Japan, it's already at 25%, and by 2030, it's
expected to rise to 30%. We don't know what the percentage of the elderly was
in the Greek world, but one estimate for the Roman world puts a percentage
between 6% to 8%, which is close to what it was in the West, about a century
to go. Life expectancy now runs at about 80 for females and 75 for males in
some countries. In antiquity, and indeed in the Middle Ages, a much smaller
percentage of people survived into their 50s, and let alone their 60s, their
70s, or their 80s than do today. One of the chief reasons why more people
survived today into old age is because there's less risk of mortality in
infancy and early adolescence. As we've seen, infancy and early adolescence took
a very high toll on all pre-industrial populations, including ancient Greece.
According to the model of two researchers called Kohl and Domenne, who
have investigated pre-industrial societies, those who reach the age of 10
have a good chance of living another 37.5 years, whereas those who attain 60
can look forward to another 10.4 years. A problem inherent in the study of
old age in antiquity is that the Greeks rarely recorded a person's age
death on their gravestone. The Romans did record a person's age, but that
evidence is highly unreliable. Tim Parkin, who has investigated the subject
detail, describes the evidence as all but useless, and not least because there
was a propensity to exaggerate age by age rounding, the point being, as we
noted earlier, that it was a kind of hip to be old in the ancient world.
So age at death is more commonly recorded in pentads and decades, 35, 40,
45, etc. than we would expect to be the case in reality, and the tendency has
always been to round up. So what was the secret of surviving into old age?
Moses Finley, one of the greatest ancient historians of the last century,
put it down chiefly to the kind of wine that you drunk. The Romans, he noted,
used a preservative in their wine, resembling syrup, known as sapper.
They prepared it by simmering must, a freshly pressed grape juice that
contains the seeds and the stems of the grapes, over a fire in leaden
vessels, and the consequence being that they were systematically poisoning
themselves. The practice also, incidentally, would have led to a decrease
in their fertility. The Greeks, on the other hand, used a harmless resin
additive as a preservative, and do so to this day in the drink called retzina,
which leads Finley to the pleasing conclusion that the Greeks lived longer
than the Romans. It's a charming theory based on alcohol, but there's no
evidence to bear it out, and I've always wondered whether Finley, who was
knocking on 70 when he proposed it, did so with a pinch of mischief.
According to a treatise falsely attributed to the satirist Lucian,
entitled The Long-Lived Ones, the factors that contribute to a long life
include climate, diet, occupation, physical fitness, and mental alertness,
and I would agree with all that. As has been true in every period of human
history, much depended on your social and economic status.
You're much more likely to attain a ripe old age if you're wealthy and lead
a sedentary life. So if you are set on achieving longevity, I strongly
suggest you become a philosopher or a poet, like the highly distinguished
group of elderly Greeks whom I listed at the beginning of this lecture.
They no doubt had a better diet than the average person. They were probably
very well looked after, and they certainly didn't have to overexert
themselves by doing manual labour. It goes without saying that you would
also have to have a tough constitution and good genes. That's true today,
of course, but it was particularly true in antiquity.
And finally, you'll need to be psychologically resilient. To reach old age,
you'd probably have faced many more psychological challenges and
buffettings than the average person does in the West today. In the particular,
there was a very good chance that you would have outlived some of your
children, and perhaps even some of your grandchildren as well as having to face,
perhaps of an early age, the death of your spouse.
Let's now look at the material circumstances of the ordinary elderly,
not the privileged set I've been talking about up till now.
You don't, of course, receive a pension from the state. In Athens,
the only people who received state support in old age were the parents of
sons who had died in war, and women who had given birth to a son
after their husband had died.
If you were a man, you could always earn a modest income
from jury service, just enough to scrape by.
We talked about jury service in the lecture on being a Greek.
However, since this occupation was available to anyone over the age of 29,
it can hardly have provided a livelihood for all the old men
living in Athens who needed support.
There weren't any old people's homes. We do hear once of an institution
known as a gyro boschion, which roughly translates as
old people's home, but the word only occurs in lexica,
and it may be an invention of comic writers.
It's also a fact that no Greek writer whom we know of
ever concerned himself with the economic plight of the elderly.
That may be due to the fact that writers belong to the privileged class
themselves and didn't have to bother about such things.
Athenian law, however, did make some provision for the elderly
by stipulating that your son, or sons if you were lucky,
was legally bound to look after both his parents in old age.
If he failed to do so, he was debarred from ever holding public office.
He would, in other words, be publicly disgraced.
He was also required to look after his grandparents and great-grandparents
if they happened to be alive.
Only if you had failed to teach your son, or sons, a basic skill,
or if you had made him become a prostitute,
would he be released from this solemn and binding obligation.
So the best insurance policy against old age, so to speak,
was to raise a family of boys who would, you hoped,
look after you in old age, and perhaps the less important,
provide you with grandchildren with whom you could say,
play knuckle-bones.
But what if you happened to be childless,
which was a not uncommon occurrence?
Well, being looked after by your slaves was probably okay at a pinch,
but you couldn't really trust your slaves.
They were always out for their own advantage,
and they might just as soon put a pillow over your head
to suffocate you as feed you,
or at least that was probably the gossip.
So the best course of action was to adopt.
You could adopt a son of any age.
In fact, if you were getting up in years,
you'd want to adopt a man of mature years himself,
someone with a sense of responsibility, someone you could trust.
Adoption in the Greek world was, to a large extent,
based on the principle of mutual self-interest.
As an adoptive parent,
you were guaranteed from your adopted son
attention and care in your declining years,
as well as a decent funeral
and, hopefully, regular visits to your grave.
As an adopted son,
you got to inherit your adoptive father's entire fortune.
That's because in Athens and probably elsewhere,
parents, adoptive or otherwise, were required by law
to leave their whole estate to their son or sons.
On the other hand, if you didn't have an estate to pass on,
then your chances of adopting were pretty slim.
In fact, as we move down the social and economic hierarchy,
the plight of the elderly becomes grimmer and grimmer.
Who would volunteer to be the adopted son of a man
who had little or nothing to bequeath?
The effort you would have to put in on his behalf
just wouldn't have been worth it.
You might even be out of pocket at the end.
So far, I've talked mainly about elderly men,
just because we know more about them
than we do about elderly women.
Let's now consider the plight of elderly women.
I listed the names of famous Greek geriatrics
at the beginning of this lecture,
and I now have to tell you that we don't know the names
of any women who lived to a great age.
Either they were insignificant or there weren't any of them.
Just like an elderly father,
you'd be entitled to support from your son
or sons as an elderly mother.
If, moreover, you were well-to-do and became widowed,
you'd very likely return to your original family,
and you'd be entitled to take your dowry with you
so you wouldn't have been destitute.
If, on the other hand, you were one of those unlucky individuals
who didn't have any dowry to reclaim
or didn't have any sons to support them,
you'd be in a extremely precarious situation,
much more so than a destitute man,
because you won't be allowed to adopt once your husband has died.
So you may well have to go out to work.
The lawgiver Solon enacted that women over the age of 60
were permitted to act as mourners at the funerals of those
to whom they were not closely related.
They probably earned a pittance for their services.
Other aging and aged women could serve as midwives,
no less cheerless and perhaps fairly lucrative profession,
in a society with such a high level of infant mortality.
As for elderly unmarried women who had nothing to fall back on,
well, they would just carry on working
just as they had done all their lives.
Eventually, there comes a time for everyone
when you're no longer capable of work.
In that case, if you don't have a single living relative,
you can importune, there was no alternative,
but to become a beggar.
Though there were upper age limits for men
who took on certain official roles,
the concept of retirement was essentially foreign
to the ancient world.
A service in the citizen militias of Greece,
down to the time of Alexander the Great,
did not end until you reached the age of 60.
Up until your 50s, you'd serve as a reservist
on call if your city came under attack.
The Athenian statesman Pericles held the office of general
when he died from the plague at 66.
The only retiree that I know of is Laertes,
a disused father in the Odyssey,
who has ceded to his son both the headship of the family
and the kingship of the island.
We don't know his age,
only that he is on the threshold of old age,
whatever that means.
Even so, Laertes continues to toil in his vineyard.
I strongly suspect that it was a matter of pride
and perhaps necessity for elderly Greeks
to demonstrate their continuing usefulness
in however humble a capacity.
Most of them, in other words,
probably worked until they dropped.
They certainly wouldn't have got a lot of help
from their local physician.
The science of gerontology
had no equivalent in the ancient world.
The Hippocratic corpus,
the corpus of medical writings ascribed to the physician Hippocrates,
contains only a scattering of observations
about the physical effects of old age
and virtually nothing about how to tend the elderly.
This was no doubt due to professional helplessness
in the face of the degenerative process brought on by old age.
So you would have had to face your aches and pains
without the benefit of regular visits to your physician.
This in itself must have encouraged self-reliance,
which, after all, is no bad thing.
I now want to turn to the subject of how you would have been regarded
and valued as an elderly person in Greek society.
I suggested at the beginning of this lecture
that the elderly were esteemed,
but I now want to give more nuance
to that rather simplistic characterization.
The picture that will emerge is complicated
and by no means clear-cut.
As we've seen, the medical profession had little interest in you.
The philosophers on the contrary,
because many of them lived to a great age,
did show some interest, at least in your mental condition.
The Roman orator and politician Cicero, for instance,
wrote a dialogue on old age, the De Senectute,
shortly before he was murdered at the age of 62.
It draws heavily from Greek philosophies,
so I think it's appropriate to cite in this lecture.
Cicero puts his most important ideas
into the mouth of a famous and highly respected Roman
called Cato the Elder,
who claims that moroseness, quarrelousness,
and tetanus are states of mind
that are by no means confined to the elderly.
Old age, he goes on to say,
so far from being slow and feeble,
is lively and always full of beans.
Some people never stop learning however old they are.
Learning is what it's all about, how true.
Socrates is said to have taken up the flute in his 70s.
Cato rocks.
Like us, the Greeks had stereotypical models of old age.
The most memorable portrait of old age in Greek literature
is that of the elderly Greek chieftain Nestor in the Iliad.
Given Homer's enormous influence,
it's worth looking at the portrait in some detail
because it probably reflects how a lot of Greeks
would have regarded the elderly.
Nestor is garrulous, long-winded,
prone to lapsing into lengthy recollections of the past,
by no means averse to singing his own praises
and rather critical of the younger generation.
Even so, Homer's portrait is by no means devoid
of affection and respect.
He introduces Nestor as, I quote,
a man from whose tongue flowed speech sweeter than honey.
I wouldn't mind being introduced like that myself
at a conference of my peers.
He commands respect among the officers too.
It's largely due to Nestor that the war of words
between Achilles and Agamemnon,
which erupts at the beginning of the poem,
doesn't result in bloodshed.
He is the soul of common sense.
So while he's ranting on,
expatiating at length
upon what the English call the bleeding obvious,
he's also giving frayed tempers the time to cool down.
There are other stereotypical portraits of the elderly
in Greek literature that are less affectionately drawn, however.
The cruelest of these are the portraits of elderly women
drawn by the comic dramatist Aristophanes.
Aristophanes consistently portrays elderly women
as little less than contemptible
in their yearning for sexual attention.
In the Assembly of Women, for instance,
three old women squabble with one another
as to which of them can first have sex with a young man,
and they insist that the young man satisfies them
all before he can have his way
with the young girl whom he lusts after.
Did the Athenians truly believe that it was immoral
and disgusting for women who were past their prime
to experience sexual desire?
I say past their prime
because we can't be sure what age the women
Aristophanes' mocking were intended to be.
He may have thought of them as only in their forties.
Given the much shorter life expectancy
of women in the ancient world,
you'd certainly be thought of as elderly by then.
For my money, these are the most objectionable jokes
by far in the whole of Athenian comedy.
They have no equivalent in Roman comedy, I'm happy to say,
and I only hope there was a sizable proportion
of the male audience who found them equally objectionable.
Although, given their prevalence in Aristophanic comedy,
I'm hardly confident that this would have been the case.
The degree of respect according to the elderly
varied considerably from one Greek community to another.
My advice is be an elderly Spartan,
not an elderly Athenian.
The Athenians seem to have had less respect
for the elderly than the Spartans did.
Plutarch recounts an anecdote
that illustrates this point rather well.
When an elderly Athenian was trying to find a seat
in the theatre of Dionysus, the only people in the audience
who stood up and offered him theirs
were some Spartan ambassadors who were sitting
in the front row as official guests.
Seeing this, all the audience broke into applause,
whereupon one of the Spartans turned to his companion
and said, these Athenians know how to recognize
good manners, but they don't know how to practice them.
Nicely put, in Sparta, as Herodotus points out,
young men stand aside for you when they pass you in the street
and rise when you enter the room.
That didn't happen in Athens.
In Athens, at least, there were probably
as many tensions between the generations
as there are in our society.
And because of this, Plato in the Laws recommended
that as newlyweds, you should not live
with your elderly relatives.
I think we'd agree that was a rather sensible suggestion.
Sometimes, too, the tensions resulted in elder abuse.
We're told that the tragic poet Sophocles
was dragged into court by his sons
at the age of 90 on the charge that he was incapable
of managing his financial affairs.
They accused him of paranoia, our word paranoia,
which, in this context, translates
as something akin to Alzheimer's disease.
Sophocles earned his acquittal
by reading out to the jury
some of the lines from the play he was currently working on,
Oedipus at Cologne.
A play about the elderly and blind Oedipus.
And then, demanding of the jury,
do you think that's the work of an idiot?
I find the anecdote very moving.
Old age itself is often described as hateful
in Greek literature, and I think it's pretty clear
that, as an average Greek,
he would have looked forward to it with some apprehension.
What kind of life, what kind of joy
is there without golden Aphrodite,
wept the lyric poet Mimnermas?
Well, the elderly Cephalus,
a character who appears at the beginning of Plato's Republic,
had an answer to that.
When asked what life was like
without the pleasures of sex,
he quoted the answer given by Sophocles,
who had been asked the same question.
Shh, don't even mention the subject.
I'm so relieved to have escaped what you talk about.
It's like I got away from a raging beast
that had completely controlled me.
Well, should we trust Plato?
Is that what Greeks really thought?
A few philosophical Greeks perhaps,
but surely not the majority.
For my money, these lines from Euripides' play,
Alcestus seemed to express a universal truth.
It's a load of old rubbish
the way elderly people pray for death
and complain of old age,
and the long time they have to live.
Once death gets close,
not one of them wants to die.
To conclude, growing old in the Greek world
was certainly not for the faint-hearted,
any more than it is today.
The difference between then and now
is that you'd have had to be much more self-reliant,
even if you had slaves to perform your chores.
You needed to keep your wits,
as well as your limbs and organs about you.
You'd definitely be short-sighted,
and quite probably you'd be deaf as well.
You may well have collected a few broken bones in your lifetime
that had never properly been set as well.
On the bright side of things,
you probably don't have to look forward
to a period of increasing and prolonged debilitation
while your body divests itself of its physical functions,
a one-by-one.
The chances are that you will be fairly active and vigorous
until your final illness,
which will probably be brief and relatively uncomplicated.
In the next lecture,
we're going to investigate the very end of life
as we accompany the Greeks on their departure to the next world.
