Just after I graduated from Manchester University, I traveled across Europe in a land rover to
do archaeology under the direction of one of my professors, Charles Burnie, in northwest
Iran.
This was back in 1969.
It was Iran under the Shah.
And history, had I realized it at the time, would in under ten years implode irreversibly
throughout the region.
Just to give this further historical context, I was out there digging away when Apollo 11
landed on the moon and Neil Armstrong took his one small step for a man.
The site that Charles Burnie excavated was called Haftavan Tepe.
Tepe is the Turkish word for hill.
It's the word that archaeologists use to describe a natural mound that has grown higher over
time owing to successive layers of occupation.
Haftavan Tepe lies in a region called Azerbaijan on the borders of Turkey, the former Soviet
Union and Iran.
Azerbaijan is populated by a mixture of peoples, including Kurds, Armenians and Turkish-speaking
Iranians.
It was at Haftavan Tepe that I came across my first skeleton, decked out in all its
finery, an unforgettable moment.
As I finished the delicate work of brushing the earth away from the skeleton with a toothbrush,
a skull that was more than two and a half thousand years old engaged my stare.
The people we were chiefly interested in were the Urartians, the ancestors of the modern
day Armenians who flourished from the 9th to the 7th centuries BC.
Today, the Urartians are just a footnote to history, a few people have heard of them.
They're a reminder that we should always spare a thought for history's losers, and
all the more so in their case, because for a century or more they were serious rivals
to the Assyrians, a very powerful people who featured prominently in the Hebrew Bible.
We talked about the Assyrians in the earlier lecture about living in Mesopotamia.
In its heyday, the Urartian kingdom incorporated northeast Turkey, present day Armenia, and
southern Georgia.
Urartia eventually became assimilated by the Achaemenid dynasty, and that's to say,
by the Persians.
Achaemenid is the name of the dynasty founded by Cyrus the Great, and it's the Persians
who are the subject of today's lecture.
Achaemenid is a somewhat euphemistic term, however.
Wiped out is probably more accurate.
So the Urartians were just one of the many peoples who struggled, achieved some degree
of prominence, even over lordship, and then got swept onto the ash heap of history.
Though the Persians wiped out the Urartians, they did not in general make it their aim
to put the boot into their subject peoples.
If you'd been an Edomite, or a Lycian, or a Carianse, you wouldn't have found Persian
overlordship particularly irksome, politically speaking.
That's so long as you didn't do anything silly, like try to revolt, as the Greek cities along
the coast of Turkey did.
Economically speaking, it was a very different matter altogether.
Each province had to give according to its kind.
The Bactrians provided gold and camels.
The Saka, that's another people, provided clothes and horses.
The Sogdeans, Lapis Lazuli, and Carmelian, and so on and so forth.
The wealth, your wealth, poured into the imperial coffers.
In addition, you might be conscripted to serve either as a soldier or as a worker, perhaps
building irrigation trenches for your local satrap or governor.
The Persian army was heavily dependent on all its subjects.
The huge army that Xerxes took with him in his invasion of Greece in 480 BC, 2.5 million
in military personnel alone, according to Herodotus, included Bactrians, Caspians, Serangians,
Parthians, Uthians, Mycians, Sagartians, Sogdeans, Chorasmians, Aryans, Ganderans.
Have I left anyone out?
Probably I have.
Merely listing them gives you some idea of how diverse the Persian Empire was.
The Persians were very different from the Romans, however, who ruthlessly subjugated
their empire and forced upon it a program of Romanization.
In fact, the Persians were happy to let local customs thrive within their empire.
Herodotus saw a lot to admire in their tolerance.
No race is more ready to adopt foreign customs than the Persians, he wrote.
That's quite a compliment.
He notes, for instance, that the Persians adopted the clothing of the Medes for official
wear and the Egyptian corslet for military wear.
The Persians didn't expect you to learn their language either.
The author or authors of the book of Esther in the Hebrew Bible tells us that the Persian
king sent a message, I quote, to every province in its own script and to every people in their
own language.
It was written in the name of King Ahasuerus, that's to say King Xerxes, the king who led
the expedition against Greece, and sealed with the king's ring.
So if you spoke Akkadian, Aramaic, Egyptian or Elamite, that's how the Persian authorities
would have communicated with you in their official documents.
I don't want to overstate the case, but it seems that the Persians recognized the limits
of acculturation, that's to say, the limits to which heterogeneous subject peoples should
be made to adapt to an alien culture, and that was both humane and pragmatic.
So there's something, as we shall see, a bit paradoxical in all this.
Persia was ruled by an autocrat who exercised an iron fist over his immediate entourage.
I'll give an example of his cruelty towards one of his officers later.
By and by, however, the subjects of the empire were permitted a degree of freedom.
And by subjects, I mean, in fact, the entire population.
It's not possible to draw a hard and fast line between the Persians themselves and the
many peoples who lived within their borders.
As a people, the Persians came from the other side of history.
They originally lived in the mountains.
They were conquered, first by the Assyrians, and then by the Babylonians.
After a while, however, they decided enough is enough.
So their King Cyrus, a remarkable chap by all accounts, decided to attack Babylon.
And against all the odds, he succeeded and freed all the people who had been subjugated
by the Babylonians.
A Cyrus was the first person we know of to acknowledge that even subject peoples deserve
to be treated fairly.
It's he who drew up what has sometimes been described as the first charter of human rights,
even though the title is something of a misnomer.
The document in question was written on a clay cylinder inscribed in Babylonian cuneiform.
In it, the king of the world, as Cyrus pompously calls himself, describes how he conquered
Babylon in 539 BC without a fight, or so he alleges, and then took its king, Nabonidus
prisoner, all with the aid of Marduk.
Marduk, who had the title Bell or Baal, meaning Lord, was the most important Babylonian God.
Cyrus claims that Marduk deserted the Babylonians because Nabonidus had reduced the citizenry
to servile status.
To learn that their chief god had deserted them was no doubt very bad news for the Babylonians.
Cyrus also claims that he showed mercy, both to the Babylonians themselves and to all the
peoples who had been victims of Babylonian injustice.
He tells us that he didn't allow his troops to commit any atrocities when he took the
city.
We can't, of course, know whether Cyrus' assertions are true.
Even so, it's highly significant that he thought it important to promote himself as
an enlightened despot to the world at large.
Cyrus also tells us that he returned all the statues of the gods which Nabonidus had
filched from other cities in Mesopotamia to their rightful temples, to the places that
make them happy as he touchingly expresses it.
So imagine you're one of those Mesopotamians, formally subject to the Babylonians who are
now receiving back your gods.
Because statues of the gods were the gods, that's what lies behind the phrase to the
places that make them happy, them being the gods, the gods themselves are now happy to
be home.
And of course they will make their happiness known by bestowing favours on you.
So your excitement and your joy and your gratitude at the prospect of receiving your
ancestral gods back into the city, no, no bounds.
There's more good news to come.
Just before the inscription breaks off, Cyrus tells us that he permitted you and all the
peoples deported by the Babylonians to return to your homelands.
He doesn't mention any of these peoples by name, but we know from the book of Ezra in
the Hebrew Bible that this included the Jews.
The Babylonian king Nebuchadnezzar II had deported the Jews to Babylon in 587, nearly
half a century earlier.
And for good measure, Nebuchadnezzar had also put out the eyes of their king Zedekiah
and destroyed Jerusalem.
So let's now leave the Persians for a moment and suppose you're a Jew living in Babylon.
How do you react to the offer to return to your homeland?
Well, the truth is you've grown rather accustomed to the soft life.
Babylon is a spectacular and bustling city.
Visitors enter through the famous Ishtar Gate.
Ishtar was the goddess of sex, war, fertility, as well as the moon.
You name it.
It's made of stunning blue-glazed tiles decorated with alternating rows of dragons and oryx.
Oryx were the ancestors of our modern cattle.
Then there are the famous Hanging Gardens, one of the seven wonders of the ancient world,
of which unfortunately no trace has ever been found.
Babylon has a seven-story ziggurat dedicated to Marduk.
We met ziggurats in the lecture on being Mesopotamian.
They resemble steppe or terraced pyramids.
This one is known as Etemenanke, the foundation of heaven and earth.
It may have been the inspiration for the story about the Tower of Babel.
Babylon is a very international city because merchants and tourists throng to it from all over.
As far as you're concerned, it's the centre of the world.
That's how it appears on contemporary maps made on clay tablets.
Besides, you've managed to preserve your Jewish religion and your Jewish traditions.
And things can only get better now that the Persians are in charge, right?
And 48 years, the length of your captivity in Babylon is a very long time.
So you're probably one among the majority of Jews who said to Cyrus, thanks, but no thanks, and chose to stay put.
But a few Jews did answer a higher calling.
A few did feel it was their solemn duty to return to the Promised Land.
And if you had been one of them, one of the few who did return,
you would no doubt have felt extremely emotional, particularly if you had been one of the very few original Jewish exiles who were still alive 48 years later.
And over time, a small community began to settle in the ruins of the Holy City
and began to rebuild the temple that Nebuchadnezzar had destroyed, which Cyrus now permitted you to do.
So in some, the Persian Empire was anything but hostile to its Jewish population.
And the Jews, for their part, have never forgotten Cyrus' generosity.
When in 1917, the British government committed itself to establishing a Jewish homeland in Palestine,
Jews living in Eastern Europe displayed images of Cyrus the Great alongside those of the British King, George V.
The Cyrus Cylinder, as it is called, is permanently housed in the British Museum.
However, you don't have to travel to London to see what it looks like.
There's a replica on display in the United Nations building in New York.
It's intended to remind us that the struggle for human rights has a very long history.
Even though, I have to say, Cyrus would hardly have understood the concept of human rights.
He merely wanted to represent himself to the world as merciful in victory.
There was nothing wrong in that, but it's hardly the same as acknowledging that all men are equal.
An idea that would probably have horrified him.
Even so, what we are calling the other side of history, the defeated and the subjugated,
are now placed under the protection of a great king.
Cyrus later went on to attack Egypt, but died on the way there.
His son, Cambyses, however, succeeded in taking it.
So that was the end of the Egyptian Empire.
It had lasted close to 3,000 years.
Holding together a vast empire is always a challenge.
To do so, the Persian king Darius, who was Cambyses's successor,
built the so-called Royal Road, a highway over 1,600 miles in length
that stretched from Sardis in the west to Sousa in the east.
I can't emphasise too strongly what an innovation the Royal Road was.
Most paved roads before Roman times were only a few miles in length at most,
which meant that horse-drawn carts and chariots couldn't be utilised over long distances.
Now they could be, and this had profound consequences for daily life.
How?
Well, for a start, a lot of ordinary people like yourself can get to see the Persian king,
at least if you happen to live in striking distance of the Royal Road.
Eilean, a Roman author who lived around AD 200,
tells us that whenever the king travelled along the Royal Road to or from his capital,
his subjects crowded along the sides of the road, bringing him offerings.
Let's talk a bit more about this Persian king.
As an ordinary Persian, you probably rather admire him.
It's true you hear some horror stories about what he does to Persian nobles from time to time,
but that's no concern of yours, and you certainly don't think any the worse of him for that.
Greek historians are always banging on about the luxury and decadence of the Persian court,
but as an ordinary Persian, you would have had a completely different take on the situation.
It may even have given you gratification to know that he lived in great style.
Unlike the Egyptian pharaoh, the Persian king wasn't a god, he was a mere mortal.
It's true that if you ever happened to find yourself in his presence,
you'd be expected to prostrate yourself before him,
but that wasn't because he was divine, you do that simply out of respect.
There are other ways in which the Royal Road affected your daily life.
For one, it gave you security.
It enabled the Persian army to cover great distances rapidly,
which it had to do from time to time in order to quell disturbances and check invasions.
Your king wouldn't be able to run his empire unless he was able to get his troops from one end to the other in double quick time.
Less happily perhaps for you, it enables his government officials to keep in touch with, monitor and administrate the most far flung parts of the empire.
So that made it a lot easier for them to collect taxes from you and punish you if you're remiss.
Of course, the ideal way to travel along the Royal Road is by chariot.
We get the idea of this form of travel from a stunning gold model of a horse drawn chariot,
which has a standing driver and a seated passenger in it.
It was found in Oxus at the eastern limit of the Persian empire near modern day Afghanistan.
The passenger is gazing serenely at the countryside as it passes him rapidly by.
He's obviously a bigwig to travel in such style.
Maybe he's a top flight administrator.
The wheels of his chariot have large spokes, which means they're designed for long distance travel.
If you happen to be a simple peasant trudging along on foot to the next village with your donkey laden with wares as his chariot thunders towards you,
or if you're traveling in an ox drawn cart with a heavier load, you'd better scarper out of his way double quick.
Mounted couriers, the Persian equivalent of the Pony Express, are an even greater hazard.
They travel almost at the speed of light.
They're capable of traversing the entire length of the empire in just six days.
That's because there were 110 posting stations along the Royal Road, each furnished with supplies of fresh horses.
Herodotus memorably observed, neither snow nor rain nor heat nor gloom of night stays these couriers from the swift completion of their appointed rounds.
A great line. In 1912, it was adopted by the James A. Farley Post Office building in New York City.
If you're a merchant, you'll be constantly traveling along the Royal Road with your wares.
So let's suppose you trade in gold objects, a highly lucrative business in any age.
You'll probably need an armed guard, of course, to protect all those bracelets, armbands, earrings, necklaces and diadems,
as well as exquisitely fashioned decorative items, just like the miniature gold chariot I described a moment ago.
The goldsmiths you buy from are familiar with all the most intricate metalworking techniques known to man,
including filigree, granulation and cloisonné.
Filigree is the term used to describe twisted threads of gold or silver.
The reins of the miniature chariot are made of filigree, for instance.
Granulation refers to small spheres of gold or silver that are fused onto a base.
And cloisonné is used to describe small compartments, cloison in French, made of gold or silver wire, which are then filled with enamel.
Thanks to the Royal Road, your life as a merchant is probably a lot easier than it has been ever before in human history,
because you can travel further in a shorter period of time.
In addition, Adarius I introduced a common currency throughout the empire, and this revolutionized the economy.
He introduced two main monetary denominations, the gold Derek, which he named after himself, and the silver siglo or shekel.
Persian coins are nothing like the exquisite coins that the Greeks minted,
but they still mark an important advance in how people could do business with one another in the Persian Empire.
It didn't, however, mean that you would have ceased to barter any longer, or that you didn't use other forms of coinage.
And the chances are that if you were employed, you'd still be paid for your services in rations,
just had been the case in Egypt a thousand years ago, as we saw.
But it certainly made life easier for traders.
Another invention of Darius was to standardize weights and measures.
And this meant that wherever you were in the empire, there was a universal system in operation.
Incidentally, I don't think there was no inflation in the ancient world.
The price of almost everything, from slaves to land to dates, went up over time.
And this was certainly true as much of Persia as it was elsewhere.
The chances are, though, that you're just an ordinary peasant living on a small estate.
Most likely, you engage in irrigation agriculture, just as your ancestors had done thousands of years beforehand.
Or perhaps you practice animal husbandry, raising sheep, goats, cattle, pigs, donkeys, horses or camels.
Or perhaps you make pottery or work in metal, manufacturing weapons, tools, harnesses for horses or jewellery.
Or perhaps you're a nomad, wandering the trackless, uncultivated step,
as you travel with your herd from one oasis to another.
If you're educated, you might work for the Persian administration, perhaps as a scribe,
just like the scribes we talked about who worked for the Egyptian pharaoh.
You might own a slave to do your household chores, but slaves don't seem to have been particularly numerous in Persian society.
They were mainly bred in captivity rather than captured in war or sold into slavery.
As in Greece, your wife is probably several years younger than you.
And as is the case in all ancient societies of which we have record, you lord it over her and tell her what's what.
Except if you happen to be the Persian king, that is, you wouldn't want to mess with a Persian queen from Herodotus's account.
They were just as brutal as their husbands.
We tend to think of the Persians as savages compared with the Greeks.
And it's true that if Darius I had won the Battle of Marathon in 490 BC, or if his successor Xerxes, who led a much greater expedition against Greece a decade later, had won,
Western history would have taken a very different course.
The Greeks never forgot that, and they haven't let us forget it either.
As a result, we continue to be haunted by the division between two worlds, east and west.
Much of what we know about the Persians comes from the Greeks.
And what mainly fascinated the Greeks was the Persian political system.
In particular, the fact that the Persian king was an autocrat who could do exactly what he liked without the approval or consent of his people.
That concept was anathema to the Greeks.
And since the Greeks were the victims of Persian expansionism, they saw no reason to be charitable to the Persians.
But what would you, as an ordinary Persian, have thought?
Would you have envied the Greeks, or would you have been grateful for the certainties that autocracy provides?
And whatever the Greeks might say, just because you lived in an autocracy, that didn't mean you had no values.
As we've seen, here was much to admire about your society.
Herodotus certainly admired it, so much so that it earned him the title Phyllob Barbaros, a barbarian lover, meaning Persian lover, clearly a racist slur.
Of Persian education, Herodotus had this to say.
The Persians teach their sons only three things, between the age of five and twenty.
To ride a horse, use the bow and arrow, and speak the truth.
By the way, that's about all we know about Persian education.
Herodotus also tells his readers that the Persians don't vomit or urinate in one another's presence.
And maybe his point is that the Greeks could learn a thing or two from the Persians.
At the same time, Herodotus never loses an opportunity to point out how brutal the Persians were, or rather how brutal their king was.
He tells an anecdote of a Persian nobleman who requested of the Persian king that one of his three sons be excused from war.
I'll excuse all three, said the King Jovially, and promptly has all three sons executed.
From what Herodotus tells us, it's the Persian nobility who had to live in fear of their king.
And that, as I've said, doesn't bother you too much.
So long as you don't cause trouble, and so long as you pay your taxes, you'll be just fine.
The Persian Empire was destroyed virtually overnight by Alexander the Great in 330 BC.
Alexander followed up his victory by burning down Persepolis,
specifically the palace that had been built by King Xerxes, the leader of the expedition against Greece in 480.
We can't actually be sure that he ordered the burning, but even if he didn't, he must at least have permitted his army to burn it down.
According to his biographer Plutarch, Alexander carried off its treasures on 20,000 mules and 5,000 camels.
It was a terrible act of vandalism, and certainly equal to the destruction of the temples on the Athenian Acropolis by Xerxes's army in 480,
which, as I've indicated, the Greeks never forgot.
To conclude, before the Persian Wars, there's no evidence for the East-West divide, which has become such a sickness in the human condition.
But from now on, it's in the system.
We'll see it wrecking havoc again in the Middle Ages.
The Persian Empire incorporated Egypt, which we visited at the beginning of this course.
In the next lecture, we're going to visit Egypt again.
We're going to examine the daily life of Greeks living in Egypt in what we call the Hellenistic world,
the world that saw the expansion of Greek civilization to such countries as Afghanistan and India.
The world that was the creation of Alexander the Great, who, in condoning the destruction of Persepolis,
proved that it's not just barbarians who commit barbaric acts.
