In the previous lecture, we looked at a world which, though under a single administration,
was fragmented and divisive. Today, we're going to look at a world that became more
united than at any time previously in history. I'm talking about the world that was created
by the Macedonian King Alexander the Great in just a few short years. This course is not
about famous individuals, but there's no way we can ignore the achievement of Alexander the Great,
who single-handedly altered the course of history, including the course of everyday life.
Single-handedly? Well, of course, he couldn't have done it without the support of his army,
many of whom were mercenaries, as we saw in a previous lecture. And I think too that his
father Philip II deserves a lot of credit, as too does his mother Olympias. And perhaps we
should include his tutor Aristotle as well. Even so, most of the credit goes to him. Alexander
burst upon the world stage at the age of 20, and by the age of 26, had conquered the once
mighty Persian Empire. In today's lecture, we're going to look at the daily life of the Greeks,
who lived in just one region of the world he conquered, namely Egypt. It took nearly half
a century after Alexander's death in 323 BC, before three stable kingdoms finally emerged.
Greece proper ruled by the Antigonids, Southern Turkey, Babylonia, Syria, Iran,
and Central Asia ruled by the Seleucids, and finally Egypt ruled by the Ptolemy's,
the country that we're going to be focusing upon in this lecture. We call the era from his
death in 323 BC until the Roman conquest in 30 BC, the Hellenistic era. It's named for the fact
that Hellenic or Greek culture, language, and administration were now disseminated over a
vast geographical area, including not only the countries I've just mentioned, but also modern-day
Afghanistan, Pakistan, and the Kashmir region in Northwest India. The spread of Greek culture
affected both the daily lives of the ethnically diverse peoples living within its orbit, and
their way of thinking about one another in ways that had not been true under the Persians. Greek
culture did not obliterate native culture, however. The world did not become one big culture.
Local cultures continued to manifest themselves in vibrant ways, but if you'd been, say, an Afghani
or a Pakistani or the Hellenistic equivalent thereof, you would have been aware of a new cultural
force operating in your world. And the world, or at least a very sizable chunk of it, did for the
first time in history take on something of the feel of being global. This was partly the result
of the spread of kini, koine, the common Greek language. Kini means precisely that, common.
Kini was a simplified form of classical Greek. It was chiefly based on the Athenian dialect,
which was thought to be the purest dialect of Greek. There was once a notion favored by some
rather idealistic scholars that Alexander believed in the universal brotherhood of man. That's a
wild exaggeration. This notion was based largely on an event known as the Sousa Weddings, a mass
wedding that took place in the Persian city of Sousa in 324 BC, the year before Alexander's death,
and carried out under his auspices. Alexander himself married the eldest daughter of the
Persian king and arranged marriages for his senior officers with noble Persian women.
His aim was to produce at the top level of government a mixed race of Greek Macedonian
and Persian ruling elite. He also supported marriages between his soldiery and native women,
Persian and otherwise. Allegedly, there were some 10,000 marriages in all.
It was one of the boldest social experiments ever undertaken, though Alexander no doubt saw it as
a purely political maneuver. And there's only one response to it, gulp. To put it in some sort of
perspective, I would point out that it's only been in the past decade that a majority of Americans,
according to poll findings, have declared they have no problems with mixed marriages between
African Americans and whites. Alexander was thinking outside the box. That's not to say that a majority
of Greeks were also thinking outside the box, far from it. The vast majority, including many of his
senior Macedonian officers, were no doubt appalled. And the experiment failed partly because of his
death the following year in 323. But even so, Alexander demonstrated a remarkably inclusive
vision. He was taking one small step to attempt to bridge the East-West divide. His motives were
certainly political, but he still deserves credit for thinking the unthinkable, even though,
as we saw in the previous lecture, his men burned and ransacked the Persian capital, Persepolis.
No wonder he's venerated to this day as a prophet, a visionary, a holy man, even a saint,
both in the East and in the West. All that by way of background to a bright new age.
So now, please, join me in Hellenistic Egypt. We know more about daily life in Hellenistic
Egypt than we do about any other part of the ancient Greek world at any other time. That's
because it has yielded tens of thousands of papyri, comprising birth certificates, death
certificates, contracts, leases, wills, receipts, marriage contracts, lists of various kinds,
complaints to officials, tax returns, lawsuits, divorce decrees, and so on.
One of my favorites is a decree absolute written in duplicate and deposited in the
Office of Public Record, written by a wife who duly acknowledges that her ex, a man named
Sulis, has returned the dowry that he received from her family in full.
The reason she gives for the breakdown of their marriage is a Poneros daimón, an evil spirit.
In other words, she's not blaming Sulis, and he's not blaming her either. The couple have
evidently agreed to what we would call today a no-fault divorce due to irreconcilable differences.
Incidentally, she is the daughter of a grave digger, and that's the profession of Sulis, too.
Throughout antiquity, almost everyone married someone from the same stratum of society,
and often, too, from the same line of work. The divorce decree is actually dated AD 300.
In other words, it's much later than the period we're focusing upon. But there's no reason to
suppose it wasn't like hundreds, if not thousands, of divorce decrees drawn up centuries earlier.
Most precious of all, for the first time in Greek history, in the Hellenistic period,
we have private correspondence, masses of it, and it's all fascinating.
Hellenistic papyrus bring us as close to another culture as we can possibly get in the age before
photography. It's like that moment in the Wizard of Oz, when the screen goes from black and white
to colour. We learn about the social, legal, cultural, and economic life of the Greeks living in
Egypt, as well as that of native Egyptians who were forced to adapt to the Greek way of life.
Papyrus, you'll recall, were used for writing in Egypt from about 3,200 BC onwards.
Though the plant grows in the swamps of Lower Egypt, they were not unique to Hellenistic Egypt,
they were the commonest writing material in the ancient world. The reason why they have survived
in such large quantity in Egypt, however, is because of the dry soil. Most of them come from
rubbish dumps. What can be more ordinary than that? Rubbish dumps indeed belong to the other
side of history. The largest cache comes from a rubbish dump that belongs to a town called Oxyrincus.
The name means the city of the sharp-nosed fish, which lies about 100 miles south of modern Cairo.
Oxyrincus has so far yielded over 50,000 papyrus. We learn of such day-to-day occurrences as a slave
girl getting mugged on her way home, of a Greek woman being scalded in the bath by an
inattentive attendant, and so on. We learn of Horus, who sends a polite reminder to Appian
about the eight drachmas he loaned him to pay lamp on the mouse catcher. It's time Appian
paid him back. We learn of Demophone, who writes to his friend Ptolemy saying,
Do for heaven's sake, send me the flute player called Petus and that female impersonator. Along
with his drum, his cymbals, and his castanets, the women want him to perform at their sacrifice.
Have him dressed up in all his finery. Oh, and while you're at it, send me all the cheeses
that you have and some empty jars I've run out. A nice assortment of vegetables, too,
plus any other delicacies you may have. Thank you. Then there's Isias, who writes to her brother
Hephaestion. Why on earth haven't you returned home? I know you've been discharged from the army.
I've been looking after your kid all the time you've been away, and the price of corn has gone
through the roof. Your mother is furious, so if you know what's good for you, you'll hop on the
next camel and return double quick. Well, I made up the last bit about the camel. And finally,
we hear of a soldier called Hilarion, who writes to his pregnant sister Alice as follows.
If you give birth to a boy, keep it. But if you give birth to a girl, give it away. A chilling
reminder of the superior value attached to boys in the Greek world, as generally throughout
antiquity, and even in more modern times. We spent some time in Egypt earlier in this course,
around the middle of the second millennium BC. And it's appropriate to ask, what has changed?
In some ways, not a lot. There's still a pharaoh running the country, although
now he happens to speak Greek and is Greek. And he's really only playing at being pharaoh,
so that he can run the country more efficiently. It always helps to have your subject thinking of
you as a god if you want to get things done. It's still a highly bureaucratized society,
although now the Greeks are in charge. It's still a very religious society, with all its
strange gods who are half human and half animal, although it's had to make accommodation to Greek
religion. And the Nile is still running through it like a strong brown god to borrow the simile that
the poet T.S. Eliot used to describe the River Thames, or less likely the Mississippi River, in
the wasteland. When Alexander first arrived in Egypt en route to destroying the Persian Empire,
the Egyptians regarded him as a liberator because he kicked out the previous occupying power,
the Persians, whom they hated. It was probably in January 331 BC that he laid the foundation
stone for the first and most magnificent of his cities, Alexandria, though he didn't stop long
enough to see the city rise up. One of the ways Alexander changed the world was by building
a number of new foundations throughout his empire, most of which he called Alexandria.
Facing onto the Mediterranean, possessed of excellent natural harbours, our Alexandria is
situated on the western edge of the Nile Delta, which gives it access to the interior of Egypt as
well. It became arguably the greatest city in the ancient world, beating hands down for my money,
smelly, stuffy, dirty and overpopulated Rome. It also beat Athens, which only has the Acropolis
and the Agorah to recommend it. Architecturally, Alexandria would have taken your breath away.
It was laid out according to a grid pattern and some of the buildings were truly stunning.
Most of it now lies beneath the sea, but thanks to underwater archaeology and thanks too
to a few surviving descriptions, we're able to reconstruct its essential outline.
So, let's take a tour. Let's imagine I'm an inhabitant of Alexandria and that you're a
first-time visitor to the city. It's the reign of the pharaoh Ptolemy II around 250 BC.
Doesn't make any difference where you're from. You're still going to be gobsmacked,
because Alexandria is unlike any other ancient Greek city or indeed any other ancient city.
As an Alexandrine, I'm a bit prejudiced, I have to admit, but you wait till you've seen my city.
I think you're going to agree. I recommend that we first visit the famous lighthouse,
known as the Pharos, so that we can get a sense of the layout of the city. It's one of the seven
wonders of the world. How many wonders of the world do you have in your city? I thought so.
It's named after the small offshore island called Pharos, on which it stands. As you can see,
the island is joined to the mainland by a causeway. So, let's stroll over and climb the
lighthouse. It's the tallest man-made structure ever built, more than 350 feet high, according to
some scholars. And just to put things in perspective, that means it was well over twice as high as
the Statue of Liberty, and that's without its pedestal. Only the pyramids at Giza were taller
than that in antiquity. At the top of the lighthouse, there's a fire kept perpetually
blazing, which is visible 30 miles out to sea. Its purpose is to guide ships to the port,
rather than to warn them of danger. It's also a symbol of Alexandria's enormous prestige,
and it gives you a spectacular view of the city. You'll see that it's laid out in rectangular
blocks measuring 300 by 150 feet. So, it's not at all like Athens, which grew up haphazardly,
and without any sense of city planning. You probably know that Alexander supervised the layout.
What a dude. He had time to be a surveyor while running a military campaign against the superpower.
That majestic avenue that runs down the middle of the city is nearly 100 feet broad.
It's known as the Canopic Way, and it's named for the town of Canopus in the Nile Delta.
The Canopic Way cuts through the agorah, which, as you can see, lies at the center of our city.
Our agorah is, of course, the commercial, religious, and political heart of our city,
as it is of yours. But ours, I wager, is much grander than yours. Over there, adjoining the
agorah, you can see our library and the museon. Museon means the shrine of the muses, and gives
us our words, museum, and music. The library contains over 700,000 rolls. It's by far the best
collection of papyri rolls anywhere in the Mediterranean. Can you imagine what a catastrophe
it would be for learning if it burned down? It did, by the way, later, possibly as the result
of a fire started accidentally by Julius Caesar. We largely have to thank our King Ptolemy II
for making it what it is. He's an absolutely off-the-wall bibliomaniac. He's passed a law
requiring all ships docking in the port to be searched to discover whether they've got any
papyrus rolls on board. If they do, he confiscates them. Once, he gave the Athenians 15 talents.
15 talents. You could almost build a temple with that as collateral for original copies of the plays
of their great tragedians, 90 plays of Ischulis, 130 of Sophocles, and 92 of Euripides, promising
to return them after his scribes had copied them. Well, instead, he gave the Athenians the copies
and kept the originals. More power to his elbow, I say. It's always good to put one over on the
bloody Athenians. They're so stuck on themselves. Scientists and humanists come from all over the
Greek-speaking world to use the library. I saw Archimedes from Syracuse working away there once.
You must have heard of him. He's a math genius and inventor as well.
So let's carry on with our tour. Over there in the northeast sector of the city are the royal
palaces and gardens. And look, that's the mausoleum of Alexander. Isn't it magnificent?
For my money, it beats the pyramids hands down. You know the story of how Alexander's general
Ptolemy, the Ptolemy who later became Ptolemy I, hijacked his corpse when it was being taken back
to Macedonia. And if you turn your eyes over there to the southwest, to the district inhabited by
the Egyptians, you'll see a very grandiose temple. That's the Sarapayon, the temple of the native
Egyptian god Sarapis. Our kings have shown a lot of respect to Sarapis. They did so to get the
locals on board, so to speak. It's a way of garnering their support. But a lot of Greeks worship
Sarapis as well now. He's a fusion between Osiris, their god of the dead, and Apis, the divine bull.
So what do you think of our city? No need to answer. I can see you're positively green with envy.
Alexander never visited Alexandria, the finished city, in his lifetime, though he did it said,
lay the first building block. He returned posthumously, so to speak, thanks to Ptolemy the
first, as I mentioned, who hijacked his corpse while it was on its way to Macedon. There's a story
that Octavian, the future emperor Augustus, came to pay his respects to Alexander's remains
after he had defeated Mark Antony. He was asked if he wanted to visit the tombs of the pharaohs as
well. I came to see a king, not a bunch of corpses, he replied. Too bad there's no trace of the tomb
today. Alexander's corpse went AWOL centuries ago.
If I had my brothers, I'd choose to be in Alexandria on the occasion of the inauguration of the
Iso-Olympic Ptolemaea by Ptolemy II, held in honor of his father Ptolemy the First Sotir, Ptolemy
Saviour, in 279 BC. Iso-Olympic means equal in status to the Olympic Games. We know of the Ptolemaea
in considerable detail because a Greek writer called Athaneas, who wrote an antiquarian book
called Philosophers at Dinner, describes it minutely. By calling his festival Iso-Olympic,
Ptolemy was being a touch modest. What he did, a far out did, anything ever staged at Olympia.
Ptolemy supersized the notion of a festival and held the grandest parade ever held in the
Greek world. It's about time we talked about parades in our course. They help to break up
the monotony of daily life. So I invite you to accompany me. After all, it's what the 100-foot
broad, canopic way is all about, to show off a parade to best advantage. There are numerous floats,
each pulled by 600 men, supporting giant statues of the gods, as well as statues of Alexander the
Great and of Ptolemy the First. There are elephants, antelopes, leopards, camels. Look, there's even
a live rhinoceros, a great rarity. A 57,000 infantry and 20,200 cavalry bring up the rear.
I've heard the parade cost 2,239 talents and 50 minors to put on, but who's counting?
Ptolemy's got pots of money to burn. Incidentally, the historian James Evans
has estimated that it's the equivalent of 79 million US dollars in today's money,
though I personally think that's a fairly conservative estimate. The whole thing was
unimaginably vulgar and utterly irresistible. So what do you want to know next about Hellenistic
Egypt? A bit about our history. The first settlers were retired veterans from Alexander's
campaigns. Soon, however, the settlement had begun to attract Greeks from all over the Greek
speaking world, primarily Macedonians at first. You can only become an Alexandrian citizen if
you're Greek, of course. Our city has also attracted lots of Jewish residents. The Jewish
community occupies one of the five major districts of the city. They have a very imposing synagogue.
Many of these Jews have become so Hellenized, however, that they've even forgotten how to
speak Hebrew. As a result, they've had to have their Biblos, their sacred writings,
translated into Greek. They call the translation the Septuagint. Septuagint is Greek for 70.
That's because they claim that they employed over 70 scholars to do the translation from Hebrew
into Greek. Look, there are lots of different people living here, but I'm not going to pretend
there aren't racial tensions. There are definite tensions between us Greeks and the free but
disenfranchised Egyptians. A lot of us Greeks think of the Egyptians as an inferior race.
Nothing strange there. We think of all non-Greeks as inferior.
Our founder, Alexander, though, was very aware of local sensibilities. There's an Egyptian
village named Rakotis, which occupied the site of Alexandria prior to its foundation. Alexander
was careful not to destroy it. He incorporated it into the southwest quarter of his new city,
so as not to ruffle Egyptian feathers. I already mentioned that our kings have done their best
to show respect for Egyptian religion. I've got to admit that there are also tensions between us
and the Jews. The Jews believe in only one God, added to which they despise all our gods.
They refuse to participate in our civic rituals. They even go so far as to condemn our gymnasia.
They claim it's immoral to exercise naked. It's not, of course. It's a mark of our pride in not
being ashamed of our nakedness. For all these reasons, we live in separate districts from both
Egyptians and Jews. We keep ourselves to ourselves, and they do the same.
Would you like to know how Alexandria is administered? Like every Greek city,
it has its own laws, its own magistrates, its own council, and its own assembly. We have a top
heavy bureaucracy. That's largely due to the Egyptians. We inherited it from them,
and everyone has to pay taxes. Just to give you a sense of the flavor of our bureaucracy, let me
read to you a memorandum that the chief minister for the state economy sent to some poor underling
called an eukonomos, a junior financial officer. Check the irrigation channels. Supervise the
schedule of the sowing season. See that enough grain reaches the market. Make sure the looms are
producing the requisite amount of linen. Safeguard the looms that are not being used.
Audit the taxes. Check that the oil presses are in proper working order. Register all the cattle,
both publicly and privately owned. Make sure the prices are fair in the market. Plant the
dikes beside the canals with trees. Arrest any Egyptian deserters you encounter. And above all,
do your best to cheer everyone up. Poor little eukonomos. I only hope he has a large staff to
kick around in turn, all doing their best to go around with a smiley face in the hopes of cheering
everyone up. Alexandria was a highly sophisticated and cultivated city. It continued to prosper under
Roman rule due to its important location for trade. It became the port from which huge cargo
vessels laden with grain would set out from Egypt to feed the population of Rome. In late
antiquity, it remained a centre of learning, particularly of the Neoplatonist School of
Philosophy. It was the birthplace of the great geographer and astronomer Ptolemy. And it became
home to an important Christian community. It was still an important city in Byzantine times
and remained so until the Arab conquest in the 7th century AD. There's no getting away from it,
however. Alexandria was an oddity, a kind of cultural non-sequitur. A Greek city run by Greeks
set in an alien cultural landscape with which it had little in common. We've no way of knowing
to what extent the Greek population penetrated into the hinterland, though we do know that Egypt
was divided into regions known as gnomes, each with its own capital, and that though these
capitals were not polis or city-states, they did have many of the urban features of city-states,
including agoras, temples, theatres, baths, and so on. The last reigning monarch of Egypt
was Cleopatra VII, the famous Cleopatra. In 31 BC, however, Octavian, future emperor,
Augustus, defeated Cleopatra and her sidekick, Amarck Antony, at the naval battle of Actium
of the West Coast of Greece, the country now passed into the control of the Romans.
The next ten lectures are devoted to what it meant to be a Roman. As ever, we're going to
be concentrating primarily on the lives of those who, in the words of the poet John Keats, were
written in water, slaves, soldiers, women, the poor, and the riches seen through the eyes of the poor.
Celebrities, criminals, pagan worshippers, Jews, and Christians. But we'll also take time to
relax with the Romans as well. All in order to build the fullest picture of their daily lives
that we can. In the first of these lectures, we're going to examine what it meant to be a Roman.
