The Romans deserve our respect.
They made the Mediterranean world inhabitable in a way that it had never been before.
True, there was a dark side to their character.
They were capable of unimaginable cruelty towards anyone they perceived as their enemy.
But at least you knew where you were with them, period.
And besides, just think of the alternative, existing in some dark wood on the fringes
of the Roman Empire as a benighted barbarian, a true barbarian, not a Persian, not my cup
of tea at all.
Edward Gibbon, author of Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, famously observed that
if a man were called to fix a period in the history of the world during which the condition
of the human race was most happy and prosperous, he would without hesitation name that which
elapsed from the death of Domitian to the accession of Commodus.
That's to say, the period from AD 96 to 180.
Over the course of the next 10 lectures, we're going to be talking mainly about this period,
the first two centuries AD.
The world was a pretty safe place, all things considered.
The civil wars were over.
The Principate, ruled by one man, was in place, and securely so.
There was little internal conflicts, except in the province of Judea, we'll be devoting
a lecture to that.
There was only sporadic religious bigotry, nothing like the persecution, quote unquote,
of the Christians that came later, we'll be devoting another lecture to that.
If you'd been born into a moderately prosperous family, you would have enjoyed a level of
material comfort that people in any pre-modern age would have envied.
Whereas if you'd been rich, you'd have lived in a style that equaled if it didn't exceed
that of the wealthiest people alive today.
At the same time, there was slavery, and there was rampant poverty.
But a far greater number of people than ever before in human history could say without fear
of contradiction that they'd never had it so good.
So today we're going to talk about being Roman.
We obviously shouldn't think of the Romans as a single people living identical lives,
though.
On the contrary, the economic disparity and the ethnic diversity among Romans were both
at least as great as they are in our or in any society.
What we might ask did an aristocratic senator living in a posh villa on the Palatine Hill
in Rome have in common with a dirt poor farmer living on the fringes of the empire who only
spoke Latin, if he spoke Latin at all, with a very thick accent?
Well, we might ask the same question, of course, of citizens of the US today who belong to
different regions and different classes, and whose first language isn't English.
What it was that gave Romans a sense of common identity is not something that we can fully
explore in one lecture.
Though I can say that it had a lot to do with the extraordinary uniformity that the Roman
state was able to impose all over the empire, both in terms of its institutions and in terms
of its architecture.
So what I'm going to focus upon instead is what being Roman meant to someone who saw
himself as being of true Roman stock.
I'm going to be talking primarily about the mindset of Roman men, though it was a mindset
that would have been fully endorsed by Roman women as well.
It's a kind of idealist image, but one that had a profound impact upon the way that people
thought about themselves, even if they didn't all conform to that ideal.
Let me begin, however, by saying a bit about the rather problematic word, Roman.
In the early period of Roman history, the period of the kings, the designation Roman
meant simply being a native of the city of Rome.
By around 300 BC, however, the Romans had conquered Laetium, the territory surrounding
Rome, and they had extended Roman citizenship to the Latins, after whom the Latin language,
which they spoke, is named.
And this meant that from 300 BC onwards, Roman no longer meant being a native of the city
state of Rome.
It meant anyone living within Laetium.
And as the Romans began to expand out of Laetium into the Italian peninsula, and then out of
the Italian peninsula into the Mediterranean, they increasingly extended the gift of Roman
citizenship to all the peoples they conquered, until Roman eventually came to apply to most
of the peoples living under Roman rule.
And finally, in AD 212, the emperor Caracalla granted citizenship to every free man living
within the borders of the Roman Empire.
As a strategy, as a way of constantly redefining what it meant to be Roman, extending citizenship
was bold, imaginative, and unprecedented.
It was an entirely novel way of looking at human identity.
The Greeks certainly didn't come up with this idea.
When it suited their purposes, as for instance, when they were fighting the Persians, they
did occasionally think of themselves as Greeks, but they mainly saw themselves as Athenians,
Spartans, and so forth, as we've seen.
The only similar experiment was that undertaken by America, nearly 2,000 years later, and
to a more limited degree by Britain after the dissolution of its empire.
All this, however, should not blind us to the fact that, even after the passing of Caracalla's
decree, informal racial prejudice continued to exist within the empire.
So if you happen to be that blue-blooded Roman whom I mentioned a moment ago, you might
well have despised many of your fellow citizens for being commoners, plebeians, and upstarts.
When Julius Caesar, 250 years previously, appointed some Gauls to the rank of senator,
the Romans made lots of jokes about them, like, how's a Gaul going to find his way to
the Senate House?
He'll need signs all the way, ha, ha, ha.
And there are plenty of other indications that the Romans were racially prejudiced against
Greeks for a start, with whom they had a very conflicted relationship.
I'll talk about that later in this lecture.
But all Romans, whether blue-blooded or plebeian, and whatever their ethnicity, would have enjoyed
the same sense of territorial security, the same guaranteed services that were characteristic
of the Roman way of life, and the same belief in their entitlement to be top nation.
This kind of collective identity, based on a shared view of the world, had never existed
before except for the Egyptians living under the pharaohs, and perhaps for the Persians
under their kings, but obviously for a much smaller population.
As a Roman, you believed unquestioningly in the rightness of slavery, just like most,
if not all, other peoples in the ancient world.
What distinguished you from all other ancient, and I might add, more modern slave-owning
societies, is that over time you came to see it as in your interests, to grant citizenship
to slaves.
True, slaves had been freed before in human history, but never on the scale that you as
a Roman were prepared to free them, and never with the same opportunities for advancement
and enrichment.
This was a huge mental leap for mankind.
It wasn't the case that slaves acquired rights, but they did acquire expectations.
Not all slaves, but a sizable proportion, notably those who were domestics.
I'll be devoting the next lecture to Roman slavery.
Another unique feature about being a Roman is that you see yourself performing a vital
peacekeeping role in the world.
You see it as your job to impose the same language, the same legal system, and to some
extent the same standard of living on perhaps as many as six million people over a vast
geographical area that encompassed almost the entire Mediterranean and regions far beyond,
including Britain.
I'd like to illustrate this fact by reference to the Aeneid, which the poet Virgil wrote
in the reign of Augustus.
In it, the hero Aeneas goes down to Hades to visit his father Ankaesis.
Ankaesis gives him a preview, so to speak, of the history of Rome, whose founder Aeneas
is destined to become, though he has no idea of what that means.
Ankaesis gives this classic and uplifting definition of Rome's mission, parkeri subiectis
e debelari superbus, to humble the proud and spare the subjected.
It's a noble mission, and I can't begin to explain how it was that a small community
of peasant farmers living on the banks of the Tiber ever got it into their hearts and
minds to take on such a daunting challenge, but they did.
And all things considered, they made a pretty good job of it.
Only a community with a strong sense of civic duty could have dedicated itself to the public
good in the way they did.
True, the Romans extracted a lot of wealth from their provinces and acquired a lot of
slaves, but so far as we can tell, that wasn't the reason why they first began building an
empire.
Security seems to have been the principal motive.
As a Roman, your sense of civic duty would have been far greater than the kind of civic
duty that most people feel today.
The only exceptions are those very special women and men who serve in the military.
And here, it's worth pointing out that until the early 1st century AD, virtually all Romans
of all social ranks were required to serve in the Roman army and no doubt regarded service
as an honor rather than as a duty.
I'm going to ask you to think a bit more about what it meant to be a superpower back
then.
You and your forefathers had built the biggest empire the world had ever seen.
It wouldn't be exceeded in extent until the 19th century when the Brits saw it as their
task to spread civilization throughout the world.
Being a superpower and the world's only policemen are no easy task.
We know that.
The U.S. is grappling with that right now.
He was a Roman grappled with it for over half a millennium.
I'm always very moved by a somber comment which the Roman general Scipio Imiliana makes
after defeating Rome's nemesis, Carthage, in 146 BC, while he is observing the city
burning to the ground.
He says, I very much fear that someday the same doom will be pronounced on my own country.
The Greek historian Polybius, who records the comment, was a close friend of Scipio,
so there's good reason to believe that he really did say this.
It may be that you too would have had similarly dark thoughts about Rome's destiny.
To understand how you would have conceived of your place in the universe and how differently
you saw the world from other people, I want to turn again to Virgil's Aeneid.
I think it's appropriate to refer to the Aeneid in order to understand the Roman mentality
because the likelihood is that you would have read the poem at school or with your personal
tutor.
It was certainly on the syllabus, so it's values for ones that you would have been
expected to endorse.
Even though Virgil makes it clear that Rome's achievement had come at a terrible cost.
So what are those virtues?
Fides and Piatas for a start.
Fides means faithfulness, sticking to a task and seeing it through to the bitter end, not
being a quitter.
Piatas translates as piety, which is a rather stuffy concept in today's world.
What it means in Roman terms is doing the right thing, whether it's for your parents,
your country, your dead ancestors or your gods.
So Pius Aeneas, his how Aeneas introduces himself at the beginning of the poem and he
does so proudly.
One of the most memorable images of Piatas is when he's fleeing from the ruins of Troy,
carrying his father and Caesis on his back and clasping the hand of his little son Aescanius,
who is trying to match his steps to his father's.
And Caesis is clutching an image of the penates, the household gods, which the family has rescued
from Troy so that they can start a new life and build a home elsewhere.
Aeneid is an intensely moral poem, even though it does in places question the values of the
sacrifice that Aeneas and others must make to achieve an empire.
The point I was making a moment ago in relation to Scipio's comment on the fall of Carthage.
As a Roman, you also see yourself bound by duty to the race publica, our word republic,
meaning literally the common thing or common wealth.
There's a great example from Roman history to illustrate this point.
It's one that every Roman boy and girl would have known.
When Lucius Unius Brutus liberated Rome from the rule of the kings, allegedly in 509 BC,
and became one of the first two consuls in the newly formed republic, he bound the people
by an oath not to allow anyone ever to reign as king in Rome again.
And later, when a conspiracy was formed by some noble born youths to restore the monarchy,
Brutus had them all executed, including his own sons and brothers.
In other words, he saw duty to the state to be greater than love of family.
We may find that somewhat chilling, but that's because we can't imagine loving our country
more than our wives and children the Romans could.
Here's another great example of what it meant to be a Roman.
A young Roman called Gaius Mucius Skywalla,
stole into the camp of the Etruscans, hoping to kill their king, Lars Porcina,
because he had given support to the exiled Roman king.
By mistake, however, Skywalla slew one of the king's attendants whom he mistook for the king.
On his arrest, he placed his hand in a fire and held it there while it burnt,
uttering the immortal words,
I am a Roman citizen.
It is the characteristic of a Roman, both to act and to suffer bravely,
adding that there were 300 other Romans as determined as he was.
Porcina was so impressed by Skywalla's bravery that he let him go.
One last anecdote, it involves the wife of a Roman nobleman called Lucretia.
Lucretia was raped by the king's son.
The next day, she appeared before her husband dressed in black.
After first making him swear that he would take vengeance for what she was about to reveal,
she told him of the crime and then stabbed herself to death with a concealed dagger.
As I said, you would have learned these stories in your childhood.
You would have been as tough as nails yourself,
capable of enduring enormous hardship physically as well as psychologically.
Of course, that was true of all people living in antiquity.
The ancient world wasn't for sissies.
The difference is that toughness and hardyhood were absolutely central to your identity as a Roman.
Given what I've just been saying about Roman values,
it's hardly surprising that as a blue-blooded Roman,
you would have been highly traditional and conservative.
You believe strongly in the importance of behaviour that you've inherited, so to speak, from your ancestors.
The Latin phrase for this is most mayorum, the customs of the greater ones,
the greater ones being your ancestors.
Perhaps that's why Roman portrait artists always make their sitters look so serious.
Gravitas, meaning seriousness, was a distinctly Roman virtue.
You didn't do its opposite, levitas.
You regarded levitas as the mark of an inferior mind, including that of a woman, I'm sorry to say.
Let's talk about these ancestors of yours a bit more.
You revered them.
You looked to them for assistance, for guidance and for support.
You looked up to them and sought to emulate them.
You were linked to them indissolubly, just as your descendants would be linked to you indissolubly,
which was why it was so important to have children.
All ancient societies set the highest importance on having children,
and none more so than that of the Romans.
As a Roman, you saw yourself as a link in a continuous chain.
One of the indications of the traditional nature of Roman society
is the specific nature of the Roman family or familia, from which our word family derives, of course.
As in the case of the Greek oikos or oikia, however,
the Roman familia did not correspond exactly to our concept of the family.
Familia meant not only your immediate family, but also your extended family and dependence, both slave and free.
Your free dependence were called clientes, our word clients,
and they looked to you as their patronus or patron for both subsistence and protection.
The familia also included divine members, such as the penates, whom I mentioned earlier.
I'll be talking about family religion in a later lecture.
When we think of your mindset as a Roman, one of the things that inevitably comes to mind is cruelty.
Did you, Romans, invent cruelty? Of course not.
Did you have a monopoly on it in the ancient world? Of course not.
It's true, however, that you did create facilities for indulging in bloodiness
on a scale that had never remotely been equaled before.
The Colosseum, the premier venue for observing cruelty first hand, could accommodate 50,000 spectators.
It's true as well that you were inured to the spectacle of people dying,
in a way that is, to our manner of thinking, dehumanizing.
To be fair, however, many of us are just as addicted to the spectacle of violence.
Think of the popularity of television series and movies that feed our appetite for blood and gore.
The difference between you as a Roman and ourselves today, however,
is that we have the technological means to simulate violence, whereas you had to deal in the real thing.
Probably you'd have justified your penchant for blood and gore by saying that those who died
in the Colosseum and other amphitheaters throughout the empire were not real people.
They were prisoners of war, slaves, turned gladiators, condemned criminals and Christians,
subhuman, the lot of them. That's no excuse, of course, but it does put things in a slightly different perspective.
The sociologist and historian Keith Hopkins proposed that public killings were a religious right
and that the Romans never lost sight of their religious aspect.
In other words, gladiatorial fights were a form of sacrifice to the gods.
It's also true that the Romans were rather keen on chopping people's heads and hands off,
as well as ripping out their tongues.
Here again, however, there was a motive behind the cruelty.
It wasn't a psychological aberration, although it might well have fed the bloodlust of some Romans,
but it primarily served to keep the world under control.
Another important aspect of your mindset is the very special relationship that existed between you and the Greeks.
It was a relationship unlike any that has existed between any two peoples before or since.
The two of you were joined at the hip, as I explained in a previous course for the great courses called
Greece and Rome and Integrated History.
As the poet Horace so neatly put it, captured Greece made its savage captor captive
and introduced the arts into rustic Italy.
As a blue-blooded Roman, you own Greek slaves, are familiar with Greek literature,
can read and speak Greek yourself, own Greek works of art and have your sons educated by Greeks.
The equivalent to owning a Picasso or a Matisse in ancient Rome was in fact owning an original work of Greek sculpture.
And if you couldn't get your hands on an original, you'd buy a copy.
There was a hugely flourishing trade in copies of Greek statues.
Despite your admiration for Greek culture, however, you would have regarded the Greeks as slippery and untrustworthy,
although you probably felt a touch of cultural inferiority to them as well.
Talk of Greek art takes me to another subject that has bearing on the Roman mindset.
You're intensely materialistic. You like stuff, lots of stuff. You can't get enough of it.
You live in a flashy house with expensive furnishings and expensive objects of all kinds.
Again, this is a subject I'll be exploring in detail in a later lecture about wealthy Romans.
It's enough to say here that you exploited your empire so you could enjoy products from all parts of it.
Goods were transported in amphorae, sacks, glass bottles, wooden crates and barrels from all over,
so that you could enjoy the benefits of being an imperial power, no matter where you happened to live.
There's another feature of the Roman mindset that deserves attention.
You would have enjoyed far less privacy than we do today.
Enjoyed is in quotes because lack of privacy was not something that would probably have bothered you in the least.
You can't have privacy in a slave society. Your slaves know your most intimate secrets.
They hear you quarreling with your wife, complaining about the neighbors, bitching about the emperor and so on.
There's another way in which you would have had much less privacy and nothing better expresses this fact
than that whenever you needed to relieve yourself outside the home, you would have had to do so in public.
That's because Roman latrines didn't have party walls. A visit to a latrine was a social event
and the chances are you'd strike up a conversation with the person sitting beside you.
It's worth pointing out, however, that your clothing, whether you were a man or a woman, was much looser than it is today,
so it would have provided you with much more cover when you were in a sitting position than ours would.
We don't know whether men and women used the same facilities.
In Herculaneum, there's a latrine adjacent to the men's bathhouse, but none adjacent to the women's bathhouse,
which may suggest that women were forced, at times, to share the same facilities as men.
Finally, a few observations about the physical conditions of life in Rome.
Rome took a heavy toll on its population.
Much of the population lived in conditions that were unsanitary, uncomfortable, overcrowded and hazardous.
The economic gap between rich and poor, as I've already noted, was as extreme as in any society.
Effluent flowed through the streets in open drains.
The smell of urine and excrement was so nauseating that the wealthy held up roses to their noses.
The streets were filled with beggars, thieves and prostitutes.
There was so much traffic that it had been decided that wheeled vehicles could only move about at night.
Plague and other diseases were an annual occurrence. Malnutrition was also common.
At the same time, no matter what your social or economic status,
Rome offered unparalleled opportunities for advancement for those who were hardworking, enterprising and ambitious.
It also offered a wide variety of diversions and distractions at virtually no cost whatsoever,
as we'll see in the lecture about reallaxing in Rome.
In the course of the next nine lectures, we're going to look at Romans from all walks of life and in all kinds of everyday situations.
I'm going to begin, however, by talking about the everyday lives of those who were at the very bottom of the heap, namely slaves.
Slaves quintessentially belonged to the other side of history.
What distinguished Roman slaves from slaves in any other system of which we have record, however, is, as I've indicated,
the fact that many of them, in the right circumstances, were able to achieve their liberty and thereby become part of the other, other side of history.
It was the boldest experiment in what sociologists call upward social mobility that the world had ever seen.
