Up till now I've used the word being to suggest rather naively that it is possible to enter
the skin of someone who has been dead thousands of years, but one can actually get into the
armor if not the skin of a Roman soldier.
There are lots of fine strapping chaps who kill time by pretending to be accountants,
lawyers, flight attendants and so on, but who in their real lives get kitted out and
stage mock battles on weekends.
There are several legions stationed in this continent for starters.
The nearest one to me is the Legio Wichesema Quarta, the 24th Legion, which serves in
Prowinkia, Pennsylvania, and whose mission statement, according to its website, is to
defend the frontiers of ancient Rome in the mid-Atlantic province of North America.
I feel a lot safer knowing it's there.
As Jean-Michel Carré has noted, it was the Romans who invented many of the features of
modern military life.
They include, and I quote, a barracks life, promotion rolls, bugle calls, the camp infirmary,
the personnel office, tours of duty, morning reports, permissions and leaves.
The army offers you a career, advertisements, the discharge, review board and even theatrical
performances for the troops.
In the earlier period of Roman history, if you were a citizen and if you met the minimum
property qualification, that's to say if you owned a farm of a certain size, you'd be conscripted
on an annual basis for the duration of a whole campaign, just like Greek hoplites.
Our word conscript comes from the Latin conscribo, meaning to write your name along with lots
of other names.
As Rome expanded and its wars lengthened, however, you would have increasingly faced economic
hardship as a result of military service once you returned home.
That's because most of you would have been peasant farmers, so you'd return at the end
of a campaign, perhaps one that lasted several years, to find your farm completely ruined.
This got worse and worse as Rome's wars became lengthier and further afield.
So in 107 BC, a Roman general called Gaius Marius abolished the property qualification
altogether and permitted those who had previously been excluded to enlist.
In other words, those without any property, those who were very poor.
Let's suppose you're one of them.
Previously, soldiers had to provide their own armor.
You had no money, however, so Marius provided you with armor at the state's expense.
He also provided you with pay.
All this temporarily relieved a manpower crisis.
The problem was that when you were discharged, you were as poor as you had been when you'd
enlisted, and this meant that you were dependent for your retirement package, so to speak,
on the general whom you'd served under.
In time, these generals became very powerful.
We're talking about men like Pompey the Great, Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus, and Julius Caesar,
who commanded large armies for several years.
What happened was that you began to identify more with your general than you did with Rome
itself.
Julius Caesar's army in Gaul, for instance, served with him for eight years.
Not only would you have developed a deep attachment to Caesar over that length of time, but you
would also have looked to him to provide you with your retirement package.
A Caesar, by the way, was a very chummy kind of bloke, the kind of general who fraternizes
with his men when they're off duty, not like his enemy Pompey, who was very standoffish.
It was hardly surprising, therefore, that after serving with him for eight years, you
didn't ask any questions when he crossed the little river in the north of Italy called
the Rubicon and marched on Rome.
So as a result of this trend, Roman soldiers came in effect to resemble mercenaries, not
unlike the mercenaries we discussed in the lecture about the Greek military.
This created a huge problem for the Roman state.
Indeed, as I've indicated, it was a primary cause of the civil wars in the final decades
of the republic, and one that involved literally hundreds of thousands of citizens.
It's estimated that in the last two centuries of the republic, the proportion of soldiers
who were conscripted into the army sometimes reached as high as 20% of the entire citizen
body.
Another way to put this is that the length of your military service would, on average,
be about six years in length.
A military service, in other words, very much defined you as a Roman citizen.
In Octavian, the future Emperor Augustus, a defeated Marc Antony at Actium in 31 BC,
he pensioned off perhaps as many as half a million veterans and settled them as colonists
in Italy and elsewhere.
Octavian, who was very forward thinking in so many ways, understood that this was not
the most efficient way to run an army or a country.
So he introduced the concept of the voluntary professional soldier.
He didn't abolish conscription, but by the end of the first century AD, volunteers had
become more numerous than conscripts.
I should add that non-citizens, too, were permitted to enlist as auxiliaries.
I'll talk about auxiliaries in a moment, including the Peregrini, that's to say, free subjects
who were allied to Rome.
Rome's army, in other words, was what we would call today truly multicultural.
As the historian Tacitus states, it was an army of many languages and many customs in
which citizens, allies and foreigners mingled together.
So from the first century onwards, if you'd been serving in the Roman army, you'd have
been rubbing shoulders, quite literally, with men of different races who were defending
the Roman ideal, even though they weren't Roman themselves and perhaps didn't have much
idea of what being Roman actually meant.
That's a pretty amazing thought.
At the same time, it was a great way to integrate peoples into the empire and to give them a
sense of unity.
So let's suppose you're young and you've seen a poster calling for recruits.
You have a dead-end job, with no career prospects, so you decide to enlist.
Ideally, you're aged between 17 and 23, though you might at a stretch be as young as 14
or even as old as 36.
You've got to be 5'10 inches tall, though this qualification was later lowered to 5'8".
So it's doubtful at 5'6", that I would have made the cut, sad to say, though we do occasionally
hear of soldiers who were as short as 5'4".
You're more likely to be accepted if you come from the countryside.
There was some prejudice against city slickers in the Roman army.
They were thought to be unruly and in general a rather bad influence.
If you're a foreigner, you'll serve as an auxiliary, as I just said, though you'll need
to have at least a smattering of Latin to understand the orders that will be barked at you.
Assuming that the adjutant in charge of recruitment thinks you've got the right stuff, your name,
along with any distinguishing physical characteristics, will be entered down on the role of the cohort
to which you've been assigned.
A cohort consists of about 600 men.
I'll talk about cohorts in a moment.
Now, or perhaps later, you swear an oath of allegiance to your emperor.
The oath is known as the sacramentum, our word sacrament, of course.
And you'll renew your oath every New Year's Day.
You'll be paid three gold coins, our rei, they're called, as a sign-up fee.
And our reios was worth 25 denarii, and a denarius was worth about $15, so you probably
received about $1,000 or more, a considerable inducement, therefore.
You get a sign-up fee if you enlist in the U.S. Army, too.
This is called your viaticum, a word whose Latin roots mean what's needed for the journey.
Incidentally, the Roman Catholic Church uses the word viaticum for the Eucharist that a
priest gives to a dying person, signifying that that person is undertaking a journey
to the next life.
Congratulations.
You've just become a member of the most formidable fighting machine the world has ever seen.
You'll now have to undergo four months of gruelling training.
If you've enlisted in Rome or its Enveron, your training will take place in the campus
Martius, the field of Mars, beside the river Tiber.
Mars was the Roman god of war, and the month of March, Martius, is named after him.
It was the month when the Roman army traditionally began its campaigning season, hence its name.
You'll be taught to thrust with the sword.
The sling was preferable to slashing because it was more deadly.
How to throw the spear or pilum, a distance of about 30 meters.
How to handle a bow and arrow.
And how to shoot darts with the sling.
You'll also learn how to practice formations, build a camp, and swim.
My favorite formation is known as the testudo, the tortoise.
That was when you would move forward, protected by a roof and a wall of shields, rather as
if you were protected by a tortoise shell.
Let's talk next about your armor.
You wear a covering over your shoulders and chest, known as a lorica, that is made out
of iron plates and hoops.
You wear a helmet, also made out of iron, in the shape of a domed bowl.
It has a brow guard, a neck guard, and cheek pieces.
You wear a leather apron with metal studs attached to your sword belt, which protects
your private parts.
Your shield, which is in the form of a curved rectangle, is made of wood.
It has a center panel with a bronze boss and bronze edging.
You carry an iron tipped pilum or spear, an iron dagger, and an iron sword.
All this weighs about 67 pounds, about 30 kilograms.
Imagine fighting a battle, lasting an hour or more, weighed down with all that.
And that's not all.
When you're on the march, you'll have to carry a sarkina or pack containing the tools
you'll need to build a camp, namely a pickaxe, a saw, a spade, and a basket for removing
earth.
Once you set off on campaign, you'll be in for a lot of marching, always carrying that
damn sarkina on your back.
You'll be expected to cover 20 miles, say about 32 kilometers, in five hours.
That's known as a justum itta, a just or reasonable march.
A magnum itta, a not so reasonable march, will be up to 30 miles.
That's about 50 kilometers.
At the end of every day, you'll have to build a temporary marching camp as a protection
against a surprise attack, unless you're lucky enough to be on a stretch of road where there's
a permanent legionary fortress where you can dos down for the night.
The chances are you'll also get tapped for fetching water, foraging, or looking after
the baggage animals.
And someone has to construct latrine trenches.
Why not you?
If you're in hostile territory, you might get tapped for guard duty.
It's estimated that one fifth of a legion's manpower was on guard duty at any one time.
Both permanent fortresses and temporary marching camps were laid out in a rectangular fashion,
bisected by two roads running adjacent to one another.
The headquarters, known as the Prinkipia, was situated at the center.
There'd also be a hospital for the wounded, known as a valetudinarium.
Valetudinarium is a English word, which means someone who is always fussing about his or
her health.
You sleep in a leather tent with seven other legionaries.
They're known as your contubernales, your tent companions.
They're the most important people in your life, the ones you're most closely bonded
to.
You not only eat with them, but you also stand alongside them in battle.
It was your attachment to a contubernium, a mess group of the sort I've just mentioned,
that did more than anything to foster your sense of group identity.
Before departing from your temporary marching camp next morning, you'll have to strike camp.
This means you'll have to destroy the perimeter wall that you built the previous night.
Let's suppose your general has decided that the Omens are favorable and that you're about
to engage the enemy.
You're drawn up in battle formation, perhaps ten or more ranks deep, preferably on level,
open ground.
That's the sort of terrain Romans liked to fight on.
There are gaps in the line so that individual units will be able to maneuver more easily.
Your centurion is standing in the front rank on the far right.
Your standard bearers will lead you into battle ahead of your line.
They have a very important role in the battle because the legionary standards they carry
have to be visible at all times.
You're given the order to charge when you're about 30 yards, just under 30 meters, from
the enemy.
First, you hurl your pilum, then you ram the enemy at speed, trying to grind the boss
of your shield into his belly or groin.
A stone's and arrow's, as well as spears and perhaps ballister balls, balls unleashed
by catapults, hurtling all around you.
The din is indescribable, just like in a hoplite battle, and eventually the enemy gives
flight.
Well, let's hope so at any rate.
You take prisoners, plunder their camp, and strip the dead of all their valuables.
You erect a trophy with the spoils you've taken from the dead, their armor and weapons
especially, just like the Greeks did.
It was a particularly bitter fight in this case, so you decide to sever some heads and
place them at the foot of the trophy, as Caesar's army did after they defeated the supporters
of Pompey in the final battle of the Civil War.
If you've been wounded, there are surgeons, mediki, to take care of you.
And luck to you is all I can say if you're wounded, there are no antibiotics, so wounds
often tend to be fatal.
If you're pronounced unfit for service ever again, you'll be given an honorable discharge
like all other veterans, and that means you won't have to pay any taxes or perform any
civic duties.
When you aren't fighting, you and your fellow legionaries take on the role of engineers,
road makers, surveyors, bridge builders, carpenters, masons, and so on.
The Roman road system, which extended the length and breadth of the empire, was largely
the creation of the legionary force, although native workers would also be conscripted.
It's been rightly said that Roman soldiers spent more time digging than they did fighting.
Incidentally, I wouldn't recommend misbehaving.
Your centurion has the power of life and death over you.
He is the military equivalent of your Pata family arse.
If you commit a mild offense, he'll beat you with a rod.
If you commit a more serious offense, he'll have you fined, demoted, or even transferred
to another legion.
If you fall asleep on guard duty in enemy territory, he may order your fellow soldiers
to club you to death.
The Greek historian Polybius tells us that if an entire unit was deemed disobedient
or cowardly, one soldier in ten was beaten to death by his fellow soldiers.
In other words, the unit was decimated to use a word of Latin origin, though oddly
in our language, decimation means reducing in number of sides, not by one tenth, but
to one tenth.
I want to say a little about the structure of the Roman army.
It was divided into legions, each comprising about 4,800 infantry and 120 cavalry.
A legion was subdivided into ten cohorts, comprising about 480 men apiece, and each
cohort was subdivided into six centuries, comprising about 80 men apiece, not the hundred
as the name suggests.
The designation century refers to the fact that a legion at full strength would have
comprised 6,000, but as I've indicated, 4,800 was nearer to the mark in reality.
If you enlisted as a foreigner, you'd be assigned to an auxiliary unit.
You were obviously much more expendable than legionaries, and for that reason you would
typically be placed in the front ranks in battle.
You'd wear less protective armour than legionaries.
In essence, you were what we would call cannon fodder.
Like all armies, the Roman army was very hierarchical.
If you had technical expertise in metalwork or carpentry or medicine, you joined the ranks
of the immunes, our word immune, which means that you were exempted from some basic tasks
such as standing guard.
If you were among the elite, you were known as the principales, the principles, all of
you hoping to be promoted to the rank of centurion.
The most privileged among this class was the aquilifer or eagle bearer.
He was the chap who carried the eagle standard of the legion and who led the legion into
battle.
Below him was the signifer, there were about 60 of them in all.
Each of them carried the signum or standard of one of the centuries.
These men were all highly decorated.
And next in rank to the centurions, and moving up the ranks, we come to the centurions themselves,
60 in total, each in charge of about 80 men.
They were the backbone of the army and the ones too who dished out the punishment, as
we've seen.
And within the ranks of the centurions too, there were divisions.
The most important centurion was the primus pilus, the centurion in charge of the first
century of the first cohort.
Centurions couldn't rise any higher except to become prithectus castrorum, a prefect
in charge of the camp.
So the rank of centurion would be the highest rank you could aspire to if you joined as
an ordinary legionary.
Then above the centurions were five young military tribunes of equestrian rank and one
senior tribune of senatorial rank known as the tribunus latichlavius or the broad striped
tribune.
He was so named because senators wore a toga with a broad purple stripe.
Military tribunes served for only a brief period before returning to civilian life.
The head of the legion was the legatus legionis, the legionary legate.
He was a high-ranking senator and would typically remain in post for three to four years.
So in the course of your military career, you'd see a lot of turnover at the top end
of your legion.
That might seem counter-indicated to us, but it seems to have worked well enough.
It's the common soldier, you in other words, who are the heart and soul of the Roman army.
I have to warn you, conditions of service in the Roman army were sometimes appalling.
When the German legions mutinied in AD 15, their ringleaders, according to the historian
Tacitus, had this to say about the treatment they received.
Nothing has been done over the years to remove the abuses.
Old men have been serving for 30 to 40 years, their bodies maimed by wounds.
If anyone lives through these dangers, he's sent to the ends of the earth and given a
waterlogged marsh or unplowed hillside, which they call a farm.
There's no rest from beatings or wounds.
The winter is awful, war is dreadful, and peace a profitless bore.
There was a chance too that you might be posted to some godforsaken part of the Roman Empire,
like Britannia.
The English poet, W. H. Auden, wrote a wonderful poem that sees life through the eyes of just
such a luckless individual.
It's called Roman Wall Blues, the wall in question being Hadrian's Wall, which was
built by legionaries on the orders of the Emperor Hadrian in AD 122, seemingly to keep
the smelly Picts and Scots out of the Roman province of Britannia.
It captures the mood of a soldier serving in the Roman Empire better than anything I
know of, wet and cold, with lice in his tunic, suspicious that his girlfriend back home is
having an affair, looking forward to the day when he can retire and put his feet up.
What's it all about, as you might have asked in his position?
What does the Roman Empire mean?
Why are you putting your life on the line to preserve these people who live in the back
of beyond?
You certainly don't get any thanks for it, questions that many legionaries must have
wrestled with in other provinces as well.
And you also have to deal with a lot of prejudice back home.
It seems odd that Roman citizens should have some contempt for the soldiers who guarded
their empire, but there's plenty of evidence to suggest that this was indeed the case.
Tacitus often refers to ordinary legionaries as the volgus, the mass or the mob, a very
pejorative term.
What made it all worthwhile was, however, that the service in the army brought with
it considerable benefits.
If you were permanently assigned to a province, you'd be able to lead a domestic life of sorts.
Many soldiers took a common law wife, variously referred to as a hospita or focaria.
Hospita means hostess, whereas focaria means kitchen girl.
Until the emperor Septimius Ceueros came to the throne in AD 193, however, you weren't
permitted to marry, though you were entitled to join the army if you were married already.
If you rose to the rank of centurion, however, there was no such restriction, and you could
marry whenever you liked.
If you were on the march, your wife and children would at times be able to accompany you.
And if you didn't have a wife or significant other, there was no shortage of prostitutes
accompanying you on the march or awaiting you at your next stopover.
Though there was a prohibition against owning property in the province that you were serving
in, it wasn't strictly enforced, particularly in the West.
A veteran chose to stay in the same province after discharge, and many of them no doubt
are settling down with a local girl.
There are other advantages.
It's true that your pay, known as your stipendium, our word stipend, which you receive three
times a year, is very low, but each new emperor will give you a donative from the Latin donativum,
a monetary gift, both on his accession and by the terms of his will.
Where you really luck out, however, is from the retirement package you receive after 25
or 26 years' service.
Discharge is only possible on alternate years.
This will come either in the form of a grant of land or as a financial gratuity.
If you're a foreigner serving as an auxiliary, you'll also receive the priceless gift of
Roman citizenship.
On discharge, each soldier is presented with a bronze diploma stating his rights.
The downside is that you only have a 50 to 50 chance of reaching retirement age.
This is not only because you're so frequently in harm's way, but also because of the stern
imperatives of ancient demographics.
People died so much younger in those days.
I've reserved for last one of our best sources of information about daily life in the Roman
Army, namely the so-called Vindolanda tablets, tablets made of wood that were used both for
administrative matters and for private correspondence.
Vindolanda was an important military post on the northern boundary of Britannia.
The tablets, some of which are contemporary with Hadrian's Wall, tell us a great deal
about the lives of soldiers serving in Britannia, and occasionally, too, about the lives of
their wives.
One tablet is in the form of a letter sent from a certain Claudia Ceuhera to Sulpicia
Lepidina, the wife of the prefect of the ninth cohort, stationed at Vindolanda.
So these are women of fairly high social rank.
Claudia writes to Sulpicia as follows.
Greetings, sister.
Do come to my birthday celebration on September the 11th.
Decasion will be all the happier if you can make it.
Give my best to your husband, Carialis.
My husband, Ilias, and our son, send their greetings as well.
I really hope you can come.
Be well, sister, dear one, so that I may be well.
Farewell.
Incidentally, although the letter was written by a scribe, the last sentence, be well, sister,
and so on, was added in a different hand, presumably Claudius.
It's one of the earliest known examples of writing in Latin by a woman.
I really hope that Sulpicia made it to the party.
In the next lecture, we're going to be looking at the various ways in which one could be
a Roman woman.
We've seen that Greek women had very few outlets for their talents.
We'll see that though the same was largely true for Roman women, among the upper echelons
of society, there were a serious force to be reckoned with.
