It's an amazing thought that until the 1970s women were being told that their bodies were
feeble, their brains deficient and their emotions unstable.
Roman law makes frequent reference to the infirmitas sexus, the infirmity of the female
sex and to the levitas anime, the fickleness of the female mind.
In other words, the women among you just don't have what it takes when it comes to rational
decision making, your weather veins.
The epic poet Virgil sums this up well in a line that he uses of the ill-star Dido,
Queen of Carthage.
Warium et mutabile semper femina s, a woman is an unpredictable and fickle creature.
Most Roman men would no doubt have agreed with him.
By the way, I've used the word creature because Virgil actually uses the neuter form of the
adjectives unpredictable and fickle, thereby turning woman into a thing.
One of the ways that women manifested their infirmity or fecklessness as Roman men knew
to their cost, literally, was by chucking money around.
So in 215 BC, those poor, overtaxed Roman men passed the so-called opium law, named
for Gaius opius, the tribune of the plebs who instituted it.
This limited to half an ounce the amount of gold that a woman was allowed to possess.
It also prohibited them from wearing a dress with a purple border.
A purple dye was extremely expensive, or from riding in a carriage, except on a long
journey.
Tut, tut.
I hope that taught the wretched things a lesson.
Can you imagine what damage Roman women would have done if credit cards had been invented
back then?
The opium law was passed at a time of dire hardship, one year after Rome's catastrophic
defeat at Cannae at the hands of the Carthaginian general Hannibal.
And it was later repealed.
But it teaches us a great deal about male prejudice towards women, of which we will
see plenty of examples in this lecture.
The Christians, or I should say some Christians, were no better than the pagans.
Saint Jerome, writing in the 4th century AD, had this to say about women.
I'm paraphrasing slightly.
If your wife has a bad temper, or if she's stupid, or if she has a birthmark, or if
she's haughty, or if she has foul breath, you'll only learn these things after marriage.
You always have to be telling her how beautiful she looks.
If you so much as look at another woman, she feels rejected.
You have to bow down before her, and call her my lady, and you mustn't forget her
birthday.
It's worse if she's pretty than if she's ugly, because then you have to be constantly
on your guard, and so on, ad infinitum.
Saint Jerome concludes that it's better to be alone with God than in the company of
a woman.
There's an interesting comment in light of the fact that when he was in Rome, Saint Jerome
moved about in a coterie of well-educated women, and was accused of having a non-marital
relationship with one of them.
On the gynecological front, the Romans weren't more advanced than the Greeks had been.
As late as the 2nd century AD, we still find Galen, the foremost medical writer of Roman
times, describing women as, quote-unquote, less perfect than men on the grounds that
their bodies are colder.
As late as the 2nd century AD, did I say?
What am I saying?
The prominent Victorian biologist and social scientist Herbert Spencer argued that female
evolution had stopped, I quote, at a stage before man's to preserve vital organs for
reproduction.
The implication is that women should not tax their brains, because it's likely to render
them infertile.
And what was it that Larry Summers, the then president of Harvard University, said about
the supposedly innate differences in men and women in regard to math and science?
Much the same stuff that Aristotle had been spouting two and a half millennia ago.
So perhaps we shouldn't bash the Greeks or the Romans too hard.
Let's look at the position of women in the Roman family.
As a daughter, you were under the domination of the oldest male ascendant in your family,
the so-called Pata Familias, literally the father of the family whose role we discussed
in an earlier lecture.
The Pata Familias had the right, in theory at least, to kill you if you disobeyed him.
His sons were also subject to him in the same way, but whereas they were automatically emancipated
on his death, you and your sisters would become subject to a replacement Pata Familias.
You'd never escape male domination.
As a wife too, you were subject to the par or protestas of the Pata Familias, though
as we'll see in a minute, there was a type of marriage that didn't entail subjection
to your husband.
There were many other ways in which you as a woman were slighted by the law.
When your children grow up and are ready to get married, it's your husband who gets
to choose their marriage partners.
He may take your recommendation into consideration, but he is under no obligation to do so.
If you marry into a prominent upper class family, there's a good chance that your daughter
will be used as a pawn to form a political connection with some other prominent upper
class family.
A deal of this thought was called an amikitia, literally a friendship, a nice euphemism.
Julius Caesar gave the hand of his only daughter, Julia, to Pompey in order to form an amikitia,
even though Pompey was six years older than his father-in-law.
Julia's death in childbirth a few years later contributed to the breakdown in relations
between Caesar and Pompey, and thus led indirectly to the outbreak of the Civil War.
Your daughter might be betrothed or even married before she reaches puberty, a state of affairs
that is all the more likely if your family is aristocratic.
The Emperor Augustus humanely fixed the minimum age at marriage for girls at twelve, previously
there had been no minimum age.
Unlike in Greece, men and women do seem to have been able to date together, at least
if we're to trust Ovid, the author of that scandalous poem called the Ars Amatoria or
the Art of Love.
Ovid tells his male readers that a good place to go with your girlfriend was the Circus Maximus
because you can nestle up close to her.
A conversation isn't a problem, you'll be able to chat about the horses.
And if her dress is trailing on the ground, you'll be able to raise it up out of the dirt
and sneak a look at her legs at the same time, she won't object.
There were two types of Roman marriages known as with the hand and without the hand.
In a with the hand marriage, you have no legal rights.
Property is transferred to your husband in the form of a dowry and your husband in theory
has the power of life and death over you.
In a without the hand marriage, there's no dowry and you won't be under your husband's
control to the same extent, instead you'll remain under the control of your nearest ascendant
male relative.
Without the hand marriages became popular from the first century AD onwards in part because
they conferred more independence on women.
We might be tempted to conclude from this that Roman wives lived under the thumb of
their husbands and many no doubt did.
But there was no shortage of very loving marriages either, including some that were arranged
that Pompey and Julia for instance were devoted to each other and Pompey was broken hearted
when Julia died.
Likewise, Marcus Brutus one of Caesar's assassins was devoted to his wife, Porchia.
He even revealed to her the plot against Caesar's life.
According to one version of her death, Brutus learns that Porchia has committed suicide by
swallowing lumps of burning coal.
Pliny the younger too had a very loving relationship with his wife, Calpurnia.
You cannot believe how much I miss you, he wrote.
I love you so much, I stay awake most of the night thinking about you.
Admittedly all these examples are from the elite but there's no reason to suppose that
those at the bottom of the social ladder weren't as loving.
For me, nothing proves this better than an inscription written on a tombstone found
in Rome.
I'm going to speak it in full.
The freedwoman Furia Speys, that's a great name by the way, it means something like reckless
or desperate hope, erected this memorial to her dearly beloved husband.
When he and I were children, we fell in love as soon as we met and my life with him was
all too brief.
A cruel destiny separated us when we should have continued living in happiness.
I beg you, most holy moneys, those of the spirits of the dead, to look after my beloved
whom I have entrusted to you and that you be attentive and watchful over him during the
hours of darkness, so that I may see him and so that he may persuade fate to let me
come to him softly and soon.
Is that moving or what?
Mussonius Rufus, a Stoic philosopher of the 1st century AD wrote, neither riches nor beauty
nor nobility can add anything more to a marriage than can concordia, concord, a word whose etymology
means literally hearts together, or as we might say, two hearts beating as one.
I think it's pretty clear that there would have been a lot of Romans who were very happily
married and who were disconsolate when their spouse died.
A Roman wedding was very much like a Greek wedding.
It took place in the bride's home, probably in the atrium, the most important part of
the house.
You, the bride, would wear a white woollen dress with your hair parted in six locks tied
together with woollen ribbons.
You declared before the assembled company, I now belong to your family.
And that was pretty much it.
You are now officially married.
The bride and groom didn't exchange vows that had all been attended to in the marriage
contract signed by both families.
This was very much in the form of what we might call a prenuptial agreement.
The groom would have promised not to mistreat his wife or throw her out of the house or
bring another woman home, while his wife, in her turn, had agreed not to be away from
home for more than one night without her husband's permission and not to have sexual relations
with any other man.
If either party reneged on the deal, the consequences would have been spelled out, a financial penalty
for the offending party.
So, after you had stated that you now belong to your husband's family, a pig or a sheep
is sacrificed, and after the gods have been given their share, the rest is divided among
all those present.
Towards evening, the whole wedding party sets off in a torchlight procession to the bride
groom's house, singing hymns to hymen, the god of marriage.
We have an example of the kind of hymn that was sung written by the poet Catullus.
It begins, you who dwell on Mount Helicon, that's the mountain in Greece, you who are
the son of Urania, you who give to a husband a tender virgin, without your blessing, no
home can have offspring.
The wedding guests also shout out obscenities as they go on their way.
He seemed to have been intended in part to avert evil fortune.
It was never a good thing in the ancient world to be too fortunate.
Nuts are strewed among the crowd, like confetti, like in ancient Greece.
And then at the door of the house, the groom picks you up and carries you over the threshold
to prevent you from stumbling, which would have been ill-omined, a ritual of course
that survives till this day.
He then presents you with fire and water to indicate your formal incorporation within
the home.
The guests accompany you both to the bedroom, singing songs.
Catullus' hymn to hymen concludes, let the bride now approach her husband's bed, bride
and groom, delight together as you wish, and soon have children of your own.
Close the doors, bridesmaids.
We've done enough joking.
May you flourish newlyweds and pass the springtime of your years in constant love-making.
And then indeed, the doors of the bedroom are closed, and from now on, your primary
duty is to provide your husband with children, preferably boys, a no less hazardous undertaking
in Rome than it was in Greece.
As in Greece, as a respectable woman, you were required to keep a low profile.
Your low profile is symbolized by the fact that until quite late in Roman history, there
were no real girls' names.
So if, say, you belong to the Julian clan, or Gens Yulia, you'd be called Julia.
If you belong to the Claudian clan, or Gens Claudia, you'd be called Claudia.
And so forth.
If you had an older sister, she'd be called Julia Major, or Claudia Major.
If you had a younger sister, she'd be called Julia Minor, or Claudia Minor.
If you had another older or younger sister, she'd be called Julia Maxima, or Minima.
In other words, your social identity was largely defined by being first someone's daughter,
and then someone's wife.
Whenever you went out, assuming you were of respectable birth, you'd be chaperoned by
one or more slaves.
You'd cover your body up completely, including your face, your dress, which would reach down
to your ankles, was known as a stola.
It had multiple folds, and was probably brightly colored.
Before it, you'd wear a pala, which you'd wrap around you like a cloak.
Modesty and fidelity were your foremost virtues as a woman, and it was essential not to give
provocation to the lustful male gaze.
You could hardly do better than take your cue from a certain Claudia, who died in the
second century BC.
The epitaph on Claudia's tomb captures the lives of countless unknown Roman women, at
least from the perspective of how their husbands wished to think of them.
It reads as follows.
Friend, I haven't got a lot to say.
Stop and read.
This tomb, which isn't fair, belongs to a fair woman.
Her parents gave her the name of Claudia.
She loved her husband dearly.
She bore him two sons, one lives on earth, the other lives beneath it.
She was pleasant to talk with, and she moved gracefully.
She looked after the house, and worked with wool.
That's all.
Be on your way.
Claudia was the ideal wife, devoted, retiring, faithful, and, one assumes, utterly uncomplaining.
What's more, if the corpus of funerary epitaphs is anything to go by, there were thousands
upon thousands just like her, described by their husbands in near identical terms.
A note too that the only task which Claudia performed was spinning a homely activity if
ever there was one.
Even the Emperor Augustus's wife and daughter were expected to spin.
One last indicator of a woman's low profile.
Until the time of Augustus, statues of women were not displayed in public.
If however you belonged to the lower social orders, you would have been much less restricted
in movement than upper class women were.
Probably you would have had to work.
If you lived in the countryside, you'd help on the farm.
If you lived in the city, you obviously had more choices.
Midwife, only midwives delivered babies in the Greek and Roman worlds, not physicians.
A wet nurse, hairdresser, a perfume manufacturer, basket weaver, seamstress, street vendor,
actor, waitress, barmaid, cook.
You might also go into the entertainment business as a dancer, musician, juggler, mime artist,
or pantomime artist.
While slave women performed many of these jobs, there was nothing to prevent both freeborn
women and freed women, married or single, from performing them as well.
You could also become a prostitute or a procurus.
The brothels were too apeni in the Roman world and there would have been no shortage
of work, even though you'd have to compete with slaves.
By the 3rd century AD, there were about 45 brothels in the city of Rome.
Prejudice against women was not only embedded in the way Roman society operated.
It was also enshrined in Roman law as well.
If a woman committed adultery, it was a criminal offence, whereas if her husband committed adultery,
it wasn't.
The emperor Constantine decreed that if a woman was raped, she was automatically part
responsible for the crime, whatever the facts surrounding the case, the same state of affairs
incidentally that prevailed in America up until the mid-20th century.
Even if it could be proved that she tried to resist her assailant, she'd still be guilty
of what we would call today contributory negligence, the theory being that if she had
screamed sufficiently loudly, the neighbors would have come to her rescue and prevented
the rape.
There's no telling to what extent women were subject to domestic violence, but the phenomenon
certainly wasn't unknown.
A 1st century AD writer called Valerius Maximus, who provides his readers with a number of
examples of women being punished, actually abused by their husbands, tells us that a
certain Ignatius Metellus cuddled his wife to death merely for drinking wine.
Valerius goes on to tell us that, far from being charged with homicide, Ignatius didn't
even come in for any public censure.
He ends his edifying anecdote with the observation, and so, long ago, when the misbehavior of
women was kept in check, their minds were prevented from scheming.
You can just hear Valerius saying, over the good old days, when you could beat your wife
to death with impunity.
Valerius was not alone in voicing such sentiments.
Marcus Porcheus Cato, otherwise known as Cato the Sensor, a man who was revered for upholding
the old Roman virtues, believed it was imperative that men keep their wives in check.
As soon as they have begun to become your equals, he warned in a speech attributed to
him by the historian Livy, they will have become your superiors.
Overall, however, I'd still say it was preferable to be a Roman woman than a Greek woman, though
we should be wary of imposing our standards and expectations on other societies.
First off, unlike your Greek counterpart, you wouldn't have been secluded in a separate
part of the house.
You'd have been permitted to leave the house more frequently than Greek women were.
Whenever your husband invited his friends over for a banquet, you'd have taken your
place beside him, instead of being cooped up in the women's quarters with the female
slaves.
And as the Mate Familias Domina, the senior female member of the household, you would
have shared with your husband joint responsibility for presiding over domestic religion.
Widows who did not remarry also enjoyed a particular status.
They bore the title of uni-wira, which translates as the wife of only one man.
It's also the case that what were regarded as female virtues were held in very high
esteem.
One shining embodiment of that was Cornelia, the daughter of the famous general Scipio
Africanus, who was celebrated as the model of wifely and maternal self-sacrifice.
She remained loyal to the memory of her dead husband, even to the extent of rejecting an
offer of marriage from a king, and devoted her energies to educating her two sons, Tiberius
and Gaius Gracchus.
In addition, the last decades of the Republic saw the emergence of a more self-assertive,
more independent and, dare I say it, more liberated type of woman, though I have to
say this new public role was confined to members of the aristocracy.
I take this description of a consul's daughter called Sipronia, who had an affair with a
notorious social revolutionary called Catiline in the late 60s BC.
Sipronia was well-read in Greek and Latin literature, and could play the liar and dance
more skillfully than any decent woman should.
Her sexual desires were so powerful that she took the initiative with men more often than
they did with her.
Yet, she possessed intellectual gifts that were by no means inconsiderable.
She could write poetry, tell jokes, speak either modestly and tenderly, or like a whore.
In a word, she had both wit and charm.
It's written by Salast, a conservative Roman historian.
For Salast, Sipronia was clearly a threat.
He obviously saw her as stepping outside her socially sanctioned role, and he goes on to
lump her among a particular set of high-born women, he mentions no others by name, who made
their fortunes as prostitutes.
At the same time, it's by no means a damning portrait.
What red-blooded male would turn down an evening in Sipronia's company.
Contemporary to Sipronia was Clodia, the notorious lesbian of Catullus's poems, about whom Catullus
wrote exquisitely beautiful poetry, some of it highly obscene, and much of it demonstrating
the control she exercised over him.
And yet another was Sir William, who had a high-profile affair with Julius Caesar when
he was at the beginning of his career, and who played an important behind-the-scenes role
in Roman politics.
Clearly, none of these women aspired to live in accordance with the traditional female
virtues of frugality, chastity, modesty, or devotion.
All of them dabbled in politics, too, and all of them had considerable political clout.
Politics, in fact, by the 1st century BC was not impervious to women's influence, even
though women could not vote in elections.
And in this case, I don't just mean women of rank, like Sipronia, Clodia, and Sir William.
Graffiti found on the walls of Pompeii indicate that women frequently endorsed candidates for
political office.
Stacia and Petronia ask you to vote for Marcus Casselius and Lucius Alfuchius as Ediles,
reads one.
I think it's entirely feasible that women attended political rallies and that they canvassed
for their candidates.
And while we're in Pompeii, let me mention a certain Eumarchia, whose public profile
shows what a woman with talent and ambition could aspire to in the 1st century AD.
Eumarchia was a sacerdose publica, a public priestess.
The cult she administered was open to the entire citizen body and not just to a few
powerful families.
She was, in fact, a priestess of the most important cult in Pompeii, that of the goddess
Venus.
Eumarchia was also patroness of the Guild of Fullers.
The Fullers manufactured and dyed clothing and cleaned it, too.
There's was a highly important occupation because wool was central to Pompeii's economy.
Eumarchia came from very humble origins, but she inherited a fortune from her father who
was a brick manufacturer.
And as a result, she was able to marry into one of the city's most prominent families.
This is the exact antithesis to the image of the Roman woman presented by the epitaph
to Claudia that we discussed earlier.
I certainly can't see Eumarchia taking orders from her husband or modestly averting her
gaze when some male casts an eye in her direction.
Her career proves that in the right circumstances, a woman of talent, energy, enterprise and
means, could shake off the traditional restraints that condemned the majority of women to a
lifetime of submissive obscurity, however happy their marriages might have been.
Like so many of the people who lived on the other side of history, Roman women have left
very little literary testimony behind them to help us flesh out their lives.
We can only speculate about what they thought about their daily lives and to what extent
they felt exploited, denigrated, all constrained or alternatively cherished, respected and
fulfilled.
In the next lecture, we're going to look at a group that has left us even less testimony
and who certainly didn't feel cherished, respected or fulfilled, namely the urban poor.
