Last summer, when I was in London, I happened to come across a plaque on a wall bearing
the following inscription.
The 7th Earl of Shaftesbury, when a boy in Harrow School saw with shame and indignation
a pauper's funeral, which helped to awaken his lifelong devotion to service of the poor
and oppressed.
Rome, like many cities in the developing world today, would have offered far more disturbing
spectacles than the one that so distressed the philanthropic Earl of Shaftesbury in 1812.
But I'd bet my life that it never prompted anyone, and I mean anyone, to devote himself
for herself to the service of the poor and oppressed.
One thing that the ancient world did not invent was a social conscience.
That didn't emerge until the 19th century.
Some scholars have argued that what they call mass structural poverty has been the condition
of most human beings throughout most of history.
That may well be true.
Humans' population at its height, that's to say from the 1st century BC to the end
of the 2nd century AD, is generally put at around one million.
The poor constituted a very sizable percentage of that total, though we have no means of
estimating how sizable.
Thousands, perhaps tens of thousands, would have been not only poor but also destitute
and homeless.
I would also note that in most societies, including Roman society, women are more likely
to be impoverished than men, the elderly, more than the young, and the disabled and
the infirm, more than the fit and the unimpaired.
Before we begin looking at poverty in Rome, however, we need to establish what we mean
by poverty.
We need to give it both definition and context.
We tend to think of poverty as an objective condition, which it isn't.
According to our way of thinking, its chief attributes would probably include a barely
subsistence level diet, a high level of infant mortality, and a low level of literacy.
We need, however, to understand poverty within the standards and expectations of a particular
society.
If for instance you were a wealthy Athenian, you'd probably be judged relatively poor by
our standards, whereas you, as a wealthy Athenian, would certainly judge us poor by your standards.
And that's because you would regard the long hours that we work as a clear indicator of
our poverty.
And you would have been quite happy to live in what we would call modest circumstances
because you took much more pride in your public buildings than we do.
In other words, these people were much more civic oriented than we are.
What does it matter if you live in a hovel if you can take pride in the magnificent temples
on top of your acropolis?
The Romans didn't hold quite the same view as the Greeks.
They were not ones to settle for modest circumstances if they could possibly avoid it.
But they still took considerable pride in their public buildings.
So how should we measure wealth?
There's now widespread agreement that the traditional way of measuring living standards
by per capita GDP, i.e. gross domestic product, divided evenly by the size of a population
is unsatisfactory.
Analysts increasingly seek to replace it by offering a much more broad based picture
based on human flourishing and quality of life.
And I'm going to try to take human flourishing and quality of life into some account in this
lecture.
So what did it mean to be poor in Rome?
Well let's suppose you live alone in the city of Rome, that you're getting up on years
and that you have no relatives to care for you.
Your wife Antonia died in childbirth 15 years ago and you never remarried.
Both your sons are dead.
A Servius died in infancy and posthumous.
Just the name Romans gave to sons whose mothers died in childbirth died just before he was
due to put on the toga of manhood, the toga Wirilis, aged about 15.
You haven't seen your daughter in years.
So you're going to have to work till you drop.
You have very few possessions to call your own and no savings.
The satirical poet Juvenile who lived around AD 100 lists the worldly possessions of an
impoverished Roman as follows.
One undersized bed, a cupboard, a chest, six cups, a pitcher and a small statue.
The statue probably made of bait clay was no doubt of some god the poor fellow worshipped.
You live in a one room apartment in what is called an insular or apartment block.
Insular literally means island because it and other apartment blocks like it were surrounded
by streets on all four sides.
Your only source of heating is an open brazier which means that in the winter time your room
will be smoke filled.
You don't have any facilities for cooking so you eat in the local Popina or Tawerna
which gives us our word tavern.
The Popina is rowdy and there are frequent scuffles but it's the center of your social
life such as that life is.
If you don't have even enough money to go to the Popina then you'll have to live on
scraps of food that you find in the marketplace.
You probably don't have any money saved to pay for your own burial so when you die no
ritual will be performed on your behalf.
Your corpse will either be tossed unceremoniously into the river Taiba to be born out to sea
or else dumped in a communal pit outside the city.
One estimate puts the number of corpses that met this fate annually in Rome at 1500.
Being poor also means being very vulnerable to disease.
As one of the urban poor you're at much greater risk than the rural poor in part because of
your greater exposure to infectious diseases due to overcrowding and inadequate sanitation
and also in part because of the ever present danger from fire and floods.
Because of malnutrition you're highly susceptible to berry berry rickets and scurvy gastroenteritis
is a regular health hazard and it's a dead certainty that you have a lively assortment
of parasitic worms in your intestines and so much for your health.
As I've indicated you live in an insular traces of insulae have been found all over
Rome and in the neighbouring port town called Ostia about 15 miles from Rome.
The insulae that have been excavated in Ostia were fairly sturdily built however that might
simply be a function of the fact that the ones that weren't sturdily built have left
no trace in the archaeological record.
Some of these insulae were seven or more stories in height.
They were excavated as a persons of a wide variety of socioeconomic status.
Their ground floor apartments were large and spacious and leased out to the wealthiest
tenants.
As you ascended floor by floor however they became progressively more cramped and uncomfortable
as the tenants themselves became progressively poorer.
As one of the very poorest you occupy some pokey rat infested leaky room directly under
the eaves in which you can barely stand up and which has only a small opening for light.
There's no window glass to cover it so when it rains you try to cover it with an old rag.
It must have been stifling and fetid in the summer, dank and dark in the winter.
To reach your apartment you have to climb as many as 200 stairs like one poor occupant
described by the poet Marshall.
Imagine carrying your shopping and your water up 200 stairs or carrying your filled to bursting
chamber pot down those 200 stairs.
Probably half of the contents end up on the stairs especially if you're a bit wobbly
on your pins.
It must be awfully tempting some days to empty the contents out of the window especially
late at night even though there are stiff penalties for doing that.
Obviously too the higher up you live the more at risk you are if for instance the roof leaked
you'll be the one to feel the effects first giving you a good chance of contracting pneumonia.
First of all however is the threat of fire because that will turn the building into a
death trap particularly if the fire starts on the ground floor.
Fires in Rome were extremely common particularly in Insulai which were largely built of wood.
That's mainly because the only form of heating above ground floor are the open braziers that
I mentioned earlier.
Juvenile lamps which were the only source of artificial lighting added to your vulnerability
supposing you can afford a bit of oil as these could so easily be knocked over.
As juvenile observed if the alarm is given on the ground floor the last man to burn
will be the one who has only the roof tiles to shelter him from the rain.
How many poor burned to death in an average year is impossible to guess but it would have
been one of the most melancholy and perhaps predictable statistics of the Roman world.
The Emperor Augustus was the first to establish a fire brigade in Rome consisting of 7000
Weigiles or Watchmen armed with buckets of water but they were completely overpowered
by the worst recorded fire in Rome's history.
The magnum incendium Romei the great fire of Rome which occurred in AD 64 in the reign
of the Emperor Nero.
The fire is said to have raged for a week and to have destroyed 10 of the 14 regions
of the city.
The historian Tacitus says that after it had been put out Nero allowed the homeless to
occupy the grounds of his palaces and that he arranged for food supplies to be brought
into the city to prevent them from starving.
He deserves credit for that.
The claim that he fiddled while Rome burned is by the way a later fabrication.
After the fire Nero rebuilt the city with wider streets to limit the spread of any future
fire.
They also required that houses but not insulae be made of brick.
Insulae were also vulnerable to flooding whenever the Tiber burst its banks.
This seems to have happened on average once every 20 years particularly during winter
and spring.
So if your insulae stood in the flood plain you stood a good chance of it collapsing and
your possessions becoming waterlogged if not washed away.
This was not the end of your troubles.
Flooding increases the incidence of disease by causing extra men to overflow into the
streets particularly in the most populous parts of the city and thereby contaminating
your water supply.
A particularly bad flood occurred in AD 69 five years after the Great Fire when many
apartment buildings collapsed due to the undermining of their foundations by the standing
water.
I'm sorry to say this isn't the end of your problems.
Being poor also means being excluded.
A Rome from earliest times divided its citizenry into plebeians and patricians.
The patricians whose name comes from Parter meaning father were the privileged ones.
Their origins are hotly disputed but they were almost certainly aristocrats.
The plebeians were everyone else.
In other words they belonged to the other side of history, the Great Unwashed.
In early times as a member of the plebeian order you were debarred from belonging to
a religious college, debarred from holding a magistracy and debarred from being elected
to the Senate.
You were also prohibited from intermarriage with a member of the patrician class.
Though most of these restrictions were removed over time there remained a category of citizens
who were identified as belonging to the lower social orders.
The category known as the humiliores from which our word humble humility derive.
We'll be talking about them in a minute.
Being poor also meant not counting literally.
One example of the several different kinds of assemblies of Roman citizens that were
periodically summoned for voting purposes.
The most important was the Committia Kenturiata or Centuriet assembly.
So named because the citizen body was divided into 193 so called centuries.
Each century had one vote so there were 193 votes in total.
The wealthiest citizens however who of course were far fewer in number were divided into
97 centuries and these centuries voted first.
Once a majority was achieved the election was over and the results announced.
So if you were poor and you bothered to turn up to vote there was a good chance that the
election would be declared over before you could even cast your ballot.
You simply didn't count and you weren't counted.
Lastly being poor meant being despised.
Juvenile wrote there is nothing in the calamity of poverty that is harder to bear than the
fact that it makes people look ridiculous.
That is so well observed.
Roman literature contains many cruel jokes about the poor.
Looking ridiculous however was only half the story much worse than that was being an object
of contempt.
Plato in the Laws had argued centuries previously that the virtuous person will never be reduced
to beggary in a moderately well organized state a view that would have found many supporters
in Rome not to mention many supporters in this country today.
He also recommended that beggars should be expelled from his ideal state.
This kind of prejudice was reinforced by the value laden terminology that both the Greeks
and the Romans used to describe both the wealthy and the poor.
The Greeks called the wealthy aristoi creistoi and beltistoi adjectives which literally mean
the best whereas they called the poor poneroi and heiress which mean the bad and the worse.
The Romans called the lower classes the humiliores our word humble humility as we saw and the
upper classes the honestiores our word honest.
The Latin word plebs which gives us plebian was often combined with the adjective sordida
which hardly needs any translation.
And to this day the word plebian is pejorative in our language which shows the extent to
which the Romans have succeeded in passing along their prejudices to us.
The Romans did however take considerable pride in tracing their descent from hardy Italian
peasants and they told uplifting stories of their past that celebrated the virtues of the
simple life lived on the land.
A famous example is Cincinnati's a farmer admittedly not destitute but a simple hardworking
farmer nonetheless who was summoned from his farm to be dictator for six months and
who having saved Rome quit his office and returned to his farm just 10 days later.
I strongly suspect that the agricultural poor were viewed rather differently from the urban
poor the agricultural poor so the conventional argument ran supported themselves by dint
of hard work whereas the urban poor leached off the state by accepting free handouts of
corn.
In a lecture about being a Roman soldier I pointed out that townies were less welcome
in the army than rural folk and that is part of the same prejudice.
Very rarely the Roman authorities do seem to have acknowledged the plight of the poor
and sought to do something about it.
In 107 B.C. the Roman general Gaius Marius permitted citizens who did not own any land
and who were excluded from service in the army to join for his campaign against Ugartha
in North Africa.
They no doubt signed up in large numbers in order to escape destitution.
Though it's fair to mention that Marius was no social reformer.
He didn't care a toss about the poor.
He merely wanted to solve the manpower crisis in the Roman army.
Well what kind of work do you do.
Let's say that your parents had apprenticed you to a craftsman.
They had to pay some of money to get you started.
That's because you had to work for free for several years.
There are lots of trades you might have entered but after you had your accident you had to
work as an unskilled worker hurrying yourself out on a daily basis to perform a variety
of menial jobs.
And that's what you do now.
You're known as a mercenarius our word mercenary meaning a person who works for money.
Decent folk despise you because like the Greeks they think that working for someone
else is equivalent to being a slave.
What happens when you literally drop when you can't work any longer.
You'll have to live on charity already in the Odyssey.
We encounter beggars doing what beggars do the world over fighting turf wars.
Odysseus who returns to his palace disguised as a beggar a scraps with iris the resident
beggar and succeeds in supplanting him.
Beggars were a feature of the urban and no doubt rural landscape too in the Roman world.
There are tens of thousands of them no doubt in Rome.
They accost you all the time in the street.
The lucky ones like iris whom I just mentioned have managed to attach themselves to a wealthy
house.
A household slaves dish out scraps to them either on their own initiative or sometimes
at the bidding of their masters.
You also see what we might call professional beggars.
These include priests devoted to the Eastern Goddess Sibili who depend in part for their
livelihood on arms from the general public.
Another kind of professional beggar are the so called cynic philosophers.
The cynics have rejected all worldly goods.
Their name Kunikos in the Greek means little dog.
It gives us our word cynic.
It seems to derive from the fact that they aggressively accosted passersby to spread
their philosophy of poverty and to make them give them arms.
If you're reduced to becoming a beggar and most people will give you a wide berth a character
in a comedy by Plautus says no one benefits a beggar by giving him food or drink.
You merely lose what you give him and prolong his life of misery.
Plato would as we saw no doubt have agreed.
A juvenile speaks of beggars who hung out at a particular spot outside the city of Rome
called Arichia along the Via Appia where they waylaid the carriages of the wealthy
as the carriages slowed down while climbing a hill.
Even so the Roman world did witness the beginnings of what we might call philanthropy.
The elder Seneca actually argued that it was wrong not to give to a beggar because I quote
everyone has a right to charity.
Seneca belonged to the school of philosophy known as Stoic which promoted the virtue of
humanitas.
He tells us of a particularly horrifying practice that is still current in certain parts of
the world today and namely that of deliberately maiming children so as to make them appear
more pathetic and then sending them out to beg.
Seneca alludes to one vile practitioner of this art who smashed children's legs, cut
off their arms, tore out their tongues and eyes and beat their shoulder blades into a
hump.
His description provides not only a haunting image of those poor children now condemned
to a life of beggary but also of the vulnerability of children to extortion and exploitation.
So is this the whole of what your life consisted of?
Was there nothing to look forward to being poor in Rome?
Indeed there was and here is where we need to talk about what sustained the life of the
poor, about what gave their lives something of quality as we were talking about earlier
and that enabled them to flourish albeit within modest limits.
Enjoyment of the amenities of life in the city were by no means limited to the wealthy
just because you didn't own a nice villa, just because you dwelt in a squalid rat infested
leaky death trap, you could still have a good life at the state's expense or rather
at the empire's expense.
For instance a visit to the bars cost you only a nominal sum if that.
I'll be talking about bars in the lecture about relaxation in Rome but I'll just make
a few points here that particularly apply to the poor.
You could find shelter from the heat or the cold in the bars any day you wished.
You could stay there as long as you liked, idling away your time, gossiping with your
friends or indulging in a variety of pastimes.
If you wanted something a bit more stimulating or public holidays you could watch exotic
animals tearing Rome's enemies to pieces or see gladiators fighting to the death in
the arena.
Admission to the Colosseum like any other amphitheatre was free and as an ordinary citizen you'd
have to sit in the tiers above the senators and the knights, all those bloody stairs to
climb again.
If you were a woman you'd have to climb even higher and sit beside slaves and foreigners
but it was probably worth the climb.
The spectacle would have distracted you temporarily from the challenges and misery
of the daily grind.
If you couldn't get a seat in the Colosseum then I'd recommend hoofing it over to the
Circus Maximus next time a chariot race is scheduled to take place.
The Circus Maximus could accommodate about 250,000 spectators so virtually the whole
of Rome could attend.
When there are the periodic handouts of the corn doll to look forward to, especially at
election time, though these are intended for the entire populace and not exclusively
for the poor.
So you'll probably have to scramble to get your share but it'll be worth your while
to show an interest in the candidates at the elections, even in the local ward elections
for that reason.
Augustus divided Rome into 14 regions comprising 265 wards for administrative purposes and
no Roman election took place without a healthy dose of bribery and corruption and even you,
the abject poor, stood to benefit as a result.
To conclude, one of the wealthiest men in Rome was the orator, philosopher and politician
Marcus Thalias Cicero.
Cicero devoted much of his time to addressing questions of ethics.
He really did wrestle with the question, what does it mean to be a virtuous man?
Never once however in all his voluminous philosophical writings did he consider the plight of the
poor.
Far less did it occur to him to apply his great mind to the task of trying to alleviate
their plight in any way.
On the contrary, when one of the insulai that he owned burned down, he rubbed his hands
with glee because he saw this as an opportunity to increase the rent after rebuilding another
rickety death trap to take its place.
He didn't think twice of the miserable souls who burnt to death.
Cicero was one of the most refined intellect that the Roman world produced, but he never
had the kind of epiphany which that great philanthropist and social reformer, the Seventh
Earl of Shaftesbury, had as a schoolboy in 1812.
I doubt too that Cicero would have tossed a brass Cisternaeus in your direction when
you jangled your begging bowl at him.
Well, something that the poor throughout the ages have been able to do to ease the
harshness of their fate is to dream about what their lives would be like if overnight
they suddenly became rich.
In the next lecture we too are going to dream about being seriously rich Romans, about leading
a life that was almost completely insulated to apply the Latin metaphor we've been using
in this lecture in a different sense, insulated from the hardships and privations experienced
by the urban poor.
